Welcome to The Basin Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, I'm Jay Sticky.
And today we have a topic suggested by one of our patrons, which we'll be diving into,
not until after our sequence posts, because we always do those first.
And we always have.
Yes.
Well, you know what?
We've always been at war with Eurasia, so same thing.
We've always done the first.
Our first post is called Burden Some Details, which is a continuation of the conjunction fallacy that we've been talking about for the past couple episodes.
Yes.
It starts off by reminding us that the conjunction fallacy occurs because we substitute judgment of representativeness for judgment of probability.
By adding extra details, you make an outcome seem more characteristic of the process that generates it, even though that makes it less probable.
And I wanted to start out this with going into a little bit of feedback that we got, because in the less wrong posts, specifically, it said that this is one of the most controversial findings and people are always denying it and arguing against it.
And I was like, hmm, that's interesting.
I guess that's why it's been researched so much, but I don't know why it would be so controversial.
And then on our discord, just hours after we posted the episode, someone was arguing against it and saying, I like how this is why it doesn't make that much sense, which I thought brought up a really good example.
So I'm going to read that.
Oh, you're interested.
Yeah.
So the user who was, again, why weaker says that the conjunction fallacy actually makes sense, doesn't it?
It's like saying Superman will violently murder 10 people.
Who are terrorists about to murder 10,000 people?
Technically, the second example adds extra information that makes it less likely.
Just Superman will violently murder 10 people is less likely than Superman will violently murder 10 people who were terrorists about to murder others, right?
Well, because there's many reasons you could murder 10 people.
Right.
If you told me that Superman murdered 10 people, I might find that implausible.
If you told me that you murdered 10 terrorists, I'd find that more plausible because that's how Superman rolls, right?
But if all you told me is that he killed 10 people, they could have been supervillains, they could have been bank robbers, they could have been terrorists, they could have been whatever space aliens that were invading.
So if all I knew is that he killed 10 people, I would guess that they were bad people, right?
And I think I would be correct in guessing so because I already have the character of Superman, right?
Like, I already know a lot about him.
Yeah, like, except that he doesn't kill people, so I think it's very unpopular with it.
But, like, with the examples and hypotheticals.
The way he did kill people, didn't he?
You know.
It's Batman that's never killed anyone.
Superman also is supposed to not too, yeah.
But I think they both were forced into it every now and then in the comics for dramatic purposes.
And in Man of Steel, the movie.
Right, but that one was the most terrible movie from what I've heard.
You know, I, maybe because I never cared or knew about Superman, but I liked it.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
Okay, I never saw it because I just heard it was so bad.
It was like one of the fun Superman, like the only thing that, I never liked Superman because, and as Batman very well puts it in the Batman or Superman movie.
Because Batman's so much better.
Because, no, no, Batman, in those, he's, eh, whatever.
He's a less fun Tony Stark, but the, like, Superman's not brave.
You know, if you're literally invincible, you're not interesting to watch you take down the enemy.
You can move at the speed of light and are impervious to all damage.
Like, it's not fun watching you solve a problem.
Right.
When Spider-Man jumps in front of a car and has to catch it, you see him put the force into stopping it, right?
Like, he could get killed.
Well, most of the good Superman stories are ones that don't focus on can he punch the other guy and survive.
Yeah, it's like a moral dilemma between you have to make like two bad choices and...
Like the whole, the original Superman movie with Christopher Reeves, the whole thing was like,
is he going to save this town from being killed by a nuke, or is he going to save Lois Lane?
And...
The answer is obviously both.
It turned out to be both.
Flying back in time magic, yes, but...
Oh, I didn't know it was the, I didn't know it was the backward in time one.
So he's fast enough to fly back in time, but he's not fast enough to catch Lois Lane falling off a building
and whatever house he is going to die and catch the nuke.
I really want to interject that music, that magic.
Explain such a good consistency clip right now.
Should we get a sound bird?
But to address why we create this actual point, like, I think with, was it Linda, the feminist librarian or something?
Like, we don't know anything about her character.
We only know what's been provided.
So like, I think that, granted, it set it up like the kind of person that was going to be active in the feminist community,
but I, maybe at this point, it's worth just like actually looking at the math, whatever you look,
if you draw it out and you say, here's the space possibilities where Superman kills 10 people
and I'm going to draw another circle for where Superman kills 10 terrorists.
It'll have to be inside the one where he kills 10 people.
And if I were to throw a dart at those two circles, I would more likely hit the big, you know, you said what I'm saying?
Yeah, yeah, I do.
I think there's a slightly like higher probability that Superman would have killed 10 terrorists than 10 people, generally,
but I think it's such a small blip in the math that it still is just like so much more probable for A than B.
I also love how you use the man of steel to steel man this position.
Well, I did say that I think the fallacy is that instead of reading the literal meaning that Superman killed 10 people
or Superman killed 10 people because they were terrorists, the way it's read when you read the statements is
Superman killed 10 people for no reason or Superman killed 10 people for some reason
because in real life, no one would just say Superman killed 10 people and not say anything else.
You might see a news headline like that.
So I think it's more about how our brains process it because if it doesn't have the explanation in the end, it's applied for no reason.
I think that's why newspapers do that too because there's a compulsion to be like, but why pick it up?
So what you should always think is that append at the end for any possible reason we can think of as opposed to for no reason.
I think that's a good point about human psychology.
Like there's something really unsatisfying about A versus B.
I think just like as creatures that like to gather as much information and hear complete stories.
And because like you said, no one would just say the first one and not tell you the caveat unless there was no caveat to give.
Unless it's clickbait.
Well, I'm raising that because I was catching up on the backlog of the mind killer podcast and you guys mentioned the headline which I heard about that one of the people involved in the one of the largest vaccine trials for COVID vaccine died.
And I remember seeing that headline.
What I didn't remember doing or no, I must have seen this because I saw it on Reddit and I always click the comments on anything that is interesting, but not in the headline.
It was on the control group.
But it was reported left and right that somebody died in the vaccine trial.
And so you can bet if we had a Superman and Superman killed 10 people, that would be on the front page of every newspaper that you could click and get ad revenue on, right?
And you'd have to go to Reddit to find out.
So Stephen, when I hadn't heard that.
So when you said the beginning of that, like that somebody who was involved in this trial died, I thought that the punchline was going to be but not of COVID.
So like I was like already just so suspicious of that headline.
Right.
Like as soon as you said it, I was like, okay, but I'm waiting for one who's I'm waiting for one yet in the in the experimental group who gets hit by a car.
And they're going to report that someone in the vaccine trial who received the vaccine died of a car accident.
The vaccine maybe makes you less able to control cars.
They would actually probably have to put that in the adverse events effects rather.
The one of my jobs when I was doing clinical research is to just you collect every bad thing that happens to everybody who's on an experimental drug.
So you could be on like a drug for diabetes, but like you break a nail and you're like, my nails are breaking more easily.
You got to write it down.
You don't know if it's a side effect, but there was a really funny.
This is such a decide.
Nevermind.
There's a funny story about something.
Is it short and really funny?
Yeah, I can try it.
It's both short and really funny.
It's totally worth it.
Yeah, I was going to have to drag it out of here.
I forget some of the details anyways.
I'll just shorten it.
But there was some CRC was collecting ACE for a drug and one of them was there was a guy who came in and said, dogs are following me around.
And she's like, I had to write it.
I had to write it.
You had to put it down like legally.
And then it turns out that was a real side effect of the drug in males.
It like changed your sweat to create a scent that was attractive to dogs.
Holy shit.
She's like, that was one of my instructors actually at the research boot camp.
And she used those as an example of why you should always record all the AEs.
That is a wonderful story.
And I think that's awesome.
And now I need to ask, was it what it made dogs follow you in an aggressive manner?
Or because like you smell like another playful dog.
Because if that's the case, where can I get this drug?
Because I was just thinking that.
I mean, what if it makes you sexually attractive to dogs?
I would not want that.
If it just made me seem like a playful dog.
And I'm like, oh my God, every dog wants to play with me now.
I don't care what else this drug does.
You can mark it as just that, right?
I think it was a heart attack drug, but I don't remember.
I don't want heart attacks either.
Perfect.
Yeah.
Like double bonus.
It stops heart attacks because you feel so happy for the dogs.
I was just thinking that too.
It's like, maybe that's how it really works.
I think that's a mechanism of action.
But I do like the takeaway from my Curious Thing that if you don't include any details,
the brain might autofill for no reason.
And I think as long as we're careful to safeguard against that,
that sounds like good wisdom to take from that.
I would want to test like, that man killed 10 criminals for some reason.
Versus this second one.
But then if you know about the conjunction fallacy,
you might be like, clued into what they're testing for.
I feel like the statements Batman killed 10 people
and Batman killed 10 people for some reason have equal probability.
For some reason encompasses all possible reasons.
Unless for no reason.
Unless for no reason is the default thing that people think.
Sure.
Yeah.
I think you'd have to ask two different groups.
Probably.
Yeah.
Which they usually do, I think, in these anyways.
That's why I'm not designing jokes.
That would be a fun test, though.
If we can find some way to ask a bunch of people
that somehow aren't on the Bayesian Conspiracy Discord,
because I'll have heard about this.
I mean, if we have a listener that goes to Comic-Con
and wants to just randomly ask people one question or the other
and record all the results.
But no, it's no probability.
We should ask people who don't know what the conjunction fallacy is.
So, yeah.
Alright, yeah.
Anyone who can get this information for us, I'll send you 20 bucks.
The first person who gets it, I can't do it to everybody.
Right.
Yeah.
It just reminds me of the thing where comic book-cons
bring really good business to restaurants nearby,
because nerds tip well.
But if you're in a casino area, the casinos lose business,
because nerds know statistics.
Cool.
That's why they probably do have Comic-Cons in Las Vegas.
I think LA Comic-Con is the biggest.
Yeah.
The world or the New York Comic-Con might have been.
LA is where it started, so I would imagine.
LA or San Francisco, it's in that.
Damn it, it's one of the California ones.
As a non-Californian, I just have San Diego, San Francisco,
and Los Angeles all as one big city in my head.
Yeah, me too.
It's surprising how far apart they actually are.
But to me, I don't care.
Right.
They're on the coast, they're in California, they're the same damn city.
Like, Jayce, if you told me your friend worked at Burger King,
and then you told me today they moved to a different Burger King,
I don't bother picturing a different Burger King, right?
To me, it's like they work at an abstract Burger King that I don't care where it is.
So your incremental image of California is like generic beach with palm trees.
Yeah.
High rises and like a highway.
A bunch of very attractive but shallow people that want to act,
some orange trees.
but are doing waitressing instead.
That, yeah, that definitely was in LA.
There were some very bizarre people in LA when I visited.
I think the reason I don't think of that about San Francisco is because
now I know San Francisco is where all the nerds are.
There's some different weird people in San Francisco.
But they're probably just between a few blocks of Los Angeles,
so there's a lot of intermixing.
In the next generation, we're going to have very attractive, very smart people
because San Francisco and Los Angeles are the same town.
You're counting on the smart people breeding with pretty people.
That's true.
Yeah.
What are we talking about again?
I mean, the pretty people are busy being waiters
and the smart people are making tons of money,
so they just hook up with the people who don't have that much money.
Perfect.
They just automate all the waiters' jobs.
Aw, shit.
We've solved that problem.
I had to start getting jobs as house husbands.
I want to get a job as a house husband.
Anything else on why we encourage feedback?
Because I found that valuable, but if there's anything else there,
I want to dig it out.
That was basically the whole gist of it.
Nice.
Well, thanks for that.
That was awesome.
Look how good Stephen got at segueing us back on track.
My segue was like, what were we talking about?
Yeah, let's see.
Conjunction fallacy.
This reminds me of methods of rationality
when they were talking about the overly complicated plots.
I realized that that was probably
as you're trying to put conjunction fallacy explanations
in the universe.
And playing with what I think is called the Batman's Gambit on TV Tropes,
where you need like a number of things to line up perfectly for this to work.
Yeah.
You know, like pitch meeting makes fun of like the Joker
having all the crazy luck in the world.
But I kind of just see that like as his power, right?
Maybe you just don't see all the things he's trying in the background that don't work.
He actually has superpowers.
He just doesn't know it.
Or like the thing is he's not trying because he's like, fuck it.
I don't care if any of my plans work.
Like that's the thing is like I'm just fucking around.
So, you know, like the guy with the cell phone bomb in his chest
and the prison that he earned the jail he happened to be taken to or whatever.
It's probably a dozen things he does that don't work out that we never hear about.
Exactly.
Maybe he had a cell phone implanted in a prisoner in every jail across the city
and they all blow up at the same time, right?
It would be such a good movie.
Like from the point of view of the Joker.
Just seeing all the stuff that like Batman never notices or something
because he didn't advertise it right.
I'd watch that.
So we were just talking about one way to avoid the conjunction fallacy by saying
in our head of all possible reasons rather than, you know, for no reason.
And this post is basically the same thing.
Like how can we avoid the conjunction fallacy?
And what Eliezer says is that forecasters would have done well to
would it could have avoided the conjunction fallacy by noticing the word and
and being very wary of it and not just wary but leaping back
and even not knowing that they were going to get tested afterwards
about the conjunction fallacy or anything.
They should notice the conjunction of two entire details combined by the word and
shocked by the audacity of anyone asking them to endorse such an insanely complicated prediction.
I mean, yes, but like I like the general theme of it.
But then it could say because of or due to, right?
What you need is just like you just need to be able to notice
that there's two different things being assertive here.
That was what made me think of methods of rationality where there was the like
as soon as somebody starts talking about a plot that has like more than two steps
or what was it or like more than two details that have to go right.
They were like, uh, like complication.
What was it?
Penalty for complexity.
More epicycles.
Yeah.
That was when he was arguing with himself.
I have my memory of it.
But Draco's father said the limit on how complex something can be is three
things going right at once.
And since you never want to wish things all the way to the limit,
the practical limit was actually too right.
So like, I feel like if you could just get some kind of word like complexity penalty,
which might also, you know, apply to this, that'll just jump out as soon as you see
like probability of this and this.
You just like, whoa, wait, complexity penalty.
That's what makes communities so helpful.
Cause unless you're as, uh, able to bifurcate your brain as Harry is, um,
like if I'm talking with my other rationalist friends about my steps to accomplish something,
they'll be like, wait, hold on.
That's actually, you know, you're, you're conflating that these all things will
line up this way.
Having an outside view is super helpful.
Right.
Yeah.
And he literally says what we just said.
So maybe I was remembering him saying this, but, uh,
Eleazar says regarding the US and Soviet Union suspending diplomatic relations,
the scenario was not the US and Soviet Union suddenly suspend diplomatic relations for no reason,
but the US and Soviet Union suspended diplomatic relations for any reason.
Yeah.
As we were saying.
And so like, it ends with that thing about, um,
futurists and universes where like there was a,
some friend of Eleazar's was really impressed by this futurist who was saying like,
this will happen and that, that'll lead to this technology.
And then like making all these complicated predictions and Eleazar just like,
tried to just say, um, I think that's, you know, conjunction fallacy.
The person didn't get it.
So he's like, okay.
So, and then, uh, I don't have the article open,
but what was the thing you said about universes?
Uh, is it here?
I can find it.
Okay.
Universes replicating is simpler than universes replicating for these reasons.
Yeah.
The futurist gave or something.
Hang on.
I've almost found it.
It's more probable that universes replicate for any reason than that they replicate
via black holes because advanced civilizations manufactured black holes
because universes evolved to make them do it.
And he said, oh, I like that.
This is where a whiteboard just comes in handy.
And like, I mean it, you just draw a circle and be like,
here's all the reasons universes replicate.
Here's the three epicycles where it's your theory, right?
It doesn't mean it's wrong.
It just means that it's necessarily less likely than happening for any reason.
The point I think he's hammering on, and, um, it should have been stated more explicitly
in this post, in my opinion, but, um, what, what he did say is that they,
people need to feel a strong emotional impact for Occam's Racer.
Feel every added detail as a burden, every single extra roll of the dice.
And yeah, I think that's, if humans could feel Occam's Racer as a littler,
literal emotional reaction, that would help a lot.
It's too bad that we can't like program that in.
Yeah.
But we can try.
Yeah.
I mean, like you could try through propagating the idea of conjunction fallacy
and then people like knowing to say, oh, complexity penalty,
but like people in the rationalist sphere know that people outside
not only don't know that, but don't want to hear your explanation.
Plus they'd be like, what the hell is a complexity penalty?
Well, that's what I mean.
Isn't it a complexity bonus?
Yeah.
That's what I mean though.
Like that's, you can say that to another rationalist and they'll be like,
oh, like catch themselves.
Yeah.
And you can do it much more quickly than pulling out the whiteboard
because in most like, you know, in dinner with your family,
if you pulled a whiteboard out, like, well,
maybe other people's families are different, but my would be like,
we don't care.
Stop talking about the science things at the table.
I like the, the end here.
It says forward is written.
If you can lighten your burden, you must do so.
There is no straw that lacks the power to break your back.
Which reminds me, I haven't made this assertion for months.
We need to do at least, not at probably an episode,
but we need to maybe we'll sub out the sequences for the 12 virtues of rationality
at some point.
It's very artsy and fun.
Like it's written in like this height.
If you haven't, I imagine most of our readers are familiar with it,
but it's written in this like high pros kind of language that if it was your
only exposure to Kasky, you'd think he was some nut job.
Why did he talk like this?
Was with all this flowery language.
But it's like, no, this is supposed to,
it's supposed to copy that revenants or reverence and stuff.
It's supposed to look like it should be chiseled on a stone tablet
and put on a capital front lawn.
It bothers me that he chose 12 instead of 10 though.
I do not have 12 fingers when I'm trying to list the virtues.
I run out of fingers.
Well, when you go through it, we'll see if there's any that we can chop.
Okay.
This reminds me of George Carlin's bit from complaints and grievances where he
compiles down, or yeah, where he reduces down the 10 commandments to two,
which is always be honest and faithful to the provider of dinooki
and try really hard not to kill anybody unless the person believes in a different
visible person than the one you believe in.
If you break down all the commandments and throw out the useless ones,
that's what you're left with.
Yeah.
I did enjoy the few that he just threw out.
He's like, that's not envy.
Our whole economy is based on envy.
That one's going out.
Right.
Yeah, I don't know.
Maybe like for solstice, we can come up with the 12 virtues of rationality
as opposed to like the 12 days of Christmas.
And sing it?
Yeah.
That could be fun.
That'd be a way to actually remember them all.
All right.
What is evidence?
I was just trying to imagine the beat to that song.
It would be really hard to crunch into.
Yeah.
But it would be really fun for somebody, not me.
Sure.
Hey, somebody do this.
There's definitely, there's a rationalist choir.
And we should link this.
I'll add it to our links.
But somebody in the Bay rationalist community made a like rational sing-along chat room
thing.
And you can log into it if you like singing to sing with people either.
I'm guessing like whatever songs you would want.
It could be like the songs that people sing at the various rationalist parties or...
How does that work with the latency?
They, it's explained in the post and I'll link it.
Okay.
They built a thing for it.
And it doesn't have video, I think.
But the latency apparently is, there's a built-in mechanism for handling it.
Remember back in the day when we had high quality landlines and there was no latency
at all.
You could like literally hear the other person taking a breath to say something?
I felt so much more comfortable doing phone calls on a wired phone.
It was basically like having someone in the same room as you, but there being a, like
you were blindfolded.
It added so much more data to conversations that like it made me less anxious.
Like I have really bad phone anxiety or anxiety over any kind of like calls because I need
to see people's body language, facial expression, tone of voice.
See, I didn't know that because I don't even like looking at people when I talk to them.
You're probably looking at them out of the corner of your eye though.
And like, you get a lot of data from that.
And if I'm missing all that data, I get really like insecure about whether I'm interpreting
people correctly or if they're interpreting me correctly.
VoIP is really hard because a lot of times like if someone wants to signal they want to
say something, they do it by intaking a breath.
And by the time you hear that on VoIP due to the second or half second of latency, you've
already started the next word.
So then you're talking over each other and it's just, it's awful.
I've noticed since coronavirus that a bunch of podcasts have gotten worse to listen to
because people aren't recording in the same room anymore, which we probably are doing
the same thing, but there's just a lot more people talking over each other.
I think about the last nine killers we talked over each other quite a bit.
I think the quality of the ones that we record in person is probably better than the ones
we do online.
Definitely.
At least for our show.
All right, so we have what is evidence next?
While walking along the street, your shoelaces come untied.
Shortly thereafter, for some odd reason, you start believing your shoelaces are untied.
Light leaves the sun and strikes your shoelaces and bounces off.
Some photons enter the pupil of your eyes and strike your retina.
The energy that photons triggers neural impulses.
The neural impulses are transmitted to the visual processing areas of the brain.
And there, the optical information is processed and reconstructed into a 3D model that is
recognized as untied shoelaces.
There's a sequence of events, a chain of cause and effect within the world and your brain
by which you end up believing what you believe.
Evidence is an event entangled by the links of cause and effect with whatever you want to know about.
And I'm pretty sure this isn't like unique tele-esser, and maybe it is.
I'm sure someone has thought of this or said it before, but I really liked this being put
in such concrete terms because I hadn't seen that before in my readings.
Like this description of evidence being the entanglement of your eyes and your brains
and your shoelace.
And then he goes, I'll just specify, not quantum entanglement.
Right, right.
But yeah, you have to have eyes and a brain, which again, not literally, because if you
ended up in the same state regardless of what light entered it, then you'd be blind.
But that's what he means by blind.
Yeah, and you can have beliefs about other sense inputs too, right?
But the idea is that, yes, there needs to be something that happens in reality that
impacts something in your brain.
Yeah, so this is why a rationalist put such a heavy premium on the paradoxical seeming
claim, a belief is only really worthwhile if you could, in principle, be persuaded to
believe otherwise.
That's, yeah.
I like having, and it's really good that we're reading back through the sequences, but I
like pulling things like that out because I do occasionally run up against somebody who
doesn't think evidence is a good reason for something.
You get this a lot with creationists where it's like, why wouldn't you believe in God?
And I was like, there's no evidence, or why don't you believe in X?
There's no evidence.
And they're just like, well, and then they'll just keep arguing.
I'm like, but that's the end.
The best ones are like, maybe you don't understand what I mean by evidence.
You give like the problem of evil.
And they're like, well, yeah, sure, logically, that makes sense.
What do you care so much about logic for?
And it's like, well, all right, have a good day.
Goodbye.
And on one hand, that sounds dismissive, but it's like, I can't argue you into believing
the laws that govern organized thought.
And the thing is, you believe them too.
You're not you believe them.
You operate that way.
You turn your car wheel left to move left every time because that's...
If your child gets sick, you take them to the hospital, you don't just pray.
Unless you're one of those insane people who does just pray and then their child dies.
Well, I'm just thinking of like everything else they do.
They set things down rather than toss them because they'll break or whatever.
Their entire life they operate in logical evidence based ways.
But then they pretend like they've got this exceptional area that they don't touch, but it's like...
That's because I don't know what logic is there.
That's why I feel like you could just street epistemologize them from first principles.
Like, okay, do we both agree on what logic means or what evidence means here?
And once you get them all the way up to saying yes, then you can go back and say, but there's no evidence.
I want to pursue that further.
But before we do, I wanted to also read this other thing he said about evidence,
which I thought was an important consideration.
He says, not every influence creates the kind of entanglement required for evidence.
It's no help to have a machine that beeps when you enter winning lottery numbers,
if the machine also beeps when you enter losing lottery numbers.
So the light reflecting from your shoes would not be useful evidence about your shoelaces
if the photons ended up in the same physical state, whether your shoes were tied or untied.
So for it to be evidence, it has to happen differently in a way that's entangled
with the different possible states of the target.
He's just like, rose path walking us to like the Bayesian definition of evidence.
Yeah.
That's why you shouldn't place lots.
Yeah.
He also says this, that if photons reflect off your shoelaces and hit a rock, the rock won't change much.
It won't be detectably different depending on whether your shoelaces were tied or untied.
This is why rocks are not useful witnesses in court.
A photographic film will contract shoelace entanglement from uncoming photons so it can act as evidence.
If your eyes and brain work correctly, you will be entangled with your own shoelaces.
Yeah.
Rational thought produces beliefs which are themselves evidence, which, and then I goes on to say,
if your tongue speaks truly, your rational beliefs which are themselves evidence can act as evidence for someone else.
I was like, that kind of, and then I was thinking about, if either of you read like Heinlein Stranger in A Strange Land.
Yes, that's good.
Yeah.
There's like the character of the true witness who's like somebody whose job is to like just
be a professional rationalist and always tell the truth.
It's somebody who can act as, what is it, first person testimony can act in the place of evidence.
I think there's a good example of this.
I'll cut you off, but like a month or so ago when you mentioned on the air that global warming was not a significant impact on the giant wildfires that are probably still burning,
but everyone got bored with so it's not in the news anymore.
At least the smoke's gone.
So like, I think it was reasonable for me to update in the direction of global warming was not that impactful on the wildfires when I heard that from you.
Because I assumed that you had done your homework.
Because in general, you're a reliable person, which is fine.
And I am now more inclined to believe the next thing you say, because as soon as you learned that you were wrong about this, you corrected it.
So the next time you make an assertion about something, I'll be like, okay, he's not going to make that mistake again.
Right?
Well, I try not to.
And we all try not to, but it's like, I think that if you have a source that updates based on like new evidence and or admits that they're wrong,
that makes them a way more reliable source.
Like if someone, it just says they're right all the time and you point out that they're not and they just ignore you.
Then it's like, all right, well, why would I ever believe you again?
This reminds me of a, I had a boss who just liked every movie and every movie, like we'd come out of it with him going, oh my God, that's the best movie I've ever seen.
I got to buy the DVD like right now.
And, and I just got to the point where I was like, I can't trust you for video for movie recommendations.
Yeah.
Or like, you know, you can generally like, you can trust certain people by reputation of like person who, yeah, like has discernment in some sense.
That's why Simon Cowell's opinion is actually important.
Yeah.
As opposed to Paul Abdul, who loves everybody.
I don't understand why they always have that dynamic on shows.
Because you need someone that the audience can relate to because the audience wants the people to win and to be nice.
I guess.
And Simon Cowell has to be like the dad who's like, no, not good enough.
Go back to your room and practice.
I'm going to use an example of a, of a show that isn't garbage like American Idol because I recognize the name Simon Cowell and how much in the Great British Baking Show.
Where the judges are both like, one's more Simon Cowley than the other, but they're both harsh and like, you know, very judgmental of it.
But they have two non-judge comic relief people that are there to be like, I think it looks great.
Oh my God, that's awesome.
They're there just being super supportive.
And so like that's, that's the way it should be.
Right.
The judges should be as critical, especially if it's a, you know, contest as they, as they constructively can be.
But then you, if you, if you're at home and you want the people who worked so hard all day on this to feel good about it, you want the people there being like, oh my God, that it looks so good or whatever.
Right.
Yeah.
I just wish they didn't always cast the person who's actually like, like Simon Cowell is cast in the position of the bad guy.
Like he's kind of the villain, like a lovable villain.
But like, or, um, Gordon Ramsay, like same deal.
Except he doesn't have an opposing person saying the food is great, does he?
Does, does Paul Hollywood, you said?
Gordon Ramsay.
Oh, have a reputation about what? Sorry.
Does he have a counterpart that says, oh, this is actually what you did pretty good?
No.
This food is great.
His stuff is basically by himself.
Yeah.
Like.
That's why I have a lot of respect for him.
Maybe they should put him and Guy Fero together.
Oh my God.
Guy Fero just like deep-frying love everything.
I've never seen either of these shows, but that is the impression I get.
I don't watch a lot of, uh, I'm just drop, draw a blank on that chef's name.
Gordon Ramsay.
I don't watch a lot of his stuff, but I've watched, uh, all of like Cutthroat Kitchen,
which is hosted by Alton Brown, who didn't, he didn't judge the food.
He, there was like a blind judge that would come in and judge the food.
Um, but they'd always say something complimentary about it, even if it sucked.
And then they would rip it apart and be like, here's why it sucked.
That's, yeah.
When, when I'm in my writing group, it's the compliment sandwich.
Yeah.
And then you're like, and here's where you took a giant turn.
Here's a healthy helping of this sucked.
And, uh, but your punctuation was spot on.
Yeah.
You need something good at the end as well.
Yeah.
Um, I'd like, so I like this line that if your tongue speaks truly your rational beliefs,
which are themselves, evidence can act as evidence for someone else.
But it's also like really hard because like I sometimes repeat things that I've heard
that I didn't investigate myself or maybe didn't investigate it.
But you tend to like, I don't know.
So I trust people in the rationalist community.
Cause they're like, if I feel like if people like see something and they,
they haven't necessarily verified it, they'll be like,
I don't know what my epistemic status is here, but like I saw this thing.
Like they won't just say it as though it was true.
Yeah.
Like I feel like a bunch of people that I know in the rationalist community or like
somebody whose opinion I would absolutely trust because they would like tell me as
much as they knew about the thing.
Yeah.
And with the global warming fires thing, I just, I hadn't heard of that before.
So when I did hear it, I updated way too hard on it.
Well, David's also like, I think it's a fair reason to update on what he said, right?
Yeah.
And, and he did say it rather, he did make, I think I, I'm behind,
but I listened to the episode where he walked back on that.
Cause he's like, I think I make, I made too strong a case for it.
I think he did.
And so, but how strong his case was made, you're like, oh, he's done his,
he's done his due diligence and he's otherwise reliable.
Like I think it was perfectly reasonable, but that's,
that's why this process isn't without a misstep.
It's, it just gets you more reliably in the right direction.
I think if they're talking about the idea of what was it of ideas being contagious.
And I think that it's not necessarily though,
the thought that it's like a one to one, like I have this belief,
I tell it to Steven, now Steven has this belief.
It's like, I, I tell you a thing, Steven like updates 80% that things probably true
because Jay stills third research, huh?
Or like, and then the next person down.
That sounds about right.
Yeah.
You know, you tell Rachel and Rachel is like 60% and et cetera.
So like you're, you're propagating the beliefs, but like smaller amounts of them.
I think it's also really helpful if you have like a back and forth network with these people
so you can update as they update.
Yeah.
Like that, that was what I was thinking too.
Cause like you were saying, David said this, he was too,
then he came back and said, oh, here's an update.
And then you updated based on his update,
which is how it should be, that's how science works.
Well, I think you went and tried to go verify this and then found that you couldn't,
and you're like, oh, I was wrong.
Right.
I looked at it and I was like, okay, it is an influence,
but I greatly overstated how much of an influence it was
and how I understated just that, the global warming part.
Right.
And it's one of those things that makes a community valuable.
You know, like if I go to the discord and post something that's not true,
someone will call me out on it.
And I'm sure there's a relevant XKCD where it's like the fastest way to get information
is just to go out and say the wrong thing and someone on a forum will correct you.
So you can save yourself the time of doing the primary research.
That's really funny.
I wonder if anyone's tried that.
I'm pretty sure I've seen someone do it at least one.
I don't remember where it was now.
Someone I met who's active in the community, Alex Chen was,
for a while, like the number one person asking questions on Cora,
or I think asking and answering, which like, it was this ridiculous amount,
like at the peak of their productivity, I think they were like asking 50 questions a day.
Wow.
Asking or answering, but like, that's like in, you know, in search of positive answers.
I wonder if anyone's tried to just like do the opposite thing where they just like,
I have this belief that X and see if like a bunch of people come and screaming at them.
This doesn't come out to Wednesday, right?
Yes.
I'll try and think of something to put on discord and I'll just,
we'll test this before it comes out.
Okay.
And then now the best part is that I get to say, I knew that, you know,
I won't actually sound it stupid even though I said this because I said it in advance,
but they won't hear it until the future.
Right.
Yeah.
All right.
My perfect excuse to make something up.
I'll give it some thought.
Are you worried that after this they'll never be able to trust a thing that you say on discord?
No.
No, it's just a one-time thing.
You're coming on seeing it right now.
They're welcome to distrust me as much as they want.
I hope no one trusts anything I say anyways.
I try to be honest and reliable, but like no one should take anything I say as facts.
I trust your like media recommendations.
Not good.
Oh, maybe that's it.
I'll recommend something terrible.
That sounds nice and harmless.
I don't know if you can because there are people who really love terrible things.
I'll think of something.
Okay.
If I'd be like, oh my God, Batman vs Superman knocked the Avengers out of the water.
Right.
Of course they'll never believe that coming from me.
All right.
I'll think of something.
All right.
The rational beliefs being contagious.
Yeah, it says they're contagious among honest folk who believe each other to be honest.
And that's why I claim that your beliefs are not contagious,
that you believe for private reasons which are not transmissible is so suspicious.
If your beliefs aren't tangled with reality,
they should be contagious among honest folk.
And that is why I personally don't trust religious people
because they have access to special revelation
and the rest of us just have to believe them.
No, that sounds like bullshit to me.
I mean, I'll trust their recommendation on how to improve a recipe.
It depends on what they're saying and who the person is
because religious people range from this is one special domain where magic applies
and then everything else just like works logically,
like doctors who are religious,
but still I would trust their opinion about neurotransmitters.
But yeah, then there's some people who just colors everything.
But he does say that if your beliefs aren't tangled with reality,
they should be contagious among honest folks, which, okay,
that sounds right to me, but then like...
How do they know that you're...
I don't expect people in a different culture than me
to necessarily be contagious by my ideas.
Contaged?
Yeah, infected, sorry.
There's a word for contagious and it's not contagious.
What on earth would culture have to do with that sort of transmission?
I mean, there are...
I trust other rationalists, but like...
But there can be beliefs that...
But like somebody in my cosplay group, not necessarily,
unless I knew them well enough to know that they basically would...
Then I would introduce them to the rationalist community.
I guess I was thinking it depends on the particular belief slash claim.
Like if I don't care who says,
don't mix ammonia and bleach when cleaning your bathtub,
like they're right, right?
Then I think things like having a minimum wage is harmful.
That is something that I would not expect to, for example,
cross over into the socialist or even democratic
tribes at all, even though, you know,
someone who says it may be a rationalist and may believe it to be true,
but I don't think they should consider that to be contagious to others because...
This guy's a rationalist.
Doesn't mean anything outside of our community,
except for like maybe some estrategist thinks it means something bad.
Yeah, but if a more conservative rationalist and more liberal or more...
I don't even want to say conservative and liberal.
If a more red rationalist and a more blue rationalist met,
I don't think they would expect some things to transfer over.
I disagree.
Disagree?
I mean, like you and Wes and David aren't...
I don't know if it's a red-blue divide, but there's different colors there,
but I think you guys, you know, when you're not jokingly disagreeing,
I think you aim to find some sort of ground in the middle, right?
If it's just straight politics stuff, then, you know,
David plays his role as the obstinate,
like I refuse to concede one millimeter of ground on anything about government.
But I get the impression he's kind of playing a role.
He might actually believe everything that he's saying as strongly as he does,
but if he's that confident, he seems way confident.
I think he's having it up a little.
Exactly. I think he's having fun.
But if you guys are arguing about some actual effective, whatever, particular real thing...
What I've seen as rationalists on either side of political divides
tend to agree on facts, but they have different opinions about moral weight of things.
Like someone, like, I don't know, I think guns are bad,
and somebody who is all like pro-guns,
or, you know, same with any issue that gets divided along political lines,
where it's not really that they disagree about the fact that, like, this is happening this often.
It's more of how much of a problem is this, which sort of...
Yeah, that plays a big part. They don't disagree about the data.
It's not like arguing with, you know, it sounds like we're harping against religion,
but it's just an easy, giant target.
It's not like arguing against somebody about how old the planet is.
It's like, because, I mean, that's just...
We can look at the available truth there.
I didn't want to, like, make it about abortion, but, like, I was just thinking,
like, the best example really I could think of is, like, somebody saying,
like, they both agree on how often abortion is happening,
but a democratic rationalist might say, and I think it's fine,
because I assign more moral weight to a woman's choice,
where a red rationalist might say, like, I, like, actually am concerned with these, like,
proto-humans being killed, and I think that it doesn't weigh out morally that way.
I find myself comfortably in the middle there.
I think every abortion is a bummer.
Yeah.
Even in their events to save someone's life or whatever, like, it sucks.
You know, humans, I think, are a special kind of animal.
And I was going to say being, but yeah, like, and every time a life gets extinguished,
that's a bummer.
Now, that doesn't mean that it's wrong to have abortions.
And the least bit, you can have something where it's both like,
the truth can be a bummer, right?
So, or, you know, the best choice can be a bummer.
As it is, this is by far the best choice.
Easy access to abortion is the way to do it.
I absolutely agree, but I can see how I don't expect someone who's even,
even a rationalist on the right side to necessarily be infected with that belief.
And I don't know, does that make my belief less legitimate because I don't expect it to be contagious
in some cases?
On the other side, like, I have seen Democrats say that,
or, you know, leftists who believe in abortions say that, like,
not only is abortion, like, fine, it's great.
I'm pro-abortion because I don't think that fetuses have any moral weight at all.
Like, they'll go really far to the extreme and make things up about, like,
they can't feel pain, like, they can't, you know, like...
I think they've just been mind-killed.
At that point, they're refusing.
And then people on the right that are saying, like, you know,
a soul is imbued on conception, which, like, I wouldn't expect a rationalist to say either of those things.
They would say, I don't know whether or not it, like, when it has sentience.
It does suck that something that might have sentience or even, like, a conception of pain
and doesn't want to experience pain that sucks.
They, like, I would never imagine somebody saying,
nah, it's fine, they have no soul, therefore, they, I don't know,
or somebody to say the opposite that, yeah, there's a soul.
I don't know.
It felt like that was explaining what I was trying to say more,
but it might have just made it more confusing.
I mean, rationalists are just less extreme in general because they take other people...
Well, rationalists are definitely more extreme on things like AI risk, like, I think, uh...
But that's because we're right on that one.
I think we do tend to be more moderate just because we assign less probability to things,
like, people that are able to say, I 100% believe that this is true,
versus, like, me personally, I don't know when sentience appears developing fetus,
and I'm, like, comfortable saying I don't know that.
And therefore, there's ambiguous moral weight on killing it, depending on what stage it's in.
Yeah, I think...
And the likelihood that it's at the, you know, it develops at this stage versus this stage.
Right, it's not going to be at exactly 62 days or something, right?
Like, who knows, but it's, I mean, maybe it is, but it would be weird to say, oh, we found it.
It's this exact second after fertilization or something.
But it's, like you mentioned that...
I forgot how it came up, but SJW is not liking Rationalist or something.
I think part of that might be because we tend to have moderate beliefs in a lot of things.
Yeah, exactly.
Both sides read us as being on the enemy's side because we, like...
Right, because...
We can't fit us into either category.
Well, yeah, exactly.
If you're not 100% in our camp only shooting the other way, then you're one of them.
I was just going to say, like, the weakness that they see is the strength that I see is that we're able to, like, actually see the other side of the argument and admit that there's merit to it.
That's what I was going to say.
Yeah, I mean, so there's merits to positions I disagree with.
It doesn't mean I agree with them.
It means that I can acknowledge the merit of it.
Hey, I see where you're coming from.
I think that's a good point.
I think that the cost-benefit analysis still comes out this way.
Yeah.
Even on positions where, you know, someone may be on the extreme side, they still are willing to talk to people on the other side, which is seen as a no-no by a lot of people.
Yeah.
They're just monsters.
You can't talk to them.
Exactly.
If you talk to a monster, you become a monster.
That's how vampirism works.
The other side is vampires.
Anyway, are we done with sequences?
I think we had one thing at the very end.
I'll go ahead.
Okay.
So try to explain the kind of thought processes you use to systematically produce beliefs that mirror reality.
Explain why you think you're rational.
Why you think that, using the processes like the one you use, minds will end up believing snow is white if and only if snow is white.
If you don't believe that the outputs of your thought processes are entangled with reality, why believe the outputs of your thought processes?
Processes.
I really struggle with that word every time.
Yeah.
If you don't believe that the output of your thoughts are entangled with reality, why do you believe your thoughts?
I shudder to think that there are definitely people who feel that way.
I don't know how I think things.
I mean, I think that if they're really like, I can't trust my thoughts, they're in some sort of psychological crisis.
A lot of people might just be like, I feel it in my gut.
I suppose.
Yeah.
But part of their evidence for their thought is their gut feeling, right?
Which actually, people's gut feeling is pretty good when they do various...
Well, yeah, it depends.
You get nurses that can be like, oh, shit, that person's about to have a heart attack.
For no reason, anybody who's not a nurse can discern because they do have that much experience.
Or also, we just have a bunch of general heuristics as evolved beings about if you feel nervous about a person.
If somebody's giving you a bad vibe, you might trust that.
Or I don't know, that's a bad example because then that gets into like, but what about if black people give you a bad vibe?
Like, you will be more satisfied with your meal.
They have tested this.
If you look at a menu, order the first thing that looks good and then just close the menu as opposed to if you read all the things.
Oh, that's cool.
Because of option paralysis.
I've kind of made that...
Comparisons to...
Unconsciously, my own way of doing it.
Because once I've made the decision, it's like, well, I'm not going to sit there and like, you know, oh, I should have gotten this occasionally.
But then I've never, I don't know, maybe I've never tried to operationalize like, how much did I enjoy what I got?
But then I'll just get the thing that I saw that, you know, that I thought I might like the next time or something.
Remember when you used to go to restaurants and go out to eat?
Right.
It feels like ages ago.
In that case, I should randomize where in the menu I start.
Yes.
Because otherwise I'd always end up with something near the front of the menu.
Or go to one of those expensive restaurants that only has like five things.
And they hand you, it's like a placard.
It's got a nice printed thing.
And it's like, here's the three or four or five things that we have.
Pick one.
And it's like, well, I've seen everything and I don't like these two.
So yeah, get this.
I tend to look at a menu like just by sort of blurring my eyes and skimming around it.
And the first thing that jumps out, I guess you do get tend to get more things like towards the beginning of the menu if it's got several pages.
But like, that's fine though, because it's still me getting a thing I like.
It depends where I'm going to.
If it's a breakfast place, I'm like, where's the pancakes made?
Yeah, you go to the section that you know you're going to like something.
Exactly.
Anyway.
So for next time, the two sequence posts we're going to read is the lens that sees its flaws, which is one of my favorites.
And how much evidence does it take?
Yeah.
How much does it take?
Find out in two weeks.
Exactly three evidences worth.
Evidence units.
Yeah.
All right.
Our main topic was we had our patron who was apparently a patron for like three years.
Long time.
Lucas or Lucas Z.
It's L-U-K-A-S-Z.
I think I remember this one.
Is it the L with the line through it?
Maybe.
Yeah.
Okay.
It's probably Wukasz then.
Oh, gosh.
Because I think he's a Polish listener.
And my Polish is really, really terrible, particularly.
I'm barely literate.
When I was a kid, I could kind of read some kazoic metoic, which is like Matthew the goat kids, kids stuff.
But I think that would be pronounced Wukasz.
All right.
I'm glad that you knew that because I did not.
I was going to say either like Lucas.
I kind of trusted that you don't know how to say it because S-S-Z is also how your name ends.
Yeah.
So I'm like, okay, this sounds like an Inuyashi understandable word.
Put that together.
So he wrote in, or they wrote in asking about immortality.
Does somebody have the email if we want to like pull out?
I just have the, the patron messaging that I was having back and forth.
Okay.
In short, we can find the email in a minute too, but it was current longevity efforts would be a good conversation topic.
Aubrey de Grey, Davidson Claire, Michael Fossel.
Is there any chance that our age, I'm 40, will reach the longevity escape velocity?
Right.
I guess we should briefly say what the longevity escape velocity concept is.
Longevity escape velocity is the idea that at whatever, at time X will invent some technology, will popularize some technology that will increase the average healthy human lifespan by some number of years.
At some point in those number of years, there may be other life extension technologies and lather rinse repeat.
You know, if every five years you're finding technology that increases the lifespan by eight years or something, you're going to live for as long as you want.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Right now, I don't know how fast we're discovering life extension technologies.
I'm assuming it's less than that.
That every, maybe every 10 years we can expand life by one year.
Right.
So we're not, we're not at a escape velocity yet.
Yeah.
But we also don't know because we don't know which things we've already like discovered or helped.
Like we don't know how long, well, that's the exact question.
We don't know how long we are going to live as compared to our parents compared to our grandparents.
But we don't have enough data yet to really sort of plot it.
Can we reach the point where the average extension in life discovered every year is more than one year's time?
Right.
And that's the million dollar question, right?
Like I wanted to put this one off a little while so I could do some homework and I didn't become an expert in two weeks, but I had to try and learn some.
I mean, and none of it's the scientific stuff.
I basically just sort of assumed Jay, so I know all that.
So I came out of another direction.
Like, Aubrey de Grey is my go-to figure in this community.
I think he's in his 40s, but he looks a lot older because of his awesome Gandalf beard.
He's kind of like, wait, he's in his 40s?
No, I think he's in his 50s now.
Well, now he is, but you're right.
But in any case, I remember I was watching some interview with him a few years ago and he was like 45.
He's 57.
Okay.
So this must have been more than a few years ago.
In any case, he was.
And his name is Aubrey David Nikolas Jasper de Grey.
That's awesome.
What?
He looks like Albus Percival Wolfric Brian Dumbledore.
He looks like Dumbledore too.
Look at him.
Like, this is our Dumbledore, you guys.
Yeah.
So sorry, Stephen, go ahead.
No, no, you're good.
So, like, I think he rightly points out, so he's the chief technical officer at the Methuselah project or foundation.
I forget what it's called.
The Sense Research Foundation.
That's right.
Yeah, he dropped the Methuselah thing then, right?
Society for engineered negligible senescence, I believe.
And also, vice president of new technology discovery at age X therapeutics.
Well, I was going to say, you guys know more than I do, but you're looking at his Wikipedia.
You're cheating.
But no, that's helpful.
I'm glad you got it right.
In any case, he's the CTO over there, or he was at least a few years ago.
My information might be out of date.
And he has to spend most of his time kind of basically evangelizing for getting the message
of what they're trying to do out and trying to get money.
But I think he makes a very compelling case that this is an important problem to solve, which, like, to us, it's like, no shit.
But to a lot of people who some people think don't exist, Brian, but a lot of people don't see this as a big problem.
They see it as the way life goes.
Oh, yeah, you live, then you get old, and you get decrepit, and then you die.
Or they even think it's a good thing.
I, all the time, hear people, like, death is advocating for, like, death is really important and great.
And it's a, it's, we should celebrate death.
It's what gives life meaning.
Yeah.
I just, Brian has read Lord of the Rings, right?
Yes.
He's the Lord of the Rings nerd.
And, I mean, fucking, what's his name?
J.R. Tolkien wrote that death was the gift given to mankind.
Yeah, I know.
Deaths are cursed to have to live forever unless they die of sadness or slain, which, I mean, that's a big loophole right there.
Like, if you don't like your life, you can just kill yourself.
But, um, but yeah, the gift that humans got was that they would shuffle off this mortal coil more quickly.
Yeah.
It's a bullshit gift.
In just a few decades, where you get, like, an optimal four decades.
How can, how can someone who's read Tolkien, who says death is a gift, claims there's no deathists?
I think that he thinks that they exist in the same way that Flutterers exist.
I'm not, I'm not going to try and sit here and either poke holes or steal man Brian.
But I do think, I don't think he would argue that they don't, that they aren't real.
He would just say that, like, this is, this is not a majority enemy.
Okay.
And he might be right about the majority part, right?
Like, I think most people would say, yeah, death sucks.
I wish it didn't happen.
You know, anyone who's lost somebody would probably say I wish that they didn't have.
Well, they would say that specifically.
Yeah.
Right.
But at least when I was young, the whole death gives life meaning was still a comment talking point.
And it still is now.
It's still now.
I thought it was starting to be less so.
I guess most of my stuff is 10 years old.
But I remember even watching a talk from Sam Harris during, you know, the, the peak of the new atheism thing.
So this would be like 15 years ago, basically making that case.
A lot of the new atheist stuff, like the part I had trouble with was, yeah, a lot of people were like saying that death is great as like a way to sort of, you know, when they're listing all the benefits of being an atheist and versus like being religious.
They're like, and you get freed from this idea that there's such a terrible thing as like an eternal pit of torture.
And like, you know what?
Death is natural and fine.
And we like this is just people's people who are scared of death, like come up with these crazy ideas in order to deal with their fear.
But we atheists are strong and we can face death with stoicism and respect and dignity.
And I was just like, not me.
I don't want it.
I think part of the knee-jerk reaction that you get from other smart people about saying, Hey, I think death is bad.
We should stop it.
They get like that same sort of like, Oh, I've heard this argument before.
You're trying to slow me on an afterlife.
Yeah.
And so like, that sounds like magic.
Right.
So I can get where they're coming from.
But at the very least it's a common enough place or common enough idea where like, most people don't see this as a problem that we should be working to solve.
They might, they might say it sucks, but they're not like, and we should do something about it.
Have you seen all of the good place yet?
Yes.
So spoilers.
Have you seen all of this?
I have not, but I don't care about spoilers.
All right.
Massive spoilers.
Anyone who doesn't want to know how it ends, skip ahead about a minute, maybe two now.
But from what I heard, I'm still working through the final season.
At the end, it goes full depth.
That's where they're like, and dying is great.
At the end, you choose oblivion rather than getting to live forever in the good place.
Basically, the way it ends is that they get to the good place and everyone there is kind of just like, not exactly wireheaded happy, but they're basically that and they're bored.
Okay.
They've done everything, which seems weird because they weren't creative with everything they did, but etc.
I'm given, you know, that's fine.
If you got a lame utopia, that would suck.
And then they're just stuck there.
And so like the architects who worked on the good place, they've all like, they were all stoked to quit their job when, when the new people are moving in, the protagonists to take over because they're like, we've never been able to figure this fucking thing out.
No one here is really happy.
Oh, okay.
So the solution they come up with isn't, let's give them the opportunity to like, respect or start over or, or whatever.
The way that they did it is like, hey, you know what, like at the very least, here's an exit.
If you guys want it, you guys can leave.
Like now you're not stuck here forever.
Well, I mean, I'd rather have the suicide option.
Right.
Existence was more horrible.
This is what they got was the suicide option.
Okay.
But it isn't like this is the best choice in the end and everyone's going to choose it eventually.
No, I mean, I think not necessarily, but it's not like the second they made this doorway to no, no one knows where like everyone ran through it.
Okay.
But now it was an option.
Okay.
So it was, it was, but it was still death esteem.
Right.
I feel like, I feel like there's more optimal solutions, but I do agree.
The thing that's deathest about that is, sorry, I finished your thought.
Oh, go ahead.
It was like, I think that's the same argument that people make when they say, well, why would I want to live forever?
You'd get so bored.
And I was like, but like people on their deathbed, when they ask them if they want to die, like that, or like they always say one more day, people who commit suicide are depressed, like they're living in a hell.
I could see, yeah, if you were forced to live in a hell, but I don't think like reality is a hell.
Reality is excellent in a lot of ways.
And like, if you're somebody that's just going to die because you get bored, like, does anybody ever commit suicide because they're bored?
Unless they're like being artificially kept in like some, you know, I mean, I'm situation like they're in jail.
There's some people who commit slow suicide, like drinking themselves to death or something.
That's like, because they're not happy.
Yeah.
I mean, that's because they're going wrong in their life that could be fixed.
Or their brain.
Like depression is a solvable problem.
And I think that like the main thing is that like right now I have a backlog of easily 200 years of things I'd like to do.
My current trajectory, I'm not on track to finish all those things.
Mainly because I make no effort to getting through that list.
I mean, so like, but if I had 200 years to do these things, you can bet in the next 100 years I'd have a backlog of if I did the math properly.
I'd get a different number, but 1500 years of things to do.
I don't think we're ever going to run out of stuff to explore problems to solve.
And that's the thing is like, you know, right now there's 1000 books I'd like to read.
And by the time I finished reading them in 200 years, because I'm a slow reader, there'll be 5000 more books that I want to read.
Lather, rinse, repeat until I'm, I'll never run out.
As long as you keep writing books, then I'll have books to read.
I absolutely agree with all you guys.
But I do know that there's some people who are just like only doing the same thing over and over and are bored of it and are just ready for it to end.
And you don't, I know you.
But for some reason, like they just, they don't find the ability to just do something different and not be bored.
I understand.
And that, and I mean, that's a bummer.
I think that's probably partially depression too.
I think that's not normal.
I think that is basically depression.
Like whether it's like clinical and fixable with therapy or drugs, but it's like your life is not doing whatever it needs to to make you give you that.
But that is also like something that can be fixed.
Yeah.
Like I think I talked about, you know, my recent jumping on the antidepressants and stuff and I found that beneficial.
It's weird.
Like even in my most depressive phases, like there were days where it's like I would get up and be like, and not exactly have the thought I wish I wasn't alive.
Because I knew intellectually that like, no, I want to be living until I can fix this.
Yeah.
But I don't have the energy to want to keep doing that, right?
Yeah.
But I, but I understood intellectually that I would.
If I wait long enough or do like some interventions, I'll get back to Stephen who wants to live.
Exactly.
And so I mean, granted, some people's lives are a bummer, but like that's the thing is I think that I think that is also fixable.
Yeah, it's because they're alive.
You're a bummer.
But at the end, at the end of the day, if, you know, somebody wanted to die, they should be allowed to, right?
Right.
But that have to be like, I would like it to be a very exercised choice.
You know, this sounds like a, you know, where they, some of the states where it's like, you have to get one of those invasive wand ultrasounds or something before you get an abortion.
Like I kind of want something that extreme before you're allowed to kill yourself.
Like in that, it's an ugly parallel, but it's like, I, because this is for sure, man.
Like, you know, because again, imagine like a future.
It's like, are you sure you wouldn't rather just have your mind wiped of most things and we can drop you off in a different country and you can start, you start scratch, whatever random shit.
I think the difference that you could point to.
It's basically his death if you have your mind wiped.
Yeah.
So maybe, maybe most of it or something, right?
But I don't know, whatever it is.
Like, my other thing too is I never got like, suicidally depressed.
And I, which is lucky, which means my depression never hit that far on the scale.
But I always had this, like, I guess when I was first getting depressed, I had like just this understanding that, hey, you know what, if anything ever gets that bad, I can just, I'll get out another way.
I'll throw my phone in the river and take a boat to another country.
And like, then I won't have any of the problems I have now.
This guy, I was this ice cream shop owner that I worked for when I was a teenager who used to just have these deep thoughts.
And one time he was like, you know, I don't ever, I don't understand why anyone would ever kill themselves.
Like if I, if I ever got to the point where I just felt depressed enough to kill myself, like that you're just throwing everything away, then like, then you're totally free.
Like, throw away all your belongings, hop on a bus, go, like, go do something crazy.
Like, you know, if you're going to die, that's like literally the worst thing that could happen.
So go, go try whatever.
Lots of cocaine or whatever.
I think that, that you're.
I think it is just a misunderstanding of how depressed brains work.
It is.
That's what I was going to say.
Yeah, but you got that.
Once you're that depressed, you're not going to do that.
I think the thing that gives you the will to do stuff, just there's no, there's no engine, there's no gas.
That message was out there more though.
Like the, if you're that suicidally depressed, what you probably do need to do is do something drastic, like quit your job for several months, like put your life on hold, or like go say the thing you really need to say to that person.
Do a different state or a different country.
Just change things up.
I wish like society supported that more, you know, like that that was first of all the message that like if you're suicidally depressed, that means you're free.
Go do the thing.
And then also there was like services support systems for people doing that.
There's also the fear when you're depressed that like wherever you go, there you are.
So I will go to a different state or a different country, but I'm still going to be me there and I'm still going to be depressed there.
And now I don't have someplace to sleep.
And this is even worse now.
I think that, I mean, like the things that fix depression that like they've studied are things like diet, exercise, sleep.
And like,
Drugs were going to talk about when we get to the actual longevity part of this podcast.
We were going to have a subject.
I will say that when I was at the peak of my back pain, if like I knew it was just a bad day and I just had to get through that day and the next day would be better.
Like if I knew for a fact that every day would be like that, I would not want to live because I mean the pain was really high.
And also I couldn't do anything that was enjoyable because the pain sapped all my energy.
And I would have been like, no, this, this isn't worth going, going forward.
That's totally why I think euthanasia is like acceptable.
But like in a future where nobody was ever in that much physical pain, maybe that would be different.
But like, yeah, there's definitely like things that can make your life miserable enough that it's not worth the amount of suffering.
It's weird because I know there's really good drugs out there, painkillers, narcotics and like lots of old people are on them.
And that like-
I don't want those lungs.
I know, but I mean that makes it better so then you don't have that pain and you can live again, but you don't live normally.
You're kind of foggy and can't do as much stuff.
So I don't know how I would feel about maybe trying those instead of death for a while.
I would try it first.
Yes.
Definitely give it a shot.
Yeah.
But that said, I'm glad you found other tracks to, to being-
Me too.
Better.
Yes.
And all that.
It's, yeah, I guess I could find a way to segue this back into the longevity thing, which is like you mentioned old people, like part of the issue with dealing with this is that people view the symptoms of aging of just accumulating damage for too long from being alive as like distinct from other problems.
And they are, they're distinct in that they have different causes, but they're not, they, they, they're not in this like separate magisterium of, well, this is the kind of things that we don't work on.
And I think that I had a more articulate way of driving this home, but I dropped it.
So I'll let someone else pick up the wheel.
I think, okay, so his, his primary concern seems to be at 40, and I am also at 40 now.
Do, is there going to be, can I get on this not dying thing?
Like, will technology advance fast enough that we will hit escape velocity before I reach 85 or 90 or whatever, where my body actually gives out.
And like, I just, I don't know.
I don't think anyone knows.
I'm not even sure that people at the very high end research places could say that with a pretty great says the most of the fundamental knowledge needed to develop the anti aging medicine already exists.
And we, yeah, we know which specific things cause death related aging.
And we have the knowledge that we need, we just need to, it's, it's about like, are we going to put the money towards this or, you know, as big pharma going to keep.
I personally think he's over, overconfident on that because there's a lot of old people with a lot of money that would be putting money towards that if, if that was as optimistic as he.
I think that he's saying that the, the separate pieces are there, but the, the working machine isn't put together.
Yeah, it's, it's not until like, we can provably, you know, fix these this list of issues.
Like we, we know what they are, we know how to fix them now, but like, is it going to happen in our lifetime?
Yeah, it depends on, again, whether there's enough of a push by governments and like the private sector and whoever is needed.
I think to make sure these things get made in a timely manner.
Yeah, I think a few years ago, his estimate was something like 50% of this being a thing in the next 25 years.
50% of what being a thing?
Longevity technology.
Okay.
So maybe he's optimistic, maybe he's not, but maybe he's pessimistic, maybe he's perfectly calibrated.
I don't know.
I'm worried it's going to be a lot like cancer where they think they found the thing that causes cancer and they fix it,
but then they just find like another deeper problem.
So they solved some cancer, but there's other stuff that needs to be solved too.
And it always spirals like that where they get a little better and they solve some things, but there's always something just out of reach.
But that's kind of the thing is like, yeah, we're not going to solve aging in one swoop.
Right, right.
We're going to get better at it.
But that means you don't know exactly how many steps you need and so you can't say for sure that you'll get them in the next four decades.
I think that's why it's an estimate and not saying, I've got a timeline for this deliverable.
Right.
There was, sorry, you were still talking.
I was just going to say, I think that a major factor of it is the lack of funding.
I know that as of, I want to say two or three years ago, his organization was managing about $5 million a year.
Which when you think of aging and aging and aging related deaths as like the leading cause of suffering across the entire planet.
That's nothing.
It's nothing.
$5 million can't even pay for a very large staff.
Right.
Not to mention the facilities and the supplies they would need.
They staff about 30 people that work under, like that they are, that's on their payroll.
They work in conjunction with other communities and other centers.
But like the scope of the problem is just completely not acknowledged by the budget.
And it comes with no national budget.
Right.
You would think that, hey, if I would just imagine that China would be putting forward 0.01% of its GDP towards solving this problem.
Because if they got life extension technology first, what a boon, right?
They could sell that to the rest of the world.
They could hoard it for themselves and be immortal while the rest of us all die.
And that goes for insert any country, right?
This seems like an easily self-interested goal with enough self-interest to motivate just about anybody to do it.
That's why I'm not as optimistic as Opry to Grey is on how far along we are.
Because other people would also see that and be like, I could make bank.
I am because I'm cynical enough.
I've been in the clinical research industry.
There's not a guarantee that any particular company trying to find the answer to one of these things would find it.
It's just game theoretically, I guess.
If you're trying to calculate the payouts for some private medical organization,
you're going to make much more money, much more reliably if you knock a molecule off of a Zoloft and make a Zoloft knockoff
and then rebrand it as a new antidepressant or some bullshit like that.
Yeah, part of it is that there's no short-term money to be made here.
There's a lot of people in government and in high-level organizations that are religious and don't think that death is a problem.
So you have to first of all convince people that death is a problem
and deal with the fact that culturally we're largely death-ist and largely religious across the world.
And then secondly...
I think it doesn't help matters at all that because of stringent FDA testing,
it takes at least $100 million to bring a new market to the drug.
Yeah, $20 million, $100 million.
I've heard up to a billion sometimes.
Yeah, our FDA is ridiculously conservative, I think.
And if there's a drug that'll expand someone's lifespan by one year,
in order to recoup that cost, you have to charge a lot for that drug
and people aren't going to pay that much money for something that'll give them one more year of life.
Yeah, that's another thing. I think people are that interested on the stuff that'll provide marginal benefits
because it's all going to look like stuff that provides marginal benefits right now.
And that's all it'll ever be, just marginal benefits stacked up on top of each other.
I'm curious how...
But if it costs too much to make a small margin, then it won't come out.
I really think that this over-regulation making things too expensive to have small margins is going to be a major problem
because the margins are going to be small.
There's not, in my opinion, going to be one drug that just automatically expands your life by 20 years.
No, there's like... I forget how many things...
Like, there's at least three therapies.
Or never mind, I should find the entire list before I just start saying things, but there's...
That's also why I'm more thinking it's going to come in a different country than the US.
That's what I was going to say.
Country with less regulation.
There's other countries that have much less conservative FDA's or like, no FDA analog where they could totally do this.
India, China, Mexico.
That's why you use China, my hypothetical, and not the US.
China or India. India makes a lot of pharmaceuticals.
But I mean, they also have a lot of brain drain right now, which is going to make it harder for them to progress.
Maybe like Korea, Japan.
Could be Korea.
Korea is really on the cutting edge of medicine.
How is their regulation though?
Conservative, but I think there might be some fewer restrictions.
Actually, I would want to look that up. I'm not positive, but...
I know Mexico is pretty liberal, but again, Mexico loses a lot of its intelligent people to the US, especially since we're so close.
Yeah, it's a really difficult country to optimize for like...
I was going to just kind of pivot a little bit because you mentioned like diet and exercise and stuff.
Yeah, yeah.
At least according to Robert DeGray five years ago, the benefits are basically negligible on longevity.
Now, I think on life quality, it's definitely a factor, and I don't think he hit that point hard enough.
I listened to his episode on the Joe Rubin experience from like 2015.
Like, well, here's an example he gave.
So like, Japan is the longest-lived country in the world, and in 2015, the numbers were different than they are now for the US.
But if you guys had to guess, what is the average life difference and life expectancy between here and Japan?
So...
Five years?
I heard this before. I don't remember the exact number, but I think it was something like seven years.
It was four in 2015.
So you guys guessed a lot lower than most people guessed.
They usually guessed around 10 or a dozen.
Yeah, well, I mean, you regularly see like people who lived 120, and I think that would probably skew people's like ideas of how long the average Japanese person lives.
Right.
I think one of the surprising parts about that is also that Japanese people smoke a ton compared to the US.
Well, that's part of what Stephen's saying.
It's diet and exercise.
Yeah, like staying healthy to an old age has like individual benefits, but like in terms of centenarians, centarians, what do they call them?
Centerians, I think.
It's largely genetic, and you will see like the people that, you know, are 120, you interview them and like they're not like shining examples of doing all the right things.
Like, I remember there was a Cuban woman who lived to like 110 or something and she smoked a cigar every day because they were asking like, you know, like what, what, um, I think they actually interviewed her and were asking like,
what things do you do to preserve your good youth?
And like it was like, she's like, oh, yeah, you know, I, I go for walks and I talk to my friends and I make sure I always smoke a cigar.
That's sad.
Just keeps me young.
And I was just like, hmm, you can really improve your odds by changing things because like the smoker with amazing genes, a third of them are going to get lung cancer.
So you can have the amazing genes, but the smoking is still going to stop a third of them.
Yeah.
And that, you know, just at the, that one woman's woman's point, like one cigar a day is more like a treat than it is like a.
That's a significant accumulation of carcinogens over time.
She just had good genes.
It's a lot less than, especially like the way you smoke cigars is not how you smoke cigarettes.
Right.
Assuming you don't actually inhale.
And yeah, you, if you do inhale, it's usually a lot less, but like.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, like the same thing with people eating like bacon for breakfast every day, though, like.
Or she said that she smoked like John Wayne.
Then I'm like, okay, no way you made it to 120, right?
110.
How did John Wayne smoke?
Famously five packs a day.
Holy shit.
Which is if you crunch the numbers, doable, but hard.
Yeah, that's chain smoking as long as you're awake, basically.
Right.
You know, if you can burn through a cigarette in about three minutes, that's fast.
But in high pressure times, I think a regular cigarette smoker can burn through a pack in
an hour, which is one about every three minutes.
Right?
Yeah.
I guess.
There's 20 in a thing.
So I just, I remember like when I was smoking would take me five to six minutes to smoke
a cigarette.
Yeah.
So you would have to practice to get John Wayne speed.
But in any case, like, I think there's a lot to be said about like your own, like physical
well-being, whether or not like you're alive or not.
Sure.
I guess I'd rather be decrepit and alive than healthy and dead five years ago.
If those are my options.
If being alive meant that I made it to longevity escape velocity, but the tradeoff is like,
it turns out in most, according to Aubrey de Grey, is not substantial in your own life
expectancy.
If you average out across people who like work out and stuff in terms of just years alive.
But like, I'd rather my last decade be alive.
Like my great grandpa up until his nineties was climbing onto his roof and cleaning out
his gutters.
Yeah.
Like in shoveling snow and stuff.
Like, you know, he was not bedbound for his last decade, not even close.
Just three days ago, I was talking to someone whose grandmother, if she ends up lying down,
like if she slips to the floor or something, she can't get up again.
She has such bad arthritis that someone needs to help her up.
And that was a problem when in the evening she slipped down to the floor and not until
her caretaker showed up the next day, like 14 hours later.
Yeah.
That's why you have one of those like medical cull life alert.
But and yeah, she's, she goes everywhere in a wheelchair and basically just spends her
entire day sitting in a recliner watching TV because that's all she can do.
And yeah, she made it to 90, but it's not a great existence, man.
Yeah.
I would definitely try and maximize like the amount of fun I could have sitting down.
But you know, if you're talking about people born 90 years ago, though, like the other
assumptions are going to be that like other things are going to improve along the way
as well.
Yeah.
Certainly.
And the velocity is like you're like 85 and on the edge of death.
And then suddenly it's like, oh, here's the thing that'll, you know, yeah, the people
who are in their 90s now lived through the age when we burned lead in our gas, right?
So all of us are born after that.
So that's helpful.
I do think it's a really good idea to still try to be as healthy as you can to maximize
your chances and to make those extra five years that might be what you need to push
you over.
Well, and to maximize your like quality of life in your late years are almost separate
arguments too.
It also living is has its value and then like being in good health has another value.
But I think they're both.
Yeah.
Well, it also may be the case that like if you make it to 70 with a decent functional
liver and two kidneys, you might be able to take some of these treatments.
Yeah.
Whereas if you're at 70 and a lot of your organs are already like starting to fail, the treatments
that are available won't help you anyway.
And so you won't get those extra 10 years that will get you to the next treatments.
So I think just being healthier when you're older is good for reaching escape longevity
regardless.
Agreed.
I would say, you know, getting enough exercise and decent diet and enough sleep are all really
important aspects.
Yeah.
I think it was just a good idea.
Like that's going to make your quality of life better.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I would like I'd like I'd said I'd rather have 90 years of good health than 110 years
with the last 30 years sucked.
Right.
So I know we've hit this on previous episodes.
So I don't think we need to get too far into it, but definitely a good exercise routine
and sleep routine is really good for quality of life and life and general health and maybe
longevity.
There's a lot of things that could go on that list.
Yeah.
Well, there's another thing which I have not really thought wasn't that important until
Corona virus hit and I saw it taken away.
I think like connection, right?
Yeah.
Like social a social exercise regimen.
I think it's also very important.
Like if you are disconnected from other people, that's just going to I think it's going to
make you live less long in general.
It does.
They tested this.
Yeah.
It seems to be a human need.
So like even if you have social anxiety or something, go out there, consider it like
you consider exercise.
This is something I have to do in order to have, you know, a longer life and a more
healthy life.
There's an interesting thing.
I feel if I've talked about this on here, but I was trying to look up benefits versus
like drawbacks of drinking alcohol because I drink alcohol and there was this like theory
going around for a while that like resveratrol and wine or like some other thing in beer
that I forget like because they were trying to figure out why drinkers and non drinkers
like why I forget if they if drinking barely affects your lifespan or if it like doesn't
seem to or maybe in some populations.
And drinking encompasses a wide variety of behaviors that's probably important to caveat
that you don't mean, you know, killing 24, a 24 pack a day is drinking.
We're having a beer a night is also drinking, right?
But I'm talking about just drinking it all versus quitting alcohol entirely.
I see.
Neuro toxin.
But it turns out the what is actually making the difference is that like alcohol does damage
you over time, but it's not like resveratrol.
It's the fact that people who drink are more likely to be social than those who don't.
Son of a bitch.
Yeah.
Drinking is a social activity.
There's a difference between, you know, somebody who stays at home and just like solo drinks
and watches TV and like somebody who goes out to bars or like, you know, goes out to
breakfast and gets mimosas or whatever, you know, social thing, have a party and has some
drinks.
So it's clear evidence that socialization, like, you know, getting out having a social
life, having friends is pro longevity.
This is something I picked up just via osmosis versus with my wife's line of work where now
she's in hospice, but she was just in like nursing home care and stuff.
And the one of the pivotal things of people having longer or healthier later years is
having a social network and talking to people.
Yeah.
Like I know that my grandma, it's a bomber because she doesn't get to hang out with her
neighbors as much.
I think they still kind of do sitting several feet apart and stuff outside, but it's called
my grandmother.
We don't get along, but like COVID happened and she was like in a nursing home or in like
a fancy nursing home.
But like they had clubs and they would go on the bus and go to like Trader Joe's and
learn cooking and like go to the aquarium and stuff.
And now everybody's locked in their rooms.
Yeah.
It's part of the reason that religious people have a decent quality of life and longevity
as well because they have those in quilting communities, built in social aspect every
week and community.
That's why we need a rashless church, which I will someday get around to doing something
about.
We'll call it the Bayesian conspiracy.
Perfect.
I'm glad that your opinions about that have come back around.
Well, like the, what I was going to say is that, you know, people will market, oh, play
this game, play Sudoku's, do word searches.
Those are good for your brain, you know, what's really good for your brain, modeling other
humans as you're engaging with them and trying to anticipate what they're going to say and
what they're going to interpret about what you're saying.
Right.
So this is a very cognitively demanding task and if you're going to, if you plan to work
your brain, do that.
And so people do when they're socializing, I think that's really valuable.
My great grandparents lived through their nineties, they played, they played bridge
every, every, either once a week or twice a week with their neighbors, like, and granted
those are all anecdotes and stuff, but the, the data from my wife isn't, this just happens
to be the case.
And Jace corroborated some compare, I'm, as far as I'm concerned, it's established
in fact, that, that having social, having social networks as, as a, in your older age
is just beneficial for you medically and cognitively.
I'm realizing that I'm not equipped at all to answer, how do we say Lucas's name properly?
Wukash?
Probably Wukash.
Let us know how we did.
But I don't think I'm much more equipped to address anything like more science-y than
any of that.
Like this, I did do a little bit to try and get up to speed on it, but there's a lot.
Other than like just reading the pop side books or reading the Wikipedia pages of people
mentioned in the email, like there's not much more I was able to do in this amount of time.
So I mean, we're not done with the episode, but before I, before I forget to plug this,
if anybody, if anybody listening knows a lot about this and wants to talk about it, email
us at, I just had a Bayesian conspiracy podcast at gmail.com.
That's the one.
Send us a comment or put something on the Discord or...
I definitely see emails more than I see comments.
Send us an owl.
Yeah.
If you just don't ping me on Discord, there's a 0.1% chance I'll see it.
If you do ping me, there's a 95% chance I'll see it.
But email is the easiest way.
But any other medium where you say, hey, listen or ping me or whatever, or ping one
of us and get in touch.
Anyone who sends a literal owl gets all sorts of internet points.
Right.
And we will make them a rationalist bishop someday.
Right.
I'm plugging things.
I meant to do this last episode and I forgot.
Plug a thing.
It's not mine.
It is...
Also, please don't actually send an owl in a cage that I will have to care for.
I hear owls make terrible pets.
Yeah.
But if it not want.
If it flies here and drops off something, that'd be tight.
Exactly.
And then flies away.
Yes.
Okay.
Gianluca, I hope I'm saying that right.
I've listened to a handful of episodes, is, or is doing or finished the official audio
version of the replacing guilt sequence.
Yeah.
It's ongoing.
I've been listening to it.
It's really good.
I've never got around to reading it, even knowing how valuable it was because I'm lazy
and hate reading things.
And so I've been listening to this and I said I'd plug it last time and I forgot.
This is great.
So you can search for the...
We should totally link it on this episode.
Oh yeah.
We'll go ahead and just link it too.
But if you're just, if you're going to search it in your thing, it's just called replacing
guilt find it in any pod catcher and it's awesome.
How many episodes is it up to?
Let me double check.
I've been listening in order, which I listened to one out of order because the way this thing
does it is newest to oldest for some stupid reason.
Yeah.
Like re-listening to it, which has been really valuable even though I've read it already.
Because with a lot of, well, I guess with most complicated, long things, you don't remember
everything or you don't like process everything correctly the first time.
And especially I think with like psychological things like this, where it's, here's like
a model about psychology that you have to kind of struggle with to like watch how you're
interacting with this thing and then like see if you can put like the intervention in
play and then kind of check, did I do it right?
Like, but I don't know, I've gotten a lot of value out of just going back and then being
reminded that, oh yeah.
The word should.
Considered harmful.
Like, yeah.
Should considered harmful.
That's epic.
If you catch yourself like being like, yeah, I should go to the grocery store.
Then like you'd be like, oh wait, it should's bad.
I need to go to the grocery store so I can get food so I can continue to live there.
I've traced my values all the way up and now I can say I'm anticipating that more strong
and motivating.
Yeah.
I'm anticipating that internalizing the messages of this sequence will actually make me more
productive and doing the things I want to do, which I'm excited about.
Yeah.
It's you have to dig through some kind of hard like entrenched shit for some of these though.
Like this is really a, I don't know, I was raised Catholic Catholic guilt as a thing.
As far as I know, I don't have a lot of guilt baggage.
I mean, I have some stuff I carry around, but you got to look at your like actual behavior
because like a lot of the stuff you do is invisible to you.
I guess let me say that I know that it's possible to be aware of like how heavy your
guilt baggage is, right?
Or at least have some idea.
I'm not carrying around what I am perceiving as a lot, but I probably carry around some
that I could lose.
And I definitely do think I think I could benefit from framing things better and be more accomplishing
that way.
Like I feel guilty for the amount of like, I remember when, well, I was asked at some
point like a year ago, what's like my guilty pleasure?
And I was like, well, and they even the person asking gave the caveat, like, I don't think
guilty pleasures are a thing.
You know, if you're having fun, that's all that matters.
But if I had to pick one, it's like watching reruns.
I watch several hours of reruns a week and like what, you know, even as useless as it
is to watch American dad, I've seen all of cutthroat kitchen twice.
Like, you know, so as useless as it is to watch those shows, you know, even if you're
getting utilize out of the fun of it or whatever, fine.
But like, there's probably better uses of my time.
There's definitely better uses of my time than watching, you know, I don't know.
I'm trying to think of the show I've seen the most, but whatever, seeing the show three
or four times, like that's a complete waste of time.
And I feel bad about that.
So I should stop feeling bad about it.
And just as long as I'm plugging again, the replacing guilt episode 30 came out on October
29th.
And it looks like they're every week, but if it is every week, they missed a week.
So when you're watching reruns, a lot of times you aren't watching them anyway, though,
they're just happening in the background.
And there's the other perk with reruns is that like, it's, it's relaxing terrain for
your brain.
So it's a great way to unwind because like, even if you're, you're watching Seinfeld,
you know, for the second time or something, it's like, you know, what the joke is coming,
but that means your brain doesn't have to work, you're not, you don't have to follow
it.
You just get to tune in when the laugh comes and then tune back out.
It depends if it's something complicated to or like something you've watched so long
ago that you've forgotten it.
Yeah, there's some things that definitely benefit from rewatches.
And you like, you pick up little jokes that you missed the first time.
I rewatched things that like I watched in my childhood and that was, that's been really
interesting.
That's a trip sometimes.
It is.
And I'm rereading like, I've been reading some stuff aloud to Phoenix or like other
people that enjoy being read to that is things that I found personally like.
Who does into being read?
Nementous.
I don't know.
Some people don't have the attention span, but I love it personally.
I love reading aloud and being read to and like that's something that's been in human
culture forever.
Like people would sit around a campfire and they would sort of retell the stories of like
the heroes of, you know, like story of Odysseus, the other epic stories of the old man.
And now we have like Superman, Batman, et cetera, which provide the same role, but there is
like some desire for repetition.
Like children want to hear the same story before bed because it has that same sort of
like there's something calming about hearing it again and again.
Tell us the one about the trolls, Bilbo.
You know how for some whatever bizarre reason, the music that you listen to as a teenager
imprints on your memories and emotions different than any other music really?
That's the most emotional period of your life.
Yeah.
I was just thinking like for at least the last century, we've had the thing where there's
constant new music and so, you know, teenagers always have their own different thing.
That's where like, oh yeah, hippies have their 60s music, which was great and all, but it's
not my music, right?
I was just thinking like 500 years ago, when literally the only music you had was what people
in your village could sing and play, like literally everyone would have the same songs
as their teenage songs.
Like how uniting would that be across generations if everyone had the same feelings about the
same songs?
Hmm.
That's interesting.
Yeah.
And then, you know, your old Lola Bife when you were a kid was your nostalgia music or
something, right?
It's weird because there's some things like I remember recommending the Billie Eilish
album a little bit ago and it's beautiful and amazing and I love it.
And nonetheless, still like even songs that I know are objectively worse that I heard
when I was a teenager.
They have that sentimental value.
They have a different quality to them that it just, it feels a little different.
I think it's really healthy to have both a bunch of songs or a bunch of artists that
you have that sentimental value like, oh, this is my childhood favorite song or this
is my like my middle school jam and also be able to appreciate new music.
There's a lot of people that sort of the the songs they listen to growing up in their
like twenties and thirties are just the only thing they want to listen to for the rest
of their lives.
Oh, yeah.
And that seems so sad.
That's the age of hippie.
Yeah.
All he ever wants to do is listen to the doors, man.
That is like a universal human thing that like large populations of people have, though.
And I was I got really worried that I was starting to have that where like every time
I realized that like, oh, no, I don't like any of the new music.
Is it objectively bad or am I becoming old?
The thing is, most of the music so far were objectively bad too.
But some of the really good stuff is still around.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I tried to Billy Eilish album.
I can't understand what she's saying.
So I need to just read the lyrics.
I'm bad at that.
We've talked about this.
When I first met you thought I hated music, but it was really just that I don't listen
to it because I can't understand song lyrics.
Well, no, I usually can't either.
I have a very hard time with most lyrics, but like Billy Eilish specifically, I found
very easy to understand.
I'm not sure why.
If you listen to the same songs over and over, you get better at picking stuff out.
She mumbles a lot of it, which is fine.
It's like it sounds cool.
But like it might as well be in Korean.
I think what it is with her is she oftentimes says an entire word when she says the word.
Like, I mean,
That helps.
Yeah.
Like Kesha is really good at that.
I can understand Kesha music.
Just fine.
Awesome.
Her album Rainbow was beautiful.
It was great.
I think Kesha, I think she's one of those artists who like actually has a degree from
Harvard or something like that, and like just like they play a persona.
Like Maynard from Tool.
He makes the most amazing music and some of the lyrics are just shockingly like emotional.
But like the words, the lyrics are stretched to match the music.
Sometimes one word will be spread over several different beats.
Sometimes several words are shoved into a single measure and it, you know, it makes
it a lot harder to understand.
I had to listen to some of those songs many times before I got 90% of the words and there's
still some that I don't know.
That is a trainable skill, by the way.
It's like the same thing with when I first got into doing EMS.
I couldn't hear anything anybody was saying over radio ever.
And like the more you listen, the more you get better at picking that out.
I think it's, you know, the same with foreign languages.
It's the same with listening to music.
EMS.
Oh, gotcha.
Oh, picking stuff over the radio.
Now I get it.
I thought you're saying music again.
I'm like, well, hold on.
What music are you listening to?
Okay, yeah.
Well, I do listen to some music.
No one listens to music on the radio.
No, not on the radio.
I listen to some music that like some people wouldn't classify as music.
I remember.
I really like industrial.
Industrial is totally music.
I love industrial.
Yeah, but I mean like, you know, coil, not lacuna coil, coil the British band where like
it's bizarre phrases.
Yeah, I stretched out strangely, dubbed on top of like a thumping noise that they sampled
from the subway.
Dude, I went to see a band here.
Really artsy shit.
I went to see a band here in Denver where the percussion was an oil drum that had a chain
on top of it.
The guy would bang on it.
Is this blue man group?
No, no.
Because they're awesome.
This was a...
What was it?
Echo beds.
And it was...
Echo beds.
It was like really well done.
And I was like, this is...
Most people wouldn't like this, but they found something and they've managed to make it music.
And this is pretty fucking impressive, especially because the venue where I saw them was such
a small place.
I was literally standing about four feet away from the band.
And there wasn't a stage or anything.
I was just right there with the dude watching him do his thing.
I was like, this is an intense experience.
Yeah.
Anyway.
So we have gotten way off topic.
I have a couple of less wrong articles that were released recently about the subject of
aging.
Okay.
Hit us up.
So we have What's Our True Life Expectancy, which was asked in the like questions section.
I'm really short, so I'll just read it.
Okay.
Adam Zerner says, I recently learned that, and recently learned as a link to the Stupid
Questions October edition 2020, that when they talk about a life expectancy of EG 80
years, it's assumed that the future looks similar to the past, but with exponential
progress in technology, that doesn't seem like a good assumption.
For example, according to Bostrom's survey, which links to just Bostrom's website, 90
percent likelihood, the median pessimistic year for AGI is 2075.
So taking into account technological progress, what do we expect life expectancy to be?
2076 for everybody.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And then like...
2075 and three days.
Yeah.
So I can't really like read all the comments, but there is a bunch of very smart people
in the comments saying like what, you know, sharing what things they know as far as evidence
goes or like sharing their own predictions.
So I recommend reading through that one.
And also there's some good arguments too.
What was it called?
Yeah.
I'll link to both of them.
It's what is our true life expectancy.
And then there's another one, which was three open problems in aging that was posted even
more recently by John S. Wentzworth, which is a longer article, so I'm not going to
read the whole thing, but it's talking about atherosclerosis and how much oxidation.
And the mitochondria senescence by stable switch.
So it's a brief description of each of these open problems.
And then some questions about, for example, well, maybe I'll just read like the beginning
of it.
Um, so aging has a surplus of excellent experimentalists, but a shortage of good modeling slash analysis
slash theory less wrong in the adjacent community of a surplus of people with great modeling
slash analysis skills, many with an outsider's interest in aging.
So this post outlines some problems which could fit that skill set.
I expect all of these could be solved to a reasonable degree of certainty with careful
modeling and some beyond high school, but not revolutionary statistics using already
existing data.
So this is sort of a call for that, which, uh, since this was posted so recently, it
was on November 7th.
There's currently eight comments, but I'm keeping an eye on this one because I just really
like the idea of coordinating the community to see like, which people, you know, can like,
do we rationalist have anybody who could just grab at this low hanging fruit here?
And how could we like sort of coordinate or fund this?
And I'm, yeah, I'm really hoping to see some movement in the comments here.
But yeah.
So sort of the answer to, or yeah, you know, the answer as far as we know, um, for WUKAZ
WUKAZ WUKAZ again, probably I'm not entirely sure.
And also assuming that he's Polish.
Yeah.
Um, for a pal, who are, yeah, um, is, we don't know, like nobody knows right now.
Um, we know, we know what the questions are and we can maybe make some predictions, though,
how long we think that these problems will take.
So yeah, I don't think that they're hoping that we could find, you know, the right answer
on Google and deliver the, the, the answer.
I think they're just saying what's the, like that they're trying to see if we know what's
the consensus and like the consensus is that different people who have different levels
of background experience give different predictions.
But, um, we didn't, from what I, from what I know, and I want to get into a career in
this field at some point, that would be my ideal, but it is looking pretty hopeful.
There is a generation.
I think it is certainly, I mean, it's hard because everyone's going to have that sort
of like bias where they're thinking, Oh, it's going to happen in my lifetime.
Like I don't think it'll happen in Ray Kurzweil's lifetime, despite him saying it will his whole
life, right?
Um, it might.
Uh, I hope it does.
Um, but I think that, you know, some people are, it's easy to be motivated and not even
notice the motivation that it'll happen now.
Like no one's thinking probably 2150, right?
No, I don't think anyone's saying that because we don't know what the world will be like in
150, but there, there is another avenue towards longevity that we didn't talk about much or
at all yet, but there's not really much to say, which is, you know, we've talked about
uh, protecting and preserving our meat suits, uh, if there, if you could move the, the important
moving parts of your brain to another substrate, um, that is more reliable and doesn't deteriorate
like, like your body does, like I'm talking uploads and or robot bodies or something.
Um, that is another way to live longer.
And there are several projects working on that.
And uh, I think the, the problems there are obviously distinctly, uh, different kinds
of challenges than they are of like, how do we keep our bodies working?
Right?
Um, before we go like into the more esoteric stuff, can we, do we want to talk briefly
about NAD plus?
Is that the drug you take?
Uh, no, but the thing that I take supports NAD plus production.
Okay.
Let's, yeah, I'm glad you reminded me because that was on my short list of things to ask
about.
Okay.
Uh, well, the, um, NAD plus is one of the primary things used in our mitochondria to
power our bodies and ourselves.
Is that November alpha delta plus?
Or is that, okay, gotcha.
NAD.
Yeah.
I wasn't servicing N80 plus.
Oh, I see.
Yeah, yeah.
Okay.
Um, but yeah, it's, uh, and it decreases as we get older and there was a lot of promising
research in 2013 or so.
A new promising research just came out.
Yes.
Uh, this is when it first like hit the scene and everyone started talking about it.
And, uh, it was, it was like, and still is, sorry, uh, one of the most promising avenues
for at least slowing down the impacts of aging and possibly getting, uh, a few more
decades out of things.
Uh, does this work on, uh, polymerase tails or, um, no, no, it works by, uh, these cells
not degenerating as quickly.
Uh, and it's, it's still an ongoing, um, ongoing research project.
So I don't want to like overpromise anything or say that like this is definitely the thing,
but it has a quite a number of, uh, Nobel laureates and specifically Nobel laureates
in physiology and, uh, chemistry and such, uh, saying that this looks like probably
our best path forward right now, considering what we know.
Um, and, uh, the NAD plus levels, they support the mitochondrial health, but, um, you
can't like supplement it directly.
Uh, the best you can do is make a lot of the precursors, uh, bio available in your body
so that your body can have all the materials that needs to make more of that stuff.
So, uh, there are two supplements right now that are common precursors to make the NAD
plus, and that is kind of like what the big push has been, um, lately among people who
are excited about this kind of stuff is these particular supplements.
And the one I am most familiar with and who has, that has the most research behind it
right now is called Nica, oh, how do you, thank you.
It's, I don't know exactly how to pronounce it, but yeah.
All right.
I'm going to just put in the show notes to put in the, I'm going to put in my little,
I take notes during the episode of what to put in the show notes.
I'm not going to put that.
I'm going to put supplements and you guys, I'm not going to try and spell that.
Yeah.
It's, it's, I would imagine it's pronounced Nica, Tinnamide, right beside because
that's how it's spelled, but I don't know.
Maybe I'm pronouncing it not.
I believe that is the pronunciation.
Okay.
Uh, and that is the main one that has been, uh, people have been
supplementing with for quite a number of years.
It is, uh, can go, go into your cells pretty easily through cell walls and
they're from there be turned into NAD plus, uh, problem is really it's more of a,
you won't know until decades down the line if this is actually helped slow aging
by some percentage.
So it's, it's a hard thing to measure.
There have been a lot of tests, uh, both with cell cultures and test tubes and on
mice, which are very promising.
And the few human trials have been, most of them have been positive.
I mean, like you said, it's, if this thing was invented 15 years ago or seven
years ago, we're not going to have the data on how it works in humans yet, but
mice don't live that long.
Yeah.
So how much did this, how much did this improve, uh, mice, uh, life spans a fair
bit, but the problem with mice and with all animals in general is that they are,
well, they're different from humans.
Um, the problem with mice is that not people, data doesn't transfer neatly.
Like it's, we've found a lot of ways that we can, um, increase mouse life spans
ridiculously long.
I want to say like nine times as long, but like they don't work in humans
cause mice are, there's some systems they have that are simpler than ours.
Interestingly, and I don't structure differently.
I don't remember where exactly I read this, but almost all animals have a,
like the smaller an animal is generally the fastest heartbeat is.
And you know, I think I don't know where you heard this and I think it's bullshit.
I think you heard this from, was it David Brin who joined you on the
immortality panel?
Maybe we're all animals have more or less the same number of billion
heartbeats. Yeah, was it billion?
That's the only place I've heard it and that sounds made up to, no, I don't
know if it's, I don't know if it's true or not, but it sounds too neat to be made
up or too, too neat to be true.
Right.
Right.
Right.
So I'm not buying the fact that a mouse with an average lifespan or a guinea pig
with an average lifespan of five years has a billion heartbeats.
It might.
Yeah.
I mean, let's Google really quick.
How long, how fast is the guinea pig's heart rate?
From what I've read, well, not from what I've read, from what I Googled
right now, that mammals at least all get about a billion heartbeats per lifetime.
Okay.
Well, I walk back on, was it David Brin that was on that panel with you?
It was David Brin.
Yeah.
I apologize, David, for putting you in my, this is obviously bullshit list
person.
I doubt it.
I don't think he's listening.
August 1st, 2019.
Okay.
And yeah, there's a nature article says about a million.
So, I mean, but that sounds kind of like if you can work out and get your heart,
your, you know, good cardio and get your resting heart rate down to 60, then,
then you're going to live, you know, like, well, what?
Third or 20% longer than someone's resting heart rate is 80.
Well, no, here's the thing.
The exception to that is humans.
Humans have significantly more than a billion heartbeats.
And well, that makes sense because a billion would be about 33 years.
If you're, if you're resting heart rates about 60.
Okay.
Yeah.
I, yeah, the, the there's about 33 billion seconds or about a billion
seconds after 33 years.
Oh, so if you're, if your heart rate is a ballpark 60, then we're, we're crushing
that number by people are regularly hitting their nineties.
Yeah.
And that's with occasional spikes in their heart rate, you know,
and one of the, one of the, um, uh, I'm going to get, you get the side eye
from Wes here for Evo psych because, uh, one of the, uh, ideas is that humans,
a lot of our comparative advantage comes from having knowledge and the ability
to use that knowledge.
And that just basically increases as we get older right up until we start
actually hitting, you know, senescence and dementia.
But so, uh, humans are already optimized to exploit everything easily biological
available to make us live as long as possible, which is why, like things
like extreme calorie restriction will more than two and a half times
expand a mouse's lifespan.
Uh, whereas with humans, it does almost no, like those, those pathways may
already be unlocked in humans to get us where we are at this point.
There is, um, heart rate variability, which does correlate to a lot of, um,
health and like mental health stress type things that can increase longevity.
There's actually this one that I've been using the elite HRV monitor, um,
which has an app paired with it where yeah, the heart rate variability.
Um, I thought you said HIV gives you a comprehensive non-invasive snapshot
of your autonomic nervous system, which is profoundly involved in your physical
and mental functioning.
And, um, that's different though than the having a certain number of
heart beats per time, which all I can find is there was a, uh, there's a Danish
study, um, that was in the journal BMJ heart that did show that, uh,
and also a billion, it's not like, it would be amazing.
Wouldn't that, that would be proof of intelligent design.
If a billion heart beats, there's some relationship between heart rate and
overall life expectancy.
And that makes sense.
I think that lower heart rate, lower resting heart rate within healthy bounds
is associated with good cardiovascular health, which is associated with longevity.
Higher pulses correlated with a greater chance of dying.
But, uh, there's like the, the more, you know, breaking down the complications
of the, yeah, it's, it's more complicated than just how many heart beats.
But that is why lots of animal studies don't necessarily translate over to
humans because humans already have unlocked possibly it is theorized have
unlocked a lot of things that other animals haven't.
So things that work on them may not work on us because we've already got
that going for us.
So, um, yeah, the, but NR is the, the, the supplement in our, uh, that's what
it's usually abbreviated at.
Nicotinamide, right?
That that one.
Thank you.
Is the, is the one that, uh, people have been using a lot of people have been
using, um, in hopes that it'll work.
There's a sexy new kid on the block, uh, which is N M N, uh, is the abbreviation
for more letters.
Yes.
Right.
Um, do you have the, yeah, that's, um, nicotinamide mononucleotide.
Thank you.
And that is what, once the, uh, an R is in your cells, it, it gets combined
into the N M N and then that, uh, is used to make an AD plus, uh, which runs
the mitochondria or which helps fuel the mitochondric reaction.
Anyway, my country is the powerhouse of the cell.
Yes, it is.
Uh, the thing is, um, in animal studies, the N M N can't get through the cell
barrier, so your body first has to break it down into N R, then the N R goes
through the cell, then it's made into M and M again.
And, and, uh, so a lot of people thought that just supplementing and, and, and
directly is, doesn't really particularly matter because your body's going to
have to break it down into N R anyway.
That's, that's what I'm hearing from just everything I've heard so far.
That sounds like it makes sense.
Yes.
It takes more sense to take the more bioavailable version.
Right.
The, the one that's further down the chain already, like the same
way that, um, a, a Draftanil is a pro drug for modafanil, but you have to take
much higher doses of a Draftanil to get, and you don't really get anywhere near
the same effects.
But there are two things.
Uh, the first is that N M N has a phosphate molecule with it that N R does
not have that has to be somehow, um, brought in through your body.
So maybe eat a lot more bananas or something.
Uh, whereas if you took the N M N, they would have the phosphate in there already
and they would break it down and be there and ready to use.
Um, so which one's better?
That I don't know.
Like I said, this is the sex thing on the block.
Also, there's a study that suggests that intestinal lining in humans might be
able to get the N M N directly through the cell barrier.
But then there was another study that said, eh, we're not so sure about that.
Plus it might be only in the intestines.
So, but, but it seems like we're fairly confident that M N N R, uh, might work.
That, that, that has more grounding currently than the, than around longer.
And it's been studied a lot more.
So yes, that is why that is more confident.
So I'm going to go home and buy that one.
It's me personally.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, it is up to you which one you want to buy.
Either one should get you there.
Eventually, uh, I, like I said, the N R has more research behind it.
So that one is probably the better bet.
Um, also the, uh, N R is significantly cheaper.
Uh, it's about, uh, three times as much to get the N M N.
So, and it's not like a lot, a lot, but it adds up over the course of a lifetime.
I think what's it cost a month, about $50 for the N M N.
Whereas the N R you can get for 20 ish.
Oh, good.
Okay.
I was going to say, I mean, 50 bucks wouldn't make a break at the bank,
but it would be annoying.
20 bucks is a couple of couples of, you know, that's like one going out to dinner,
right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
And I mean, so this is, this is how I kind of do my, my, my literal, uh, budgeting on
these sorts of things.
Like my membership, the Chronix Institute is now paid often or I've got a life
membership, but back when I was paying month to month cost four bucks last month
my Netflix subscription, and even though there's pessimistically a 1% chance,
optimistically a 50% chance of it working or something, the, the expected
benefit of that is way higher than me having Netflix.
And so why would I spend, why would I not be willing to spend less than I do on
Netflix on it?
Um, you know, over the, over the course of the next five years, I'll probably
spend more on Netflix and Hulu than I, than I will on my lifetime membership for
Chronix.
And so I'm not sure if you've heard of Dr.
Sinclair.
He was mentioned in the email, but he's another one of the, um, aging research
guys, I'll actually post and yeah, like quartered alongside Aubrey degree.
Yeah.
I'll post a blog of his that, where he talks about this specific thing.
And basically everything I said just now comes from his talking points about it.
Uh, but of note, he takes N M N and not N R.
Yeah, I was going to say, um, and he at least thinks it's better.
Provide a little bit of free advertisement, but Natropics Depot, um,
it was a very good company.
Has nicotinamide mononucleotide tablets for 26.
99 a bottle for how many for 30.
So, uh, I believe that's a month's worth.
Do they have the N R there for substantially less as well?
Well, let me not quote that.
Um, all I know is that I was bummed when they stopped selling a DraftNL pills.
Um, oh, they did.
I think, well, I think so.
I know that they sold the powder for a while.
Oh no, maybe they still sell it.
I've got annoyed cause it's like, it's like 35 bucks for 30 of them.
And I like with you were just saying it's like, I barely noticed.
I get more benefit out of a quarter of a Madaphnil pill than I do a 300
milligram pill of a DraftNL.
Yeah.
They only have the N, N, N, N, the NMN, the, the nicotinamide.
Um, and based on what, I don't know, um, research that I've done, like on and off.
I've been following this too.
And I am convinced that the, or like I, I don't know, my suspicion, I'm not
going to say I'm convinced by like, well, I don't know.
The, I'm updating more in the direction that the N M N is more effective.
Uh, and I've been taking the Niterpix depot one.
I had actually, in fact, when I'm dealing with people selling it were Elysium.
Uh, I had like made a deal that I was going to start taking it at 35.
Cause that seemed like kind of expensive.
I think there's just the one that's like $50 or more.
Yeah.
Um, and it comes in the fancy bottle.
Yeah.
But then Niterpix depot got it for cheaper.
And I was like, yeah, heck, seems like, why not?
I'm going to be taken.
And the, uh, Charlie, who, you know, does a fair bit of research on this
sort of stuff and she also takes N M N.
Actually, the notes that I was just referencing, we're part of our
conversation and, uh, yeah, naturally it takes the N M N and, uh,
depends on how conservative you are.
I think I'm going to stick with the, they're both going to provide benefit.
It's just one might be like slightly better.
Um,
and there's no way for like a doctor to look at a healthy human and be like,
they're 90% within the age range of 39 to 41, right?
No, especially because that varies so much between individual humans.
That sucks.
Cause then that would be that don't, cause you've taken this for five years,
right?
Uh, more than that.
I think it's been six, six and a half.
So like, if you were biologically exactly 38 or something, that would be so nice to
know.
Yeah.
Elysium is doing a clinical trial.
Um, they started it in January.
So it's been going for about a year now.
Um, yeah, hopefully we'll see some results from that, but I don't know how
long it's going to go.
I'm looking at the article, but it was not say the duration.
Okay.
I've got the clinical trials.gov identifier though.
So we can link to that too.
If somebody wants to dig through it,
excellent.
Can find out more info.
They could probably just find out info about the like study design though,
because they're not going to publish all their details on.
So I don't know really what else much to say here other than I,
I wish we were experts and could have given a more like technical,
technical deep dive.
The episode description slash website for this episode will have tons of links
to further reading and all these cool drugs that we're talking about.
And if anyone is an expert wants to talk about it, I'd be super interested
in having them on.
So if anybody's in the field and knows anybody that can help me get in the
field, perfect email me.
I would say to recap, make sure you get at least two hours of good exercise
a week, uh, make sure you get as much sleep as is needed for your body to
feel rested, uh, have a social life of some kind, even in coronavirus times.
Join the rationalist singing thing.
Yeah.
Web app.
Yeah.
Somebody made it.
Yep.
Link to it.
Uh, and maybe supplement with NR.
Yeah.
I mean, that seems like the best you can do.
Oh, I guess also moving away from polluted areas.
Yes.
Oh yes.
That can help.
We forgot to mention that.
Yeah.
Managing your stress can help too.
Stroke.
Low stress is good.
All the things.
Pollution is terrible for your brain and your longevity as a whole for your
healthy brain.
Cars are bad for you.
Cars.
Yeah.
I mean, in the car, I probably don't consume that much exhaust.
No, I'm talking about just car accident risk.
Oh yeah.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
We can speak back about that, that I wanted to touch on before the episode.
I was hoping that when I moved here, I'd be able to like sell my car and just take
the trains.
I was like, yeah, there's a train system in Denver.
This is great.
And then like after being here a bit, I was like, uh, it's not very, it's not very
practical.
Better than anything in Texas, but it's not saying much.
I can't use it day to day to like, without it being ridiculous.
It's great if you work downtown or in an ever text center and you don't want to
drive there.
That's about the extent of it.
So yeah.
All right.
So we had some feedback on car stuff, you said.
Yes.
We did have a quick feedback that I wanted to hit.
Um, when we were talking about the, uh, I think it was just last episode about
the high cost of getting a, um, driver's license in Sweden, uh, it turns out that
their accident rate is quite a bit lower, like I think a third of the U.S.
rate or traffic fatality rate, mild driven anyway.
And so, um, I guess that was a victory.
Ha from Jayce.
Yes.
Yes.
I quiet little ha like too polite to just laugh and point at him.
Yeah.
No, I feel bad about doing that.
No, no, no.
I mean, when I learned that, I found that was like, I was like, okay, maybe this is
like really justified and a good idea because wow, that's a big deal.
But literally the same guy who wrote to us and was complaining about how much it
costs in Sweden, um, said that, uh, he doesn't think it's necessarily worth it.
So the cost is too damn high.
Lots of jobs require a license and it's basically an anti-economic mobility thing.
People don't die as much.
Yeah.
But that said, like, if you need a car to get to work, but it costs $4,000 to get
your license, that would kind of like really fuck a lot of people, right?
Yeah, I'm not saying it's a, it's great.
Like, I don't know, but it's hard for you to put utilize on like things, you
know, preventing people from dying.
Yeah, anyone, but money also prevents people from dying.
Like if you have money to go to a doctor and you put the utilize in dollar
amounts of how many like lives are saved versus how much like inconvenience, the
amount of money and time, that would be really hard.
The hard death is that it's not just you who, who you're at risk, right?
It's whoever you hit.
Or whoever hits you.
Yeah, exactly.
So like if, I mean, I could be doing everything right and then some dipshit,
you know, as drunk crosses the, the meeting on the highway and slams into me at
a combined 160 miles an hour, right?
So like it's, that's, that's the bummer.
Well, like to me, that's, that's the only time I used to get angry when driving.
I'd delivered pizzas through college and then I realized that the difference
between like rage driving to a place and like just chilling was like three minutes
per trip.
And so I was like, you know what, I'm going to just take it easy on the road
all the time forever now.
And I'm almost exclusively due.
The only time I get stressed, so I get to live longer.
Exactly.
The only time I get annoyed to the point where I will like, uh, express it or you
have like my, basically my pulse change on the road is when someone does something
dangerous, if they're going to be stupid, like, and I, you know, I was driving four
Collins yesterday, it's a 70 mile drive, somebody, the left lane over 10 car lengths
ahead cuts off this big white truck and without signaling.
And I just kind of went and like, look at that idiot.
And, uh, you know, it all worked out fine.
If it crashed, it'd have been, my reaction would have been different.
But when people do things that are risky to me and other people, but mainly like if
I don't see it, it doesn't get my blood going, but that's when I get mad.
And I'm like, you almost fucking killed me.
You're inconsiderate on behalf of other people.
Like if I'm on the highway and I see so to cut somebody else off, I'm like, oh,
Dick, I, I probably say it, but it doesn't, like, it doesn't stress me out really.
But like, I, and I'm not an angry person and I'm not like a, let's call people names
person, but even just like imagine the situation.
I'm sitting there like, motherfucker, but because there's so much responsibility.
Yeah.
And it's, because again, it's not just you.
We need the self-driving car future where everyone can have full mobility and not
kill each other.
It's just, we just really bad at long-term, we're bad at long-term
calculus is that's why I like don't think we should be driving.
It's somebody being late for work one day, like is not inadequate, like, you know,
risk to measure against dying or killing somebody else.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, we certainly shouldn't if there's other options.
It's like, oh man, I'm going to be late to the birthday party.
Yeah.
Or like, and like, it just seems like such a, you know.
Well, what got me was his comment saying that it's an anti-economic mobility thing
because like, that's a big deal.
That'll impact GDP.
If like, you don't have the option to change to a better job because you don't
have the mobility needed to like go to a different part of town, that the
difference between longevity now and longevity 50 years ago is that we have a
lot more wealth and more productivity now.
So less people need to be working in the coal mines and the factories.
And those people can instead be working on, you know, high tech stuff or becoming
researchers or something.
Like GDP really is important for everyone's lives and, and progress to
continue progressing.
So yeah, I don't disagree.
Yes.
That's a different thing.
Like how many people are we willing to trade off dying in car accidents to get,
you know, another half a percent of GDP and maybe get to longevity escape
velocity a decade sooner?
I don't know.
If someone wants to try to do that math, feel free.
Yeah.
And how many people and friends did we lose along the way?
At the very least, I'm confident that where the needle is pointing now is not
the optimal position.
It's definitely two lacks in the US.
Well, no, I mean, just like the, like you mentioned, oh, I can't be a minute late
to work.
Well, like a lot of people can't just look at fire because they've got stupid
jobs, like that norm should change.
Be like, sorry, you know, they're like five minutes.
Yeah, a couple of times.
And it's like, like, oh, you need three write ups that the woman just hated me
and wanted to get rid of me.
So she was like three minutes late and I was just like, geez.
And those people suck, but that's a lot of people's jobs.
So like, you know, if, if there's an accident on the way to work and I need
to, you know, speed the rest of the way to get there on time, a lot of people are
in that position, right?
So that's definitely, so some norms about just like society needs to change
around that and stuff.
But, you know, you also probably shouldn't have gotten your license when you
said that you, you didn't stop at a single stop sign on your test.
Yeah, I guess apparently I rolled on all of them.
And so like, and what's funny is a little two lacks here.
Well, and my wife had a similar situation where I can't remember exactly what
she did.
She said something about, like, I think there actually may have been a dog on
the road or something and she swerved erratically around it, you know, because
the first time you all sit in an animal is terrifying, right?
And she's still passed or something, right?
And like, but her handling of that didn't result in anyone's injury, but it
was reckless or something.
I can't remember the specifics.
So when she got back to the DMV and like, yep, you passed.
And she's like, wait, really?
She was looking at somebody who was upset and that person didn't pass.
And she's like, what did you do to fail?
Like, I, I can't remember what again, Rachel did, but it was just like, if
apparently it's really hard to fail and somebody did.
So it should be harder.
I do agree.
You should, you know, like everyone, probably not quite to the point is right.
$2,000 of training before you can get this license.
Maybe like, if there's wonder, does it have to be that expensive?
Like, can they just make the test harder?
I mean, I think that's why you need the $2,000 of training because the test is
now you can just drive with your parents more.
Like right now you get like the way that the way that it worked for me anyways,
you get your, uh, your learners and parents get it.
And then, well, but the way I can say it worked for me is then your parents will
drive with you for a dozen hours and then let you make up the other hundred and
just write them down and say you did them.
My dad tried to teach me to drive in like his stick shift Jeep, which was
terrible and he was so anxious that he like wouldn't let go of the little
hang, hangy thing above the door and was yelling, Oh my God, you almost hit that.
So like, and then my mom is a terrible driver.
So she taught me how to drive incorrectly on my driver's test.
I actually also passed because I parallel parked incorrectly.
And like the guy was just like, Ah, okay, where'd you learn that?
It was like my mom taught me.
He's like, why don't you try pulling out and then why don't you do it?
And he talks me through the correct way of doing it.
So I did it.
Right.
He's like, okay, I guess you pass.
Don't, don't do it that way.
That was dumb.
I don't know what the hell your mom was thinking.
I was just like, I know, right?
Like my dad taught me to drive a stick on like one of his co-workers, like 70.
It was, it was a co-worker at the transmission grinding.
Well, what was fun is like this thing was like a some 70s truck and it was,
it was definitely already a junker.
Like it had, I want to say 15 degrees of play on the wheel where like you had to
turn the wheel just like that had no response for several degrees before it even
catch and so straight.
So we practiced in the field, not like a gravelly field in the middle of nowhere.
And he's like, we're practicing on this because you can't hurt this car.
So stalling it and rocking it back and forth was totally fine on it.
Can't hurt the car.
Can't hurt the field.
Right.
I mean, you can hurt the garage.
You also can't tip this, this vehicle.
So go nuts.
You're fine.
Yeah.
I unfortunately have a couple of friends who just like never learned to drive and
don't have anyone to like, I've been the person offering to be like, Hey,
if you ever want to like go drive some donuts around in a Walmart parking lot,
get your license.
You can do that.
Don't do it in Walmart.
Go somewhere else.
There's usually better break in areas.
You know what I mean?
Oh, no, yeah.
It was the first large parking lot that came to mind.
But yeah.
Oh yeah.
I'm just thinking like that because I think that while practicing donuts is
probably reckless.
I did also a driving lesson with my dad of, Hey, here's how to drift in the snow.
Right.
And so this will.
And yes, while it will be fun because now you can show your friends how to drift.
The important thing is like now the car's out of control and now you know what
that feels like and here's how we're going to get out of it.
And so now when my car goes out of control in the snow, as it does reliably every year,
I don't panic.
I don't slam on the gas.
I don't slam on the brakes.
I find the, find a way to try and get traction and occasionally hit a curb,
but that, you know, happens once every four years, right?
On average or something.
So point is, is that like the way to get good at it is to practice the basic shit
of just how cars work, how roads work, all that, but then do some deliberate
careful practice under bad condition.
You know, the first time it's raining a lot out and there's the opportunity and
you haven't done it before.
Go with your friend and say, Hey, we're going to go driving the rain when you
can't see in the roads or slippery, like practice, practice, practice, practice.
And that is probably generalizable for a lot of stuff.
That's why I hit the point so hard.
All right.
Alrighty.
Uh, shall we think our patron?
Yes.
I got this week.
Wait, can I do a bit?
I just want to like be like, this episode brought to you by me.
Hey guys, let's talk about, no, let's not.
Let's talk about this, this person.
Oh, okay.
Okay, cool.
Okay.
Yeah.
Do we want to provide it of the beds of ads again last time, which was like,
I mean, I almost want to go in and actually beep out the word.
The company that you said, so no one gets anything.
Actually, this episode wouldn't be possible without dental person, which is an
awesome internet handle and yes, presumably a person in the dental industry or something.
Um, anyway, dental person is the, our, yeah.
So we tried to put together a little sketch where we're going to pretend like
we had a sponsor.
I'm not sure that went that well.
Maybe we should cut that.
We'll, we'll see if it makes it through the, we'll, we'll see if it makes it
through the cat.
Cause like, it'll be for patrons only.
Now I could just imagine like somebody coming across.
Oh, no, that just reminded me of, uh, Phoenix has told me about a podcast where
somebody tried to put some fake advertisements in their thing.
And they were actually funny, like advertisements that had to do with the,
like there was like three of them.
They're like, this, this thing brought to you and they did a little joke each time,
but like what happened was the people listening to it weren't used to
advertisements and like Phoenix had the same thing where as soon as they started
to like do the spiel, they just skip, skip, skip.
And I'm like, man, why are there so many advertisements that skip, skip, skip.
And they, they didn't even know that they were funny jokes.
They just automatically were like, no ads.
The right way to do it was how we, we've got worm did it, which is they did
commercials for Fugly Bob's burger shack, which was like, I think a place actually
mentioned in the book at one point and they just like pretended like it was
commercials, but like, it was like the very beginning.
That was where like Taylor met up with everybody when they were interviewing
her to be a super villain.
And then like they're, that was really great.
Cause God was just like, what would I wonder what's going on with Fugly Bob's
right now, like with, with the merchants in town and like the, the slaughterhouse
nine come in and so all the commercials would be like, and things are pretty
terrible right now, but we're still open.
It was stuff like that.
Oh God, is that Leviathan?
I wonder if welcome to Nightfield, when they did their commercials, they were
like always real companies, but it was not a real commercial sponsored by any of
them because they were just weird surreal shit about how like Nike sneakers, they
make you float upside down.
But like the thing is, if, if a corporate, if a corporation was to sponsor
welcome to Nightvale, I could see them being like, okay, we'll agree to sponsor
you, but only if we can say anything we want and just attach your name to it.
Yeah.
I mean, if a advertising company was smart, that seems like a win-win.
Absolutely.
I found there's like, there's a few people that managed to make advertisements.
Not terrible.
I tend to like the McElroy brothers and I think they usually do funny enough, like
gags about the ads.
Um, but six, this YouTuber, wheezy waiter who like, thanks, Jen X.
I like a YouTuber now.
Watching that like a TV show now, but like, he did a ad for Blinkus that was in
the middle of, um, he like, one of his things that he and his wife try things
and that they have the series, why do people like X and they were doing, why
do people like meal planning and in the middle of it is like, okay, so now I'm
going to give you a, you know, ad for our sponsor Blinkist, but also I'm going
to try to do as many food puns and over the course of this ad as possible.
So it stays in line with our cooking thing.
And it was just like the pun counter was going like once a second.
Like somehow he was managing to put, he put like 47, like food puns into this.
There are definitely ways to make it less annoying, but, uh, make no mistake,
our real sponsor this, this episode is dental person.
Thank you so much for your support and everybody who helps keep the lights on
and lets us pay for hosting bills, equipment and a little extra for us.
Yeah.
At the end of the day, um, for the most part, you know, like it goes, I used it
to buy the, uh, the mic I use at home for, we want more, um, you know, so it's,
it's, uh, it's, it's appreciated.
Thank you.
You guys all rock.
Yeah.
I want to shout out to, um, Lou, somebody else has to say that.
Oh, Wukash.
Yeah.
Wukash as well, who, uh, is also a patron of ours and gave us our topic.
Wukash, thank you for both your patronage and the topic dental person.
Uh, you are the reason that all the rest of our audience didn't have to listen
to any ads today.
So maybe where they have any real ads, any real ads.
Yes.
And maybe why I saw some of them have a good teeth.
Nice.
Okay.
Uh, thank you everybody.
We'll see you again in two weeks.
Awesome.
Good night, everybody.
Bye.
