Welcome to the Bays in Conspiracy, I'm Ian Ashbrotsky.
I'm Stephen Zuber, and it's a lonely night in the recording studio.
Yeah, no jest today.
No jest, no guest.
So it's just us, which I think everyone knows what that means.
So buckle up, this will be one of those tangential episodes where Stephen came up with a topic.
And nothing happens, and we eventually just say, okay, please listen to us again in two weeks.
But we'll try and make some stuff valuable in the middle there.
I wanted to start off this one by, when I was editing the last episode, I got a chance to re-listen to everybody's positions again.
And so I haven't read any of the feedback if anything's come in yet, but I put down a little note here that after some thought,
Stephen's official opinion at the time of recording is that it was wrong to kick Sargon off of Patreon the way that they did it.
If they told him to stop using the N-word and making signed comments about raping people and whatnot, and then he refused, then I think it would be fine.
Jess made the excellent point that this doesn't allow him any room to contest his position in a formal way.
I think David said something like that too, but Jess put it that succinctly, that the way that they did it, they didn't leave him follow these 10 steps and he can be allowed back on the platform.
This was more of just a pull the rug out kind of thing.
Yeah, it was sort of like Tumblr randomly banning all sorts of accounts without warning.
Yeah, and I'm trying to think if I want to stand by this or not.
I think even if it was somebody as despicable as Alex Jones or whatever, you tell them what they're doing wrong and if they don't fix it, then they're kicked off.
And I get where that's still slippery, you know, hey, you've got to buy our books and drink our Kool-Aid and come to our church and we'll let you stay on the platform.
It's a slippery slope, but I do think that, look man, we asked you to stop threatening this woman with rape.
If you don't stop it, we're going to kick you off, right?
I think at that point, it's much more defensible.
So my new position is that this case was handled poorly and I think that there's ground there to be discussed for setting up tenants for like, here's the Terms of Service for our platform, right?
You know, Sam Harris pointed out at some point that, in fact, there was a tweet from the CEO of Twitter saying thanks Sam, it was good recording with you or something.
So there's going to be an episode coming out with him and I hope they bring this up. If they don't, I'm going to be pissed.
But you know, whenever Trump was threatening North Korea with like, well, we'll rain down Armageddon or something on you,
Harris was like, doesn't that violate Twitter's Terms of Service?
Because it does.
Yes, it technically does.
It technically does in a way that like isn't just me saying that.
If it was me, that would also violate Terms of Service, but I can't actually rain Armageddon down upon North Korea.
But Trump, in theory, could. So, yeah.
I get why there's all kinds of great reasons not to ban him from Twitter.
Actually, I don't think there's any great reasons to let him keep Twitter. He should have been kicked off Twitter a long time ago, but-
censorship?
Just for being stupid.
Do you see a tweet from today?
No, what do you say now?
All right, I'll dig it up.
But I was going to say, at this point, Twitter is basically a public platform.
And like, especially if the president is just using it to randomly air his opinions.
I mean, that really kind of demonstrates how much this is just a platform for people to say what they want.
And it's, if Twitter does go in and start really gatekeeping and gardening their area, then that's great.
But that would be a radical change of what was, and that would make Twitter not the platform that it has pretended to be for a long time.
Totally.
And yeah, it's interesting.
I mean, it can be run like a private forum, or it can be run like an open platform, but having like this halfway thing, we're like,
oh yeah, we're an open platform for everyone, except for the people that we disagree with is, in my opinion, total bullshit.
I think that's fair.
You know, by all means, you know, that's my thing with like Facebook.
If Facebook had a downvote button, I'd probably still be on Facebook, you know, because like, at least on Reddit,
and there's definitely a hive mind and stuff depends on the on the subreddit and stuff.
But like, somebody goes on there and says some crazy shit, you know, they get downvoted, and if you set your settings right, you don't even see it.
Or you open up the comment with negative 600 downvotes and give them another one because they said something terrible, right?
Anyway, speaking of people using Twitter to say something stupid, quote,
be careful and try staying in your house.
Large parts of the country, capital C for some reason,
are suffering from tremendous amounts of snow and near record setting cold.
Amazing how big the system is.
Wouldn't be bad to have a little of that old fashioned global warming right now.
Speaketh the president this morning.
So yeah, being kicked off or being stupid, I think they'd lose a lot of people, but...
Like destroy their entire business model.
But you can curtail your own experience on there.
Well, the best way to curate your experience on Twitter?
Not go on Twitter.
Yeah, that's probably a safe way to do it.
I was talking with a lunch with Matt Freeman this week, and he had said that he's in just an effort to make his online experience happier.
If you see something, he's made a...
He's resolved to...
If he sees something on there, on any social media thing that makes him unhappy or outraged, he just stops following it.
Even if they often provide good stuff, he's like, no, I'm just done. Whatever.
And that's not the worst way to do it.
If all you're doing is following Neil DeGrasse Tyson from Ripping Apart Movies with How Bad Their Science is,
or whatever your motivational We Rate Dogs Twitter, which if you're not familiar with, everyone should be aware of...
They're all good boys.
Yes, they are.
They're good dogs, brunt.
But...
Yeah, I mean...
Anyway, that's my thought on the Patreon episode, the censorship one.
Yeah.
Anyway, we have a topic for today.
We do have a topic for today, sort of.
Yes.
Yeah, we didn't ever quite get to the end of the whole evolutionary psychopathology slash albion seed thing that we did like two or three episodes ago now.
And we did want to finish that up.
So I figured we would go ahead and do that today in addition to our bless wrong and feedbacks and other things.
Cool.
Okay.
So as a quick refresher, if...
And boy, did we get some comments on that last episode, but we'll get to that later.
Oh, the Patreon one?
No, no, no, the albion seed one.
Oh, okay, cool.
Yeah.
But as a quick refresher, it seemed...
And the argument was that the four original settlers, settling groups in America, had four very different cultures that they came from, which seemed to influence not only their life outcomes, but also their strategies for living lives.
God, that sounds really obvious when you put it that way.
Well, but it's worth spelling out.
Okay.
The other thing that really struck me with reading these was just the graphs of how that continues to influence the attitudes of the region now, like county by county breakdowns.
You would think that's enough time for stuff to happen and things are less isolated than they used to be, but there's still like remarkable tendencies to keep with that trend.
So that's really interesting.
Yeah, but the position was that they tended to sort into two types of general life strategies, ones of living fast, mating young, and ones of living slower and mating older.
Live fast and die hard.
Exactly.
And, well, I'm just going to go ahead and read this next part.
Okay.
So this is a stated, a proposed mechanism for how that sort of thing might evolve come about.
Yeah.
Okay, so here's a proposed mechanism for how that thing would work.
It says an epigenetic mechanism looks around quote unquote, which of course doesn't actually mean looks around, but in the same way that like when you're in the womb, you get a feel for the environment based on how stressed the mother is and how much food you get, that sort of thing.
Your genes and whatever hormones that are impacting your development notice the environment in a non sentient way.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So epigenetic mechanism looks around quote unquote at the world during the first few years of life to try to figure out if you're living in the sort of unpredictable dangerous environment that needs a fast strategy or the sort of safe masterful environment that needs a slow strategy.
Depending on your genetic predisposition and the observable features of the environment, this mechanism makes a decision quote to lock you into a faster or slower strategy, setting your personality traits more towards one side or the other.
And then they gave a breakdown of the foremost common ways to the foremost common ways to interact with your environment.
So just just to pause there that that thesis isn't that controversial.
Not at all.
I don't think so either.
Genetics has a bunch of woo around it.
But, you know, look, if you eat the right foods, you can change genetics or whatever is the about as dumb as it gets.
But the idea that, you know, people who with, you know, mothers that were in starving situations during pregnancy, those children have different life outcomes and different biology than children who were not malnourished as feti fetuses.
Fetis is more fun to say.
Okay.
But I'm pretty sure it's fetuses.
Yeah.
So yeah, I'm with you so far.
You can lose me here.
All right.
So the four basic strategies that are laid out are the antagonistic slash exploitative strategy, a fast strategy that focuses on getting ahead by defecting against other people, because it expects a short and noisy life without the kinds of predictable iterated games that build reciprocity.
It throws all this away and focuses on getting ahead quick.
And these are the kinds of, you know, lie, cheat and steal sort of people that will burn the commons and burn their friendships in in efforts to just go.
Yeah, or only phone form friendships for, you know, the purposes of getting more whatever they need before they move on to the next town to scam, right?
Yeah, exactly.
I think it might be worth stopping here really quick just to point out that none of this is like morally expulatory or morally none of this is none of this is about the ethics involved.
Right.
You know, this isn't saying, oh, look, their mom was hungry to now their assholes and that makes it okay.
This is just, you know, biology.
Yeah.
You know, so like, yeah, you might have problems that came from things outside your control, but that doesn't make them like not problems.
And also it's not, I mean, yes, we generally don't want people to act like this, but it's totally understandable too in ways like if you are growing up in a hostile environment where everybody hates you and they're not going to give you a break.
Sometimes the best thing you can do is be like, fuck all of you, fuck the system.
I'm going to get what I can because you hate me and want me to die anyway.
Right.
And especially if you take it from the gene centric point of view, right?
Where, you know, your genes that make your brain aren't really caring that like, you know, they don't have this inner Gandhi that they're trying to suppress.
They just don't build one.
You know, if you're, if you're born in a war, ravaged country and, you know, under the under the heel of some whatever dictatorship, then like, yeah, you're going to do what you need to do.
And it could be the most, you know, arguably the morally best thing for you to do to, you know, supplant the system and get the fuck out of there.
Right.
Yeah.
Like the gay Jewish kid living in a Nazi society, be like, you know, take everything you can burn the place down and run because fuck all of them.
Yeah.
Anyways, that is, that is one.
Next one is the creative slash seductive strategy, a fast strategy that focuses on getting ahead through sexual selection, i.e. optimizing for being really sexy.
Sign me up.
Because it expects a short and noisy life, it focuses on raw sex appeal, which peaks in the late teens and early 20s, as opposed to things like social status or ability to care for children, which peaks later.
Not much to dissect there other than like, you know, I guess we can think of examples, maybe of people, you know, with this, this wouldn't be necessarily every couple who has kids, you know, at 19 or something, but certainly maybe is this referring to like the jocks?
I don't think it is actually, like, I felt mildly called out by the fact that creative is in that title.
I'm like, oh, I see, like the rock stars, because the rock stars generally get laid a lot and then like look like hell by the time they get in their 40s.
Okay, I could follow that.
And yeah, but and I was like, poets and artists, I guess, yeah, yeah, they're all just trying to get laid, aren't they?
I mean, like, that's the thing about poets.
I guess everyone's trying to get laid.
But that's like the thing about people who are in theater, right?
You look at their life and you're like, man, that's awesome life.
I would want that.
But then you find out they're basically living in complete poverty and have nothing going for them in their lives, except they're all super hot and fucking a lot.
We were, I was watching old SNL episodes last night, and we started with season one, episode one, which opens the George Carlin or rather opens with a bit with John Belushi.
I forget.
He was around for SNL forever.
But then Carlin was the first host, which I like plugging because I've been a Carlin fan for like 15 years.
But just I want to, this is, he told you this would be full of tangents.
The culture, I think it would have been, I didn't watch Saturday Night Live growing up.
And I think it would have been really fun to have because you really get the pulse of that sector of society once a week.
You've seen a few head full of episodes maybe at some point.
Of Saturday Night Live?
Yeah, I used to watch it a lot.
Yeah, so it's just like, if you're into the, especially the comedy industry, everybody who's anybody's been through this, through this workshop, right?
And I remember like, you know, Chris Pratt famously lived in a van and he moved to LA and stuff.
And he was apparently also always a wholesome dude.
But like you said, full on poverty, probably still getting laid because he's Chris Pratt.
But at least I certainly hope so.
But I guess I had, I was at a couple drinks last night, so a lot of my thoughts were somewhat disjointed and not that easy to recall.
But I remember when Rachel and I went, or when she was getting her master's in New York and I went and visited, we went to a place in Times Square called like the Starlight Cafe, which was a complete nightmare.
Okay.
It was really funny.
It was like, it was this diner and everyone was like in themed costume, you know, someone like, I think our waitress was dressed like Marilyn Monroe or something and everybody was like singing and, you know, even like we were in line for like the Empire State Building to go to the top.
And this guy was singing One Direction song really well.
But, you know, Rachel and I were after we left the Starlight Cafe, I kind of looked at it and I was like, you know, I think everybody here who's like doing stuff to get noticed is trying to quote get discovered.
Right.
You know, so they're here doing this grungy shit, you know, working for, you know, seven bucks an hour in a diner in New York City.
And they're just waiting for somebody, some talent agent to come along and notice them.
Right.
So yeah, the, I guess the reason I brought that up.
Well, I can draw it back to the article.
What about that strategy is fast.
I guess, hold on, let me answer my own question.
That has no long term planning.
Right.
This is just like, I'm going to put everything I can, I'm going to go to the city and I'm going to get discovered.
I'm going to do whatever it takes.
Yeah.
And not like, I'm going to get a job and like, so I can feed myself in five years.
And also fast.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And fast in terms that there's going to be a lot of sex early on.
Fingers crossed.
Right.
Yeah.
Which nowadays we have ways of preventing that from resulting in children, but used to not be the case.
And so that sort of strategy would result in having kids early in life.
Yeah.
All right.
Cool.
Thanks for the digression.
What is number three?
Number three is the pro social slash caregiving strategy.
A slow strategy that focuses on being a responsible pillar of the community who everyone likes.
Because it expects a slow and stable life.
It focuses on lasting relationships and cultivating a good relationship that will serve it well in iterated games.
A good reputation that will serve it well in iterated games.
Sorry.
Yeah, you're good.
So basically Hufflepuff.
Oh yeah.
Do you want to plug that cracked video because we can tie them into these or after that.
Let's do it after we do the next one.
Yeah.
So the pro social caregiving strategy is I guess what like the loving parent.
Yeah.
This is like everyone in middle America, right?
Okay.
Or it's what everyone thinks that everyone in middle America is.
The nuclear family.
Yeah.
Okay.
Exactly.
Gotcha.
All right.
The skilled provisioning strategy.
Skilled provisioning strategy is a slow strategy that focuses on being good at a specific useful task or at specific useful tasks.
Because it expects a slow and stable life, it focuses on gaining abilities that may take years to bear any fruit.
This is the nerd strategy.
And the professional strategy.
And the professional strategy.
You don't have to be a nerd to be like a great carpenter or handyman or something, right?
No, that's true.
So yeah, nerds certainly, you know, I'm trying to get good at my career slow strategy so I can do, let me pull out a word here.
Yeah.
For specific useful tasks.
It doesn't say to make, oh yeah, it expects a slow and stable life, but also to take, you know, to get the skills to make that happen.
It sounds like anybody who masters a trade, like a trade, not a skill would fit into this category, right?
Probably.
I mean, yes.
Okay.
Yes, I would think so.
Like someone who's really good at HVAC systems or master plumber, that kind of thing.
So these aren't all necessarily exclusive.
No.
But it's easy to draw them into boxes.
Yeah.
Exactly.
And the first thing that you notice very quickly with this, and I think it was positive.
I think it was even brought up in the article was that it seems very easy when you get these sorts of four groupings to sort everything in the world into one of these four.
Yeah.
And I don't know if this is like an aspect of having four things, but there's a lot of cases in the world where there's four things that everything wants to get sorted into.
And I mean, we started with Hufflepuff, but I mean, seriously, like that pro-social caregiver is Hufflepuffs.
The skill of provisioning is Ravenclaw.
The creative seductive is Gryffindor.
And then the antagonistic exploitative is Slytherin, right?
Yeah.
Maybe swap those two.
I'm not sure the Slytherin Gryffindor.
Yeah, those seem a little tough to pin down.
Plus, the downside of Slytherin is that there's an obvious bad one.
Yes.
So let's do this with the Ninja Turtles, because they're all good guys.
Okay.
So we can say, I'm trying to...
Antagonistic is Raphael.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And that would make the skilled provisioning strategy Donatello.
Absolutely.
Pro-social caregiving Leonardo, which leaves somehow Michelangelo for creative and seductive.
Party dude.
That's fair.
Yeah.
There were, and I believe Scott Alexander mentioned this, that there were also four humors,
which more or less fit these four than Ancient Greece, the four elements.
Oh yeah.
Fit this as well.
You found that great cracked article, or cracked after hours video that was like seven minutes
long, that we're definitely going to link to, because it summarizes all of these really well.
Yeah.
And I've seen a handful of other things.
They're really fun.
I need to watch more of them.
They...
I guess maybe they do a regular show, and then they do like an after hours joke show or
something.
No.
The after hours was just one of their regular shows.
It's just the name of one of the shows.
The concede is that they meet after, you know, a thing, but now that's the show.
Gotcha.
The show has stopped a long time ago though.
They had, I think, three seasons before.
I don't think I ever saw the show then.
I remember back in the heyday of cracked.com, that was a lot of fun.
It would just be kind of like the good version of like BuzzFeed's like eight things you won't
believe, but they really were, and they were like real stuff, and they were well written.
At its peak, cracked was awesome.
Yeah.
I learned a lot of actual cool, interesting things there.
Yeah.
And, you know, some of the after hours episodes are just some of their best articles put into
video format, but they're good.
I'll check it out.
That sounds like a lot of fun.
Yeah.
All right.
So the one I wanted to throw out here was The Avengers for these four categories.
Okay.
Avengers have more than four people in it.
They do.
So we'll pick, you know...
That's cheating then.
Well, no, no.
We'll pick...
There's like five core members, right?
Okay.
So I...
So like I'm going through this, and I'm trying to think...
Yep.
America's pro-social caregiving.
I think you're right.
And then Iron Man would be skilled provisioning.
I was thinking Iron Man might be the antagonistic exploitive one.
That'd be Hulk, because Hulk smash.
Does Hulk have a strategy?
Smash.
So I was thinking, because Rachel and I just rewatched The Avengers, because the first
one, because we need to get her caught up again before we start Endgame and Captain Marvel
in a couple of months.
So the hard part with this is their characters really evolve, especially like, especially
all of them.
But most noticeably, Cap a bit.
Cap actually evolves less, I'd say.
It's really Tony's...
Thor and Tony evolve a lot.
Thor especially, like, you know, because he...
At the beginning, he's straight up the kind of the creative, seductive strategy.
Right.
He's just like, you know, this meathead beefcake who's just going to come in, kick ass, take
names, and bed all the women.
Get the girl, yeah.
Exactly.
So...
And same as Tony, you know, in the first Iron Man, he's just like, you know, he's the
reformed kind of war prophet here, but he's still very much of like the asshole who doesn't
care, right?
But he did spend decades, like, building up to that position.
Yeah.
But...
He is certainly not reproducing early in life.
That's fair, but he sort of fell ass backwards into that, right?
It's hard to say, but none of them will fit perfectly, but...
So let's see, pro-social caregiving.
I guess you're right, Captain America, especially in the early cap.
Like, later on when he's more of like, you know, I'm just here to fight for whatever,
yeah.
And then that leaves skilled provisioning.
Who's left?
Yeah, maybe that does have to be Tony, because...
But none of his strategy was slow.
His whole thing was kind of like kick-ass and, you know...
Well, it's a life strategy, though.
It's...
The Iron Man thing wasn't a life strategy.
That was more of like a, I'm going to solve this problem and go kick some ass.
I don't know.
Maybe I'm being too analytical about it.
I thought this would be easier.
And having more difficulty thinking of, like, you know, whatever, Black Widow and Hawkeye
are also Avengers, but...
I guess...
He shoots arrows, man.
That's not a power.
At least they joke about that in Age of...
Oh, you didn't see Age of Ultron.
I know, but I saw that clip.
Oh, where he's like, I'm here with a bow and arrow, none of this makes any sense.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I was like, oh, man.
It was fun.
Okay.
At least, you know, for anyone out there who hasn't seen Age of Ultron but has seen
Infinity War, that, you know, red dude with a stone in his face doesn't make any sense
unless you saw Age of Ultron.
Well, I mean, they explained it to me.
They explained it to me before I went in.
Okay, good.
But still.
Was Hawkeye even in Infinity War?
No.
He wasn't.
They say that he was...
He and Scott came up with his last name, Ant-Man.
Okay.
So they both sided with Captain America during the Civil War.
And while most of Cap's team just went on the run, Hawkeye and Ant-Man took plea deals
with the government so they could, you know, be with their families, which made Ant-Man
too really fun.
It was just very much a comedy movie.
Good fun.
Okay.
But my joke on Infinity War is like Hawkeye doesn't bring anything to the team except
like he's their heart and that's why they lost Infinity War.
Cool.
All right.
So the Avengers thing didn't pan out.
I'll think of another example before the end of this.
But that does make us, that should make us at least think if we just fall into a convenient
mental trap.
Oh, we definitely, especially when you find things that don't very easily fit.
Yeah.
So my other one I wanted to throw, and it doesn't really fit with like the reproductive
species.
But if we pick the houses or the turtles, I was going to name out like four prominent
rationalists so we could, we could, we could shoehorn them into a turtle costume.
No, no, that doesn't, you can't just pick four random people.
You have to have a team of four already or a group for grouping thing.
Okay.
So it can't be four prominent people.
No, no, no.
Okay.
That's be like a group of four that already exists.
Then I don't have one for rationalists.
Okay.
Okay.
Well, but there's the four horsemen of the new atheists.
Okay.
I'm going to go through that one.
So I would say antagonistic exploitive sounds very much like Hitch.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
If we had to pick one, right?
Yeah.
Dawkins is a close second for that.
Right.
Well, not really.
He's not, he's antagonist.
I think people are comparing.
If we find him antagonistic, but he's not by nature.
If we're as Hitch would like to brawl.
He loved the brawl.
Yeah.
So that's a no-brainer.
Creative seductive strategy, that one might be Dawkins or Harris.
Because the obvious pro-social caring is Dennett.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So let's see.
Who's the, who's the creative seductive one?
What turtle did we decide that was?
Michelangelo?
That was, yes.
Hmm.
Let's just see who the skilled provisioning one is then.
That'd probably be Dawkins because he's the one who's done the most in academia.
Well, I mean, Dennett has to, but like Sam Harris wasn't, wasn't that.
I don't think, I don't think he really became quote, quote, became a scientist until after
that.
Yeah.
But the skilled provisioning one, let's see.
You know what?
Absolutely.
Creative seductive is Sam Harris because he's the one who's gone ahead and created his
own podcast and works on his personality as what gets him forward.
And he's cultivating this whole thing.
Yeah.
He's, he's half his, more than half of his income is basically entertainment, right?
Well, he might not put it as entertainment, but it comes from his podcast.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, that's, that's people listening to him because they enjoy listening to that
as opposed to because they need his knowledge or because they need what he can produce with
his hands.
That's right.
Yeah.
Whereas Dennett or Dawkins, you know, produces these great books with his hands and that
pays his bills.
Yeah.
Or, you know, scientific advances.
Yeah.
I'm not sure.
I remember I watched him interview with him where, you know, people asked him what like
science has he done in the like the last few decades and it's like not much.
You know, he did.
I mean, I know he introduced the concept of the selfish gene.
That's true.
Or the meme rather.
Both.
Yeah.
Well, yeah.
What have you done lately?
Exactly.
But yeah, but still what he's doing now is, you know, he's, I think he saw writing books.
I haven't.
Yeah.
The last one I read was the greatest show on earth, which was a lot of fun.
Yeah.
Like popularity doesn't matter to him nearly as much.
No, no, I wouldn't, I wouldn't say so because certainly because his life doesn't depend
on it.
Right.
You know, or his livelihood rather.
Yeah.
So absolutely.
If popularity matters to him, he would listen to his friends and told him to shut the fuck
up on Twitter.
Right.
Twitter.
The only way to win is not to play.
Alrighty, so anyways, should we continue with this?
Yeah, please.
Okay.
Um, but let's, uh, let's move on from the whole, you know, are we fix fucking things
up?
I think of everything in fours, which I think we have caveated very significantly and had
some fun with.
Um, if we do look at it that way, though, we start to ask some interesting questions
about what life interventions work because there've been a lot of preschool studies which
have shown repeatedly, uh, over many years and many studies that there is no real, um,
effect on kids intelligence or, or learning their IQ changes are not permanent.
They're, um, improved in skill, great skill level, tapers off after a year or two.
Like no matter how much preschool intervention there is, it never seems to make any academic
difference by the time they get to high school.
However, that sounds really unintuitive to parents who put their kids in expensive preschools.
Right.
But you would think they get a big head start.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, they don't get a head start with the things that they're expecting, but
they get her to start with other stuff.
Right.
Well, yeah, that's the thing.
Even though it doesn't improve their academic performance or, um, IQ scores or test on test
or whatever, uh, it does correlate always to improved life outcomes.
Early preschool tends to have, make people much, uh, stable, better at life later on
in life.
They have more, um, high degrees, I guess, of education, uh, better jobs, less time in
prison, less crime convictions, and the, the doesn't, doesn't really necessarily make
sense because what we're trying to give them more of education, they're not getting and
yet somehow their life improves anyway.
And, um, that doesn't make sense unless we think that what we're actually giving them
is a safe environment in free in preschool, that it wasn't fixing a brain problem, but
it was pushing them into a slower life strategy by having them feel less like a kid.
This is a chaotic, costal world and more like this is a stable, predictable, exploitable
world where I can have the slow life strategy that is generally considered good for society.
And, uh, that is really good in the modern era.
My inner Robin Hansen is just yelling at me saying that's, that's because you're
domesticating them early, your house training them before people think they could be house
trained.
Well, I mean, you know, if you want to call it domestication, call it domestication.
That's what slow life strategy is, right?
Working better with others.
Oh yeah.
I wasn't saying it was necessarily, uh, in challenge, is generally thought of as a bad
thing because you're being made into a patch, right?
I would hope that our discussion with, with Robin on his, uh, on the elephant in the brain
made clear that if, if our discussion didn't, the book does, that it's not a bad thing.
It's, if anything, it's a good thing, you know, you can hold a job and the world makes
that important.
Anyone who's had a desk job knows that it's not our natural state to sit at the desk for
eight hours and stare at a screen, but, um, being able to do so gives you all kinds of
life perks, like being able to, you know, eat and stuff.
So it's sleeping doors.
So, um,
And have heating and air conditioning.
Yeah.
Like I was saying, I wasn't saying that that was necessarily, um, in opposition to those
other points, but that it was just another way to frame it.
You know, this, this, the slower life thing is really weird too, because so I have this
nice place I'm living in, right?
It's well insulated.
It's heated in the winter.
It's cooled in the summer.
It keeps me safe from the elements.
And I see people who literally live in tents outside, you know, and that is a very uncomfortable
life.
You can tell by the time that they're in their fifties, they look like hell.
They probably aren't going to live through their sixties.
It's, it's, it's, I'm sure they're in constant discomfort and pain, but on the other hand,
what am I doing?
I'm just kind of prolonging my life to have much more of the years where I'm old and wrinkled
and no one wants to sleep with me.
And, and is it really worth all that slaving away during my young years?
Does it matter if you're, if you look better when you're older, you're still too old to
get laid a lot, right?
So I think there's, there's suboptimal strategies and like different goals here, right?
So like, if your goal is to be, you know, uh, Ted Danson when you're 70 and still able
to get it, then like maybe focus your efforts on other stuff.
It's hard to say whatever, but like, um, the, I would argue that the point of like having
a place for your stuff and staying warm and stuff isn't just so you look better and feel
better, although that's, it's, it's honestly about the feeling better part, but I would
say that somebody who, you know, makes money, makes enough money like we do and continues
to live in really shitty studio apartments, you know, and just like lives like a bum,
but stores away like, you know, incessantly so that they can have a great retirement.
That seems like kind of a lost strategy, right?
Cause you've wasted all of your like optimal years that you can do stuff by just, you know,
never going out, never eating good food, whatever.
So certainly if you take it too far and extreme, you're not enjoying it.
But I think, I think the goal is like, you have this place that, you know,
you can stay warm and comfortable and have a life worth living.
Not that living on the street isn't worth living, but many people hate, you know,
many people hate living on the street, right?
So because you hate that, you do what it takes to not do that.
It just, it strikes me.
I mean, people used to live on less than a dollar a day for most of human history, right?
Humans weren't nearly as productive as we are now.
And it just, it didn't seem to matter.
Sure they had huts basically that they kept the rain from falling on your head, but
you were still exposed to basically all the metal elements and you had to burn wood inside
to not freeze to death.
And, and yet they were still happy.
They still had lives.
I don't know.
They still had lives and stuff, but I think the downside is that like the minute they couldn't
do stuff, they were completely dependent on the people to take care of them or they just died.
Right.
Whereas like, and a lot of them died anyway, just randomly in the middle of life.
The goal for us is to like, you know, live healthily enough for the next 30 years and
then retire and then have, you know, enough saved up to like not die like they did,
like our poor ancestors.
I'm not sure where to go with that other than, other than I feel like the slow strategy,
it sounds like it's just like a new thing, you know, but it's it because we're, we're
applying it to people and because that's natural and that's what we're talking about.
But the article brings up like animals and stuff too.
You know, so like, why do ducks, why do like, whatever, mates,
litters, hatches of, what do you call them?
Whatever batches of ducks are called when they, they have 20 something kids and a couple survive.
Right.
And they have 20 because they know a lot of them are going to die.
Whereas elephants and chimps and stuff, they have one or two and they're going to take care
of them for 10, 15 years.
I'm not sure what chimps are, but elephants do it like that.
And they're like, yep, I'm going to invest everything and you're going to live.
So from like, I think looking at it, it's, it's analogous to human experience and human
lives, but the real lens to view this through, I think in the, the context of nature is like
the gene centric view, right?
What, what's in, what's in the interest of your genes to survive?
Yeah.
And so.
Well, the thing is I don't care about my genes.
Right.
That's why it doesn't apply to us as well, right?
I guess what I'm really getting at is that aging is bullshit.
Agreed.
You work all your life just so that you can be somewhat comfortable when you're old.
Thank you.
That was the other point I wanted to make you reminded me that the reason that we're living
and saving is that we live long enough for life extension slash singularity stuff, right?
Right.
Yeah.
You guys forget this irrationalist podcast.
We're still, we're still singularity cultists.
Yeah.
So, which we'll have to talk about at some point.
But yeah, my, my goal isn't, I mean, I still, I still think about this because I, for the
first time in the last couple of years, I've like, have enough money to like save a retirement
and do stuff, which I'll be 30 in a few months, which is weird.
Like now, like at this point I'm saving stuff, but everybody does it differently and whatever.
Well, it's usually about 30.
Well, I mean, 20s are just getting started.
One of my groomsmen, when I went and I was, I saw him on LinkedIn, he's been at his job
for eight years.
And I'm like, dude, you've been doing something for eight years.
I haven't done anything for like anything like that amount of time.
But yeah, my goal, like, so the reason I brought up my savings and stuff is like,
I still will have this weird, which we'll talk about the, we'll have a future episode at some
point too.
Well, we have no shortage of topics to get around to this.
This isn't going away.
My planning for the future is like, I think what Naveen, when we had him on, when he had said,
when in doubt, bet on things staying the same, that's really resonated with me.
Because like, I have no, I would be flabbergasted if in 40 years society looks anything like it
or looks much like it does today.
Like, because there'll be too many starving old people on the streets, or, you know, if
things stay like they are now, and there's not much change.
So I'm thinking some universal basic income will keep us all alive, which make our
retirements just like cool party money.
I mean, they kind of already have that for old people.
Kind of, but we keep, they keep telling us that that's going to be all dried up in 10
years or whatever, right?
So in America, the, you pay Social Security to the government every paycheck for your
entire life.
And you're told that when you retire, you'll get that back a little bit by little bit.
And so you don't get it back, but the people who are young, when you retire, give you their money.
Yeah, but I think certainly in some countries too, like Japan, there's moral people than
there are young people by like a long shot.
So there's not enough to pay into it.
So what I'm getting at is like, we're either going to be in some weird dystopia where like,
you know, at least the way I think about it, where our savings won't matter because you
can't eat the money.
Or you certainly can't eat the bits that it's stored on the computer.
Or, you know, we'll be in some UBI utopia or best yet some transhumanist utopia where,
you know, we don't need money and, you know, shelter because we don't have meat suits that
are super vulnerable and uncomfortable all the time.
Just means that we're going to need electricity.
Yeah.
And that's super cheap.
The sun's out, you know, half the time.
So winds available.
All the, all those, all those clean energy people keep talking about how there's,
there's energy all over the place.
So whatever it is, I, uh, my long strategy, how did that come up?
Eh, came up, oh, saving stuff.
Oh, getting old sucks.
Yeah.
So the goal of, of saving and having a comfortable life is that you live long enough that aging
no longer becomes a problem.
Yeah.
That's the way I'm thinking about it.
All right.
Alrighty.
Podcast.
Onwards.
So let's see the next bullet point here.
A lot of intelligent, responsible, basically decent young men complain of romantic failure.
Most MIT students are probably pursuing slow life strategies.
Most violent adolescents in psych hospitals forget this is, or no one forget this was a
Scott Alexander article who works in a, well, he'd worked, he moved to the Bay Area.
Does he still work in a like psych ER?
No, I don't believe so anyway.
That was where he took over his residency.
Oh, okay.
Well, in any case, this is where he got a lot of his formative, uh, understanding of human
psychology and nature, which is definitely like a, what trial by fire trenches view of,
of human, human life, but it's valuable and it's accurate for a lot of people.
So anyway, he worked in a, um, an emergency psych ward or no, wait, he was a psychologist
at an ER.
I forget whatever it was.
Right.
He saw a lot of people who were being committed and voluntarily and were in horrible
psychiatric shape.
Exactly.
So the reason I brought that up is because this line here about violent adolescents in
psych hospitals are probably pursuing fast ones.
This is from personal observation of people coming in.
So the first strategies activate a suite of traits designed for having sex earlier.
So life strategies activate a suite of traits designed for preventing early sex.
The good news for these people is that they're adapted for a life strategy, which in the
past has consistently resulted in reproduction at some point.
So if you're the, the town blacksmith, but again, even that's the wrong way to think about
it, right?
Cause you know, even blacksmithing is fairly new, but if you were, well, I guess not,
it's fairly new, but it's been around for thousands of years.
So like, I think even, um, I don't think, I think probably too much of my, my understanding of,
of Greek and Roman culture comes from movies like, uh, 300, but they didn't make the
blacksmiths go fight.
Did they?
Well, the Spartans had their own warrior cast, but a lot of the Greeks, um,
a lot of the Greek cities just had people.
They, they would raise the people.
You'd like anyone who could fight, come fight.
These people are trying to invade us and, and slave us.
Weren't there some cultures that like said, all right, cool.
You've got to trade that the society needs.
You don't have to go fight in war.
I bet that's been around.
That's, I'm sure that has been.
And if it hasn't, let's pretend it was.
So I'm not wrong.
I think it was, I think it was more likely just the case that someone couldn't fight
because you know, they were a scholar or something.
They really were no good at any of the things that demand physical.
Well, a scholar can still draw the enemy fire, right?
So, um, I suppose, but, but if, if you were the only person in your town who knew how to,
you know, build shelters.
Well, okay.
Here's the thing.
Let's say that we all live together in one housing complex, right?
As opposed to, uh, as opposed to spread across the city as we currently are.
If, uh, the people from Aurora ganged up and we're going to come burn our place down,
kill us, take our women and our stuff, would you be like, I'm sorry.
I have a valuable skill.
I'm going to stay over here and program my computer.
Or would you be like, Hey, Enios, Hey, next door neighbor,
let's get our pitchforks and defend our land.
That's fair.
Yeah.
It was basically anyone who could fight fought.
Well, but there might be just to bring that point home or I guess to take it another way.
There might be people that are worth removing from the conflict and saying,
all right, look, you, you, you and you, we're going to take over here.
And we're going to hold the front lines while you guys like survive and move society five
miles west or whatever, just because you guys are the essential ones to keep,
keep society worth living or something.
But the way I was thinking about it is that you wouldn't be conscripted to go to war against
like a, you know, someone who's not on your borders or something, right?
Maybe.
Um, no, I mean, we're really the only thing, the only thing that I am only historical background
I have to draw on right now is, um, pre-Republic Rome, when, uh, they would just
raise people from the countryside, from the city, be like, Hey, we got to come fight with us.
And, uh, people like had to provide their own weapons and armor.
And, uh, the equestrian class provided their own horses, which is why they were known as
the equestrians.
They were rich enough to have horses when they rode off into war.
And then they came back home and they went back to their jobs afterwards.
Hmm.
It wasn't, yeah, it wasn't really a conscription thing as much as it was a
war's here, let's go kind of thing.
That's fair.
Things work different.
And then, you know, eventually they got good at conquering and had a professional standing
army and became an empire.
But at first a lot of those city-states were just like, okay, it's fighting time.
Everybody strap on the sword that you got.
Or make, you know, find one on the way to war.
Yeah.
Yeah.
How many people died?
How many soldiers died in World War Two?
Um, I don't know.
Do you have a ballpark figure?
I feel like it's sub-million, right?
A lot of civilian casualties.
Whatever it was, I know that, like, there were battles in like pre-Roman and, you know,
during my American education of history is showing right now.
But so I can't name the years.
But there were, you know, there were significant battles where hundreds of thousands of people
died in like, in conflicts.
I don't think before the pre-modern era, there were ever battles where that many people died.
Really?
Hundreds of thousands?
Maybe.
Maybe I'm thinking of like wars, but where it would be like a third of your population
died in war, like in some conflicts.
The closest I can think of is when like Genghis Khan was rampaging through Asia and would
literally massacre an entire city.
Oh, I was thinking of soldiers.
No, I don't, there just weren't that many people.
See, I thought, I had, in my head somewhere, maybe I was listening to a Steve Pinker talk
at some point where, like he had said that people would be constricted to go fight the
battles on the plains and you would lose tens of thousands in a day or something.
I could see tens of thousands.
Yeah, but hundreds is a lot of people.
You need really wide lines for that to happen, huh?
Yeah.
So maybe a battle could last a week or something in that case.
I don't know.
But I'll have to read the dust jacket of the better angels of our nature again.
So I never read the book.
It was 700 something pages, wasn't it?
So I don't remember.
I like, not that I don't remember.
I've never seen the book, so I couldn't tell you.
I know it was big.
Yeah.
And I'm like, I'm a slow reader.
That's the downside.
No, they're just weren't that many people back then.
The Persian Empire spanned most of the world and they had like, what, 120,000 men altogether
in their empire fighting men?
That sounds low, but I'm not a doctor.
So doctor of history.
Hold on a second.
We are literally sitting on something I can tell us this.
Well, I guess I'll bring that up only just because like, what I remember is that the
percentage of people would die, that died was huge.
Whereas like, I'm not sure what percentage of the United States we lost in World War
II, but it was not negligible, but it was small.
We lost a lot of people in sort of other countries, but it wasn't like we lost like
a third of our of our population or something, right?
Holy fuck.
What do you got?
Am I right?
There are wildly differing accounts.
Some people saying over 5 million people in the Persian army, but that looks like it was
probably inflated.
Greek sources estimate seven to 800,000 soldiers, which is a whole of a lot more than
I thought there were.
And 1.7 million must have included noncombatants.
How many?
1.7 million including noncombatants.
Well, I just saw that military deaths from World War II from all causes totaled
somewhere between 21 and 25 million.
I think that's on all sides.
Unfortunately, civilian deaths totaled somewhere between 50 and 55 million.
So that's kind of a drag how that shook out.
Yeah.
But you know, I don't know what the population, we really should have done some homework
before I went off on my history.
I am very interested in history, but I know very little about it.
So I'm getting around to learning about it.
Yeah, it does seem like here's here's sources that say that Persian army appears to have
included 300,000 infantry and 60,000 cavalry, which is closer to what I was thinking.
In 1887, Hans Delberg stated that the army of Xerxes must have included 55,000 fighting
men at the most.
Oh, so apparently World War II was the most costly war in terms of human life.
Yeah, yeah, because I just I can't imagine an ancient army having five million men in
it.
There just weren't that many humans around.
Stalingrad has had most deaths, but I'm looking at specifically what I'm trying to
find here is per population.
And so like apparently the battle of Stalingrad was the most was the was the battle with the
highest number of casualties somewhere around 2 million, which is crazy, right?
But I don't know what the populations of Russia and the United States or in the Axis
forces were back then.
So this is a really long way.
I can remember how we even got on old war stuff.
Anyway, there's my there's your guys's thing where this is going to be a joy to edit Steven
needs to learn to learn history.
But yeah, no, going back to all before we got sidetracked, as we do often, I guess.
Don't say I don't say I didn't warn you.
Right.
I know just 15 minutes ago I was being like, man, we slave away at an office for these
modern conveniences just so we can get old and comfort.
But based on based on that last paragraph of Scott's, I really, really think that I'd
much rather have the life of the MIT student than the young psychotic and a psych ward.
Haging and comfort starting sound pretty good now, isn't it?
Yeah, you know, I guess I could sit behind a computer monitor and do spreadsheets for
eight hours a day, as opposed to having to, I don't know, do whatever people without an education
do.
Well, even just without like a that an ability to regulate their actions.
Yeah.
Well, like, I mean, I know somebody didn't finish high school who, you know, is a,
I'm not sure what maybe master plumber, whatever the classification is.
And I mean, technically, I only finished high school myself.
I dropped out of college.
So it's not like I really have an education.
Yeah.
I think we're misappropriating the use of the word education.
We mean training.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Anyway, I pulled out a quote here that I like because this is it's a little soundbite like
this that keep me like energized reading a Scott Alexander essay because he's great.
And he it's it's really good ratio of like word count to like educational content.
There's not a lot of rambling.
Maybe a good example of a bad, bad example of that or a good example of a bad way to do
that would be like anything that you could, if you Google a recipe, you scroll through
like three, four paragraphs of like this person's bullshit life story.
Right.
And it's like, well, when I used to make this, it's like, just give me the fucking bullet
points, man.
Oh my God, I have such a hard time reading articles in prestigious journals and not
prestigious journals, but like the New York Times or Washington Post or whatever.
Because like, I know there's some a lot of times good reporting interesting things,
but I want to get to that and not be like, so I interviewed this old lady about her life
circumstances and these are all the things.
And then her daughter did this and this and man was in a tragedy like to get around to
finally saying what needs to be said.
I'm like, I don't give a fuck.
I'm never going to meet these people.
I hope they all die tomorrow.
Or it's not true.
I just, you know, but if their deaths would make it, so I didn't have to read
those four paragraphs.
I'd be okay with that.
Or maybe I hope they're all doing great, but I don't really care enough to read about it.
Yes.
Like I was listening to This American Life.
There's one on school shootings, which was a great way to start my Monday.
But I couldn't imagine reading that.
It was, it would have been super boring.
And granted, it was, it was presented for audio, but it was just like, you know, the
actual content they were delivering was just mired and, you know, stops and, you know,
talking to different people and that would be a bad way to read an essay.
Like there's this great essay that a co-worker sent me on basically how Newt
Gingrich is personally responsible for destroying the Republican party and making
them a bunch of assholes.
Wow.
I can say the article was really interesting.
Yeah, that sounds interesting.
I remember when Newt was a big deal.
I was in high school and yeah.
His whole thing since like the 70s was like, we got to stop playing nice.
He would go to like, you know, conservative think tanks and conservative campuses
and be like, we got to be assholes.
We've got to, we've got to, you know, play dirty.
We've got to cheat.
We've got to do whatever.
That's the point.
None of this like, you know, let's hold the esteem of the ambitions of a greater
America in mind.
It's like, no, let's fuck that and just try and try and be shitty.
Anyway, this thing took me like two days to read because it didn't distill it down
to like things Newt did in bullet.
And, you know, even if it was bullet point paragraph, whatever, it was just like
this long exegesis.
And the guy kept talking about, well, then Newt and I were at the zoo.
It turns out he really likes visiting zoos.
And here's a picture of him with a turtle and it's like, come on, man.
Anyway.
I thought, I didn't read a lot of nonfiction.
Like just recently I've started reading some nonfiction because I thought it was like
fiction where every paragraph is important and you got to read everything.
And like, I just started reading nonfiction.
He's like, okay, I can skip this page.
Okay, I can skip this page.
Like, I was like, holy shit, this goes by so fast because most of it is unnecessary crap.
Most of my like nonfiction reading comes from sites like Wikipedia.
Yeah.
Especially if I want to get to it.
If I want to learn about something, you know, if I want to learn about, you know,
if I need to go off and get a crash course on world history, I'm going to read the
work of pedia sections on it because it leaves out all the fluffy bullshit.
Granted, the fluffy bullshit is really interesting if that's your thing.
But if you just want to know what's going on or what happened, you know, skip all that.
Also, speaking of bad word count to like, you know, content deliverance,
I'm doing great so far this podcast.
Anyway, a good example of what makes Alexander not just educational but entertaining.
I pulled out this quote, quote, and it's seductive to be able to think
of it as all part of a plan, literally seductive in the sense of a medic evolution,
like that Hogwarts chart.
So it's just, you know, he doesn't sound like, you know, an esoteric, you know,
I'm delivering all this stuff.
He's just like, I don't know.
He doesn't seem like a guy like too much times in his hands that he's just writing
all this stuff out to show that he knows all this stuff.
It's like, okay, he is tying this like, you know, to a nerdy, funny way that literally
made me laugh out loud reading this.
So and also like Hogwarts chart is literally seductive in the evolutionary
mimetic sense, but you know, also literally true because it is seductive to think,
oh yeah, you know, we were raised in more stable environments.
So we have this new slower life strategy and people were raised in a chaotic shitty
environments have the fast life strategy.
And so that's kind of like the plan, you know, the genes plan was like, well,
this is the only way I can get reproduced.
So this is why I'm going to go.
So it is seductive to think of it that way.
Yeah, totally.
Which is probably why we did, you know, an episode and a half about it.
Yeah. Well, I mean, it's also just like I said, my, I guess I didn't say, but I've
been thinking about, you know, my first real dive into like the joy of science was reading
Richard Dawkins and his book, which I didn't actually read the whole thing, The Selfish Gene,
you know, lays out the gene centric point of view where it's wrong to think about the evolution
and or about evolution guiding the fitness of organisms, especially individuals,
but it's about maximizing the fitness of genes.
And, you know, granted, we as humans don't care about our genes.
And so it's, this is just more fun for like understanding how the world got to be,
how it is and less about like how we should live our lives.
It's, you'll see like, I don't know, like guinea pigs and ducks and other things,
you know, they, they hatch or they're born and then five minutes later,
they're running out of their eyes open eating solid food.
Like, whereas, you know, humans, I guess some cats, dogs, you know, whatever,
bigger animals tend to, you know, tend to be anyway.
They start off for the first couple of weeks, whatever they don't, they can't see,
they can't do anything, they're completely helpless.
And that, that really indicates the survival strategies of those, of those species.
And I don't know, that sounds, it is sort of esoteric and pointless as far as how we
should live our lives, but it's super interesting.
So you can walk around and just see these things.
It's, I don't know, it sounds hippie that doesn't, I don't know.
It makes it an interesting way to relate to the world around you.
Yeah. And to understand what's going on.
And there are moods that I have less and less now, but I used to have all the time of like,
I want to know what's going on.
So one of these days I'll get that, that spark back and be more scholarly.
But do we want to, I want to jump to feedback before we do less wrong stuff,
because there is some feedback directly pertinent to this
that I want to bring up while we're on the topic.
Yeah, totally.
Because there were a bunch of things said about our last episode on this.
Okay. In that case, I'm going to go to not without incident,
who says the idea that poor middle Americans are overrepresented in the military is mostly a myth.
People from the poorest and wealthiest consensus tracts are underrepresented.
And so are West Virginians who are probably the prototypical Appalachians.
I, I was very, I followed the link that they provided and was really surprised that,
yeah, the very poorest in the US were underrepresented in the military,
which was like, I thought personally surprising.
I don't know.
I wouldn't have guessed it either.
I would think that you struggle to not be hungry as a kid.
And even if you're, especially if you're raised in the environment where it's like,
look, I know if I left the house, my parents would have like more food for themselves.
You'd think, hey, cool, these people will feed me, give me shelter and train me,
and then pay for me to get a higher education.
I'm going to go do that.
You know, frankly, I'm really curious.
I haven't clicked the article just or click the link.
Does it, is it just data or does this the kind of thing where I dig an NPR,
like ad nauseam interview sort of thing?
Cause I know it was just a few graphs.
The, the West Virginia thing was interesting because West Virginia was an outlier in all
the Southern States.
Like all the Southern States are strongly overrepresented in the military.
And the, the ones that you would expect to be underrepresented,
like the, the Northeast ones were the West Virginia struck out as slightly underrepresented
in the military.
And I don't know why West Virginia was unique in that way,
but all the other Southern ones were over.
So I'm not going to concede that one.
Everything I know about West Virginia comes from the announcement trailer for Fallout 76.
So I better not weigh in.
Okay.
Oh, he has another comment, but I'll come back to that later because it's not related to this
topic.
Supreme switch says Quakers are still active in many parts of the world.
And then not with that incident says, I used to go to Quaker meetings sometimes with a friend
when I was a kid and I'm not that old.
There are eight monthly meetings in my city.
I wonder if there's some confusion between Quaker and Shaker going on.
Also, I think it's fair to say that modern Quakers are very different than Quakers of
the 18th century, but so are modern Catholics and nobody's claiming Catholicism is extinct.
Yeah, that's a good point.
I thought when I think of Quakers, I think of the old guy on this oatmeal box.
I just automatically thought that's good marketing right there.
Yeah, right.
I just automatically pictured those.
So maybe there's a lot more Quakers and we just don't hear about them because they're,
you know, very tolerant, accepting, quiet folk.
Yeah.
And if you're not making waves, nobody's going to hear you, right?
If you're not like out there screaming, praise Jesus and having mega church rallies and shit.
Yeah, I think certainly I don't think Scott or the author of Albion Seed was making a point that
like these cultures have remained unchanged for 200 years, but that there are surprising
extrapolations you can make from people's location and especially their ancestral location
to like their current attitudes.
Yeah, certainly they're different.
This one I thought was the biggest one for me.
Rockham says, Rockham, Rockham.
At one point, the discussion went in the direction of some segments of the population are genetically
predisposed to being brutish, crude and violent.
They are unpleasant to be around, but at least useful for military or manual labor.
That right, that line of reasoning is dangerous and can think of a few good societies and many
bad ones that adhere to it.
Maybe I misunderstood you.
If so, please be clearer.
And yeah, I would like to say that I definitely was not trying to say that at all.
I think that obviously genetics have some effect on everything because that's just
kind of a truism, but I was trying to say that some segments of the population are
culturally predisposed to being brutish, crude and violent.
Like that was my major contention that some cultures really are worse than others for living
in a modern society with other people.
And I think that it should be okay to say that and to try to push the cultures that
are more adapted to the society we like.
Yeah, careful.
I mean, someone's writing a golden ticket to the intellectual dark web when you say things
like that, but you're not saying, and it's those people over there.
No, and I also don't think genetics has nearly that much to do with it.
Culture is a much bigger deal than genetics, in my opinion.
I know plenty of people from the South who have moved to Denver because we have a lot
of influx of those sorts of people, and they aren't that way.
There's a reason they left the South.
Yeah, exactly.
But they will sometimes tell me about their friends who are still back there,
how their early childhood was like, and how they managed to be a bit more stable,
but it's really remarkable that the way that people are, the culture they're exposed to,
how big a difference that makes on the rest of their life.
And I feel really grateful for my parents being as awesome as they were.
And I know it's not people, anyone's fault for being raised in a shitty culture,
but I do think that we have to say that sometimes this culture isn't the greatest,
and we should try to steer people away from them.
Yeah, no, I totally agree.
It's just a sad lottery that some kids lose.
You don't get to pick your parents.
If you're born under a culture that thinks the Taliban is super awesome,
and we're going to send them, we're going to tie it to the Taliban directly or something,
and it's like, what chance do you have to, I mean, everyone has a chance.
But the thing is, your future outcomes are highly constrained.
And if you get out, it's like a big deal that you made it out because you had so much to overcome.
And I want to say, like, I know a couple of people who have come
ancestrally from that border region, and I do not think that they're genetically inferior
because they came from there.
Oh, no.
And yes, that's the difference that keeps you off the train to the intellectual dark web.
All right, there's another comment about this coming up,
but why do you keep saying that about the intellectual dark web?
I poke fun at it.
Yeah, but they're not the ones who are going around saying that, you know, races are...
They're not racist.
They're the ones that pretend you can't have those conversations or else you get to...
Because we were talking about deplatforming last week and I was thinking about this.
The whole thing is that, like, you can't say things like that because, you know,
your college will make you write an apology essay and, you know, whatever.
And it's like, I don't know, I think it's funny.
I should probably, I think the joke is super dead at this point.
The guy who wrote the bell curve, like, was assaulted.
And the woman that was escorting him, who wasn't even, you know, working for him,
she was working for the university, had to go to a hospital.
No, no, no, totally.
And that's over the line.
And none of this is okay.
Don't get me wrong.
But like, I was listening to one of the most recent, very bad wizards where it was like
the Christmas episode where, I think I mentioned this last time, Tamla, the philosopher?
No.
Yes, yes.
Whatever, whatever one whose mom is Christina Hoff Summers.
Yeah, yeah, that's right.
Or Stepp Hom.
They had like a half hour drunken argument about...
Also, I only said no because I knew, like, Steven's the one who doesn't know their name,
so he's going to get it wrong.
So my reflex was no.
And then I was like, oh, wait, yeah.
Okay.
So sorry about that.
You're totally fine.
They that like the mom was talking about how some guy...
I forget what...
Oh, it was...
You know, he got on an elevator.
It was like at some conference or maybe at a school.
I can't remember.
It was a professor and someone, some woman asked him, what floor?
And he was like, oh, lingerie, please.
Which is like an old joke.
Apparently.
Because they're not in a shopping center building.
You know, they're at a hotel or something.
And so it was an old joke, whatever.
I'm sure it was some old guy, which is, you know, makes this old joke more like...
okay, I guess, if it was a joke that he was used to telling.
You know what?
20 years from now, we're going to be making jokes about the Avengers
and kids are going to get really offended or something.
I'm already offended.
Anyway.
Or at the very least, they just won't get him.
That's right.
They'll be like, who's this old guy?
Why is he talking about avenging things?
Out of touch, nerds.
Yeah.
So she was talking about how it was like, you know, this big deal that like he, you know,
his university is making him write an apology.
And, you know, Dave was like, so fucking what?
Like, don't give me...
And but what she was saying, like, she made it sound like it was this whole big,
like kind of like de-platforming this person's, you know, scared for their job.
And it's like, but they're not this person that you're,
the example that you're raising here.
This guy's fine.
Nothing's going to happen.
And if it does happen, we can talk about it, but nothing did.
I guess, why, I don't know why I find so much fun beating that horse.
I think it's, I never talk about it off the show.
I think it just comes up because we touch on things
that taken, if you're quote mind them and take them out of, and which means to take
them out of context.
You're trying to distance yourself from that so that you will not be attacked.
I don't really care.
Okay.
I don't have anything to lose.
Okay.
But I stand by everything I say, but the joke is that if I were,
if you're to take something like what you said about, you know, these people not being
brutes or whatever, kind of, it sounds like a, my best friend, some of my friends are
black kind of thing, whatever, but it's obviously not.
But my point is, if you quote mind it, then, you know, somebody who I can imagine,
like Christina Hoffsummer or J, Jordan Peterson's voice could be like, see, that's the thing.
He needs to be worried now or whatever.
Right.
And I, it's not that funny.
And I don't know why he's saying it.
So I think you, I think you're right.
I'll, I'll, I'll ease off of the, the break line there.
No way.
Like, I mean, I don't know.
We're not big enough for anyone to care, right?
But if someone, someone could absolutely take that thing that we just said about people,
you know, giving money to the Taliban and me saying that some cultures are predisposed
opposed to being brutish and crude and take that and see, look, they hate Muslims.
Why are these white dudes so racist?
And that's sort of what, what I meant is like the joke, right?
Cause that, that's the, I hate saying the intellectual dark web, like it's a thing,
but to the extent that it is become a thing, if you've mentioned it on a podcast,
three podcasts in a row, it's now a thing.
All right.
So what they do is they'll say things that give ammunition to people who want to say bad things.
Who?
Oh, the IDW people?
Yeah. So like, you know, say for example, you point out that, you know,
some people come from brutish cultures and someone else could say, yeah,
like those dirty Muslims.
And that's not something I would endorse.
That's the, that's the joke or that's the line that someone might, might take it with.
Yeah.
So that's the joke I'm making.
And I, you're right.
I'm kind of preemptively staving off those jokes.
Well, but the fact is that someone could take everything we've said in this episode and that
one a few episodes back and use that as ammunition to say like those dirty Muslims, right?
Or, you know, whatever those, those Southern war hungry people or something.
Right. Right. Right.
Or those redneck hicks or something.
Yeah.
Whatever they want to say or all those black people.
And what, what are we going to do about that?
I like, are we going to not talk about this thing?
So that's the joke is that like someone like Christina Hoff Summers would say,
you have to not talk about it because someone could do that.
And it's, you know, Christina Hoff Summers is the one who's saying literally,
you should talk about it anyway and fuck those people.
That's what makes her intellectual dark web.
No, no, what she's saying is that your, your livelihood is at risk.
If you want to say those things.
Well, I mean, but that's why, that's why they want like, you know,
a private journal to publish these results in because everything's so scary,
because the mob will get you.
I mean, you're not scared because like you don't think anyone.
Because I don't matter.
Your leadership.
Yeah. You don't think anyone in your leadership,
but your company is going to get wind of this and think that it's going to affect you.
But like if the podcast were popular enough and of 20,000 people on Twitter or something
started adding your boss and being like, why do you employ this racist?
That's a really good point.
If this blew up and we got, you know, 100,000 downloads, an episode,
I'd go back and delete some episodes, probably.
Really?
I can't think of which one right off, but I definitely go back and probably edit some.
Okay.
You know, I got a lot of kickback.
It would have been like the first, oh, it was on the polyamory episodes.
When I had said something along the lines of like, I'm no fan of like Islam.
And you guys gave me these looks like I'd said, I hate black people.
And I'm like, what?
And I kind of staggered and said something about suicide bombers or something.
But my whole thing on that was like, just to, you know, I guess bring up that two-year-old
dead horse was like, my position is I'm against religion in general.
To the extent that it provides polite comfort or whatever personal comfort to somebody,
go nuts.
I'm past that in my anti-theism stage.
But I guess the practice in your life, to the extent that it affects other people,
especially your kids, I'm pretty uppity about.
And so like the, and this isn't all of Islam for sure.
But, you know, there are parts of the world where like, it's still punishable by death
to be gay or, you know, where leaving the faith is a crime that you have to worry about.
Worry about the safety of your life about where people flee your country and, you know,
cut ties with their families because they, whatever, they're gay.
They left the faith.
There's cultures where if your sister is raped, you have to kill her because it's
dishonored your whole family.
And so I think that's pretty fucked up.
And so whatever, whatever teaches that you should do that, I'm against.
And to the extent that it's, if it's a, if it's a small niche group,
like the Scientologists who I don't think do any of those things,
would do other crazy shit, I'm against Scientology too.
But since they're, I'm assuming like a few thousand people, maybe tens.
Yeah, they're in the tens of thousands.
But I mean, that's nothing.
You know, that's, that how many people live in Denver, a million?
Yeah.
So that's, that's a drop in the ocean, right?
But if, if Scientologists numbered over a billion, or if they were the largest
religion on the planet, that'd be fucking scary.
That's my point, right?
So, but to the extent that they're small.
So like, you know, I'm against religion.
I'm against more, more specifically harmful religions and harmful branches of religions.
And that scales with how big they are.
So that's, that's my whole thing on it.
You know, don't get wrong.
I know Muslim people.
I know, I know more apostates than I know practicing Muslims.
But I think I talked about before, I just happened to know very few religious people.
But I think that's not by like deliberate effort.
I guess I just don't go to places to meet them.
Most of my religious people that I run into, I run into like out in the world.
Oh, so that's my, that's how I get by is I never go outside.
Okay. Cool.
Yeah.
So that's, that's my thing on that.
But the, the anti-religion thing, I had a point here to make, to drive this back to
the British thing.
Which is why you hate the intellectual dark web people.
Yeah.
But now that line is fuzzy.
Like I said, the line was that like, if you take something,
I feel like I beat in the horse.
Yeah.
Okay.
All right.
Moving on.
Alrighty.
So this very next comment by Sailor Vulcan is,
Hi, this one is, by the way,
obviously aimed at you since this was not my position.
Hi, I noticed that.
Bring it on.
Sailor Vulcan.
Hi.
Oh wait.
Sailor Vulcan is one who wrote that awesome essay that we talked about on Less Wrong.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
Sailor Vulcan is a cool person.
I'm just like seeing the name.
I'm remembering names from different places now.
So.
Sweet.
You're starting to get a feeling for some of these people.
Yeah.
Hi, I noticed that in this episode you seem to wrongfully conflate the intellectual
dark web movement with the alt right slash white supremacists slash misogynists.
However, the intellectual dark web movement has both right wing and left wing people in it,
and it is not a hate movement like the alt right is.
The whole purpose of the intellectual dark web movement is to one provide spaces where people
can have open, civil intellectual discussion even when the subject matter or the views being
expressed are culturally taboo, and two, to resist and protest exactly the kind of censorship
and extra legal mob justice which you talked about in this episode.
In this episode, you also contradicted yourself.
On the one hand, you talked about how people in the IDW movement, i.e. Sam Harris and Jordan
Peterson keep talking about how they're so oppressed as if their voices and ideas are
not being systematically silenced.
But you also said that there was a lot of extra legal mob justice which censors and punishes
people for not towing the democratic slash SJW party line.
Which is it?
I think part of the problem here is that there's more than one of us on the podcast,
because I am the one who said that there's a lot of extra legal mob justice.
I would say that too.
So that's fine.
You would say that too.
In that sense, I contradicted myself and thank you for pointing that out.
That was a really good way to put it.
Yeah, so my position on it, I think I've hashed out a bit, is that I feel I mostly completely
joke about it.
I feel like I should do some actual, let me think about this.
I mean, at this point, Brett Weinstein isn't the IDW and he's like way left.
Yeah, no, don't get me wrong.
He's just not as left as some of the people that were screaming at him in his university,
but he's like super left.
Right, so there are a lot of people on the right, like Dave Rubin and whatever claims
to be a libertarian, but has some weird stuff.
Sam Harris is pretty left too.
He definitely is.
And yet he keeps talking about the left, like there's some toxic weird.
He equates the left with the ravaging Twitter mob, which is hardly fair.
I think it's what you see, because what he sees is the ravaging Twitter mob
from the extreme left coming after him.
And so if that's most of his experience, then that's...
Yeah, but it's weird because he's got to know that the inflammatory culture war
that's kicked around on social media isn't just people getting people to vote Trump.
It's also getting people on the left to hate each other because it's so easy,
especially when you get figureheads whose job it is, literally, to get communities
together online and radicalize them and get them to hate other sub-communities.
In fact, Harris had a great guest on a couple of weeks ago where they talked about this exact
thing. So the fact that he seems to be, I guess, never acknowledged the fact that maybe
some of the stuff I see online comes from people whose job it is, is to make me feel
outrageous and afraid. I don't know.
I think it can be hard to see that when you are feeling afraid, though, and all the attacks
are coming from what you thought were your allies on the left.
That's fair. And to belabor this a bit for Sam Harris, he lives with actual security
concerns for having written the end of faith, where he's so hard against Islam.
And he's received, he lives, I'm assuming, at a secret address. He has a very sensible
concern for his safety. And yet there are people that he's run into in real life on the left who
would say, no, you don't, you're being racist. Well, maybe not straw manning, but if he would say,
look, I'm afraid that Muslim extremists are going to kill me, they would say,
that's ridiculous. That's all rightist propaganda or something, right?
So don't get me wrong. The intellectual dark web, like I said, I'm reluctant to say that it
serves an important purpose. But it does. I think it's a weird umbrella term. I certainly think
that there should be communities, the world should be a community where anyone could get
together and discuss anything. We just talked about if you want to question the tenets of your
religion in some parts of Pakistan, you could get killed. So that's insane, and that's wrong.
I think they're holding a line that we're trying to hold a line anyway, that I'm glad there's
a group out there at least fighting to keep it from not eroding as quickly.
Yeah. And I think I joke about to the extent that they're doing that, because I feel like a lot of
it is how on the left they play the oppression Olympics, where, oh my god, I'm in seven
epicycles, or I'm at the conjunction of seven Venn diagrams of victimhood, and don't I have it so
hard? That seems to be socially rewarded. So like there's an urge to catch up on that on the other
side. And I think it's a really stupid game. But I'm also not a public figure. Maybe you get
points for the more people who throw bottles at you when you go to conventions or something,
the more points you get. I'm being facetious. But anyway, to answer Taylor Volgan's direct
question, which you unfortunately deleted. Sorry, wait, no, it's right back.
Thank you. I want to point out again, that this is a really well put question from a
rationalist author who's who's who's and I'm not struggling. It's a gotcha. No, no, well,
it's a gotcha in a good intellectual sense, in that I don't really know how to answer this,
not because like I, I have, you know, some conception I'm trying to stick to or something.
The fact is, I haven't thought this out that much. I feel like a lot of this is like overhyped
worriedness, but a lot of it isn't. I think it's also some horns effect from some of the major
players that, you know, like I, I don't think that like we talked about on the Patreon episode
with David, who is a good, I think, not defender in that he will stand by Peterson and everything,
but he's a good person to have in the room if I'm going to shut on Jordan Peterson,
because he would say, Hey, look, here's a lot of good things that he did. But even even David
was willing to acknowledge that like, look, you're right, he didn't really know what to
do with his sudden fame, sudden fame. And, you know, he says, he said some weird things. He's
anti climate change. Oh, really? Yeah. So it's like, I don't really know how you can be that
way. I'm anti climate change too. He's kind of the belief in climate change. He's a climate change
denier. So I guess maybe I should look up what the like their actual core structure is. My
understanding is that this was kind of a term thrown out as a joke. But I think Brett Weinstein,
didn't he make up the term? I have no idea who first made it up. I think it's, it's sort of out
as a joke. Yeah. Yeah. So I never left like the Joe code. And it's like when people, so when I
constantly joke about it, I'm only doing it in that context, to the, to the extent that there's
a group of people having important conversations that they feel like need to be had, but they can't
have them at, I don't know, whatever campus Douglas Murray got assaulted at, you know, that's,
that's a real thing. And so which, which is it? It's both. Like, well, no, it's not. It's,
I don't know, I'm trying to think like Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris are never going to lose
their audiences and never going to lose, they're never going to be silenced because they're too
big. And yet there might be smaller people who are silenced. You know, like, I might be told to
shut up at work if I keep trying to bring up the bell curve or something. But that's not really
intellectual dark web territory, right? Like maybe the workplace isn't the best place to have a
conversation about how some people are better at my job because of genetics than others, right?
Right. Like the Google memo guy, who I think also probably wasn't silenced. Like you got on the
Joe Rogan podcast, didn't he? I have no idea what happened to him. I lost his job at Google,
though. Yeah, which sucks. Hopefully he can make money somewhere else. Because, you know, if you
work at Google, you're great at whatever I'm assuming as a programmer. Oh, wait, he definitely was,
because that was the whole point. I wish I had a more succinct answer for you. But it's not
so much of an answer as it is like an explanation of where I'm coming from. I was treating it more
like a joke. To the extent that it's serious, I think it's important. And I think that it's valuable.
Even if I think some people over there are saying things that are probably stupid and wrong,
that's important that they should be able to say stupid and wrong things. I totally agree. I think
any sort of like censorship law is a bad idea. I think any group with Jordan Peterson in it is
going to have lots of stupid and wrong things said within it. That's fair. And some valuable
things too, probably, right? I'm not sure what he contributes valuable that what that's valuable
outside of psychology, but there's probably something. So the, I made a joke, or I didn't
actually make this in public, there was a, you know, Sam Harris sent out like, if you're a subscriber
to the show or a Patreon supporter, when he was leaving, he sent out an email saying,
there was like six sentences long saying, I'm leaving tomorrow, you can follow my website if you
want. And then Dave Rubin and Jordan Peterson released a video to much the same as the fact that
that was 31 minutes long. And like, that's why I don't listen to Jordan Peterson because I don't
have all day. But that's my beef with him. That's my beef with his way to deliver content rather
than not just my beef with him. So what you're saying is you wouldn't listen to our podcast.
I started this podcast because I wanted something like this to listen to. I certainly hope that
this isn't so bad that I wouldn't listen to it myself. Well, I mean, sometimes we get off on
tangents and such. That's fair. So I imagine that the people who don't like our podcast already
don't listen to it. That's fair. And we're not so big that people are going to be talking about us
and they're going to hear about it at work or something. This is our format now. Either you
like it or you don't. Yeah. And sorry. Please listen to a different podcast if you don't like
this one. Yeah. Or provide thoughtful feedback. But I know I've said this a couple of times,
but I'm kind of scattered right now. Sorry, Sailor Vulcan. But yes, to answer your question,
when I make jokes about it, that's not me seriously engaging with it. To the extent that I am,
I think I've answered that. By all means, I really appreciated your comment and
hit us up again. I'm eager to hear where I'm wrong. If you want to talk more about this,
let us know. That sounds valuable. So sorry that took I'm assuming 10 minutes. No worries.
All right. Yeah, we got a couple less wrong posts here to chat about. Cool. Less wrong post
numero uno was. Before we start, let me just say one more thing to Sailor Vulcan and anyone who's
been disengaged about my intellectual dark web discussion, that I will stop talking about it
until I get a more serious understanding and approach to it. I mean, you don't have to stop
talking about it. But I think I do. If I'm going to not take it seriously to some people, you know,
about, I don't know, it'd be like if every time I that like atheism came up, I would joke about
the new atheists, but like I refuse to like never engage with the actual content. It'd be kind of
old. It seemed disingenuous. And I feel like that's how it's coming off here. And I totally see
that. And it would seem not just disingenuous, but like intellectually dishonest. Like I'm poking
fun at straw man. And that's where I'm leaving it. And I'm treating like that's all it is. There's
more stuff here to actually talk about. So I'll be, I'll be a more, I'll more seriously investigate
this before it comes up again. Cool. All right, back to less wrong. Okay, less wrong post. The first
was super stimuli and the collapse of Western civilization. So the post basically introduced
the concept of super stimuli, which pretty sure we've talked about many times and we know,
but quick recap, it's a stimulus that is, it's like the cocaine of as opposed to a coca plant.
We, we all evolved like coca is also probably a super stimulus, not to beat the point, but
well, I mean, the coca plant, not really nearly that much, you'd like chew on it and it kind of
like stimulates you a little bit, but it's not like taking cocaine. No, no, that's super concentrated.
I would say it's more just like a soda compared to, or like a candy bar compared to an apple.
Okay. Yeah, sorry to, sorry to choose to nitpick on the example. You're right. Yeah, no, okay.
Yeah, one point. Well, because one, like, coca doesn't do anything when it doesn't matter.
Coca doesn't, coca isn't like a food or like something that we needed as our,
in the essential environment that we're hardwired to like for good reasons. You're right.
Where sugar is. Yeah, okay. That was a terrible example. We should cut my example. It's fine.
So yeah, this is more like we, we were evolutionarily adapted to
seek out high calorie foods because calories are pretty scarce in the environment and this
is something that would lead us to live longer. And they, they, it was an adaptive behavior back
in the day. We sometimes found sweet things like apples or nice fatty things and they made us happy
and we ate them. And nowadays we can take all those things and combine them into a candy bar,
which is just more sweet and fat in one concentrated package than you could ever
find in the ancestral environment. And it has absolutely nothing in there that's good for you.
So the kind of exact opposite of what, what we had evolved for this ability for.
Yeah, or this, this, this adaptation. Yeah. And so like the thing is, is that we're hardwired
for great reasons to enjoy certain stimuli, certain input. And yet that, that is hijacked
with technology or certain discoveries in nature that, oh, look, this hits that note really well
for your brain. And our brains don't know the difference. Do our brains, you know,
it's the reason the candy bar tastes so good because it has all the stuff in it and
that our, our hungry ancestors really wanted and needed in volumes that they couldn't imagine.
You might kill a caveman by giving him a Snickers. Probably wouldn't kill him.
No, but he would never be the same.
So yeah, super stimuli and the collapse of Western civilization. The point of the
article is that the market will continue to respond to incentives to competitively produce
super stimuli and that regulation is complicated and probably won't work.
Yeah. He uses the example of video games, excuse me, I'm saying this too fast.
He uses the example of video games, which I feel is a really good, like, non-charged example
and pointed out that at the time of writing, some half dozen people had died playing World of Warcraft
or one of those. Yeah, various online role-playing games. Yeah. You've actually mentioned on more
than one occasion on this podcast Diablo 3 and how it's like perfectly time to give you little,
hits little rewards. It's closer to perfect. I guess I didn't play World of Warcraft, but
which probably because I have some disciplinarian in my head that's saying,
look, you can't play World of Warcraft if you want to have a life. Steven, you are incapable of
handling this. You're the idiot who put 500 hours into your first playthrough of Elder Scrolls Oblivion.
If you were online actually dick measuring with other people, you would just die at your desk.
So I don't have what it takes. But yeah, so Diablo 3, I think is, this came out before Diablo 3.
And I don't think it was perfect. I don't know if anyone died playing it, but I was just showing
this to Rachel. No, someone had because I was showing her, I was telling her, my fiance that
people have died playing games like this and she's watching me playing. She's like,
I don't get how that's possible. And I was like, here, just watch for like five minutes. I'm going
to tell you when things pop up. And granted, it's different from the backseat. But from the front
seat, you're playing, you're going through a mob of enemies. And you know, it would just seem that
the moment I'm like, okay, as soon as this one's done, I'm going to call it. I'm going to pause
and quit. Yeah. And then I come across a double experience shrine. I'm like, oh, this last two
minutes, I've got to ride this out double experience, man, let's let's let's beat that grind.
And then oh, man, double attack. Oh, you know, I finally got the enough to go fight this boss
that was killing me a second ago. And it's, it wasn't enough to kill me. But it was enough
that I absolutely noticed the little rat in my head hitting that button for more cocaine, right?
So it was just that immediate feedback of nope, keep going, keep going, keep going. And I totally
felt it. That was a game where, you know, I lost sleep, not a ton. This wasn't the most addictive
game I played. But I lost lots of sleep to World of Warcraft. Yeah, it's not just you, man. Yeah.
And I mean, and if there's a company that can make a game that's 5% more addictive than that one,
they're going to get the market share. That's right. Yeah, it's so the point is that the the
market is there for people wanting to consume this stuff because just like there's somebody
making the next sweetener or something, right? I think the the point that he was, this was more
just like, I think more feedback on or more responsive feedback. I don't know if this is
part of his initial layout of essays for the sequences. But you know, what about regulation?
Couldn't we just, you know, pass a law to stop that? But how do you pass a law that says if
Diablo 4 is too fun to play, you can't release it? Right? Like, that sounds a bizarre,
b totalitarian and c totally unworkable. Right? Do you give it to a control group of
a thousand people? And if more than two of them die, it doesn't make it to market? Like,
right? Sorry, this game is too, oh my god, then there'd be a black market for games that are too
good for the government to let you to play them. Oh yeah, hands down. That'd be awesome. I mean,
so good. It was banned in 12 countries. That actually sounds like a really good marketing
for it. I would buy the hell out of that game. What's all the hype about?
So I'm going to skip the next bullet point or two. If people have the right to be tempted,
this is a quote, if people have the right to be tempted, and that's what free will is all about,
the market is going to supply, I'd like, can I stop real quick? If people have the right to
be tempted, and that's what free will is all about. I'd never quite heard someone put it that
way before, that free will is the right to be tempted, which, you know, that only sticks out
to me because I have, you know, a real hard on with religion and the devil, and specifically
like the Lucifer speech near the end of devil's advocate, but which is just all about temptation
and free will. And I run into those themes a lot in the stuff that I enjoy reading. And so that
was like, that was interesting. I think on the free will tangent, that it that you can certainly
say that, I mean, I don't know if you would say that's what free will is all about, if you're a
philosopher, but what you could say is that like, to the extent that your ability to indulge
whatever you want isn't constrained, that's free will. What Dan would call elbow room,
or maybe. Although if you were never tempted by something else, didn't ever really have
that much of a choice in things, right? Exactly. That was my thing. I mentioned like,
I never tempted to put my hand on a hot stove. So is there any like free will to not put your
hands on hot stoves? Right. Or, you know, I mentioned last episode, the episode 45 of The
Very Bad Wizards, where they argued about like, how much your societal pressure as a child
impacts where you can go in life. And they used bad examples, like they used, you know,
kids in the, you know, in Detroit, you know, playing basketball and listening to hip hop,
like isn't their future constrained, because like they're not, they don't get the, they don't
really have the option to like, you know, go to college and get some pointless degree in the arts
or something, because, you know, or, you know, in the sciences, less pointless. Don't get me wrong,
I have a degree that's basically an arts degree and it's pointless. So I'm not shitting on other
people, I'm shitting on myself. I would have used the Amish as my quintessential example, like,
you know, I don't know if they get to choose whether or not they get to work with cows or
work with wheat, but they don't get to choose whether they get to work with computers or work
with cars, you know, so like, their choice space is very finely constrained by their environment.
And I think that sucks. And I think that's, and to go back to my anti-religion thing,
if the Amish were a billion strong, I'd be super against the Amish. There's this,
I'm railing on the Amish right now, there's this like kind of thing that makes it kind of quaint,
like they get to, they get to preserve kind of antiquity humans or more antiquity human
survival, which I think is great. If you want to opt into it when you're 20, you want to go
join a cult and go, you know, throw away your phone and do whatever, go nuts. That sounds
actually kind of cool. That's, if that's, that's something you want to do, that's great. I think
it's terrible is to raise a kid that can die of a splinter because they can't get, they can't go
get medicine. Are you saying then that the people who opt to join that cult should be sterilized so
they don't have children? Uh, I wouldn't go so far, but maybe I am. Yeah, because then otherwise,
some of them are going to have children and then they're going to want to raise them. Or they're,
or they're forced to give their kids up or, you know, forced to break, leave the cult when they
have kids or something. Well, I mean, they have the Rumspringer. That's, that's kind of like a field
trip in school, right? So like, yeah, it's a field trip where they show you all the worst parts of
the great modern society while shunning you and, you know, being like, don't talk to us during this
period. And it's, it's like it, it's disingenuous way to represent, way to represent the rest of
the world. No, you're wrong. The rest of the world has a lot of shit in it too. But I think
Rumspringer is honestly genius in how well it, it makes people hate the outside of the Amish world,
you know? Yeah. No, it's, it's, because you're lonely, you're homesick. All you have to turn to
is like drugs and rock and roll out here. And it's kind of an empty life. And yeah, of course,
you want to go back. It's a great tool. If that's what you're going for. And you're thinking, yeah,
I got a taste of that outside hedonistic world. And boy, was it horrible. For sure. That's the quote.
Yes, sorry. No, no, that was great. If people have the right to be tempted, and that's what
free will is all about, the market is going to respond by supplying as much temptation as can
be sold, which is just, I'd like that it was a callback to Birch's law, which we talked about
just episode or two ago. Yeah, saying that, yeah, literally just saying that. And then the next quote
being a key assumption of free market economics is that in the absence of force and fraud,
people can always refuse to engage in harmful transaction. To the extent this is true, a free
market would be not merely the best policy on the whole, but a policy with few or no downsides.
Now, this was really interesting. Because like, just to reiterate it, a key assumption of economics
is that without force or fraud, people can refuse to engage in harmful transactions. And if you put
it that way, that's not just the best policy of all options. There's like no downsides, right?
I think if something is not your advantage, you can just choose not to take that advantage.
I think the, if there was no force or fraud, sure, but that's not a world that we live in,
especially with given how broad force can be, right? I think that that is the trap that
he's trying to warn away here, because this came just like three or four episodes after policy
debates should not appear one sided. And he linked to policy debates should not appear one sided in
the a policy with fewer no downsides. So I think what he's trying to point out is, if you think
this is how free market economics works, then there's probably something very wrong,
because it looks to be one sided, right? Right. Without force or fraud, this is great. So what's
the deal? And that should set off a bell that this policy, it looks so one sided, there must
be something else going on. And to me, not being an economist, I would just say that
there's more like there's too much force and fraud in the system for that to be perfect.
So, you know, somebody could lie to you about whatever, and then boom, you're addicted, you
know, or something, right? Well, or they could give you exactly what you want, and you like it so
much, you stop doing other things. Yeah, which is like another another force, right? So they don't
have to lie to you, they just they that's that's not a force at all. No one forced anyone to play
World of Warcraft until they died. No, no one forces people lead candy bars. That's true. But
our biology doesn't force us, but it pressures us. Maybe that's the difference. I think, I think
you absolutely cannot use words like force if you're talking about people choosing what they
want to do because of their biology, because that just kind of perverts the use the word force.
That's why I use pressure.
Touche, sir, I lose this argument. But you're right, because like if we're pressured by our
biology, like then what else are we, you know, we don't we don't have anything else. It's not
like there's some ghost in the machine that really wants the right thing. But our our stupid
monkey brains are stopping us. It's like all we are is our monkey brains, all that stuff
laid on top of it. So it's it's interesting to say the least. Yeah. All right. So he points on as
well that on some occasions in the ancestral environment, a typically beneficial act may in
fact be harmful. Homo sapiens are still tempted by food, but our oversized prefrontal courtesies
give us a limited ability to resist temptation, not unlimited ability. Our ancestors with too
much willpower probably starve themselves to sacrifice to the gods or fail to commit adultery
one too many times. The video player who died must have exercised willpower in some sense to
keep playing for so long without food or sleep. There is that quote that I pulled out because
this just makes me like that's the other thing that's what makes people like Yuzkowski and Alexander
great writers is a they're delivering lots of really cool content in a fun way, but they also
make me laugh. And I don't have to be laughing out loud to enjoy something, but it helps. Yeah.
And so he's like, I suppose one could argue that the consumer makes a rational decision that that
I suppose someone could argue that the consumer makes a rational decision that they'd rather
play Starcraft for the next hour than live the rest of their lives. Well, let's not go there,
please. And so I think that's that's a fair like just let's just leave that over here. We're going
to assume that they didn't decide that because come on. Yeah, you're doing we're doing the
discussion on how many people are actually trying to die playing this game. Now this this next part
kind of reminded me that all this was written before the replication crisis, the replication
crisis, because he says that resisting any temptation takes conscious expenditure of
an exhaustible supply of mental energy, which I mean, I believe is true, because it's not
easy necessarily to resist temptation. But but those are like those studies that like,
you can only be shown a marshmallow so many times right take it. Exactly, which which have now
failed to replicate. And so I was like, oh, that doesn't hold up quite as well, which is,
you know, cool, though, because but the benefit of this post is that that's not the crux of the
post, or, you know, certainly not the crux crux of the sequences. So like, you know, that that one
part of this one post can fall apart. And don't get wrong, he says a lot of the psychology that has
been called out or not called out has been failed to replicate failed to replicate and has been
shown to be less than solid. Yeah, he says even when where we even where we successfully resist
a super stimulus, it seems plausible that the effort required with the deplete willpower much
faster than resisting ancestral temptations. I don't know, possibly true. I mean, anecdotally,
it sounds true to me. Yeah. You know, like my my office brings us bagels and donuts on Wednesdays,
because for some reason, developers are like children and we need a lot, we need lots of things
to keep us there and keep us happy. So frankly, if they had donuts every day, it would be hard
for me not to have an everyday I have one every single week when they when they bring them in.
So that sounds like just me after a while. I probably would. Yeah, like I just we have snacks
out in our office at all times. And I just I have some of them when I'm hungry. But for the most
part, I don't know. I think you're a person of above average willpower. Maybe I just have below
average attraction to donuts. That's fair. Yeah, it's a hard time finding like a sweet thing for
you to indulge yourself with. What is your like go to thing? This is a complete tangent, but I
meant to ask actually, because I have no idea, like, for the last two months, I've been really
wanting cinnamon rolls. Okay, what is your thing? Do you not do you literally not have one? I'm sure
I do. I just, I don't know. I can't think of one off hand. You're like, yes, even I have one,
it's called looking and feeling good. I don't know. It is hard to resist the temptations of
the fair sex sometimes. That's fair. Um, yeah, you're also more anti food than most people.
You eat to like just to survive where I, we've talked about this and this is another tangent,
but buckle up. It's not that long. I, one of the things that like when you're talking about
transhumanism earlier, you know, when we all have cool robot bodies or we don't have to eat or sleep,
I think simulated eating would be something worth like putting in us. Or, you know, even like real
eating where you eat real food and break it down and enjoy it, but like you don't die without it,
or you don't get hungry. Because like, a, there's the fun culture aspect of getting together and
having a meal, which we've been doing for, you know, millions or hundreds of thousands of years
as a species. But if you eat, you would have to poop or something, you know, whatever. You'd have
to get rid of that mass eventually. I know, but whatever. So however this would work, again,
simulated, if we're all in the matrix, we'd simulated, we simulated things and it just turns
to nothing. Oh yeah. I guess we're in the matrix. Yeah. Whatever it is to make the thing work.
I think it'd be fun to have that around because eating can be a lot of fun. I really enjoy the
textures, the tastes and all that stuff. And there are, there are parts of like super primitive
things like eating and stuff that I find fun. I think the only times I really like,
I'm not an overweight person by the way. Oh, no, no, no. Yeah. Stephen is a very slim person,
not very slim. He's good, good shape. He's not like, you know, that's the thing he said about
Stephen. He's a good shape, not in good shape. He's a good shape. He's the correct shape for
an adult human. Barely. No, I, the only time I've really liked food is when I've been really hungry,
like my first year at Burning Man when I didn't bring enough food. And after like a half day,
people were just like handing out food this one place I walked by and I was like, oh, thank god,
so good. You told me about the time that you tried soiling for like four days or something.
And you literally cried after having like real food again. I totally didn't literally cry, but I
like tears in my eyes a little bit. That's fine. Yeah. But in any case, I totally get it. And
granted, that's a really high price to pay for that kind of reward. Because of course,
your brain's going to be just like, thank god, right? But when it comes to regular day-to-day
eating. Yeah, fair enough. All right. So what I brought that around though was because it ties
to your willpower of resisting donuts is because you'd never really wanted them in the first place.
Exactly. Yeah. But no, he brought up that whole plausible that the effort required to deplete
willpower, effort required to resist the pleats will power much faster than ancestral environment
and goes on to say is public display of super stimuli a negative externality,
even to the people who say no. So like, is it bad to have those donuts just laying in the office,
even if you say no to them, because it took up some of your brain power and your, you know,
your ability to resist temptation just to have them there. So I say no to a donut,
but then I go home and cheat on my wife or something. Exactly. I think his case would be
a little more nuanced than that. Oh, next time I cheat on someone, I'm going to blame the donuts.
That's fair. Honey, you don't understand. They've had donuts at work all week.
I didn't have a single donut. Right? Thank god, I'm not fat. You should be thanking my secretary.
Maybe I'm trying to think of a, what's a good example of that sort of thing? Like,
I guess because the whole willpower is a pleading thing turns out to be
the best example I can think of is, this is going to sound weird because like,
I do like porn and I think it is great. But I think porn can really skew
your expectations and experiences of sex when you first start having sex as a young man.
That's definitely true. Yeah. And like, even in general, just like being constantly bombarded
with super hot people who are like, literally don't exist, right? Everywhere. It changes how you
look at everyone else in the world. Yeah, that's that's fair. I think that may be a bit of a negative
externality. Like I saw a European movie, I think like a year or two ago. And this wasn't my observation.
Someone else said it, but they were like, Oh, you can tell that this was filmed in Europe because
some people look like normal people. And it was true. Some people look like average humans.
Whereas every movie you see in America, with some very rare exceptions, everyone is just super
amazingly good looking outside the Avengers again. They're all 11 out of 10. Right. Yeah,
with the exception of Hawkeye is maybe a nine. And poor Hawkeye gets shit on all the time for
everything. It's true, though. He is the least hot Avenger. Get a real superpower, Hawkeye.
Right. Yeah. But yeah, that's that's interesting. And there's, yeah, porn is a good example. I think
there's a lot to unpack with with porn. I think it's it's absolutely a super stimuli. It it gives
you a lot of the feedback of it's a whole thing. We'll save it for later. But we'll save it for
no FAP February. Sure. Is that is that a thing? I've heard that term at least once. I don't know
if that makes it a thing. Oh, no FAP November. That's no shave November. Yeah. Yeah. All right.
Well, yeah, I guess we'll see how that goes. Oh, man, are we going to do a Bayesian conspiracy
Seinfeld like contest? Nope. All right.
All right, we're moving on. We're professionals. So yeah, first of all, brings up a very interesting
example that that it might be a negative externality there to have super stimuli around.
Yeah, which we'll leave that up for discussion, I guess. Yeah. And I think it goes into the next
in the next topic as well. He ends with an interesting science fiction story about humans
who are marketed out of existence because they were given super cute, like fake babies to have
instead of real babies and no one wanted real babies anymore, because the fake babies were like
just as good in every single way, except not with all the awful downsides. Yeah. I think that's
fun. I think Shelly might I'm Shelly comes to mind because she brought up that, you know, one
reason some people that you suspect some people get pets and kids is that it's nice to lord over
something that desperately needs your needs you to live. I think that might be true for some people.
I don't know how true that is of like most pet owners and human owners. But unless these robot
kids would die without you, then then again, maybe they would that sounds like I didn't read the story,
but that sounds like a crux of the whole thing. Like if it was like a Tamagotchi that, you know,
remember those, I do, it didn't die. If you didn't feed it, it just got sad and you know,
the room filled with poop or something, right? So I don't know what happened. I never had one.
Oh, yeah, they were like lucky Chinese toys. I remember. I don't know what happens if you
ignore one. I think if you ignore them, they get sad. And like I said, they poop that you're
supposed to clean up or something. But if it was like that, and I'm what I'm getting at is that in
the sci fi story, which I haven't read and I'm speculating on, I imagine the robots died without
you. Because that sounds like a really important ingredient for making you really want to take
care of them. Yeah, I'm trying to think of like, you know, there's a handful of like robot puppies
and stuff you can get that are just like complete jokes, because they don't do any of the fun things
that puppies do, like be soft and snuggly and have wet tongues and little feet and noses.
And be so amazingly excited to see you every time you walk in the door.
That's right. But man, if they made good robot puppies, that could happen. So
never replace real puppies. Puppies are the one thing. They're pure magic. Yeah. All right,
you can tell it's getting late for my brain. Luckily, they won't post left.
All right, last post, useless medical disclaimers. I love that title already because
God, I have some things to say about them. And some of you had a couple of medical procedures
this week. I can tell you that they're completely the I feel his pain. Yeah. Although I'm less than
sensed about it than he seems to be. Okay. All right. Eliezer relates a fun experience of signing
a medical waiver, in which I acknowledged that there was a risk of infection, repeat surgery,
chronic pain, amputation, spontaneous combustion, meteor strikes, and a plague of locusts over the
land. It was the most pointless damned form I've ever seen in a doctor's office. What are the
statistical incidences of any of these risks? Should I be more or less worried about dying
in a car crash on the way home? Taken literally, this kind of information is absolutely useless
for making decisions. You can't translate something into an expected utility, even a
qualitative and approximate one, if it doesn't come with the probability attached.
Yeah. I read this more just like this the first time he had to go to the doctor as an adult.
Okay. Just like had to sign us on paperwork. Maybe it wasn't. But like, I just see him seeing
this and he's just like, wait, what the fuck? Yeah, it's, you know, anyone who's had any sort
of medical stuff done, you sign these things and it doesn't give you probabilities. No. And it's
complete bullshit. It's the reason I anyway, don't look at warning labels on medicine anymore,
because anything that came up in their huge trials, they slap a label on like someone got this,
literally every medication says may cause dizziness. So now none of them do because, you know what,
one person got dizzy, maybe it was related to the medicine, now they put it on the label.
I am of the opinion that if something is an actual serious risk, my doctor will tell me of
it. Like everyone knows SSRIs cause sexual dysfunction because it's a well known common
side effect and doctors always tell you about it. Yeah, I think, I mean, I still read the forms.
Okay. I guess. I skim them. I stop bothering. That's just with medicines though, I would
suggest you read like the don't mix with this medicine list. It's like, you know, like your
nyquil has acetaminophen in it. And so does your Tylenol. That's what it's made of. So like,
if you're taking three Tylenol for the day to help with your cold, and then you take a big
shot of nyquil at night, you're taking too much acetaminophen. So you should, you should at least
be aware of those interactions. But yeah, I mean, as far as causing dizziness, it's like, all right,
I understand there's some risk to being dizzy. I'm going to take everything I take for the first
time at home under controlled conditions before I decide whether or not I'm good to drive. Right.
So, you know, some people, half of Vicodin will just knock them out and make them just, you know,
not zombies, but kind of like, I guess lethargic, you know, like, whereas other people like, oh,
I'm good to go. I can keep going to work, you know, whatever. So yeah. So without some knowledge
of how likely this is, it really isn't useful at all. Well, I think the downside with like,
now I'm nitpicking, but the downside of the medication is that they can't give you that
on the bottle. Well, I guess they could say 90% of people have this, which is fair.
They could just like have, you know, a little number point to something that tells you the
incidence rate. Yeah. I think that what I was going to bring up though with medicine is that,
like, it interacts with different people differently, whereas like a surgery is probably
going to be the same for everybody. It depends on your hospital and your doctor.
Well, but, but your, what they're doing, you know, if they're going to give you,
you know, a shot in your spine, your spine to the same spot as my spine, right? So like,
it's not going to be that different for you than it is for me. But they have all the real reason
to have all this shit on there is because one time somebody like, you know, got an epidural and
they're like, oh my God, I can't feel my left leg anymore. And it's like, okay, cool. You might
never feel your left leg again is what they're going to put on there to protect themselves.
So they'll have to pay out that lawsuit once. Yeah. But yeah, it, I remember, oh,
this is actually a good example. I got LASIK this summer and Rachel was driving me and to go to
the procedure and I'm rereading the paperwork they gave me. And it says there's a chance of,
you know, infection, blindness and death. And I'm like, this is the first time I'm
feeling nervous about this and we're on our way there right now. And like, I know that like my
chances of dying are slim. But like you said, my doctor who was doing the, who set this procedure
gave me his, he get, he was, I don't know if he's a rationalist or not, but he, he LASIK would love
him. He gave me base rates for everything that he talked about. Oh, thank God. I mean, he said,
hey, I've done, you know, I've personally presented over like, I don't know, 15,000 of these surgeries
or something. I've had two people lose sight in their eye over it. And, you know, one person
got shitfaced that night and tore out their, their cornea, like a contact lens and, you know,
somebody else, whatever did something, right? So like, yeah, exactly. So, but I mean, he didn't
say there's a chance, you know, just be ready. He gave me a two and 15,000, whatever number rate,
right? So I'm like, okay, cool. Don't be an idiot and I'll be fine. Yeah. I mean, I had also heard
that LASIK sometimes can end up with blindness and I was terrified for a while, but I was like,
I have never heard of this being a big deal. If it was any sort of decent incidence rate,
I would have heard about it, right? That was sort of my thing is that, you know,
uncharitably, but this way I put it in my head, it was like idiots get this on all the time and
they don't go blind, right? You know, so like, and I figured if I'm super careful, I'll be fine.
There's literally nothing, there's nothing to worry about there then because, you know, some
people go into the hot tub, you know, the few days after and you're not supposed to, you're not
supposed to get water in your eyes, all that stuff. They do it anyway and they're fine. You know,
my doctor and he even said this, that's why I loved him so much. I asked him, I was like,
did you like teach or something? Because I feel like I learned a lot in the last half an hour
and he's like, I've taught in a few lectures, wrote a few books, I'm like, that makes perfect
sense because you're awesome. Cool. I would plug his name, but that sounds super shilly. If you need,
if you're getting LASIK surgery in Denver, shoot me a message on, a personal message on Reddit,
and I will tell you this doctor because he's outstanding. Anyway, his whole presentation
involved everything that Ydkazki complains about. I think it also kind of leads a little bit to
fatalism. Like a lot of the times nowadays, I'm like, well, I got to go in for this thing,
might kill me. Yep. And it just, you know, it, it leads to more of a the world feels scary and
random rather than the world feels stable and safe when like you're told every single thing can kill
you and everything causes cancer. And I, I don't actually think this is likely the case, but I'm
like, maybe it's pushing away from the slow life strategies into the fast life strategies with
you start telling people that every single thing can kill them. Yeah. And certainly, you know, a
lot of people, at least people I know, certainly guys have like this huge reluctance to go get,
go to the doctor and get stuff fixed. And I think part of that is just like, I'm a man,
I'll walk it off. And it's like, all right, you've been trying to walk us off for two years, like
it's not going away. But the other, the other part might just be like, well, sure, I can't lift my
arm above my shoulder, but I don't want to lose my arm. So I'm not going to get this done. And,
you know, I talked to doctor, they said you could lose your arm. So I'm not going to. But yeah,
what does it mean that you could? I think that his, his ask his question pointedly of like,
am I more or less likely to die on the way to the, to the procedure than I'm, than I am during a
procedure? Yeah. That sounds like something they should have on the form. Yeah. You know, like
I'm my, my, uh, my grandpa died a few days after he got, uh, it was like double bypass or something.
He had, he had polio as a kid and then he had a bad heart for like ever. But not bad enough. Oh,
doesn't matter. Anyway, so he, um, I think his surgery had like a 20% fatality rate. And that's
something that they tell you if it's like, if it's high enough that you might actually die,
they're going to give you percentages. Um, I assume, but in many cases, they're Googleable.
Hey, I'm getting double bypass. You know, here's my couple of relevant facts. Okay, cool. In your
situation, 30% of patients died during their procedure or in the following week or something.
And he said, Hey, you know what, that's a risk I'm willing to take. But if they just said you
might, that's not good enough. I realize we're blabbering at this point, but it is just really
funny. And in a way that's kind of perversely funny too. So, um, all right, quote, I'm not the
litigious type, but I seriously wonder if it would be possible to sue based on the theory that,
quote, possibilities with no probabilities attached to them are not useful information. And should
therefore constitute a, should not constitute a disclaimer under the law. Someone will win a case
on that. And frankly, he should have taken himself up on it. I mean, seriously, like when you tell
someone literally anything has a chance of happening after this, you're giving them no
information. Yeah, totally. All right. He theorized that they probably don't have numbers because
most people would not be able to correctly update based on those numbers. And says clearly,
enumeracy produces negative externalities and it ought to be regulated. In particular, we should
impose attacks on people who can't properly diminish the emotional impact of their anticipations
by tiny probability factors. Two classic objections to regulation are that a, it interferes on
personal freedom and B, the individual always knows more about their own situation than the
regulator. I think it's a joke that he says that enumeracy causes negative externalities and so
it ought to be regulated, especially considering his previous view posts on regulation. Right.
Does he, does he have a point? I think, I think he is joking because like he was talking about how
hard it'd be to regulate super stimuli. Yeah. So I think he's saying, Hey, to the people saying
like, let's regulate this, how do you fucking regulate this? And so to that extent, it does create
a negative externality. That's right. And so at the beginning of this, he's just, it seems like
he's just ranting because he just went to the doctor and it was super annoying. But he ties it
in wonderfully with, with the context of the previous post that like, you know, again, how,
how do you possibly legislate numeracy? Right. So he has like a number of times, first with the
case of numeracy now, and earlier with Birch's law and with the super stimuli, told us things like,
here are bad things about the market. They will provide as much SUVs, as much stupidity as the
market will buy, they will provide as much super stimuli as the market will buy. And he seems to
be pretty down on regulation. I think by the fact that he's brought these things up numerous times
now, he's kind of asking us as readers to be like, what do you do about this? It totally seems like
a challenge. Yeah, that's how I read it too. And the answer is, I don't really know. So the answer
is, I'm reading these so that you can tell me the answers. Damn it. I would point out the good
thing about inside porn is that it's inside porn, not insight, do the work yourself.
I wanted to point out that the some of the stuff that Robert Hanson cited in The Elephant in the
Brain and in previous stuff, just talking about medicine, is that people don't want to pay for
statistics. There and I ought to dig this up, but it's in the chapter on healthcare in The Elephant
in the Brain. And I seem to remember Julie Gale of talking about this somewhere too, maybe it was
on her episode with him, but you can offer somebody, hey, do you want the numbers on this? And they
often say no. And like, especially if you ask, like, do you want the numbers, we can go get them for
$50. Which if you're spending $2,000 on, you know, you're deductible to get your surgery taken care
of or something, or if you don't have it and you're spending $100,000, you think $50 is nothing.
But people seem to just not want to know, which is somewhat understandable. Like if I told you
there's a chance this could kill you and you needed it, you might not want me to tell you
what the odds that it could kill you are, right? You don't count, but the average person.
If I have to get it anyway, then that information will not change my decision. And so there's no
reason for me to pay. Whether it has a 5% chance or a 95% chance to kill me, if I have to do it
anyway, I might as well save the $50 in case I live. Maybe it's to fix your bum shoulder or
something, you know? And I think I would definitely want to know the rates. But if somebody's like,
I just want this. No, that's weird. I can't put myself in. I feel like I'm straw manning
people. There's no way. I'd have to go back and find that. But I did see that there was,
I didn't look this up beforehand, so I don't have the actual numbers. But there was a, to me,
very surprising result that people seemed remarkably uninterested in getting quotes on
probabilities of outcomes with medical interventions. They were also bizarrely interested
in shopping around, which part of that is the time and effort it takes to go to another doctor
and how much you already liked your first one? I only went to one Lasik person. I should have
looked at others. There were other cheaper options. Maybe I liked someone that cost half as much,
90% as much as I liked this doctor. And I could have saved $1,500 or something. But I was already
sold. Is his office based in Boulder? No. Okay. I went to one who, when I did it eight years ago,
was based in Boulder. And he was number one or number two in the Denver metro area. And yeah,
also really expensive. But I was like, it's my eyes. I'm going to pay as much as it takes,
even if it's only like 10% better. That was something I joked about for years before getting
Lasik is that I'm not going to, you know, not going to bargain shop on eye surgery. You know,
I'll bargain shop on shoes or on cell phone chargers. But I can't just go get new eyes if
they fuck up my only ones, right? So all right, those are the posts. Cool. They were fun to talk
about. And for next time, we have Archimedes chronophone and chronophone motivators. And we
will have links to both of them up at the basin conspiracy.com. That's right. I know we had
some more feedback, but it's like almost nine. Do you want to save that for next time? There was
the one on the Patreon one, right? Yeah, I want to skim it. All right, go ahead and hit that one.
We do have other interesting feedback. We're sorry to the guys and girls who posted that we
didn't get to this episode. We'll get to it soon. Here's a random quick one from, I don't think your
name is meant to be pronounced on Reddit. Y-W-E-C-U-R. Why recur? Yeah. Why recur? Oh, okay. There we
go. You were talking about like selling out cell authors and stuff. And they said that the Martian
is a rational fic, I think. And I think I totally agree. Oh, yeah. And a good example of a genre
that can succeed in reaching a wider audience. Totally agree. It was outstanding. And it was also,
I guess, outstanding kind of means like, you know, special. But it was, it somehow managed
to be super nerdy and super captivating to wider, wider people who wouldn't ordinarily find that
stuff captivating. So I don't know how many people have read the book, who weren't already into that,
but I read the book because I saw the movie and the book was amazing. So yeah, and even better than
the movie. I thought so too. I found like his nerdy digressions of like, so much better, his
preparation to drive to go pick up that, that, that satellite so we could talk with Earth. Yeah.
That was just so interesting. It wasn't just like, and it took lots of planning and it was really
hard. And I did it. And it was like, no, no, I'm going to give you like a full chapter on like,
how I prefer this shit. Because you get the feeling that he really did. Right. What he was
planting the potatoes and he was calculating out how many potatoes he could grow per cubic centimeter
dirt, how much poop he needed for that, how many calories he could get for potatoes. It was like,
it was interesting. It was good. And none of that was in the movie. Not so much. There was a little
bit with like, yeah, like, you know, some numbers appeared on the screen, but it wasn't like, you
know, here's the actual calculations. I really liked, he was on Andy Weir, the author was on
Neil deGrasse Tyson's StarTalk radio. And which I don't listen to that much, but I heard this one
in those few years ago. But Tyson had said to him, Hey, you know, there was very little that I found
to take issue with in your stuff. And he was like, I wrote it with you ripping it apart in mind.
I wanted to make sure that that, you know, Neil deGrasse Tyson wouldn't say, Oh, you got this wrong.
Which I think, you know, hey, if you're writing a book with lots of science in it, isn't the best
way isn't the isn't the worst way to go. Yeah. The one thing I think the movie did better was that
the book started to drag near the end, like at the very end, when he was almost home to the,
you know, take off capsule. And then there's like this slow storm that moves in, box out of
sun and all that. I'm like, Oh, God, just just just get to the end. One more thing to go. Yeah,
exactly. Please. I did like the the end and more that like, they in the in the, oh, wait, how does
it end in the book? In the movie, there's this whole dramatic thing where she jumps out and she's
got the cable and it was like very much like a heroic rescue. Yeah. In the, in the book,
it's kind of much more procedural. They have it all planned, they jump in, grab them, hold them,
jump out. And it felt much more like mechanical, like you would think it would go if they'd
been planning it for 18 months on their way back. And I liked that kind of more rather than like,
no caution to the winds, we're going to do this. Right. But it was cool. I don't know that one.
God damn it Alexa. Robot scared us. Yeah. There was also a part that I really liked that I think
was only in the book where I forget all the roles, but the one of the smallest, I think was the
smallest person on the ship. When they were flying back by earth, when they're going to go back and
get Wattley, she was talking with her parents. Yes. And they said, if you guys make it, if you guys
don't make it, whatever, you guys are all going to die. And she's like, well, don't tell anyone,
but not all of us. Yeah. There's enough calories on the ship for me to make it back because I'm
the smallest. Yeah. And she lays out from like, that we've talked about this, I'm going to,
they're going to take whatever, some sort of cyanide capsule or something that won't paint
the meat, and I'm going to eat them to survive, which is so hardcore. Right. Great book. If you
haven't read it, I strongly recommend it. And I can't oversell the audiobook. Oh, really? Oh, yeah.
We did the audiobook. I'm not sure who did it, but whoever he is, he deserves a medal. He didn't
just read this, he like, he acted the entire thing. I think, yeah, they usually, well, not usually,
they often get like, celebrity voice actors to do the really big names. Oh, he might have been,
I'm not sure. But he, I mean, he did accents, he did like, you know, log entry, soul 56,
I'm fucked and I'm going to die. He doesn't, he doesn't just like, say it. I tried listening to
an audiobook, A Lord of the Rings, there's probably better ones now, because this was like,
right before the movies came out. And it was terrible. Oh, audiobooks back in the day were just
the worst. Yeah. Now they, now they've gotten good, I guess. But anyway, I really liked audiobook
too. So last quick comment here, we've got one from not without incident on the Patreon episode
I just agree with almost everything in this episode, but that's probably not a productive
conversation. It's not that bad. Here, don't tell yourself short. Instead, I'm really curious,
not right, not in a rhetorical way, but actually surprised how a group of four libertarian-leaning
people could all cede moral authority to the law in the way that you did. Yeah, Inyash. Platforms
obviously have to watch their own back legally in cases like DMCA and FOSTA, but in other cases,
where specific laws haven't been crafted to go after internet services, I don't see why it should
even be part of the argument. So I think we touched on this, and I think you had an answer.
Yeah, I don't think we touched on it. I replied in the subreddit. Oh, you replied to me,
because I asked you, I was like, what about this law thing? And you said, basically, it's just a
shelling fence that like, we can lay that up as a quick place to put this, to plant this, to put
this line in the sand. And in specific, I'm in favor of the law, because I think for the most
part, it's come to the right conclusion. It's the same conclusion that I would make where you can't.
In some ways, doesn't go quite far enough. Like, you cannot actually threaten people with credible
threats. You can't incite people to violence. And I would go so far as to say that you shouldn't
be able to harass people by doing things like doxing them and setting, you know, mobs on them,
sending them things like, I'm going to murder your children, here's pictures of where your
children go to school, which I don't think is actually illegal right now, but should be in my
opinion. But for the most part, I agree with where the law is. So I use that as a shorthand often,
I'll be like, if it's not illegal, it's okay. Because I kind of think that now I'm not specifically
ceding moral authority to the law, because if the law was different, if the law was closer to how
it was like in the 50s, where there were a number of things you couldn't say, you beat me to it.
Okay, yeah, I would, I would have been like, you know, with Larry Flint and the people versus Larry
Flint, we're like, yeah, we should be able to watch all the porn we want to watch.
Or I'm sure there's probably some obscure counties where it was illegal for black people to try to
advocate to vote or something, right? I'm sure. Yeah. So like, it would have been against the law
to try and rally them to get together to vote. Yeah. So certainly that's fucked up. There's,
I think, still a few countries around the world where it's illegal to say bad things about the
royalty. And there's places that are introducing blasphemy laws and stuff. So yeah, I'm not, I'm
not ceding ground to the legal authority because it's legal. I'm just latching onto it because
I agree with the conclusion. If it was different, I wouldn't. In where we're at in most places in
modern society. Yeah. Yeah. All right, that's fair. Yeah, I think, I think, I think so too. And
there's also the difference between like legal and moral, but and in some cases, I like you.
I like the fact that now with that incident specifically brought up the cases of DMCA and
Fosta as being permissible because the platforms have to watch their back. But I actually hate
both of those because of what they've done to free speech. Fosta is a fucking blight upon society and
is ruining things and ruining the lives of mainly sex workers, but a lot of other people too. And
DMCA is just the worst archaic copyright law that makes it so that you cannot modify your own
electronics for your own personal use. I mean, those those are things I actually do have issues
with which are the law and we've even done one episode before on with chase on digital rights.
Yeah, exactly. So yeah, I'm not I'm not all for the law. But in general, in terms of speech,
like where it's gone, in terms of actual talking speech, not these other kinds.
The protagonist in Ward, the sequel to worm, kind of like in worm, you know, some percentage people
have superpowers. And a lot of them are villains, because you get superpowers under duress like
an X men. So there's listen to always undress next man. Sometimes it was just because you were
well, someone's just because you get a puberty, an X man. Yeah, I guess you're right. I'm thinking
more of the movies too, where a lot of them kind of woke up during stressful moments, like rogue
and others, right? Yeah, but you're right. So X men, whatever. In worm, I think everybody gets
their powers through trigger events, which are always like, you're going to die, or like someone's
going to get hurt, or something really stressful for you. And so that leads, you know, since that
happens often in places where things suck, you get a lot of super villains. But there's this kind
of like cops and robbers thing, where like, you know, we play by the rules, because otherwise,
we could all destroy the planet. So we all know that we're all going to do that, except when they
don't. And then then it's like, you know, the legislate, the people who legislate per human
action, say you can kill these people. Whereas ordinarily, you're not supposed to, you know.
Anyway, so in the the sequel, the protagonist has this kind of like mantra that she follows,
where it's like, okay, first, when she's trying to like follow a decision, like, you know, make a
hard decision, like, what do I do here? And this is after the cops and robbers game kind of fell
apart. So she's like, All right, first, what's the law? All right, if the law doesn't have a clear
answer, what does like my code say? And if my code doesn't have it, what do people I trust say?
I think that's the order. Matt will know if I'm wrong. But it's the similar kind of thing, right?
And it's like, when in doubt, let's lean towards these. And if the law is ambiguous or wrong here,
then I can look further. But it's a great first place to look. That said, they have no compunction,
well, they have very few compunctions about breaking the law when they need to. So it's just,
it's not a bad place to start the conversation. I just saw the echo there when you were when
you were talking about that. So yeah, I knew at least one listener would appreciate that,
even though I delivered it poorly. And with that, I think I'm all set for the night.
Okay. Oh, wait, you gotta think of Patreon. Oh my god, I can't believe we almost didn't do that.
I got this one. Okay. Yeah. Our Patreon this week is John Peterson. Thanks a lot for your support.
I know we say this thing every time, but it means the same every time. It's awesome.
Thank you so much. You keep the lights on around here. And we really appreciate it.
You are the people who help us not be worried about the Twitter mob coming after us.
That's right. So that said, if you do want to support the podcast, we have a Patreon account at
Patreon slash the Bayesian conspiracy. We have a website, the Bayesian conspiracy podcast.com.
No, just the Bayesian conspiracy.com. That's right. The email account is the Bayesian conspiracy
podcast at gmail.com. Yeah. And feel free to write us a review on iTunes. It's part of their
metrics for what they show as trending. It's not just subscriber counts. So if you haven't done so,
feel free to write a review. And that's it for us. And there's always the subreddit,
if you want to comment there. Yeah, big fan of the subreddit. I haven't been on this week,
but I have read on my phone and I have an app that I like that I rave about a lot,
Apollo for iPhone. Check it out. So one of these days they're going to cut you a check, man.
I'll ask him. I tell you what, if he gets people that sign on and say, I heard about it through
this, then maybe you'll send me a thumbs up. In any case, yeah, don't forget about the subreddit
either, r slash the Bayesian conspiracy. So that's how to get ahold of us. All right. Thank you all
for listening. See you in a couple of weeks.
