Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Inyash Brotsky. I'm Steven Zuber. I'm Jay Sticky.
And I'm Charlie Bradley. Welcome, Charlie Bradley. You are here to talk with us about a thing we will
get into after we can do the less wrong posts. We always do those first. And I like you being
in suspense as to what the subject is. Yes, it is not at all spicy, though. I'm guessing because
it doesn't summarize well, so I'm looking forward to it. It does not summarize well. Exactly. Yeah.
If we're gonna get canceled, we're gonna get canceled for our full argument. In context. Yes.
All right. Cool. All right. So our first less wrong post this week is Pascal's mugging,
tiny probabilities of vast utilities. And this is another one of those classics, which actually,
this one isn't just a classic. It created a whole new, I hate to use the word meme,
because it doesn't mean what Dawkins originally intended anymore as an idea that replicates.
And now it means, means, means, mean jokes. God damn, it even sounds weird.
I've actually heard people using it much more in, well, I don't know. Then again,
I'm in a rationalist bubble. So, but like, I think outside of that bubble, people have started
using the word meme correctly in some contexts. Oh, cool. But this created the concept of Pascal's
mugging, which is now spread through the wider society. And I have heard it used in science
programs and news programs, by people who are definitely not in the rationalist community.
I'm not sure if they're familiar with it, though. They might already be familiar,
they might have just picked it up through cultural osmosis. I found it really cool the
first time, I think it was like five years ago, when I heard it just used out in broader society.
And I was like, whoa, rationalism is starting to get out there. A friend of mine found some like
interviews with Elieze Hukowski on this channel that was just about conspiracy theories, but like,
we like looked up the YouTuber. And it doesn't look like he's in the community.
What was the conspiracy theory that they were talking about?
I was actually just trying to remember that and I was like, oh, no, it was Rocos Basilisk.
Oh, I'm sorry. I'm sorry to the whole rationalist community for reminding
either that happened. I don't know why anyone is worried. Like, it's a thing that happened,
whatever. I saw on our discord, someone snapped a picture of one of those micro breweries where,
you know, they make their own beers and name them and stuff. And there's a different one
every month. And so they write them on the menu with chalk. Please tell me there was a Rocos
Basilisk. There was a Rocos Basilisk brew. What kind of beer was it? Oh, fuck, I don't know, man.
Probably an IPA because micro breweries tend to love IPAs for some reason.
Just trying to think of a pun, but I don't know enough about beer to make a joke about it.
Kind of that you will regret not ordering. There you go. Yeah, almost. Yeah, yeah, it's no good.
Anyways, maybe I deserve to be Pascal's mugged because I don't because we haven't even made
exactly because we haven't talked about Pascal's mugging yet. What does it even mean, man?
Okay, so Pascal's mugging starts after describing a large number three to the to the to the third,
using a certain type of up arrow notation. Basically, it's a very big number.
It is very easy to describe because he did it with five characters and the terrain machine
can compute it pretty easily. But even writing it out in base 10 would require enormously more
writing materials than there are atoms in the known universe, which is a paltry 10 to the 80.
And there's a whole bunch of math about how big this number is to help you visualize it,
but it's very mathy and it's still very hard to visualize. Anytime you say more than there are
atoms in the universe, I get an idea that's a pretty big number. And since I can't even get a
good, I don't know, I have nothing in my brain to equate that number to, I just say big. I put
a couple of very, you know, varies before that. But I don't really care more varies, though, than
there are. Yeah, I don't I don't really care how big it is, because it's just like, okay, very large,
you got it. Yeah, I like how he's in the thing was like, consider newt's can uth's up arrow
notation. And I just sent you the picture of Captain America. No, I don't think I will.
And I'm like, no, skipping the math part. I know I already know what you're going into this.
There's a really cool visualization that I remember we did in kindergarten or first grade,
where I remember when printers always had like, what the hell was it, the dots, the holes on the
side. Yeah, so they could like, I think it was so they could spool it, but anyway, they would feed it
through the printer using those. Yeah. So we, for the entire year, tore the little holes off of all
the printer paper, and had the kids like break them into 10, and then bind 10 together, and then
bind 10 of those together. And we got to a million holes, just like trash bags and trash bags full
of those like, bounded up tiny holes. There's a joke in there. That's a lot of holes. It's impressive
that you got to a million though. Well, it was called the million projects. So that was our goal.
It is surprising how there was like kids like bringing the holes from like,
printer paper at home. If like, if they had computers, which only half of the kids had
computers at home, because I'm old, I was one of the families that did not have a computer.
So what is Pascal's mugging? What is a Turing machine? I have no idea what you guys are talking
about. Turing machine is basically the basic theoretical components of a computer. We should
really have Charlie on more often. Because how often do we just say a thing and not explain what
it is? Yeah, I don't know. I mean, at this point, we're at how many well over a hundred episodes,
right? Yeah. And I know we just discussed a Turing machine at one point. Did we? I don't remember
having done so. Well, we're discussing inferential distance on the next post. So that'll give us
a great opportunity to explain why we're not explaining our terms. But yeah, it's a hundred
third. This is our hundred thirty seventh episode. I know we talked about Turing machines at one
point. I'm sure we had to. Yeah, before I was on the podcast. So if everybody goes back and
listens to the previous hundred thirty five episodes of about one and a half to two hours each,
eventually you'll find a Turing machine description in there. Or Wikipedia and read the
first paragraph. That said, I don't remember anything we've ever talked about in the shows.
Who are you? Yeah. All right. So the Pascal's wager is the formulation of the popular concept.
Sorry, I'm running on. A long time ago. Yeah, I'm running on bad sleep and
what do you call it? Stimulants, caffeine and stuff. So this would be a fun conversation.
Do you want to know? No, I'm good. I won in the afternoon. No way. Oh, I don't know.
Usually, that's about six out of nine. I don't know. In any case,
most people are familiar with Pascal's wager, even if they haven't heard it,
formalized with that name. It's like the short version. Oh, you know, you should believe in
it's in the context of religious arguments. You know, you should believe in God because
it doesn't cost you that much or nothing. And the pay off is huge. So this was a philosopher or
a blaze Pascal Theologian mathematician, actually. Okay. Yeah. One of those crazy God
believing mathematicians, which actually weren't that uncommon since I think God belief was like
the default at the time. Well, not only was it default like mathematicians in particular
tended to be more theistic than other scientists since they dealt much more in these very abstract
kind of realms rather than empirical stuff. We're getting distracted again. We are sorry.
No, you're good. Okay. So that's that's Pascal's wager. Pascal's mugging.
Right. Like if you believe you've so what was it if you don't believe you gain a little bit in life
and you get to be more you get to be more hedonistic and you get your Sunday mornings to yourself.
Yeah, you gain just a little bit in life. If you die and there's no God, well, you know,
you didn't win anything. But if there die and there is a God, you go to hell and you've lost
everything forever. On the other hand, if you're a Christian and you lose your Sundays, you pay a
little bit of cost. If you die, there's no God. Oh, well, you're dead. You, you know, you lost
those days on Sundays. But if there is a God, you go to heaven and oh, everything's wonderful
forever. So due to the fact that it's just a small custom life for ginormous payouts in the
afterlife, you should totally believe in God. It's basically cryonics. Well, yes, with better
probability distribution. Right, right. It's cryonics with nonzero probability. Right. Yeah.
So that I mean, that that's the cryonics, I guess would be the other way with nonzero. Yeah.
Right. So that's that's the that's the pitch I give for cryonics, except you assign
based, you know, nonzero probabilities to these things involved. It's a really good argument
when you can put numbers into it. Yeah. When you're when you're not bullshitting and saying,
you know, oh, it's nothing or it's infinite or whatever, then it's, you know, you can actually
do a do a calculation to determine whether or not it's worth it for you. It's how many dollars
per month and what are the chances? Right. Yeah. The obvious answer, though, was always in my
understanding. But like, okay, but what about the probability that your religion is wrong and
that one of these other ones is correct? Yeah. Then you're still better buying a lot of ticket
than not buying one at all is the standard rebuttal. But that's wrong. But some of them are
mutually like incompatible. Like if you you can't I don't think be both a Buddhist and a Muslim.
So that's why that's why you pick the most vindictive God, because he's the one who's
almost like least likely to forgive you for choosing the wrong one. Like Buddha would
probably be fine with it, you know, if you're just a person. No, I'm serious. This is how the
argument ends. But then it is not a God. The unfortunate end of the unfortunate
like conclusion of that is that when you pick the most vindictive God to worship for your life,
that doesn't come at the very small cost as advertised at the beginning of the pamphlet.
Right. It comes at a huge cost. Yeah, kind of start going and killing all the
compare all the world religions. Yeah, you've got to go to the most extreme because that's the
God who would be most likely to punish you. Anyway, so Pascal's mugging is when you get mugged
by a mathematician. It's someone saying give me $5 or I'll use my magic powers from outside
the matrix to run a Turing machine that simulates and kills three to the to the to the to the three
people. Can we just say a lot? A lot. Well, I also want to throw in that he added in one more
up notation than there was before. So that number before where there were already you couldn't put
enough zeros on a piece of paper with you had all the materials in the universe to write it out.
This number is like it's exponentially bigger than that, like hugely bigger than that. So
it's an extremely large number of people that are going to be tortured and murdered to the point
where like, I don't know, you would need more neurons than there are atoms in the universe
to even comprehend this number or some shit. I'm sure. Yeah, some giant, giant number. Yeah.
And so the basically it's the it's the inverse of a Pascal's wager. And the question is like,
well, Pascal's wager to take them to 11 really. Yeah. Yeah, I suppose no cost $5. And here's the
most extreme. Yeah, fair enough. I to me what's interesting is, I mean, and maybe I'm just a
bad rationalist or I don't, you know, find this argument compelling, but I've never really been
Oh, no human finds it compelling. I suppose. But like, well, he the post is him wondering like,
should I am I failing as a good thinker to not be concerned about the sort of thing?
Well, because because a robot wouldn't or would find it compelling or likely would if you, you
know, was if it was just based off of, I mean, this also makes me think of just,
shoot, that's the thing where like, scope and sensitivity. I wonder that same thing about
like, you know, am I a bad person for caring more about my family members and friends than
people dying in some, you know, other country that I don't know that I've never met, never seen.
This is like scope and sensitivity, like, with really bad eyesight and much bigger numbers,
right? Because it's like, you can't, you know, I mean, would you give 100 bucks to your, your,
your sibling who know, whatever, need really need 100 bucks, or would you give it to save
everybody on the continent of Asia, right? Nobody would call you a bad person if you gave it to
your sibling, because we humans understand that like, okay, there's certain ways that like,
the way that we think makes us human, nobody would call you a bad person for giving a piece of
gum to your brother instead of saving all the people in Asia. I think I said 100 bucks, but
in any case, I meant it as 100 bucks either goes to your sibling who needs it, or you give it to
charity. Right. So I actually meant it in the sense of everyone in Asia will die if you don't give
them the 100 dollars instead. But yeah, so you're right. But most, most of us understand on like the,
you know, just how big your, your care network is that how humans are wired where we're closer
to the people next to us. We can forgive ourselves for being mere humans in most of those cases.
But in the context of like, if everyone was going to die and you know, if two billion people are
going to die, they need to be a monster for not doing it. Like people keep saying whenever the
trials experiment comes up that, you know, they'd save the one person that is close to them rather
than letting the five people die. And I don't, I don't know what I would do in that case. At
least for me, it's not the obvious given that I would save the one person I love. I'll try to
fall on any train tracks near you. Please don't. I mean, I don't know. Like I might, but I just
try to say you say it with like certainty. And I keep having issues with the fact that so many
people just easily will say I'd save the one. I don't need money to charity to people that I have
no idea who they are, where precisely they live. And I don't give monthly money to people I know.
So like, I mean, I don't, I don't think it's like impossible to imagine that people do it the other
way around. It's just like more common. But what if your sibling was in the hospital and needed
money to pay the bill? And you were like, sorry, I have this $100, but I've like,
dedicated, you know, myself to sending it to charity each month. Sure. I'm giving it to my
sibling. Yeah. That's where I think people would call you a bad person. Like, or that they would
that. Well, the thing is, if you have the money, and then like, I don't know, socially, I think
that that would be really awkward, right? If I only have the $100, like what would your parents
think? Well, the thing is that like, you have, you have an extra $100, and you just, you refuse
to give it to the sibling, because you say, no, I always give $100 to charity. So like, you can,
you know, find your own money. I mean, I would, it depends on the sibling, honestly.
There's one particular sibling where I'm like, no, you should have the $100, you wanker. But,
but for, you know, for some of my other siblings, I'd be like, yeah, the charity's just going to
miss out on this $100 this month, because you're in the hospital. Well, and like, people spend
large sums of money up to and including their entire life savings, prolonging their life for
like two more years at the end of life, right? You know, when you're 90, trying to hit 92 or
something. That in any case, we're getting kind of our field. We're getting way a few.
I feel like it's still related, actually. But I think the thing that it this, the thing that's
important here is the sentence, suppose I build an AI, and he goes on with like supposed build AI
that work on some banded analog. But the thing is, Eliezer, at the time of writing this, and to
this day, as far as I know, is attempting to build a machine intelligence, which could theoretically,
you know, based on what you know, maybe take over the world, or if nothing else, have extreme
impacts. Friendly AI. Yeah, yeah, exactly. Like, I don't know if he's trying to build the mine,
but he's trying to solve the problems that building a mine will create. Yeah, the whole,
the whole blog is in the purpose of creating an AI that will not destroy humanity, if it were to be
built. And that the Pascal's mugging is a real problem, because if you're a machine mind that
works on probabilities, and, and, you know, theorems like this that work on numbers, and someone gives
you that sort of a, a mugging threat, like, no matter how low you put the possibility that they
are telling you the truth, that they're actually, you know, a dark lord of the matrix that's going
to do this, it still basically adds up to that huge number. Since zero isn't a probability,
right, then the, the, the, the chance that this could happen is worth five bucks. No,
yeah, no matter how arbitrarily small the chance is, as long as it's not zero, the huge amount of
suffering that you're going to save is worth it. If you're a mindless robot following just pure math.
Well, no, you're a very smart robot with a personality, but that thinks on math. Well,
that's kind of us minus the thinking on math part. But I mean, I'm inclined just to say,
nah, you're, you're a charlatan, get out of here. But I, it, to me, it's fun. This is almost like,
you know, this is the kind of like philosophical, whatever, mental masturbation that I enjoy,
but I don't think really does anything. Well, I think it's important if you're making a machine
mind. Right. But since I'm not, I'm not, I'm not losing this. You know, like, if someone,
this is, I mean, the problem is that the probability is so small of this person being
a dark lord of the matrix, right? But like if I would said, Hey, man, if you give me a thousand
dollars, I will put a hundred dollars, I will distribute it across a bunch of cryptos that I
think might blow up. And in five years, you might be a millionaire and in exchange, I'll keep 50
bucks of it. You know, like to you that might not be worth the 50,000, the risk of losing all that
money, right? Because the odds are all small, but those are actually like, boundedly small,
like possible to think of numbers, right? You can say I assign a one in 10,000 chance to
any of these working or something, not a one in whatever, 10 to the negative 23rd probability,
right? Yeah. Well, it also brings up, you know, part of the problem is what if the thing that the AI
is actually to give up for these theoretical people isn't $5, it's the fate of the earth itself.
Right. Because just the earth is really infinitesimal compared to all these however many uncountable
number of people. So, you know, what's the sacrifice of one earth for a chance to save that many
people? Yeah, it says a mine that works strictly by Solominoff induction would not know how to
rationalize reasons that Pascal's mugging mattered less than earth's existence. How should an
akamabiding mind avoid being dominated by tiny probabilities of vast utilities? Yeah. Ah, so
there is a point. Yes. And the, I mean, one of the interesting things about the post is that
he doesn't have an answer. He's just like, so how do we fix this problem? Guys, anyone? Because
this is a problem. And then he says like, do I have an instinct to resist exploitation by
arguments anyone could make? Am I unsatisfied by any visualizations in which the dominant
mainline probability leads to a loss? Do I drop sufficiently small probabilities from
consideration entirely? Like he's trying to figure out what, how, why do I ignore this
probability? And how can I generalize that to an AI so it also makes what I consider the
correct decision without fucking over all the programming and ruining everything we've been
trying to do to make this AI work in the first place? Yeah, that is a fun question. It doesn't
on a good point like that. And I skim to the comments. That's funny, because there were some
negatively voted ones, which you don't see that often. I didn't pull any out. So, but if you're
curious, go read the comments. And he does ask at the very end, like, like you said, Stephen, is it
me that's wrong? Should I not be ignoring this tiny possibility? I mean, I, it's hard to know
how you could possibly operate your life that way. Right. Right. I mean, you couldn't. Yeah. I mean,
that's the thing I was trying to bring up about scope and sensitivity, like, or Charlie problems,
like, I think, like, if you can live your life that way, but like, I think it's the reason
that effective altruism is unpopular with like, people that are in the rationalist community,
because it feels cold and robotic. But it's like, all I have to do to get you just to be
Pascal's mugged is tell you that like, oh, your car doesn't really run on gas. It runs on destroying
souls of angels or something. And they, and they are a billion times as sentient as you are. And
it's actually a really bad thing. Like, that's, that's the level of absurdity that's involved
here. Right. It's not merely like, you know, if you're throwing money at charity to save lives,
you're actually saving lives of actual people that you could in theory meet. You know, I'm not,
I'm not making shit up to extort you to never drive your car or something, right? Like, when I
get my car, I don't do a 60 point inspection on it every time I started. And I don't even
open the hood to see if there's like an animal sleeping in the engine, right? Or like on top
of the engine where it's warm. Like, I should because I care about animals. I've seen pictures of
raccoons and cats and stuff under there that you can live your whole life. Like, I will almost
certainly live my whole life without an animal ever being under there, right? But there's a
non negligible chance. And that's not even approaching the infinitesimal probability of a
Pascal's mugging. Well, generally, the animal would get off the engine block before he heard it,
right? Or like, I mean, it could get caught in the belt or something and ripped apart. Yeah.
It could go could go south, you know, but but it almost so closely never happens that I don't
lose any sleep over it to the point where I don't spend three seconds or maybe 30 seconds checking
my car before I leave every day. Like, you can't live your life trying to protect yourself from
every possible something killing you. And that's every like real possibility, like that, you know,
actually happens. But so the mugging thing is is so ridiculously unlikely that how could you
possibly operate that way, right? You'd be forced to give everyone who asked you $10 or however
much, right? To sell to give them both your kidneys and sell your sell your family and, you
know, harvest their organs. Like, if you really believed any of this, you'd be in you'd just be
this this absurd. And there's a movie I'm sure where it was a yes man or something where like
they have to agree to say yes to everything for a day. Yeah. Yeah. Was that Jim Carrey? Yeah.
It sounds like Jim Carrey, because he also got cursed with not being able to lie for a day and
liar liar. That one was a really good one. Yeah. Yes, Jim Carrey was. Okay. I should see that.
But in any case, no one took advantage of him enough that data totally ruined his life because
it's like, Hey, you know, because they didn't know he had the curse. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I haven't I
haven't seen the movie, you know, if someone found out like, Hey, can I have all your money? And while
I'm at it, all your family's money and all their organs, like, what is he just supposed to say yes?
So that that would be you if you if you operated this way. So I just like, nah, fuck it. Not worried
about it. Somehow I'll just meh, I'll med that problem away. That's my level of coherence,
dismissal of it. I think we need to program a eyes with a math function. I mean, and that
math function could be say, could say anything that's, I don't know, under one in 10 billion
times, one, one in 10 billion odds or something, right? You could you could throw a hard number at
it. You should necessarily throw a hard number, maybe something that is theoretically impossible
to verify. Or like, yeah, if this guy is not giving you any evidence that he's a Dark Lord,
the Matrix, just I don't assume he's lying. I don't think we'll solve the problem of how to
train an AI safely to handle this problem. No, no, no. I think what they're doing at Miri is trying
to deconstruct sort of how we got our own values in the first place. Yeah. And it's impossible
to also think on math just way like further down. Much fuzzier. Yeah. And I think that
not just values, but also like the intuitions we have, again, we're not susceptible to Pascal's
muggings. The obvious thing that we have is that we're like a communal species, a social species.
So we put like higher weight on art, the things that we value, which are like tends to be, you
know, other people, we'd have to make an AI that's capable of like, altruism or empathy or
whatever the thing that humans have that make us care about that. I recently heard a cool argument
that really we can think of our minds extending to all the people around us as well, because we
store a lot of our knowledge in other people's brains. We don't necessarily know something.
We're like, hey, we're kind of one way or another thing or, you know, I don't necessarily need to
know how to do my plumbing because I know someone else who does know how to do plumbing. And yeah,
we would never have gone beyond the hunter gatherer stage if we weren't able to sort of
collectively store memory and pass it down through generations.
That's good shit. Speaking of storing memory and passing it down, should we go on to the next?
Totally. Okay. The next post is illusion of transparency. Why no one understands you.
Anyone want to jump on this or should I start it?
We always know what we mean by our words. So we expect others to know it too.
And that is basically the entirety of the post in a nutshell.
Yeah, it's funny because it's it's that sounds like obvious and almost to the point of like
tautological, right? Like I and I assume that you all know what I meant when I used that last
sentence, right? Yes, because I knew what I meant when I said it. And even if I stumbled
through it or mispronounced a word, I still know what I meant. And I assume that you do too.
This is this turns out to be an actual problem when when communicating anything.
And the they're he describes a fun experiment that's actually worth maybe touching on.
Several fun experiments. Yeah.
Yeah, I found the one with the the tape, the answering machine message, like the most fun
there. Because it had the funniest wrinkles in it to me. Okay. To me, that was the most suspect,
but go ahead and describe it real quick. Or should I or yeah, so June gives Mark a recommendation
for a restaurant. Mark goes there and has one of two experiences is either terrible and the
service was sucky or it was great and the service was great. He calls her and leaves a voicemail
message saying it was marvelous, just marvelous. Exactly. And depending on how they talk, you know,
I'm assuming you have to take this within the bounds of like the normal way of speaking,
right? If I I never use the word marvelous to describe something if I was describing a food
place to you. So you'd think I'm being funny, probably. Right. But if we usually talk to that
way, so I'm assuming that like you said marvelous, I would think you're being sarcastic because it's
not something you would say. Exactly. So let's just assume that pretend Steven's a theater nerd
that's super dramatic that's within the range that's within the range of how they usually
communicate. So if he had a good time, or rather, if you ask people, okay, Mark had a bad time,
he left this voicemail, how will June interpret it? Some high percentage, the majority of people
say, Oh, he'll, did I say good time the first time I said this? No, he had bad time. So if he
had a bad time, and he left this voicemail, and he asked people will June get that he is being
sarcastic? Most people think yes. And if you if you say he had a bad a good time, and he left
this voicemail, what will June get? She'll like, Oh, he'll think he's sincere. But it's the same
voicemail. Yeah, they play the same one. And they don't. And June doesn't know how Mark actually
had the experience, right? And what's funny too, is that if when they say he had a bad experience,
but he's lying to June and wants her to think it was a good experience, they assume that June
thinks that he had a good experience. And there's there's no reason to think there's, I think I
remember this at least twice before on the podcast. But if you YouTube key and peel text message,
Oh, that's a good one. It's brilliant. It's this exact problem. And I mean, it's a, you know,
obviously written to comedic effect. But like, there's there's no reason to think that she would
get the two layers that you're doing through the deception of trying to be funny and, you know,
whatever be sarcastic or be joking, right? So the idea that not only does Mark assume that
Jane will get the right message or not if he's trying to subvert the expectation, but the other
people also assume that that's the funny and insane part. Yeah. So we're much worse at this when
we're little. I find this really hilarious. Like, there's a test that you can do to see if a child
has learned theory of mind yet or not. And it's the one where you show the kid a video of this kid
has a ball, the kid puts the ball in a box, another kid comes and takes the ball out of the box.
And then the first kid comes back and you ask the child, like, what does, where does this
kid think the ball is? And because they saw the other kid take it out of the box, they're like,
Oh, he'll come back and he'll know that like, Jeffrey over there has it. If they don't have
theory of mind. But like, if they do, they'll be like, I realized that the fact that I know that
Jeffrey took the ball doesn't mean that Jimmy knows that Jeffrey took the ball. So he'll think it's
still in the box. And this is a very hard thing for children to do. But we're still not good at
it as adults. Like, that's, I sort of think it's interesting that there's one test that you can
do that shows that. But I've definitely met adults that are much better and worse at this.
And I don't know what really like causes you to be better or worse at it.
I didn't think that the answering machine test was like a great one, because I kind of figured
maybe the people thought that just Mark and June know each other and have their own thing. Like,
we don't use Marvelous. But maybe the people assumed that he would, or they just assumed
that Mark's a good liar when, you know, he was trying to be trying to lie to her about how it
was a good time. That was my thought too was like, of course, people thought if he was trying to fool
her, he would be more successful because they have a relationship. So he knows how to phrase
something so that she would be misinformed. That's valid. I think to me, what was fun was that people
without knowing how Mark actually, if you enjoyed the restaurant or not, they would assume that
Jane understood the exact same message the right way, right? If they know each other, he should be
able to somewhat be able to convey that, which is I think what people are going to do. That's why I
didn't like that example as much. That's totally fair. But they had two other examples, which were
much more interesting. Which one did you like? So I like the the goose hangs high one. I like that
one too. It's an old expression which no one uses anymore. Oh, is that a real expression? I don't
know. Apparently they were told that it's a real expression in the past. Okay. And I don't know
if it actually was or not. The goose hangs high is an excellent expression and we should bring it
back. Yes. Except first we have to find out which thing it means. Well, the subjects were told either
it means the future looks great or the future looks gloomy. And regardless of what they were told,
when they were asked, what do you think someone who just heard the goose hangs high
in a conversation would think it means, they generally always thought they would mean whatever
they were told. So if they were told the future looks gloomy and they were asked, hey, you know,
what do you think someone who just heard this session would say would think it means they're
like, oh, yeah, they probably think it means it's gloomy because like, obviously, everyone knows that.
And yeah, I'm the other way around, which was a much more interesting experience experimented my
opinion. Apparently, it does actually mean it's an old fashioned things are or will be very pleasant,
desirable or merry. Everything is looking up. Okay, so everybody on the podcast, let's bring it back.
The goose hangs high. It's hanging high, man.
Sounds vaguely sexual.
But see, for all you guys know, I inverted the definition I just found.
You son of a bitch.
You don't you don't actually know if I did that or not. I don't know.
So but the thing that that was the thing is that, you know, if that's the point of the
experiment here is that if you told people it meant one thing, they would just believe it and
think it's obvious to everyone else. Well, I wouldn't think it's obvious.
But well, I mean, I think you're not a dirty liar.
They thought they thought listeners would perceive the meaning presented as standard.
If you know something, then you just tend to think that it's obvious to others.
That's the illusion of transparency. Yeah.
But I mean, yeah, it's all it's just being bad at like the theory of mind thing.
The the really interesting examples at the end where it says two days before Germany's attack
on Poland in World War Two, Chamberlain sent a letter intended to make it clear that Britain
would fight if any invasion occurred. The letter phrased in polite diplomatese was
heard by Hitler as conciliatory and the tanks rolled in.
That's why you don't fuck around when you're writing letters about war.
And you include the words, I'm not fucking around.
This aggression will not stand, man.
Yeah, so that was basically it. Don't be don't be too quick to blame those
who misunderstood your perfectly clear sentences because they're never all that clear.
There was another experiment that wasn't in this post where people would tap a song that's in their
head, you know, whether it's a happy birthday or some other popular song.
I've tested this on people tapping happy birthday. Nobody can hear it.
But when it sounds insane from your own perspective, try it.
I know, right? It's great because and people would assume with
astonishingly high accuracy. I can't remember what it was. It was I want to say 70 plus percent,
maybe maybe 80 or 90. But the majority of people assumed that oh, I'm doing a popular song.
The person who's listening to me tap will totally know what song I'm doing.
I'm really confident. And they never did or almost never did.
And it's that's just the illusion of transparency.
Well, it's clear to me what I'm doing. How is it not clear to you?
Yeah, well, that is sort of a way that you can test this, I guess.
Yeah, it's a nice at home test it yourself.
And not just test it yourself, but make it really salient with
Yeah, I was just thinking about like everyone in the cases where I've tried to explain to
people that like I can't read your mind. And they're like, well, how could you not know?
And this would be a good example of bringing up like, OK, what song is this?
That's happy birthday. Because we prime to have your birthday.
I actually knew that one. But yeah, I was at Walmart and I was getting boxes for my upcoming move.
And I noticed that a lot of the boxes they had out said for reuse each box costs the company
a dollar. And then there were boxes that did not say that.
So I walk up to an employee and there's a big cart of unmarked boxes.
And then there's a different cart, the marked boxes.
And I said, is it all right with you if I take the unmarked boxes with me?
And they look at me and they're like, no, you can't have the marked boxes.
And there's like this two minute excited explanation why I can't have those.
And I let her finish. And then I pointed at the unmarked.
And I said, unmarked boxes, the ones that do not say that I cannot have them.
And she goes, oh, yeah, yeah, fine.
She's probably had to tell people that so many times that it's just like a
script that she's primed for.
But that was an example where I was using very clear language.
We both spoke the same language. The boxes were there for reference.
But I still failed to come across. I needed to point at the boxes as well.
I'm curious how different were the unmarked boxes from the marked ones in terms of like
physical dimensions and all that.
Very different.
Okay. So so they probably were just going to throw out the unmarked ones.
Absolutely.
Okay. Because I was thinking, did they just forget to mark those?
And you had a whole bunch of one dollar boxes.
They're all incredibly clear and very different.
But I thought this was perfect for this discussion where I was just like, huh,
could I have phrased that better?
Probably not.
Perhaps I should have pointed the first time I said it to add even more information
to what I was conveying.
It's a thing that comes up fairly often when you're trying to write fiction too.
It's really good sometimes to over-explain or to default to over-explaining.
Yeah. So the moral here is be not too quick to blame those for misunderstanding your
perfectly clear sentences spoken or written.
Chances are your words are more ambiguous than you think.
Now, that's just chances.
Sometimes you're perfectly clear and they just don't understand you like with a box thing.
But the moral is that if someone, and this actually, you know,
I don't know if I started doing this before after I read this post because I read this
first 10 something years ago.
But, you know, I, especially with people close to me, if like we're having a conversation,
I'm like, all right, if I say something that is offensive or rude,
can you ask me to clarify that?
Because I almost certainly didn't mean it that way.
Yeah.
And, you know, good friends, good dialogue partners will understand that.
And seldom has come to occasion where they need to point that out.
But when it does, we get to skip the whole part where they think I'm being an asshole.
Right?
Yeah.
Yeah, it's great.
Like you said, it was like 10 years ago, you read this probably the same for me.
I actually distinctly remember this sequence post making me a better person.
Because it makes you so much more willing to give people the benefit of the doubt.
That's awesome.
And also like doing things like actually just like asking someone to rephrase something
is something I've to this day like done a lot when I jumped to some conclusion about
to start like fighting them about it.
Or we're also just stopped doing the thing of like, I don't know if everyone does this,
but it like when when someone would say something I didn't understand,
I used to kind of nod because it would be impolite to sort of interrupt them and be like, wait,
like, I don't know what Solomonov induction is or whatever.
But like,
And now do you ask for clarification?
All the time.
And like it's made conversation so much better.
Excellent.
All right.
Well, for next time, we are going to be discussing the posts self anchoring.
And I got to ask you guys about this.
Expecting short inferential differences is the one after self anchoring.
Didn't we?
Distances.
Did I not say distances?
Differences.
Oh, sorry.
Distances.
Didn't we already do an entire episode about this?
I tried to search our archives, but I didn't find anything.
I don't remember.
We've definitely talked about it, but we can summarize it quickly.
It sounds like probably one of the ones you would have done before I was on.
Since your early episodes were more sort of like explaining rationalism.
There's also the wrinkle in your brain that you've recorded a handful of these
over the last five years in audio form.
Oh, maybe this was one of the ones that I was asked to.
You definitely spoke this one.
I did.
I remembered in your voice.
Okay, okay, okay.
Well, expecting short.
Yeah, yeah, okay.
Yeah, this this was one I read just out loud for the HPMR podcast
back when we were in the middle of waiting for updates.
So yeah, we have not discussed this on the show.
So we will also be doing expecting short inferential distances as the other one,
which is again, a classic writing a lot of classics here.
And if you'd like a refresher before next episode, you can hear it in any Ash's voice.
Yes, you can.
Where is it?
It's at the HPMR podcast and I will add a link to the show notes at the basinconspiracy.com.
Toid.
All righty.
We are back and we are going to dive into our topic,
which is kind of a touchy topic.
If people want to know why the fuck did we even come up with this?
Steven and me have a podcast called Not Everything is a Clue,
where we read and analyze Worth the Candle by Alexander Wales.
And about a month ago, we were talking about, I don't know, the protagonists having the
protagonist and other people, they're having possible sex or whatever.
And like Steven was all weirded out by it because they're 17.
And I was like, whatever, man, they're 17.
That's that's totally old enough to be having sex.
And Steven was like, ooh, Age of Consent, though, they're killed children.
And I don't know.
I feel like I was a tad more articulate than that, but that is not an unfair summary of my position.
Okay, all right.
And you know, I was like, to me, it wasn't that big a deal, partly because,
you know, I think teenagers can be mature enough to do that,
but also because my first sex partner was when I was a teenager and she was five years my elder.
And then my second sex partner was 10 years my elder.
But at that point, I was in my early 20s.
And like, I've had several significant others with relationships that they had when they were
in their tweaked teens that were with men in their late 20s.
And so like, I don't know.
And so in case it's not clear, the main subject is Age of Consent.
Yes.
And so yeah, me and Charlie got to talking after I was talking with Steven about this whole like
Age of Consent is 17 weird thing.
And Charlie was like, well, I have stuff to say about that.
And so now we are here to say stuff about it.
That is that is the short thing, the short version of how we got there.
So should we say things about it?
Sure, let's say things about it.
Who wants to?
I'm waiting for somebody else because I don't actually have a fully formed opinion about this.
Somebody influenced me.
We can start with the Age of Consent as it's defined in Colorado.
I was interested in why you earlier said it depends.
Ah, yes.
It probably depends on how old you are, right?
So I looked at a few websites when I was looking at the statutes and I like...
Now you're on a list.
Sorry.
How old does the person have to be before I can fuck him legally?
That is an awkward thing to Google.
So I liked this website by a criminal defense attorney, a local one, H. Michael Stanberg.
This episode brought to you by...
Right.
And so what he wrote is Colorado does not define the term age of sexual consent.
Colorado law is written to make a determination of whether individuals based on age have the
legal capacity to consent to having sex.
The age of consent is then determined by what is excluded from the Colorado criminal law.
And my head exploded a little bit.
I was about to say, wow, I really like this.
They're going to evaluate whether they're emotionally mature enough.
Then wait, what?
Yeah.
So Colorado age of consent explained further.
The example one, the alleged victim is under 15.
The accused is at least four years older than 15 and is not the spouse of the victim.
Okay.
Wait, is not the spouse?
Wait.
The older party need not be an adult to be guilty of this crime.
In fact, juveniles are often charged with this crime in Colorado Juvenile Court.
Consent is not a defense in these cases.
Oh my God, is this like the case where like two preschoolers are playing doctor
and the one child is accused of...
I'm just creating summary of the law.
Example two, the alleged victim is between 15 and 17.
The alleged perpetrator is at least 10 years older and not the spouse of the victim.
In case that's not clear, spousal rape is fine.
Get married here.
If one of the parties is 15, 16 or 17 and the other is 25, 26, 27 or older,
this is also considered statutory rape.
But in this situation, by definition, the older party must be an adult to be guilty of this crime
and not the spouse of the victim.
So how are they defining adult if not by age?
I was curious about that too from the first example.
You said they need not be an adult, but they have to be four years older than 15.
And so I thought adulthood was 18.
I thought we were trying to define adulthood here.
And he hopefully goes on to Colorado laws criminalized sex between adults and minors
and between minors regardless of consent.
I have a problem with this myself.
Oh my God.
Wait, sorry, can you repeat that?
That didn't sink in.
To Colorado laws criminalized sex between adults and minors and between minors regardless of consent.
You know why that is?
That's because parents wanted the ability to accuse their child who had consensual sex
with their partner to accuse the other child of rape.
So there's a misdemeanor and a felony.
The misdemeanor is a person commits the crime of sexual assault if he or she is 10 years older
than a minor who is 15 or 16 years old.
I'm just summarizing the felony.
The person commits class for felony sexual assault if he or she is at least four years older
than a minor who is 14 years old or younger.
So if you're 18 and you sleep with a 14 year old and it's consensual, then you are a rapist.
Felony rapist, yeah.
So I think I don't want to like just throw out the last 90 seconds, but I don't know
if it's worth getting bogged down in the confusing legalese of Colorado's particularly
or particular definitions of.
I thought it might be a good conversation to start about consent.
It totally isn't.
It's interesting and it proves that it's murky and weird legally.
But I almost don't care what the law is.
Like just because I don't want what's right and wrong to be constrained by what can be
explained to the average judge, especially like if that judge happens to be in one county versus
like, you know, across the street in any other county, that doesn't seem like that should depend
on what is right and wrong.
I'm really wondering what other states consent laws look like and how much do they all differ
from each other just across like the United States?
Not even bringing in other country's consent laws if they even have them.
I don't know all the details behind it, but I know Michigan's you can consent at age 16,
which is I looked it up because my, you know, my previous partner said that she could have
gotten the guy she slept with on statutory rape.
And I was like, huh, and she grew up in Michigan.
I wonder how old she was then.
And so she must have been 15 or younger at the time.
And, you know, I mean, she didn't, she said it was a great relationship and she was happy
with it, but she, you know, had it if her parents had disapproved of the relationship.
Well, if they had found out about it, they could have, they could have got him.
I think she also kind of had like, you know, a fun kind of kick out of the fact that she
could have gotten him on statutory rape.
It was sort of like a power, power play kind of thing.
That's weird.
Yeah, it's, you know, coercion through legal ramifications is tight.
Well, I mean, it's not she did any of that.
Just no, but because of the implication.
Right, right.
But I mean, that's, that's more of a kink thing.
I know I was trying to use the word implication with my, with my best Dennis
stare from it's always done in Philadelphia.
Whenever you say those words, I always think of that episode.
Great.
Yeah.
Well, when he told me that story, my initial reaction was you.
And then I also had to be like, oh, well, I tend to find power and balances scenarios sexy,
but that's in fantasy land.
When I've actually had power and balance scenarios in real life, it's never real
sour and balances and relationships are pretty bad in my experience.
Like, I don't think I've ever been in one with major power and balances, but I'm definitely
on the power and balances are sexy as hell.
But I think pretty much in fantasy land, yeah, I totally agree.
In fantasy land, they're very sexy and in real life, not so much though.
Yeah, like, uh, you know, I just, I had a partner that was five or six years younger
than me at one point and they were still in college.
Like I was graduated and had a job and I owned a house and they lived at it.
And so it was neither of our fault, but there's definitely a power and balance there.
And I was always aware of it in the back of my mind and it made me feel creepy or like
made me feel like I had to, I don't know, like, yeah.
I think it's impossible to have a relationship where there's no power in this.
I think that's true.
But I think that the white, like the more there is a power and balance,
though, the more potentially dangerous or like bad the situation could be.
Another of my examples is that I had a sexual relationship with one of my college professors
for several years.
Well, they were professing you?
No, like we were friends before that, but like I was still in college at the school
that he taught at.
I just was not in his class.
Okay.
I was going to say, I mean, the issue there would be if you're in his class.
And yeah, that he was like 10 or 11 years older than me and I was a depressed
sack of shit because I was right after my friends with died.
And so this was clearly like in retrospect, I didn't like this guy.
I was being taken advantage of the whole time.
He like parasitized my need for support and friendship and then just like got into my
parents and I said, no, the first actually he got me drunk for the first time that I
had ever been drunk and then had sex with me after taking me to his mom's house way up
in the mountains.
So I had no way out of that.
And I said, no.
And he kept saying, no, you really want it.
No, you do.
So that's fucking awful.
Yeah, that is.
I will, that's a bunch of power.
That's day three.
Yeah, which is rape.
And you know what?
I told my parents that I was dating a college professor.
My mom said, good for you.
They make good money, right?
Which no, he didn't wall.
But like she didn't even raise a brow at that though, because that was like my mom,
you know, was like raised like poor and lower class.
And this didn't seem unusual to her at all.
In fact, like her response was, oh, good, he makes good money.
Well, I think there's a lot of reasons to seek out a partner that has more power.
Like if someone has a lot of money, you know, if someone has a lot of money
and can take care of you, that I would find that attractive.
If like I am in a shitty ass emotional position and they can be stable
and help me through things.
That is that is great.
Like they could also take advantage of you and you can't protect yourself.
They could.
Yeah.
Oh, I mean, that's that's a that's not a necessarily a problem with a power and
balance that it's a problem with a shitty person.
Like even someone who is poor and trashy and sucks can take advantage of someone
and and use them in that terrible way.
I was going to say I saw a comedian on Friday night named Matthew Bressard
and his girlfriend works in marketing or finance or something.
It makes four times what he makes or at least what he did in 2020 because,
you know, comedy was hard last year.
And so he's he's perfectly aware that like and they share an apartment in New York.
And so he's like, obviously she wins all the like we don't fight.
Because there's there's there.
What am I going to do?
Like go threaten to sleep in the hall.
Like so he's making fun of this power and balance.
But the other thing there was another the part the reason I chuckled myself was
he had a joke about like she asked if I'd ever leave her and he said,
well, it would have to be a very competitive offer.
Nice.
But I realized I was talking serious stuff and injecting love into serious stuff is my go to.
That was like breaking the tension.
So it's also kind of a problem.
Like, does that mean the more successful you get, the less you can date people?
And do you have to break up with someone who still isn't successful?
Do you have to turn down raises?
Like, yeah.
So I mean, that I do agree that like it's more about the person than like,
you know, the power imbalance, right?
It's not your fault that you're big enough to beat me up.
But if it was like privilege, like it's not your fault that you're like white
cis male, but it is something to take into account.
I did not realize that until I was well into my first relationship,
that one of the things she really liked about me was that I was white.
Being the ethnic majority of whatever country you're in is, you know,
a form of power and a thing people seek out.
So I was like, oh, okay.
I mean, did that feel good?
Like, no, I feel like that would feel kind of gross for me.
It felt gross.
It felt weird because I was like, oh, I didn't know that.
And that's not something I care about about myself.
But I'm glad you like it.
Like it would be like if someone was like, I think it's really hot that your
hair is brown or something.
I'm like, okay, that's just the way it was born.
But if you like it, that's cool.
That doesn't have any political charge.
Well, yeah, but I mean,
I think, yeah.
Well, maybe a little.
There's definitely hair politics where like black hair.
Oh my gosh.
Comes into play behind ethnic hair.
But like your height, right?
Yeah, people are stereotypically and not, you know,
just as long as you're getting canceled.
Stereotypes exist for a reason.
Women like tall guys, as long as I'm super generalizing, right?
And so you can pull women and the majority of women like tall guys.
It's like an evolutionary biology.
Oh, yeah.
I'm just saying, anytime you say anything about like,
you know, that sweeping, people get mad.
But anyway, so like you don't get to control how tall you are,
not without drastic surgery, right?
So, you know, if you're to get rid of that imbalance or unfair advantage,
are you to go get leg reduction surgery?
That seems like a huge cost to impose on yourself for having been born to be
what, six foot?
I mean, far weirder than the fact that I'm white is that when I lost a lot of weight
and actually started being, I don't know, conventionally attractive, I guess,
I'd spent my entire life being, you know, the nerd that no one found attractive.
And then once that happened, like the difference in the way people treated me,
even though I was more or less the same person was just shocking.
I changed my hair color a lot.
I mean, I used to have more before you guys knew me.
Like I'd have a different hair color and it would be like bright green or bright orange.
I went through the like spectrum of colors and I found that even like having
unnaturally dyed hair, people treat you really different if you have green versus red versus
black hair.
Right.
So, I mean, I guess, you know, height is a form of power in the same way that like being
attractive is also a form of power.
It can get you what you want.
Yeah, attractive.
Tall people get more raises and more people vote for them.
And that's what our lifespans, so it evens out.
Just get people to do what you want more if you're attractive.
Take that tall, pretty people.
Once you do that for me, you're like, okay, you're hot as shit.
That, as long as we're talking about hair, Jason's hair currently is purple and blue
and has like a sort of to the side with like an undercut.
Looks fucking awesome.
It's like Cyberpunk 2077.
Yeah.
What does all of this have to do with that?
That's what I'm curious about.
So, we're talking about, you know, convoluted relationship dynamics and that's more something
that I, you know, that's a fun conversation.
But I'm curious what the stances were on aging and scent that were interesting enough to talk about.
Right now I'm reading an interesting book which I picked up actually in preparation for this
and maybe our next episode will be about this particular book about how teens in Western
societies are traumatized by how they're infantilized.
And I'll get more into that, I guess, in our next episode.
But is it by Jordan Peterson?
It is not.
It is actually by a guy who worked directly with BF Skinner.
Snowflakes.
Yeah.
But no, it's not that.
I'm joking, but I actually think there might be a point there.
It's a very interesting book.
But what I am trying to say is that in the U.S. and maybe in all Western society,
I don't know, but definitely in the U.S., relationships between people who are in their
teens and people who are in their 20s or older are insanely stigmatized to the point where,
like, when we were recording our episode, Stephen, you made the comment about like,
do you really want to be that guy who's 23 and comes picking up his girlfriend from
high school in his car?
And like, no, I don't.
That feels gross just thinking about it.
But I think it feels gross because of how I was socialized by society,
because I can see why a teenager could find someone who is older like that attractive.
And not only that, if they weren't a skivvy person, I can see it like working out and being
just fine.
You can learn a lot from an older person.
When I first had sex, we were both virgins.
And I don't think that was great for either of us.
I think we would have been better off if we had started with someone a little bit more
experienced.
The person that I was dating who was much younger than me told, like,
I think I actually brought it up.
Like, when they asked me out, like, I was like, oh, there's a weird age gap.
Are you sure, like, you're not weirded out by that?
And they were like, my parents have a bigger age gap.
And like, they have a great relationship.
So I'm not worried.
And I was like, huh, I never thought of that because your parents are both old.
And I never think of it as being different.
I have a good intuition pump for this, maybe.
Like, I had a friend when I was growing up and her parents were like 14 years apart.
I think that the dad was older.
And I had joked, at least they didn't meet when he was in high school.
Right.
So I feel like this is a good intuition pump because at some point.
That's exactly what I was thinking, though, because like at the younger ages, when the people
are younger, when the people involved are younger, then like it is more skivvy for people.
If it's like a 56-year-old and a 46-year-old, nobody would care.
No, not at all.
That's what I was trying to intuit there was like, I think I'm not sure where,
and I'm curious where people are coming down on this, if there's a magic line or what the,
you know, magic number is or whatever.
Oh, there's an equation.
But my...
Half your age plus seven.
Well, that aside, I'm just thinking like, I think we can, I, is there a baseline,
you know, if she was seven and he was 21, would that be copacetic among everybody or not?
No, definitely not.
No, no.
Okay, so...
She hasn't sexually developed yet.
So we have a baseline.
That's definitely pedophilia.
Well, so, well, I mean...
And that should be a crime.
Sexually or emotionally, like...
When you say sexually developed, you just mean like able to menstruate or like has boobs or...
I mean, those are definitely partial indicators.
It's more a question of...
There's like physical maturity and like emotional mental, what's the word I'm looking for?
Help me.
Like what if she's mentally, and this is getting us too far, I feel like,
if she's mentally mature-ish, whatever, 17-year-old can be mentally mature as, but happens and,
you know, is able to menstruate.
James Potter, Harry James Potter happens various in Professor Snape.
No, no.
I'm just thinking like, oh yeah, that'd be a funny intuition, too, because he's an adult in a kid's
body.
But the, I mean, I, you said no, because it's pedophilia.
I don't even want to say like, that's the reason it's wrong, because like if she was 18,
but she happened to look 12, you know, and they were both cool with it, right?
And he's, he's 50 and he loves it.
Then it's not pedophilia.
Because of a magic number?
Because she's 18?
No, because of developmental stages in an actual human being's life.
Oh, well, see, to me, the pedophilia I thought was less about being, and I'm not a,
not an expert on pedophilia, I figured it was more about the physical attraction to the,
to the shape of the person that you're into, not about their mind.
The thing that...
No.
Yeah, I think the thing that me and Charlie, uh, object to is having a relation, sexual
relationship with someone who is not at the developmental stage where they can handle that.
This actually just strikes me as a power and balance argument.
Okay, so I mean, from my perspective, I think that's what it is, but...
I really have to interject here.
This is something I feel incredibly strong about, okay?
As someone who was victimized by actual pedophiles before I had any kind of sexual development in
my body or brain whatsoever, someone calling a distasteful arrangement between a 17-year-old
young adult, pedophilia, is infuriating that a 17-year-old has way more agency than a five-year-old,
for example, just throwing numbers out there, and to suggest that they don't,
is an injustice to actual victims of pedophilia, and it also really harms a 17-year-old young
adult.
Yeah.
Like...
Like, ooh, that gets me so upset, and I see it happening in the news, and...
When I'm Tumblr.
So it's one of those things you can witch hunt people for.
Like, if you draw, like, a sexy picture of Steven Universe, but he's aged up to be 18,
and you have, like, have it tattooed, I am 18 on his chest, people will still call you a pedophile,
because that's art that's based off of a character from a children's show, and children might be on
Tumblr, and they might see it because they're looking for Steven Universe art, and then they
might traumatize themselves, and it's your fault.
Charlie, how old were you?
Call the cops.
How old were you when you moved out?
15.
So at 15, you, like, had your own job and were paying for your own living expenses.
Yeah, and driving myself to high school and traveling.
Right.
I mean, basically a competent adult.
A little bit immature for an adult, but...
I was inexperienced.
Yeah, inexperienced.
That is the word I was looking for.
Yeah.
I was never dumb, but I was definitely inexperienced, and, you know, only time can cure that.
But at the time where you're paying your own rent, like, I think you can start making some
of your own life decisions, and perhaps there will be mistakes, but, like, one of the things
I've been banging my drum about for two years, and have started thinking I should apply to
teenagers as well, is that people should have the right to be wrong, to make their own mistakes,
and not have, you know, their choices taken away from them, because other people think
it's a mistake what you're doing.
This, I think, and I hope I didn't imply some equivocation between 17-year-olds and 4-year-olds,
and 20-year-olds and 5-year-olds, but people do, and I...
But you did ask, like, where's the line?
And I'm like, oh, I'm really confident there's a line.
Well, so...
And I feel very strongly that there should be a legal line, and there should be a magical
number.
Absolutely.
We do need to protect children from abuse.
Right.
And I agree.
I think that...
We also need to not abuse young adults.
And not all 17-year-olds are children.
Are you saying, like, possibly very few?
Are you saying by taking away their agency?
Like, you're saying you don't want to abuse young children by sexual trauma, and you don't want to use...
God, this is deep.
Like, 17-year-olds by infantilizing them?
That is where I'm going.
I wrote something down.
Let me find it.
I'm just trying to see if that's your point, Charlie.
So my point is that consent is everything.
Like, damage is greatest when autonomy is not respected.
So, like, being objectified by others and the reaction of authority figures, peers, family,
to a young person having sex can be far more harmful than the sex that act itself or the sexual
relationship.
I...
Yeah, that's what I thought.
I have experienced this.
I agreed to get in this because this is really important to me, and I actually have a lot...
I have things to say, and it's important.
I'll just throw out an example.
You know, the legal age of consent at the time when I was 14 was 14.
And, you know, someone would say, well, you know, how can a 14-year-old know if they've
been harmed better than an 18-year-old, right, when you're an adult, officially?
And I was just like, that is absolutely possible.
As a sexually abused child, I had experienced sexual situations and their social, personal
repercussions beyond what many older adults had.
And people that were deemed fit to have authority over my person had less experience than I did
with how sex affects you both in a context of with other people and internally.
And so I had experienced non-consensual sexual interactions enough to be absolutely certain
when I gave consent.
So, but, you know, you know, you is the thing, right?
And that makes perfect sense.
Like, to...
Charlie, I think it's also a really, like, was a really mature 14-year-old.
I think Charlie definitely, probably, as you're describing it as a 14-year-old, you could give
consent.
Other 14-year-olds, definitely, I think, were like, I've known 14-year-olds that
could not have.
That were very, very immature.
Well, the problem is that the presumption is that no 14-year-old can.
And they're all treated that way.
And not only are the 14-year-olds barred from making that decision, but anyone that they were
to sleep with would then be jailed and have their life permanently ruined due to sex offender
registries.
And that is, you know, probably not something the mature 14-year-old wants to happen to their partner.
Yeah, the 14 and the 18-year-old, I think, like, again, I've known 14 and 18-year-olds
that have a wide range of, like, emotional ages.
And consensual sex, I think, between a 14 and an 18-year-old, like, if you, like, the first part
of the law actually sounded really good, where it was, we're going to evaluate the sort of emotional
maturity level of these people.
And then they had to throw all that shit in at the end.
That's what I'm curious about, is how you would possibly do that.
Yeah.
Like, so that's where I think it makes sense to have magic numbers.
You know, it's like, you know, there's no, there's nothing that
happens, you know, on your 365th day after being 17, you know, at midnight, you're struck by
lightning, and now you're cognizant enough to sign a loan and vote, right?
It's just, we have a number.
Our local laws as they stand are aberrant.
They made me sick reading them.
I think that is a form of, like, child abuse in itself.
And also just totally abusive young adults.
Yeah, like, this actually just, part of that law is specifically giving parents the right to veto
their children's relationships.
And it's basically exemplary.
It does not recognize that sexual abuse can exist within married couples.
Oh yeah, the spacial thing was horrible.
It also gives the parents the ability to sell their child into a marriage.
Basically.
If they're not ready for it.
Is that why that's there?
I don't know, but it churned my stomach reading, like, the details.
So the bigger problem, in my opinion, with the whole consent thing is that
The way we are taught to interact and think about sex has a lot of problems because of purity culture.
And it's still distorting.
It's still distorting and distorting sex.
And also, like, just basically hurting everybody.
I don't know how I'm making everything shitty.
That sex is sinful and you shouldn't be allowed to sin until you're of the age of majority.
That sex is only okay in, like, sanctioned arrangements between X and Y and only under
these circumstances.
And the law has reinforced this.
And sex is still kind of gross, but we can't really prohibit you from doing it.
Like, okay.
And then there's there's the sexual double standards that come from purity culture because
of pregnancy and fatherhood and legitimacy.
And it just you can dig this.
You can you can be lost in a well never see sunlight again if you just dig to the bottom of this.
But regret does not equal abuse.
And we need to demythologize how we present sex to everyone, not just children.
This myth that sex is somehow implies this deeper relationship between the people that
have sexual contact.
False.
The fact that sex is only okay and not harmful under certain situations like that are socially
condoned to.
False.
Like, yeah, the fact that there's been raped a bunch of times.
Yeah.
And I hate that.
Like, there's people that I can't convince that, like, I'm okay about it now.
Like, actually, like, that wasn't the worst thing that's ever happened to me.
Like, it was it's bad.
But like, you know what, like, I don't want to be like treated like abuse victim.
Pat Pat.
Oh, we can't say like things around.
Like, I don't, you know, yeah, I don't want to be treated like a survivor of like, like
911 or something.
Because I'm like, yeah, that happened.
It was bad.
Like, I've processed it.
I've moved on.
Richard Dawkins got in some water some years and years ago when he disclosed that when he
was a child, some he said he was mildly, mildly raped or something.
Was this something about Elevator Gate?
Maybe.
I don't know when this came out.
I think it was years after.
I think it was after that.
At least a couple years after.
But you know, you sort of been like in this position of, sorry, that you should finish
your thought.
I was going to say, apparently he was like in the backseat of a car and a priest felt
him up, you know, under his pants.
And when he was a kid, he just processed that as yucky and it was nothing.
Like, it was, it was weird, not, not literally nothing, but it was like,
that was gross.
All right, I'm going to go home and do whatever British kids do.
Right.
Go shower now.
Yeah, or, or maybe not even that.
Maybe it wasn't even that kind of yucky.
It was just, you know, weird.
And he went on and played video games or whatever the British equivalent of that was
70 years ago.
Like, I guess I bring that up because I'm, I'm making up.
No, I don't know.
I'm just, I, I, I brought that up because you were saying that like, you didn't like
people shoving you in a box and, you know, necessitating that this was the worst thing
that happened to you when, when in yours was obviously way worse sound.
I'm assuming way worse, but like it doesn't, it didn't define you as a person.
Right.
And so like the reason that I brought up Dawkins was because as soon as he talked
about this, people are like, oh, that's why you hate religion.
And it's like, no, I have other reasons.
This, this, this wasn't even, you know, didn't make the top 50.
Right.
So I'm not really making much of a point there other than.
Yeah, this is, that was unfortunate because he brought that up to invalidate the, I think
somebody like that he'd been having the elevator gate, like argument for a while.
And this was just really disappointing for me because Richard Dawkins was like my hero
at the time.
And it was Rebecca Watson, who was one of the other hosts on the skeptics guide to the
universe had mentioned.
And she was fantastic.
She's, yeah.
I miss her.
Miss her.
Yeah.
And she had like a creepy guy trying to hit an elevator read as not hot.
Oh, God, we're going to have to.
I know, right?
So about elevator to get deeper into this.
I'm prepared to leave the show for an episode about elevator gate.
So Steve, adjust the line.
So I just, I can shut up about this.
No, no, no, no, I don't want to shut down that part of the conversation.
I'm also just wondering how far I feel that's getting us from anything interesting,
worth talking about.
I, if anyone's curious about elevator gate, there's a, I'm sure there's a volume of
internet articles on it, the height of your house.
So the only reason I wanted to bring it up is because that was just my memory of like
the moment when I was like, no, Dawkins, like a bunch of my idols all like at the time I
like found out shit about them.
And I was like, we're writing in my journal like no more heroes, like no gods, no heroes,
no something.
That's a dope ass thing to put in your diary.
Also, sounds like a title for a novel needs to be written.
No gods, no heroes.
It's from something, I'm not getting the quote right, but anyway.
There's a Scott Alexander post recently, the rise and fall of online culture wars.
That doesn't talk about elevator gate, but it talks like this elevator gate happened
in the middle of all this stuff.
And so, I mean, it was interesting that this was just a weird time in an internet history too.
But I want to lead up to what I have to say about the age of consent,
because I think context is important.
So I was sexually abused by several adults and many other children, both repeatedly and in random
like single occurrences on a regular basis from about the age of four to 13.
And all of these encounters involve some form of violence, intimidation, threats,
somewhere within like, sometimes it was like the individuals on their own,
and sometimes multiple offenders worked in concert.
Oh, Jesus.
Okay.
No one who abused me was punished legally or extra legally, like by society in any fashion.
Okay.
I, however, was punished for being a victim consistently.
I was socially ruined and emotionally demestated by the time I was six.
As a sexual abuse survivor, I was thrust into a world where there was clearly no safe harbor
or refuge because of rape culture, victim blaming, all this purity shit.
I was unable to escape being revictimized and abused until I moved away at 17.
I had to literally move away from the community to be treated like a human being.
And that scarred me way worse than the physical violence and the sexual assaults ever did.
The fact that I was treated so poorly as a result of being preyed upon was fucking devastating.
Like this, I have like two examples of icky relationships, like that people would condemn
these men for, that I'd like to share contextually, because it means a lot to me.
Like, uh, so that I can summarize.
Yeah, please do.
Why I feel so strongly about this.
So, uh, I will make it as brief as I can.
Uh, so these situations would be illegal in a current Colorado law.
But I grew up in Hawaii, which had different laws at the time.
So I was 15.
I met a 20 year old that I wanted to have sex with.
He was interested in me until he found out I was 15.
And he mentioned he didn't want to end up in jail because we dated.
Fair.
So being the nerd I was, I went to the library with the help of the librarian.
I found the law books and I started researching.
Okay.
I found the pertinent statues.
I photocopied them.
I highlighted the relevant sections.
I brought them to him and I showed him the statutes, explained to him that I understood
the law.
I reassured him about his concerns.
And yeah, that was a precious moment.
So we continued dating.
I actually had to do that with my first sexual partner too because he was younger than me.
Hey, congrats.
Gay nerds.
So we continued dating, uh, for about a year.
He moved away.
Then I traveled to Florida visit him once.
He proposed marriage shortly after that visit.
I said no.
I didn't hear from him again until I was 19.
And when he moved back to the island, we dated again for about four months.
And then I realized I'd outgrown him and I ended things.
When I was 15, uh, later that after I had, that other guy moved away,
I met a 31 year old man at a party and I told him my age, 31.
Okay.
No, you were.
15.
Okay.
Yeah.
So you were 15.
He was 31.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
And I told my age before exchange contact information and he lived on Oahu,
a different island.
I lived on the big island.
So we chat on the phone, called each other for about a month or so,
even exchanged a couple of letters, just kind of getting acquainted.
Maybe eight weeks had passed and I heard there was a concert on Oahu.
So I asked him if he'd like to go with me.
He agreed to come.
He asked me if I wanted to stay for a long weekend at his place.
We didn't talk about having sex, but I knew he wanted to.
And I was interested.
So he picked me up the airport.
We had a great time.
I insisted on safe sex.
He complied without complaint.
And I enjoyed him so much I visited him about a month later and then we never saw each other.
And, you know, a lot of people, in comparison to the ways the sexual touch was experienced for me
outside of those examples, my relationships with those two men were some of the healthiest
encounters that I had as a young adult.
And they stood out to me because I gave consent.
I pursued versus not giving consent or being asked for consent.
I was also treated with respect by both men.
They protect me from pregnancies and STDs.
It was either my idea or their suggestion.
Both men spent non-sexual time with me and invested me as a person by sharing experiences.
I was treated like a person versus an object, whereas by everyone else, I was an object.
And I was also not defamed by either of these people when I decided to end the relationship.
They didn't go around saying, calling me names, telling people I was a horror or an easy lay
or any of the stuff that my abusers did, by the way.
And I still think of them fondly, both of them.
And I hope that they aren't traumatized by their relationship with me.
And I absolutely do not feel that way about anyone else I had sexual encounters with
before I was a young adult.
And I have any kind feelings towards any date rapists or sexual predators I've encountered
in my lifetime.
And it all comes down to my consent being respected.
And if the law doesn't respect my ability to consent, that's a problem for everyone.
It creates more problems and trauma.
Absolutely.
This is different than our usual thing in which we talk about heavy stuff.
But it's all this nice, naval gazey, distant armchair stuff, not talking about somebody
who's been through some shit and not talking to somebody about that and then saying,
well, let's abstract that away and think about it distantly.
So I don't know if I'm prepared to engage too much on it just because I don't know
exactly how to navigate that.
I can try, but again, it's different.
If we're talking about some obscure whatever, we were talking before about the death of
everybody on a continent, and that's like, oh, nothing, right?
And now we're talking about one small stupid, or maybe not so small, but one stupid law.
And now it's suddenly a big, and it is a big deal because it's more salient and close.
When I was talking with Charlie about this four weeks ago, when it first came up,
I kind of, I was having the same sorts of qualms and opinions as you, like where, yes,
there are, there are young adults who can and should be able to consent and sign legal contracts
and all that. But as a society, we have this law that drives the line at a number because
it's easier that way. And we don't have a mind reading machine yet.
Well, I mean, there's not like a meter you can stick against someone's head that says
emotionally mature or not, like on a spectrum.
I don't think the laws are based on.
No, clearly not at all. I think they're based on the first half of it was.
And I think actually, I think a lot of the laws are based on now that I've been reading this book
are based on the explicit, explicit intention to control young adults.
Yeah. And commodification of them.
Yeah. Yeah. One of them is specifically there, like clearly so parents can veto their children's
relationships. That's, that's awful. Yeah. And, and like, and so I have the same parents
or basically anybody who disapproves, actually.
I still think it's going to be an issue to change society about this thing.
But I think it's a good fight now that I've been reading this book because like the guy
proposes an actual method of measuring emotional maturity in people.
Is it not the equation?
Sounds like I should read the book.
I actually think the equation. What was it? Half year?
No, no, it's not the equation.
No, what was it though?
Half your age plus seven.
I actually feel like that's, it's better than the law we have now, right?
Like, Charlie, would you, would you agree that if half your age plus seven,
like if the person is older than that, then like that's still big of an age gap?
Then she couldn't have sex with a 31 year old dude.
So I don't like any of these fucking formulas.
Yeah.
All right.
But we do need a bottom aid.
And I think that looking at like physiological and social development,
we should come up with an age and like, I think it should be 14 or 50.
And I also think that the law has to be, the law has to be explicit so that it can be enforced.
I think that's,
However, that doesn't work in reality when you're dealing with something as complex
as a competency.
There actually should at least be like a panel of judges or something.
Like, have them, have a psychologist.
I mean, there is what is in our eyes of people's competence.
Right.
So I think that the law should have a hard age, a hard age bracket where competency
can be called into question.
And this is how you resolve the question.
Right now, the young adult has no agency and they are deemed incompetent by the law.
And that's
And they have literally no rights.
Well, there's one or two special rights carved out for them,
but they don't have any of the rights that are afforded to most adults under the constitution.
And considered full humans.
Exactly.
Yeah.
You are still your parents property more or less.
The law is really like, and if you take into account like drinking age,
I always found it hilarious that I think a lot of people do.
You can, I think when you're 18, can you run the military?
Yeah, they actually lowered the drinking age to,
no, they lowered the voting age to 18.
Because you still can drink until you're 21.
You can die.
You can go overseas and kill people and die when you're 18, but you can't have a beer.
Although apparently those drinking laws are rarely enforced on military basis.
The age.
Well, I should hope not.
Because if you're 18 and you've been sent overseas to go kill people and die,
you should at least be able to have a beer.
Yeah.
I mean, there's, there's a, I mean, you said that it would be very expensive to test competency,
but I don't think it would be that expensive.
Like we test people's competency at operating a fucking two ton vehicle that hurdles at 60 miles per hour.
But we don't do it well.
I'm sure we don't do it great, but we do it well enough.
No, we don't.
Oh, and while they're not, we do like, I mean, I'm not trying to try to,
I'm, I'm, I'm kind of putting a foot down on this because I don't think that
measuring competency is a thing that is doable in general and solves the problem.
Like that's, that's why you have having something in place, like have a psychologist analyze the
person and give their verdict would be at least better than what we have now.
It may be, but then you, you know, you get a psychologist who hates black people.
And so whenever the guy is black, well, but then how do you, how do you,
how many opinions do you get to have?
Like that's the thing is that that's what makes this
really hard and convoluted where like, if you just say, look, if they're not 18,
they don't get to do it, whatever it is, drink, whatever.
I mean, I could see a law that like, once you are 18, you can no longer be denied
your competency rights, no matter what.
See, that sounds stupid too.
But I, but by the same metrics, right?
Why do you, why do you suddenly become competent on your 18th?
If you can, if you can, if you can be competent on when you're 17.
My, this goes into what I want to say in two weeks, but my personal metric is kind of
once you can cause problems for, to the political machine by taking up arms,
that's when they have to start considering you competent.
And that is why there is so much effort put into suppressing teenagers, right?
Of course, this is my opinion.
Yes.
How often did you like daydream about just like storming the government as a child?
Very often.
But it wasn't the government because I, it wasn't the government oppressing me.
It was teachers or something.
Yeah, it was, it was teachers, it was parents.
It was the people that were actually holding back.
Fucking authority figures.
Actually, Charlie brought up about Puritanism.
I grew up in a town that was settled by Puritans and still the place I went to school actually
has drinking prohibited because they kept the Puritan laws.
The section in, we were forced, they were forced to teach as sex ed because of a law,
but because of I think school boards and parents objecting, they took the textbooks
and they ripped out the page, the sections about contraception.
So they're denying you agency because basically the ability to make decisions for yourself.
They thought that if they're teenage children had knew that you could have sex safely,
then they would do it.
They weren't wrong necessarily.
They're not wrong, but they're still going to do it anyway,
but they're going to get STIs and pregnancies.
What's fun about that is they put on like the big slide where it's like,
here's all the consequences of having unprotected sex, STDs, pregnancies.
And then here's all the consequences when you have sex with a condom,
they click the slide and nothing changes.
And so all they're doing there is making a great argument for raw dogging it, right?
Yeah.
Like, well, hey, in for a penny, in for a pound, right?
If we're going to condom does nothing, I might as well not wear one.
Like, I guess for me-
I'm going to hell already anyway.
On slide five, it shows me burning in hell.
Right.
Yeah, there's wasn't one of the things in unsong.
If you've already said which everyone has,
you're basically going to hell no matter what.
So just go all out.
And if you hitler hard enough, then you get an awesome place in hell.
So anyway, I guess I don't understand quite what it would mean to like,
to have these competency measures that could be exercised in a consistent way.
Like, you know, I mean, what agency does a 15 year old have?
I don't think that they have the grasp and it depends on the 15 year old,
which is why you have magic numbers that are usually after 15 for stuff.
But like, you don't let a 15 year old sign on a student loan
that'll sum into $120,000, right?
But you let a 17 year old do it as John Mulaney has
hilariously pointed out.
I think that for those of you who tend to have adult cosigners, right?
And so like, for, I know that-
As he pointed out that when he signed it at 17, he had no fucking clue what it meant.
I think, but he's also a comedian, like telling a joke.
I think that he had to have a parent there to cosign it.
It's because we're so grossed out by sex that we couldn't have like a parent cosign.
Well, so that's what I'm saying.
That might be an argument here, but we also have,
there's also been an issue raised with parents like owning their kids,
but I'm also kind of hugely in favor of that.
Like, if you're a stupid kid who doesn't want to-
Say any adult, like, if you could cosign,
if you could get any adult to cosign that you're emotionally mature enough to have a relationship,
like, or maybe like teachers, I don't know.
That might be something, but then you'd still be like at the whim of your parents.
But like, so part of me likes that because being at the whim of your parents,
because like, if you're a stupid kid who doesn't want to get vaccinated,
because you think needles are scary, or because you're an anti-vax lunatic,
and you're in your 11.
But you can talk about that because sex is so gross that you can't talk about it.
Sure, but I guess whatever my kids' reasons are for not wanting to get a vaccine,
I'd be like, tough shit, you're not dying of measles in this house, young man.
Like, I-
So you're talking about a nine-month-old.
Well, whatever, let's pretend as a vaccine you get an 11, right?
Where we all agree they're too young for sex,
and they're all too young to design mortgages or loans,
but old enough to talk, right?
So, I mean, I guess-
I guess once you start getting into your teens, 13, 14,
you start getting more responsibilities,
and if you do make the wrong choices,
sometimes you just have to let people make the wrong choices.
The same way we let people vote for the other party,
or go to church, or take out a loan, yeah,
or go gambling, or take drugs,
because you're fucking-
You can't run other people's lives for them that much,
and the amount of control you can have over other people's lives
should start diminishing in your early teens,
and diminish more as you get older and show greater responsibility.
Not just be like, you're an infant, you're an infant,
you're an infant all the way till you're 18,
and then suddenly, boom, go wild.
Like, that's just a risk before disaster
on both sides of that 18-year-old line.
Yeah, I mean, I guess-
And this is getting us away from the age and consent stuff,
but it's like, you know, I can't control what my friends do,
because we're all adults,
and that's part of what's involved with that.
But if I had a kid who was 15, old enough to drive, not legally,
old enough to drink, not legally,
and I don't want to take away their agency,
you know, to get shit-housed and drive home from 60 miles away,
like, oh, no, I don't want to impute on their ability
to make their own decisions,
and then they kill a family of four,
and two of the people in the car were pregnant, right?
Like, it's-
An adult could do that, too.
I know, but-
We have separate laws about-
But as a parent, I think you have an obligation to be
not just like the co-signer on loans and stuff for a kid,
and to make sure they get enough food.
You're like, you're to steward them
into a safe and responsible adulthood.
Yeah, but what you were describing is negligence.
Some would just say, go do whatever, you guide them.
But you do that by taking away their agency.
No.
This makes me think of-
I wouldn't let them make that mistake.
This is why we have separate laws for the age of sexual consent
that we do for driving, joining the military.
This is not the same issue,
and I think that legally and ethically,
we're wasting our time trying to compare them.
Which is not the same.
I did acknowledge that they weren't the same,
and then went on to go ahead and talk about it, you're right.
Yeah, and we all-
Of course, we want to protect children,
especially as a parent, you want to protect your child.
But the other thing is that we all make decisions
without the ability to truly understand the repercussions
of the choices we make,
because none of us can predict the future.
We all have made decisions we regret,
and will continue to make mistakes in the future.
It's reasonable to expect people to make better decisions
as they gain knowledge and experience with age,
however, implying that underage people have no ability
to make decisions,
or that it's not okay for them to make mistakes,
that treating sex as though the cost of having it is so high,
we just have to absolutely slap that off the table,
is ridiculous.
It's damaging, and it's ridiculous.
And regret does not equal abuse.
That's part of the mythology of sex.
Like, oh, this person abused me
because the relationship ended poorly,
or they don't love me anymore.
It's like that is part of the romanticization of sex.
Sex is not the same thing.
They actually have laws about abortion
based on the idea that they said,
you will regret having an abortion.
Yes. Hey, I tried to get sterilized as a young woman.
I tried in my 20s.
I tried in my late 20s.
I tried again in my 30s.
And all in like all three times,
You might change your mind.
All three times I was given absolutely no agency
over my own goddamn body
because someone else might feel bad
if I regretted my decision or get sued.
And it was like, oh, I'm sorry, you're female
and you don't really know what you want.
Biology says you must breed,
and then we can sterilize you.
And I'm like,
That's them not treating you like an adult
until you're in your 40s.
But there's no, like I was way beyond 18.
That's not having bodily autonomy.
I don't want to get on that subject.
I'm just saying that this does tie into the fact
that the commodification of the female body purited culture
is tied into the way we think about sex
and treat young adults.
And when they're experienced,
when they're exploring sex,
they are exploring sex.
And we need to provide them with guidance and support
and treat them in ways that are healthy for them,
not make it a traumatizing experience
where someone gets thrown in jail
or they feel like they're supposed to be upset
because they were raped, apparently.
Also their whole life is ruined regardless
of whether they were raped or the rapist.
Yes, oh my God, yes.
I think this also has further bad knock on effects
because I would not consider dating anyone in their teens
or even at this point, probably their early 20s.
And the thing is some teens
will still want relationships with older people.
And I think some teens would even benefit
from relationships with good older people.
But since all the good older people are like,
fuck that, I'd be creepy if I was dating a teen
even if it was legal in the state, I'm not gonna do it.
So the only people left that are willing to date teens
are the people who are abusive
and will exploit that power rather than helping someone
and being kind and accommodating your partner's way.
Yeah, that's why we're creating problems.
I think we're also talking about a lot of stuff.
Like the sterilization thing, even as a guy,
it's hard to get sterilized.
And it's probably harder as a woman because people suck.
But the main reason for that
is the doctor doesn't want you to come back five years later
and be like, he should have talked to me out of it.
I regret my decision and it's their fault.
They made me infertile.
Liabilophobia.
Right, so I think some part of it maybe is no doubt.
Some puritanical sex bullshit,
but it's really, I think in large part,
that particular thing is just fear of getting sued.
No, it's worse for women.
There's no laws against guys getting
a form of birth control in their hands,
but there's people trying to make it illegal for women
to even have access to birth control.
And there's countries where women can't.
Right, they suck.
I wasn't saying that wasn't an issue.
Yeah.
I mean, did...
Stephen was saying that it's not just sex purity,
but there's other...
But it needs to be recognized
as a driving force behind those laws and the way we...
We...
Like, so your revulsion when you see a 17-year-old
with a 20-something-year-old,
like, you don't know that 17-year-old
or that 20-something-year-old,
it's...
I think it would be healthy for people to internally be self-aware.
Okay, I am judging them based on what exactly?
I am for this law because, well, it just sounds good.
I mean, 17-year-olds shouldn't be fucked
by people in their 20s.
Slow down.
When you said internally self-aware,
I don't understand how that applies to laws
because you can't have that with laws, right?
They're bad at laws.
Well, I mean, like, I mean, laws are...
We should have had our resident lawyer on to explain.
What laws are?
Well, I mean, but in general, I think that they are...
You know, they are cut and...
They're supposed to be cut and dry.
This is the case.
And sorry, you know, discretion,
we can argue about that in court maybe,
but for the most part, like, you know,
if someone walked in and Jace was risked deep in my abdomen
while I was unconscious and doing an appendectomy on me,
unlicensed, you'd probably be in trouble because...
I'm just going to mention Stephen being like,
it's okay, this is consensual.
But at least...
What if it was an emergency appendectomy?
Right, but I think running in and arresting Jace
would be a great idea and you could make your case in court
and be exonerated, but like, because in general, we see,
oh, look, this is happening, we should put a stop to this.
And most of the time, that's the right call to make, right?
Well, partially the consent laws don't...
Or the age of consent laws don't allow for consent.
If you had consented that appendectomy, it wouldn't matter.
Jace would still go to jail because law says
your consent doesn't matter.
But more importantly, I think the problem is that
the age is just set way too high.
Like, set the age lower because 17, 18,
that's a ridiculously high age for people who want to fulfill
one of the basic drives of biology at an earlier age.
I think you can still, like, accuse someone of rape.
Like, if you're legally, you know,
this just gives you the ability to consent.
Like, if you're 14 and you're raped by a 20-something,
you could still go to the cops and say,
I was raped, but like, you know...
In fact, they'd probably be more likely to believe you
if you had some sort of established agency, you know?
But as a kid, it's like, yeah.
So, you know, I was born in the late 70s
and raised in the 80s, 90s.
So, I don't think much has changed, honestly.
I see it all the time.
Age of consent loss have gone up in some places.
It's the major change.
So we've regressed, great.
Yeah, I think things have actually gotten worse
since the 70s.
Like, yeah, maybe...
Actually, I'm not sure about that.
I think some things have gotten better
and some have gotten worse in this domain.
Where I'm curious about how the law is fluctuated, too.
Yeah, that'd be something to research.
I wonder what the first, like, yeah,
if I'd thought to research stuff for this episode,
like, it would have been interesting to know,
like, what the first age of consent law was,
like, where it was initiated, what the circumstances were,
and what the age was.
You could probably find that on Wikipedia real quick,
but my laptop's all the way over there.
I think we kept getting modeled down
on what I tried to separate out at the beginning
and then totally forgot to keep doing,
which was, like, separate the law from what makes sense
and what we should be doing,
because those might not be the same thing.
You know, and giving agency to kids at a younger age
maybe makes sense in some contexts and not in others.
Think that you can defend all the kids.
Well, yeah, and so, like, ideally, like Jay said,
we'd have a magic wand that we could wave over somebody's head
and say, they are sentient enough to make this decision
and they're cognizant enough of their consequences,
but we don't have that.
Look, how do we...
You're in your...
Are you 30 now?
Yeah, I've been 30 for a couple of years.
He had to think about it.
Okay, see, I don't know, man.
I met you when you were in your late 20s
and so that's the age you are forever in my mind.
Aw, how nice.
He also looks very young.
Yes, that too.
Yeah, I have a face that says,
can I please check your ID, sir?
Yes, very much.
So, we don't have that wand and we can't wave it over your head.
How the hell do we know that you're sentient enough
to consent to sex?
So, that raises one of the new ones...
We know you're not a pee zombie.
That raises one of the nuanced points
that's gonna make here, like, you know,
there's a couple of, I think, interesting edge cases with this
and I maybe can get them both out quick enough
and then we can talk about them.
One, I knew a guy,
a few years ago, he's at a college party
and it's not a 19-year-old level college party.
They're 23, right?
You know, they're seniors.
And a girl comes up and, hey, you wanna hook up totally?
And a week later, he gets a call from her parents,
she was 17 and he's fucked, right?
So, what's interesting, and I don't know if...
I think that she even had a fake school ID.
And so, like...
So, she went out of her way to, like...
To make this...
Because she thought she had the authorship
and she maybe did.
She certainly had the authorship to get a fake ID.
And we could make this as details we want.
Because somewhere, you know...
If you're old enough to fake an ID,
reliably, that means that you're competent.
A lot of them care.
So, that's one.
And then, you know, like, on the other end of that,
I know people in their 60s who aren't competent enough to...
If they're not competent enough to fake an ID in their 60s,
they probably shouldn't be having sex either.
Well, but that's what you think,
because they're allowed to.
Particularly people with mental handicaps.
You know, people with their IQ in the 70s or, you know...
You know, whatever.
How do you see that we need to be included in the law?
I don't understand what you mean.
I don't see that it is.
What would need to be included and how?
Like, I'm thinking...
Let me finish the example.
I know of a couple that got married
and presumably copulated that marriage at some point, right?
Or consummated or whatever you want to call it.
And they're of equal-ish level, right?
They're both handicapped.
You know, like, if it's about agency and adulthood and cognition,
these people shouldn't be allowed to have sex.
We should sterilize them or at least keep them away from each other
and put them in chastity belts.
I'm being absurd, but like you see what I'm saying, right?
Yeah.
Like, if they're...
That's what some people think.
If it's magically about...
About, I guess, take away the last,
the absurd bit about chastity belts and distance,
but like, it does seem like we can't let...
It's an inconsistent metric.
I think that if they're both, you know, if they're, you know,
neither of them can read and write.
They can't prepare their, you know, whatever.
They can't live a life independent of help.
But if they want to hook up, you know, fuck it.
You know, like, there are people in old folks' homes
who presumably, you know, they're right with us, at least.
Well, they get police too.
They do.
And I kind of think they should,
because there's a lot of dementia going on
and a lot of people unable to...
Depends on the person, though.
Right.
Like, they're, you know...
But...
That should be in the law.
I think that's what Charlie's saying, right?
Like...
I've seen that a law doesn't...
You also don't have the ability to consent
if you have a certain level of dementia
and that should be in the law, too.
That should be protected status.
Yeah, like, just because it's not addressed...
But people should be allowed to have sex.
...doesn't mean it shouldn't be.
And I'm not saying there shouldn't be specific age.
I never said there shouldn't be a specific age.
I'm just saying that simply naming an age is not enough.
And I'm actually agreeing with you,
because there's other ways that you can be competent or incompetent.
And we need to address all of that.
Yeah.
And also the, uh...
Oh, you're done.
Yeah, because context matters.
Right.
It absolutely matters.
And if we are actually going in the interest of being just,
we need to...
We need to fix this.
Our current laws are egregious.
We're back on laws.
Laws suck.
Yeah.
So I think we can table that and just, you know, agree.
Here, here.
Because...
But does that mean you agree that 16-year-olds could have sex
and it wouldn't be gross?
Well, so that's sort of where I'm at.
If, again, these two mentally handicapped people,
I mean, again, the state saw them fit to get married.
They have a marriage certificate.
And, you know, I, again, I'm assuming that the state,
again, if they let them sign a marriage certificate,
I had no problems with them having sex.
So, like, what they probably would hopefully object to
is an able-minded person, fully able-minded person,
marrying a person who with severe mental handicaps
and having sex with them, right?
Because they're not on the same level, right?
Two 16-year-olds are close enough to the same level
as opposed to a 46-year-old and a 16-year-old on average, right?
Like, and I realize that there's new ones and it's,
and it doesn't, and I might not be making a coherent case.
Like, I don't think they even have to be on the same level.
You can be on different levels, but still consent to sex.
So I wonder, though, I mean, I guess maybe...
Yeah, actually, I think I see where Stephen's coming from.
Calling an adolescent mentally handicapped.
I wasn't.
Well, no, but, like, it's equating it.
No, it wasn't. I didn't make it clear.
I'm saying that there is a level of cognitive ability
that grows through adolescence.
Yes.
That you don't have at 10, that you do have at 20.
And some people never get past where you start at,
where you are at 10.
That's true.
And we call them mentally,
do we call them developmentally disabled?
Yeah.
So, you know, whatever it is that's coming along at that age,
that is...
I don't think you guys are disagreeing with each other here.
I don't think so either.
I just didn't like that I was equivocating.
I wasn't saying that kids were mentally handicapped.
Anyway, I guess I sort of was, but I was drawing an analogy.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, I think where you were headed was like,
you're trying to come up with an example of the mental competency
of someone in their 60s versus someone who is in their teens.
And I'm like, oh, you can't draw a straight line
between those two points.
There's more going on there.
Yeah.
If you have dementia, maybe you have the mental faculties
of someone who's 14.
But you have a fully developed body like physiologic Cali.
God damn it.
I mean, we can skip the dementia part
because that maybe takes it too high.
What if they're both in their, you know,
two developmentally disabled people who are exactly 40.
That's just not really stupid.
And they're, what was that?
I was just joking.
I was just saying they're not, well, mentally handicapped,
just really stupid.
Now, I like the, I guess, because they're,
but they're cognitively,
cognitively about where you could test
with an aptitude test or something,
a cognition test, whatever you want to call it.
They'd gauge around 10, right?
Can you?
They, so like at that, sorry, go ahead.
Oh, nothing.
I had a random thought.
No, it's, it's fine.
I'm not, I don't know if I'm making a good point here.
Well, I was going to say, you know, drugs retard
your mental capacity for periodically, for a time.
And does that mean you can't consent?
Because I mean, if that's the case, I've been on LSD
and like been raped and or raped people at the same time.
So, I mean, in the extreme example,
people often give people drugs,
have sex with them so they can't consent.
Yes.
And that's fucked up.
But you need to be able to distinguish between those two.
And yeah, you can distinguish between those two.
And I think the easy solution to your example is like,
you pre-commit whilst sober saying,
I'm going to alter my consciousness through substance use.
And I am open to doing whatever we're doing,
whatever we want to do at that point,
whether it's sex or not or whatever.
And I'm consenting to that while I'm sentient and on planet Earth.
Right?
Right.
Like that doesn't sound like a hard problem.
Right.
But so you could still have sex with someone who was on LSD
without it being evil or bad or whatever.
Because well, I think if you if you asked them
when they weren't on LSD, sure.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
But that's like, if this it seems like in the example,
then the analogy would be if this person who's mentally handicapped
at 40 could turn it off for long enough.
Well, no.
Just say I consent to sex and then turn it back on
and they're disabled again.
Yeah.
No, I mean, I guess sorry.
That's a bad analogy.
No, you're good.
Like I said, it came out of nowhere
and I probably shouldn't have jumped in with that.
It's fine.
Because it's it.
That's it.
It's it.
Exploring the edge cases where you figure out
where the edges are.
Yeah.
But like when Steven was saying,
like people are on two different levels
when they're in their teens and their 40s.
Like I agree.
I think that Charlie at 15 and her lover at 31
were definitely at different developmental levels.
But I don't think that relationship was problematic.
It was.
I don't know if Charlie doesn't.
I mean, yeah.
So like you can be on different levels
and still have good relationships
as long as, you know, you're not a bad person.
If you take the other person into consideration
and treat them like a person and be decent.
That was my point entirely
where the objectification commodification
of adolescence is really what the problem is.
And maybe it's also just a general thing with age gaps.
I mean, you know, I if I I'm, you know, in my 30s,
if I hung out in front of junior high schools
just to make friends.
No, no, I'm just saying.
Like there's no there's no sex involved.
Honestly, I wish we lived in a world where that was possible
without societal a negative societal assumption
of repercussions.
I would love to have teenage friends.
I would hate to have teenage friends.
That's the one I was making.
I have great teenage friends.
Don't get me wrong.
We're allowed to this.
This is this is more of a values difference.
But I don't think teenagers have anything interesting.
It's like I like talking about, right?
Really?
I had a co-host metamore who was in her teens.
Not cognitively.
We're going to we're going to pretend.
Oh, oh, I see.
OK, so.
April doesn't count.
I'm justing.
I know I I don't have a good answer for that.
And I guess what I'm meaning is that, like,
I am glad I'm not the kind of person to go out
and, you know, troll the junior high school
is looking for buddies, right?
Right.
And that's but I mean, that's still creepy as fuck.
That's just that's just the two of us.
And, you know, and it would be nice to society.
You know, I remember, you know, we had a friend
who likes kids in a nonsexual way.
If you say they like kids, you have to we have to qualify that.
And he even said he loves getting hugs
from like his nephews or something.
And he's like, kid hugs are great.
You know, I was at a three year old's birthday party yesterday.
And I didn't get any hugs because she was busy.
My niece was playing with this giant phone machine.
But, you know, little hugs from little kids are adorable.
You know, it's when I was 15, I had a mentor
who was not sure exactly 10, 11 years older than me.
And like it was God, it was such a good relationship.
And I learned so much.
I grew a lot through that.
My mother absolutely hated her, even though she never met her.
It was almost entirely a relationship.
But she was like, this creepy older lady that's creeping on you.
And yeah, I totally developed a crush.
And, you know, I would have loved to to have sex with her if I could.
I couldn't because first of all,
she thought that I was, you know, a teenager,
which would be weird.
She didn't attract it to me.
But also she was total lesbian.
So two layers of not being attracted to me there.
And might as well have been 5,000 miles away, right?
Right. I mean, she was just in a different part of Denver.
But yeah.
That's 1,000 miles when you're 15.
Exactly. Yeah, yeah.
I had a bike, man.
But it's very hilly.
I did actually end up going to her place once
when she had like a like a gathering of nerds over
to watch Zena stuff and then some alien movies.
That sounds cool.
Yeah, yeah. It was a great time.
And like she was just she was really awesome to me.
And it was it was a great thing in my life.
And, you know, if it had things had been different
and I would have been able to sleep with her, I don't know.
It probably wouldn't have been terrible.
And I have a hard time imagining that kind of world
because, you know, it's just so not the relationship we had.
Like from the very beginning, she was like,
oh, that's really cute.
The one time when I was like, I think I think I really love you.
She's like, oh, that's so adorable.
And how old were you?
I was like 15.
I mean, you know, so if she said, I love you too, let's fuck.
I mean, would were you consenting to that?
Like it's it's interesting, right?
It is interesting.
So and I again, I'm not saying that I don't think it should
necessarily be an evil considered to be an awful thing.
What if she had asked, can I borrow, you know,
what your parents have your parents putting away college
fund for you? Can I borrow it?
You know, like, see, that is much more likely to be very
exploitative.
But but I mean, if you're Donald, if you're not cognizant
enough to lend somebody a hundred bucks, are you cognizant
enough to to and I'm not.
This is not this isn't a question I expect an answer to.
Yeah.
And I should be clear.
I'm not sure if it's obvious.
If this is your first episode, I'm usually a bit more composed.
I'm finding this emotionally challenging on a way that I'm
trying to analyze whilst talking about it.
It's actually really interesting because I can't figure out
what your objection is.
Neither can I rating somebody else's college fund is abusive
and an abuse of that trust and that that relationship.
Whereas, you know, if there were actual romantic feelings
that developed between us, which again, there wasn't,
she's not into younger dudes and she's not into men at all.
But if something had developed along those lines,
I don't think it would necessarily be bad.
Yeah.
And that that that that wouldn't be an abuse of that
relationship if it was just kind of a natural outgrow.
OK, so flip the sexes.
Same scenario.
I can't do that publicly because then everybody thinks
I'm a creepy pedophile.
And I totally understand.
But in theory, you should be able to do that.
Yes.
In theory, that should be just as acceptable.
And I'm a female saying that.
So there, you're not canceled.
I have learned that it doesn't take one person in the group
that you're supposed to be marginalizing supporting you
to have you un-canceled.
There's two.
I'm trans.
I agree with the idea.
OK.
Yay!
Thank you.
But I think it's less now.
Right.
That's the law.
So like, it's like no take-backsies.
Yeah.
As soon as you say it, you can't be canceled.
Yeah.
Well, you know what?
I'm glad that you're like trying to figure out why you have
that impulse to be like, no, that's not OK.
It's very socially ingrained.
Yeah.
Like that's what I'm trying to point out.
I still kind of have that reaction.
Like I can't.
Yes.
I can't imagine having a relationship with a teenager.
I'm so on Charlie's side after you articulated your point.
But in the beginning of the podcast,
I was sounding more like I was, because I was saying,
oh man, age gaps are really problematic,
or like power imbalance is a really problematic.
And that was just.
They can be.
They can't.
Well, yeah.
That was what I was trying to say is they can be like,
but then I came into this feeling like I'm not sure
where I really fall along like the argument
about age of consent, just because I haven't really
had a good conversation about it yet.
Like I hadn't articulated my own thoughts.
Yeah.
And this has completely helped me like crystallize
my opinion here.
Cool.
I haven't crystallized one yet, but it's currently brewing.
I mean, when Jay says like, I'm not sure you guys just agree.
And I'm like, you know, I've been thinking that for the last 20
minutes.
I'm not even sure where our point of attention are.
Like you're just kind of poking at Charlie's point
to try to like steal, or not steal man it,
like the devil's advocate it to like.
That's the phrase I was thinking of on the drive over
as like, I think I'm prepared to devil's advocate
the other side here.
I guess what it is that I'm.
It's very like uninteresting airtime if you just
have four hosts who all very like strongly agree
with each other.
Yeah.
Sometimes I don't know man, tell that to Fox News.
Oh, well.
But I.
Should we polite the president harder?
Although I guess this was pre-February.
Right.
I still have, I, you know, confusions.
Then it's more about legality stuff.
I still don't know how that would possibly work.
You know, if you just lower the age, then great.
That's maybe step one.
But it does seem to be like you are,
you guys keep saying aptitude based.
Yes.
Have some sort of aptitude test.
And I, I feel like it's weird.
I mean, maybe it's just my feeling weird.
I, I, I don't know if I've articulated this yet.
I have a lot of like, obviously like yuck reactions
about a lot of this stuff.
And that's clearly, and if again, that's not usually
one of my like salient reasons for disagreeing
with something.
And yet apparently it's, it's a strong one here.
I have a lot of reactions to incest, but like morally,
I think that there are cases where it's fine.
That's the standard example to help you get over
like yuck example, yuck reactions.
Yeah.
It's, it's like ingrained culturally.
And when like, and some people have problems with like,
and you still get a knee jerk, like, oh, that's problematic.
Like even I was doing that in the beginning of the podcast.
And then I like, but when you actually like articulated out.
Yeah.
Yuck reactions aren't a good reason for anything.
I mean, a lot of people don't like people with two dicks
having sex or excuse me, two people with dicks having sex.
Someone with two dicks having sex might be awesome.
But, but, but, you know, some people, they think,
oh, two guys kissing is yucky.
That's like, all right, great.
Enjoy your yuckiness.
That's, that's not a good reason to do anything.
I think that's okay.
The disgust reaction is a lot of why so many laws did exist
that like, you know, about interracial marriage,
for example, like nobody could really articulate
a good point against it except, oh, it makes me feel bad.
Right.
And it, it's got cooties.
Like that's sort of the whole like trusting other people's
autonomy and their ability to make decisions for themselves.
Even if you wouldn't do it and you disagree with it,
like it's laws with empathy.
I think I've said before too, that I think I developed
on, you know, more fully.
I hope to be more developed in 10 years than I am now.
But in like my late, late teens, you know,
like I was aware of stuff as a teenager.
I even remember I think having some original thoughts,
but like, but they were few and far between, right?
I don't think that at 15, I was anywhere near where Charlie was.
And so I'm typical mining for my 15 year old self.
And so I'm having difficult, it's kind of just like taking some of
the kids to grow up fast.
So you see that an aptitude test too.
And Steven, so that's great.
I'm glad you went there.
Because then you would probably not have given consent or pursued
or allowed a sexual relationship.
And if something sexual happened with your with you,
it probably would have been something that you would have protested.
And so for like that, basically disenfranchising every 15 year old
because some 15 year olds aren't interested in sex yet,
makes no sense.
I think, and this is just the, this isn't me devil's advocating at this.
This is just my actual vague recollection of my childhood.
I do think that at 15, if somebody said, hey, you want to fuck,
I probably would have said yes.
But looking back, I don't think I was able to make that judgment.
And you know, maybe because I've got some magic thing about
sex from head that really shouldn't be there.
But you know, it could have been about anything.
You know, do you think that could have been something
they could have uncovered on an aptitude test?
Okay, I would need to be magical.
I want to dig right there.
You wouldn't have been able to make that decision.
Why is that decision so monumentally important?
What's going to happen if you fucked?
Were you going to die afterwards?
Were you going to have to marry that person
to be with him for the rest of your life?
See, you're going to demythalize sex.
It's not this titanic event.
It's not a tidal wave.
It's fricking a ripple.
Especially nowadays that we have, you know, protection.
Yes.
Yeah, like back in the day, I can see why it was,
and this is really surprising because back in the day,
people had sex much younger and it wasn't a big deal.
But back then it actually could have been a much bigger
deal where you get someone pregnant or you get pregnant.
You could die.
You could die.
And you could, yeah, yeah, exactly.
And societally you are like now property.
Yeah.
And but nowadays it's much less of a big deal.
Yes.
Because we fix these things.
And the laws should reflect that.
And our educational system should reflect that as well
to prepare these young adults for the choices
they need to make for themselves.
Also giving what you said about wanting to have,
probably would have said yes, if someone asked you
to have sex at 15.
Like, I don't know, maybe you might have.
Your hormones would have just taken over.
But just from personal experience, sometimes when
your body is uncomfortable and not, not working,
it just doesn't work out.
And I'm not thinking that my body would have been
and thinking that my mind wasn't there yet.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, I mean, and then you probably would have like,
lots of times kids, when they first get into sex,
start with things like, you know, heavy petting, touching,
kissing, that kind of thing.
They don't go to full sex on the first go.
And not only that, but so your mind isn't there yet,
but your body wants to experience.
So that's how you get there.
You experiment.
You explore sexually.
It should not be a crime to hit puberty and start exploring sex.
I think it, I don't think so either.
But I think what, to me, I, and now again, we're back on laws,
but I think that it might should be a crime to test some kids limits
and see if they want to explore their horizons with you
when you're 30, right?
And you, and they're, they're 15.
And I realized that it was your situation
and it worked out great.
But it, like, if someone was like, Hey, you know what,
try this out.
You know, worst thing, worst case scenario,
you have a bit of regret.
And like, Oh, sure thing.
You know, person who knows a lot more than I do,
because you're twice my age, I don't, I don't think that we
should be, I, I, I at least understand why people might be
reluctant to say, No, let, let people go forward and try their
hand at as many kids as they can.
Right?
Does that, I mean, does that make sense?
Cause yeah, no, I see what you're saying.
I just, as the 15 year old, you might say, Hey, I've got autonomy.
But you don't, cause you're stupid.
But that's okay.
Cause you're making, I don't even know if it's, it's, you know,
cause, you know, like, I think you still have to protect
against sexual predators.
Yeah.
But how do you, can I pump your intuition for,
what if the person, what if you at 15 have been approached by
like a 30 year old person who said, Do you want to have sex?
And also do you want like, but do you want to have sex?
Also let's do it like without protection.
You would have said yes.
I don't remember my 15 year old self well enough just to
answer that, but pretend I'm giving whatever answer.
You think that if someone had like initiated sex at 15,
you would have said yes, but would you have said yes if it
was another guy?
You're straight, right?
I'm less straight now than I was 15 years ago.
But, but you probably would have said no at the time.
Cause you weren't attracted to like, if it was somebody that
like you hated, like if it was maybe like a cute girl,
but she was total asshole who kicked puppies.
Right.
You'd probably say no cause I don't like you.
Like you'd say no to one of them safe situation.
Somebody who like, if the 30 year old was in some way off,
if you, if you didn't actually want to consent to that,
you probably would have said no, right?
I guess I don't know what actually consent means when I was 15.
Consent just means saying yes.
I like, if they ask some 30 something propositions you and
I mean, I know, I know what it means, you know, it means,
it means assenting and, and, and give a confirmation enough
to be able to like check yourself whether or not like,
do I feel comfortable having sex with this person?
Like, do they seem safe?
Do like, you know, are we using protection?
Am I attracted?
Am I attracted to them?
Yeah.
I mean, and again, I don't quite know where I'm at here.
And I don't know if I can accurately model my 15 year old
self well enough to answer any questions.
Honestly, I mean, I do remember seeing people in junior
high, you know, being picked up by their boyfriends who are
at least 10 years older than us.
And that was weird.
And they, and some of them had very bad times.
Now to Charlie's point, you know, tough shit.
Maybe you need an abortion.
Maybe you had to regret.
A lot of people are really tough times having sex at 32.
Yeah.
To with other 30 year olds.
And, but I guess, I don't know, maybe.
They have the right to make that choice.
Keeping kids safe from stuff, you know, like,
if somebody offered a 15 year old some cocaine, like,
hey, you know, you'll be, you know, most people who try it
once don't have a huge problem with it, but some people do.
And you imagine getting a cocaine problem at 15, right?
I was offered drugs at a young age, but that's another issue.
And the people that offered me drugs were all ages.
Yeah.
I guess I understand that just because someone's old enough
to give the syllables.
Yes.
I don't think that's what that refers to.
It refers to being able to, like,
understand all the stuff that's involved.
Have your own theory of mind, like,
to have a fully formed theory of mind, I guess,
partially, and to, like, also know that you want sex
and that, like, you're physically capable of having sex.
And then this is someone you feel comfortable doing it with.
If you have sexual attraction to someone and you can,
and you can actually perform sex, then, like,
you're physiologically old enough to do it,
and then you're mentally old enough to do it if
you can think through the, like, implications
and make a responsible decision.
Or even an irresponsible decision.
Yeah, or that, like, you know.
I mean, I have made irresponsible decisions as an adult,
and I'm very sexually experienced.
Yeah, like, how much do you think the law should protect
people from themselves is kind of the question.
Yeah.
And again, I just need to say this every time,
we're back on laws.
But I, I...
Well, it all comes down to protecting people from themselves, right?
That's what all these laws are supposed to do.
Because we're talking about laws here.
Are you, are you...
I'm also talking about, like, what I feel good about.
...imposing other people's decisions
because they're making the wrong decisions
and they have to be protected from them.
Well, and to be clear, we're talking about laws,
and we're also talking about, like,
just what we feel cool about,
and what we feel should be allowed,
which are different things.
Like, I mean, you know...
Oh, and it doesn't mean I feel cool about it.
Do I still get grossed out
when I see, like, really young girls being, like,
hit on by guys that, like, I don't know,
should, could be old enough to be their dads?
Absolutely.
There's a yuck factor there.
I mean, so we're all probably in favor of,
of adults being allowed to post pictures or videos
of themselves having sex on websites
that condone that behavior, right?
Like, Pornhub, whatever.
Oh, can you upload your amateur videos?
Do you mean to the internet?
Right. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, you have to get consent from the other people in it,
but yeah.
Well, yeah.
But, but if 215-year-olds,
just to rule out the confusion of a 30-year-old,
or we can even have that one example too.
That's a really complicated question.
If the 15-year-old says, totally, put it online.
I think it's great.
We had an awesome time.
I don't think they, I don't think they know what they're doing.
I don't know.
But like, you can also be there in your 30s,
they could be two 30-year-olds who also are impulsive
and make a bad decision and regret it.
But at some point, you, you, you, you stop for...
Who's been harmed by you putting porn online?
You.
People have seen you having sex with someone,
but like, you regret that decision later.
Yeah, that goes back to our period of culture.
You take the video down.
Yeah.
Well, you can never, you can never take anything.
In some societies, it's great.
In other societies, they're going to be like,
let's brand an A on your forehead
and cast you out into the wild.
You can never take anything off the internet, right?
I mean, you can take it off of your personal server
that you're hosting.
But how does that hurt you?
Unless like, a lot of people...
Maybe some shitty people find it and they're like,
oh, look, that's Steven.
Let's like, spread it around.
But like, mostly, like, that's never even going to come back to you.
I think that some people don't...
People don't recognize porn, like,
actors on the street, generally.
No, I think that just, you know,
some adults take down porn videos
that they put up themselves, right?
Yeah, and they should be able to do that.
But like, they're never down.
They just wish they were.
Okay, well, the thing about not having autonomy
over your ability to be on the internet
or not is a different rights question.
I guess I'm just thinking like,
if we're cool with 15-year-olds and 30-year-olds having sex,
we should totally be cool with them sharing that video online.
I think I am.
But I guess I wonder...
You could monetize that.
Does a 15-year-old understand what they're getting into,
that, you know, if you Google...
Maybe they do.
...if it trends.
Does anyone who's never done that before
understand what they're getting into?
They might understand that things get popular online.
They have a little more perspective because of age.
And other life experiences,
like seeing things trend on Twitter or something, right?
But they still can't predict the future accurately.
None of us have that magic ability
to never regret any decision we ever make
or fully understand the repercussions
of every decision we make.
And trying to magically extend that umbrella
over an adolescent who's going to make more mistakes
because they're exploring something new
in all these different contexts is just...
I don't know if that's not...
It doesn't work.
So, I mean, I don't want to draw the line
that we should have to be able to perfectly predict the future,
like wizards, to have that be the bar,
that no one's claiming that anyone should ever be able to do that.
What we can do is we can imagine probable futures
and anticipate outcomes
and decide on which ones we want to happen, right?
And gear the future towards those probable outcomes.
Also, the excuse I was in my teens
is commonly accepted by a lot of people.
Like, the younger you are, the more likely...
That's literally the age where you're supposed to mess up.
Yeah, the more people are like...
Once you're older, people are like,
you're 40 years old
and you're still making this stupid decision.
No, man.
But like, someone's like, I was 14.
I was like, oh, yeah, okay.
One of the things that I think is important to take into account...
We sort of talked about it with elderly people
and dementia, but that there are different stages of life,
different developmental stages
that do have earmarks.
Teenager brains are more impulsive, more creative, less...
What is the word?
They're just more risk tolerant.
That's intentional, because again,
Wes, fight me, this is evolutionary psychology,
but together at times, you are supposed to...
That's the age where you're supposed to break your bonds
from your parents and your family
and go out and learn how to be a human.
You're supposed to really test
if that lake is full of alligators.
No, more like you're supposed to go find a mate
from another tribe so you don't inbreed.
Sure, but as far as being risk-over...
Being not risk-overs.
Attached to your parents in the sense of attachment,
which is a whole psychological thing.
You know what I mean by that Charlie Wright,
like attachment theory?
Yeah.
You unbond from your parents
as your primary attachment figure
and you go and re-bond with other humans.
You know how you find peers, mentors, partners,
and start your own family, and like...
And that all generally happens in the teens.
Yeah, the thing is that that's instrumental.
Like you become more risk tolerant during that time period
because it's advantageous for you to go make mistakes.
Like the way you learn shit is by going and making mistakes.
I'd also like to point out that is one of the time periods
when your body is most able to absorb
the consequences of failed risks.
Like you can bounce back from shit in your teens
and you cannot bounce back from when you're older.
And you're more bouncy.
Yeah.
There's this joke about like children bounce.
I like, my mom went to preschool
and I worked with children in like that
and like at the library and it's just like...
This weird kind of fact about children
is that they're really resilient to...
To physical damage.
To physical damage.
Yeah.
I mean like in some ways they're more fragile than an adult
but in a lot of ways like they can just...
I remember like when I was in my teens
and I was like chasing kids around at the summer camp
and I was just like, oh my god, they have so much energy.
Or like it's always the joke of adult saying like,
yeah, I wish I had that energy.
But like these kids would run in like 95 degree heat direct sun
for hours.
Yeah.
Something about...
I was in my teens and I was tired.
Do our fucking mitochondria start decaying
as we get older or some shit?
Fucking.
Well, we also have more neuroplasticity when we're young.
Our brains are literally forming.
Very rapidly.
And I want to just go circle back to what I said earlier
was that the actual rape and abuse standing alone as a child,
I would have recovered from much better if the...
The stigma hadn't been thrown on top too.
Yes.
And the bystander effect.
All the victim blaming impurity culture stuff.
Like I was...
I was given the impression that I was merely along for the ride
and whatever happened to me,
including like rape and abuse,
what kind of touch happened was not my decision.
However, the negative consequences of the decisions
made on my behalf were entirely mine.
All you kiddo.
And that was what was really traumatizing.
Like honestly, I think it's very brave that Jace was just like,
yeah, like being raped wasn't the worst thing I've ever been through.
I absolutely agree.
That moment was bad.
How I was treated because of it.
And how like I was like basically targeted for my abuse.
My abusers were protected.
I was the one punished.
I think part of the reason that I have recovered so well
is that I never told anybody about any of my instances.
I didn't tell anyone.
My abusers started to spread rumors about me.
And I was targeted by other abusers who also let other abusers know.
My abusers never met each other and they're like years apart.
I lived in a terrible place.
It sounds like it.
Yeah, and I was raised by a terrible family.
But you've come out of it really well.
I mean, the whole thing, yeah, I actually do.
There's post-traumatic growth is something that I've been reading about recently.
It's like kind of, I don't know if it's a new psychological idea,
but I think it actually goes back to World War II.
At least like what the papers that I've seen.
But that was when they were just carpet bombing England.
It actually mobilized the people that lived in England more
to fight the war where like where they had been ambivalent.
It was this, there's this effect called a near miss.
I will, sorry, go ahead.
Like surviving a bombing by near miss.
Like it means like maybe your house was hit
but like you got out and you survived
and you come back a lot stronger from that.
If certain psychological conditions are at play,
like you still feel like you have control.
Like you feel like you can tell sort of a survival story to yourself.
There's a possibility that I could get out of this
and become stronger because of it.
But like if you're a child stuck in a situation
where like you have no control,
you literally can't tell yourself that story.
Like I can survive this because you're like,
I am at the whim of what other people are telling me and doing to me.
I may or may not survive this based on like what other people decide.
Pretty much.
I don't really want to go there because that's like, yeah.
I will say that PTSD doesn't exist.
Well, no, and like I probably had this discussion with you guys before
but I really, really loathe that common apathetic terrible saying like,
oh, you wouldn't be the wonderful person you are today
if you didn't suffer blah, blah, blah.
And I'm like, fuck you.
Don't you dare retroactively justify abuse.
Abuse is abuse.
And that was a loss and it took from me.
And I am a wonderful person despite having endured that,
not because I endured it.
Thank you very much.
I wasn't born a piece of shit.
And like refined through suffering.
I was born a loving, fearless kid.
I loved people.
I would go hug strangers and crawl up their legs at parties
and I liked to dance and I was just so social.
And I almost lost that child to abuse.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I'm amazed that you came out of it like as healthy and stable as you are.
Like if I could.
Because like definitely people can be traumatized
and it can wreck their lives.
Like, yeah, I don't want like by saying that post-traumatic
earth exists at all.
Like mean to say that no, I think it doesn't exist.
I think that it's unfortunate
that people do have sort of different levels of cope.
Yes.
That's like, but that's another thing
where like it's at different levels of aptitude
and it's not their fault for being.
Yeah.
But a lot of it has to do like,
I guess the reason I really wanted to talk about this with you guys is
if I could go back or even if I could change the laws in society
for the future.
So the next child who endures abuse like I did
isn't further victimized by the reactions of people around them.
I think that like, like dealing with the physiological realities of sex,
demithalize it, addressing purity culture issues
and sexual double standards and all this shit
is vital to allowing people to basically bounce back from trauma faster
and also not be re-traumatized continually
because they have experienced trauma
and part of like changing laws around sexual consent.
Why I feel so strongly about it is because that I can,
I can look back and be like, God, that would have been helpful.
I would, I lost so much to the, not just the events,
but the re-traumatization and the social consequences.
Decades of my life spent extremely mentally ill
and constantly re-traumatized.
And then like one step forward and five steps back.
And I, I'm not going to ever get those years back.
I'm in my mid forties.
Like what I have lost is irreparable.
Like, like there is no giving that back.
And so I just, I look at the way things are now
and I see these laws and I see people's reactions
and I'm like, no, that's, that's not helpful.
You're not helping young people by reacting that way,
by framing it that way.
Like if you really care about them, you need to acknowledge
that they are adolescents.
They're sexually exploring.
They are less risk adverse.
They, they are at like a experiential disadvantage,
but that doesn't mean they don't have agency.
There's no reason to re-traumatize them
or to traumatize them when they weren't traumatized
in the first freaking place.
So that's really what was important to me to get across.
I really liked the distillation.
That sounds like it, I was going to say on a t-shirt,
but it should be somewhere, like on a trophy of,
I'm not the person I am because of what I endured.
I'm the person I am despite what I endured.
I liked that a lot.
Yes, that's a quotable, Charlie and Bradley.
I love it.
It sounds like in the instances of the abusive encounters
yet as a kid, that it's not like more lenient laws
with sex with children would have helped you there.
It sounds like the law failed you.
That what we needed was, was more intense legal action.
Everything they did was illegal.
Yeah.
Nothing they did was illegal?
No, everything they did was illegal.
Oh, right.
Yeah, that, that isn't a matter of a, um...
That wasn't bad laws.
That was just laws not being it.
Like badly enforced.
Yeah.
Okay, sure.
Enforced.
And that was because of a lot of purity culture stuff,
victim blaming.
I didn't bring up my raps.
I never told anyone because like,
I knew that I would be the one that would be the most hurt
by telling people, by society.
There you go.
Like, definitely like they were, they weren't gonna,
I don't know, like, charge those people.
They would like, yeah, I don't know.
Or even if they did, it would be like, you know,
time spent in a trial, lots of money that you have to spend.
You could lose the trial and then you could like,
owe the other person money.
Also, your name is now slandered because it's involved
with dirty, dirty sex and you're,
you gotta wear the big A and whatever.
Like, sex shouldn't be that like, taboo stigmatized.
We need laws that are simultaneously more understanding
that kids can make decisions about sex.
And that sex isn't necessarily something
you have to prevent people from having
because it's inherently bad.
Sure, totally.
But we need laws that can both encompass that
and that like, make it easier and more obvious,
obviously a safe path for victims to come forward
when they're being victimized,
not when they're choosing to do it.
I mean, raping a child was already illegal
in Hawaii at that time.
It wasn't the law that was the problem,
it was the society.
No, I know, that's what I'm saying.
So, yeah, you're right.
It is not the law, the society, fair enough.
Yeah, it was a horrible place.
That particular.
I have one last, like, just,
and we can toss it out or we can entertain it if it's quick.
If I went to work tomorrow,
I was assuming I went to work
because work was a place I went to
instead of my, you know, the next, my office at my house,
and I punched a coworker in the face.
I would be tried to the crime assault,
you know, could be rather serious.
If I'm 15 and I'm at school
and I punched another child in the face,
you know, I probably don't go to jail
and I'm not tried in front of a judge and stuff
because people realize, oh, kids do stupid shit.
This seems to indicate
different understandings of attitudes
among children and adults.
So, like, and then, I mean,
if two 15-year-olds are brawling it out,
hitting each other in the face, that's different.
If a 15-year-old and a 30-year-old are brawling it out
and the 30-year-old keeps hitting the 15-year-old back,
that's way differently as a crime.
Is this is this readjustment of agency for children
adjusting across the board or just for sex?
I'm across the board.
Across the board, and it's all in what you just said.
Like, that's exactly what I've been saying.
Like, we mythologize,
God, that's a hard word for me to say for some.
Sex, where it's like, if a teenager has sex,
well, it's got to be a crime.
It's a really big deal.
It's like, no, not necessarily.
It should actually be taken less seriously, probably.
Yeah, you have to take other stuff into account.
What if, like, the reason that you went
and punched your co-worker in the face
is that he had, like, stolen your car?
I don't think that the cop who arrests me would care.
I think that you actually would
mitigate circumstances in the...
I think you might get, like,
some kind of punishment for punching the person,
which is not, like, the socially correct way to respond,
but, like, people would be understanding that, like,
like, he would go to jail.
You'd get your car back, you know?
You know, it's like if, and I realize I'm stretching
this past where it was supposed to go.
Or if you, like, killed your wife, like...
Sure, yeah.
At that point, I don't think you'd be
held accountable for anything.
Yeah, but, like, you know, if me and my other adult friends
want to have a fight club, you know,
I guess it's already illegal, so, I mean...
Wait, is it?
I thought you could consent to fight clubs.
Well, maybe if you're an adult,
but if a 15-year-old wanted to join,
and we beat the shit out of him.
Oh, I see.
And he's like, I wanted to.
I was into it.
It was like, yeah, but now you don't realize...
You didn't understand that...
I didn't know the thing was going to hurt.
Maybe, you know, kids don't maybe realize, like,
oh, yeah, those teeth don't grow back.
Your first set did, you know?
Or, like, yeah, that contusion,
that broken eye socket will never heal the same.
You know, you're going to be disfigured
for the rest of your life.
As an adult, you've had contexts of not necessarily that...
It doesn't have to be the exact thing,
but that's part of, like, wisdom,
is seeing different things and applying it to your situation.
You had to make those stakes first
in order to have that experience.
Yeah, I had brotherhood.
You had to have those learning experiences
to get that wisdom.
I had brothers-in-law who were literally in street gangs
and did suffer those sorts of, you know,
facial trauma in fights.
I think they would have been a lot better off
in a fight club than in a street gang.
Yeah, I mean, I guess...
They should have consented to that instead.
You know, I guess if I...
Legalize fight clubs.
If I'm looking...
If I'm looking around for, you know,
whatever, to fight, right?
I would just think it better for me,
and maybe for a society,
that's where I'm curious about,
to say, find someone your own size and age
rather than go to your local junior high
and ask if someone wants to get to a fight with you.
What if you were to do DBSM with someone?
Because, like, that's more related.
Like, if you're a masochist, you're 15,
and you find a 31-year-old at, like, a sex club
that wants to beat you up and you agree to it,
like, does that change your perspective at all?
Because, like, the cases that you're saying are still assault.
I think assault is still, like, bad.
Well, but if it's consensual assault...
You can still accuse someone of rape.
If it's consensual assault, then, like, I think it's the same thing.
Like, it's just bodily autonomy.
You get, like, there's a point where you get to the age
in scare quotes, maturity-wise, et cetera,
to be able to make decisions about what is done to your body.
And I think it's absolutely your body, your choice,
because, yeah, whether it's abortion
or getting punched in the face or having sex,
like, don't you think that there's a point
where you should be able to have the right to decide
what happens to your body, like,
even including euthanasia, I think.
We can't have it both ways.
If the adult in the room is more liable
than the young adult in the room,
then the young adult has less agency than the adult.
Like, we can't have it both ways.
I mean, I think I've got, and, you know,
this sounds like we're near the adult,
trying to hit both things, you know, like, on the one hand...
Sorry, Jace, what was the last thing you said?
I'm trying to get it back to you.
Oh, bodily autonomy, like, as I was saying, across the board.
I think that at some level, and this does come with...
And it just happens to be tied with age,
but it is experience, you know?
You can have enough XP before you're 12
to understand things that someone at 20 might not,
but it correlates strongly with age
because it correlates with time.
So you'll see, like, that some consequence...
Some actions have consequences beyond your understanding.
And the first time you see that, it might not even happen to you.
It might happen to somebody else.
But the odds of you having that first wisdom moment
go up... The odds of that happening go up with age, right?
So, like, if you're going to drink and drive, if you're 15,
it might not sound like that bad of an idea.
Yeah, worst case scenario, I run off the road
and I wake up, you know, drive home
because you're stupid and you're 15, right?
But if you're 35 and you think that way, you're an idiot.
But you're still making decisions for other people.
But then the sex thing doesn't work with drunk driving.
But I don't know, I guess, you know, with, I guess...
We're getting...
Yeah, we're getting far afield tonight.
Yeah, we're getting afield from...
This is, like, the general question
of how much should laws protect people from themselves,
which I think is still related, but it's...
That is maybe where we're...
Not exactly your topic.
I think that is where we're differing, though.
And that's what has...
That's why I was bringing up the physical violence example
of consenting violence, because that seems to distill the thing there.
Well, also, violence is worse than sex, potentially.
Yes, yes.
That's another thing.
Like, you can be raped and it can be, like, unviolent,
coercive thing.
And you come out of it, maybe, like, mentally scarred,
but, like, I think there's...
Physically undamaged.
It's not like you're in the hospital
and you're therefore have sexual dysfunction for us
in your life because you had to have surgeries to...
Even if you get pregnant, you could...
You should be able to get an abortion.
You should, yeah.
Like, you recover from this.
You can recover from this, like...
I don't know if that is...
There are different magnitudes of violence and...
And sexual abuse or sex, generally, I guess.
Yeah, so, and then...
Their consent is everything.
It's everything.
So, I'm a virgin and I'm having sex with someone
for the first time.
And I'm all about it until it starts to hurt.
And then I say, whoa, whoa, whoa, I don't like this.
I'm not consenting to continue.
Consent is everything.
Bodily autonomy is everything.
I definitely...
I draw my line in the sand there every time.
Yeah, and in that case, if a 15-year-old wants to join
the Fight Club, if they say,
I'm consenting, then they get to do it.
And they get to make the mistake of not understanding
that they're risking lifetime brain damage.
But that's just an owned risk.
About football.
But that's just an owned risk of letting people do what they want.
You can play football when you're 16.
I think, you know, and again,
I'm still trying to distill where my, like...
I think I understand where you're coming from.
I think it's coming from...
It sounds like you're trying to compare an ideal world.
Like, ideally, like, there should be a better way.
Like, it's sort of the same thing as, like, you know,
the band goods store, how we all sort of agree that should exist
because people should be able to make their own decisions.
We all sort of agree.
That's what I was going to bring up.
Okay, if they're competent, I guess.
No, no, it was just that.
Part of me, I think the band goods store makes perfect sense.
I think that my inner libertarian is super into it.
I have this other part of me that says people are too dumb...
I think the thing is that it's better than the system that we have now.
It's not perfect.
It still has lots of externalities.
It's going to be terrible.
So people are going to take the, like,
stupid drug and die.
Right.
And part of me has this...
That world still looks better utilitarian-wise than the one that we have.
That's probably true.
I think what I'm just trying to, like, analyze my own feelings about it is,
like, part of me has this intuition that people just can't,
like, in many cases, can't make judgments for themselves.
It's like, look, I know you say you want that, but you...
But tough.
I, you know, I, being the state or the God, artificial intelligence that we built,
I'm giving you this vaccine.
I'm going to make you wear a mask.
I'm going to not let you drive 150 miles an hour on the highway.
Like, whatever it is, right?
I, and I've realized that's completely at odds with the band Good Store.
It's, somehow, I need to, I need to square this out and I'll do this off the air.
Like, I think having a band Good Store sounds like a perfectly entertainable idea.
And yet there seems to be, I'm learning that there's this part of me
that feels the exact opposite way about it.
I think it depends on just, like, as the superhuman AI,
you don't want to tell humans, okay,
you can't have relationships with people of the opposite sex
because those are too often turn out badly because, fuck,
that's what most humans want really badly, you know?
On the other hand, you also don't want to be so permissive.
We're like, yeah, go ahead and blow up the earth.
I know that's not ideal, but it's your own choice.
Thank you. That actually is a great distillation of it.
So, yeah, it's...
You can't protect them from everything and you can't let them do everything.
But, like, the scale is not below up the world.
The scale is have sex you regret.
Exactly.
And that's the social position right now.
It seems to be very much like all sex is bad and harmful.
And we can't stop adults from doing it
because adults are fucking self-descriptive, terrible people.
But at least we can make these laws that say no under 18
can do this horrible thing.
And we, you know, we are very much pushing against this idea
that it's a horrible thing that should be legislated away
for as long as is possible and should be embraced as something
that people find out and experiment with as they age.
And we're also not saying there shouldn't be an age of consent.
We're saying that the age of consent should be lower
than it is in Colorado and much clearer.
And also not have special exemptions for, like, oh, but if you're married to the 12-year-old.
Yeah, oh my God, yes.
But that's a whole another ballgame.
This was fun.
Yeah, that one definitely seems weird.
I've got nothing to defend that one with.
Ooh, if you actually read through the law,
I wonder if your skin would crawl like mine did.
That was a loathsome experience.
Well, you know, it's not a loathsome experience.
Thanking our patrons.
Yay, trust me in that segue.
Who's the lucky patron who gets to be thanked after that?
And I do want to use this as a quick bridge to our next episode
where we'll talk about, in general, adult kids' autonomy
as opposed to just the specific age of sexual consent that we were talking about today.
Assuming that something crazy doesn't happen,
and I can't read a single more page in the next two weeks,
but hopefully I'll be done with the book by then.
Right on.
Well, this week's patron is Bob Rocks.
And Bob does rock.
Thank you so much.
Yeah, Bob.
Thanks, Bob.
Thanks and sorry, Bob.
You did this, Bob.
You made this episode possible.
And we thank you for it.
Yeah, thanks for bringing this to all the people out there
and for helping us to continue to do the show that we do.
We couldn't do it without you.
Totally.
All right.
If you would like to be a patron of ours,
there's information at TheBaseinConspiracy.com,
which is our home site.
You can write and review us at iTunes and other places.
Let your friends know.
Am I forgetting anything?
We have a discord.
If you haven't read Worth the Candle,
whether or not you listen to mine in Inosh's podcast about it, it's amazing.
I know at least one person who's listening to that podcast
just for fun and not reading the story.
And I've been hounding him to read the fucking book.
It's actually a lot of fun.
And I think we are almost comprehensive enough
with our discussion of it that you can probably squeak by,
but you're missing stuff.
Read it.
Thanks, everybody.
And is that it?
It?
That's it.
Okay.
We'll see you all in two weeks.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye, everyone.
Now there's some coffee.
