Hey, this is Inyash. For our 100th episode, we did a live show with people typing in the chatroom and also talking with us live online.
We were releasing the recording of that for our 100th episode. And actually, because it was really long and because we were going to skip an episode anyway for Christmas,
we're breaking it up into two episodes. The first half airing now and the second half airing in two weeks.
We had some technical difficulties at the start, which you'll hear, but due to these technical difficulties,
we ended up losing all of the audio we recorded.
Fortunately, we were saved by our awesome listener, April.
She was recording the whole thing on her end and sent it over to us afterwards, so anyone who wasn't there for the live chat can still hear it.
April, thank you so much. You have saved the podcast for December.
We used a single omnidirectional microphone for this episode,
so the quality is a little lower. And since it was recorded on the other end of Discord, rather than right at the source, the quality is even lower still.
So, the audio on this one is going to sound pretty rough, but it is what it is.
We'll probably do this every year because it was a hell of a lot of fun.
Enjoy.
So, we're just having headphone madness here.
Yay.
You know, it's just Bluetooth or Venmo or web apps on the phones.
I hate Bluetooth because it's supposed to work at the speed of light, but due to all the bullshit they have with their translation, there's always like a what?
Quarter-second to half-second delay on everything?
I can't even watch TV shows over my Bluetooth speaker because the audio doesn't seem to be the video.
It's just slightly off enough to really annoy the hell out of me.
Can you hear Stephen?
I can hear.
Can you hear?
Yeah, I can hear.
Alright, we're finally good.
Yay, Phoenix agrees with me. Bluetooth is a horrible protocol and should not be used for things like audio.
I've been talking about this.
While speaking to video.
I mean, yes, it makes sounds worse, but I like being able to walk around wirelessly on the train and all that shit.
I mean, anything where actual the speed of the connection is important.
Can't use Bluetooth.
Broadcasting is hard and defies logic.
Yeah, I'm sorry that it took us so long.
I was told by someone who's not here, Zeke Aran, who he mentioned that he doesn't listen to.
He's the only podcast he doesn't listen to sped up because I'm incomprehensible.
I like a lot of people saying it's so weird to hear voices in one speed.
We sound like we're drunk or something.
Yeah, there's no way we can speed up ourselves in real life.
I guess they'd have to come back.
I can talk really fast if that helps.
No.
Oh, okay.
So now that we're actually here, welcome to a very special live Bayesian conspiracy.
Very special multiple meanings of the term where we speak with people who are online and we are starting with Bayes.
Bayes, do you have anything you want to ask or say?
Hey guys.
Yeah.
Well, you can call me Alex.
That's my name.
And it's I suppose the real most important thing I'd like to just tell you guys is that I very much appreciate this podcast and all for your view.
I was when I when I finished methods of rationality a little over a year ago, and then shortly after the sequences, I was the only one in Kansas City that I knew of who was into the rationality community.
So you guys were my only source of actually listening to another rationalist speak for a very long time until I managed to find a few others in Kansas City.
But thanks to your efforts and the support you guys unknowingly gave me, we were able to not only form a weekly meetup but also a dojo meetup and an effective altruism meetup.
And you guys, you guys deserve a portion of that credit.
And I appreciate you very much.
That's fucking awesome.
That's awesome.
You're crushing it harder than we are here.
Yeah.
Thank you for telling me because that really helps.
It makes the whole project feel cooler knowing that people are getting shit out of it.
How many people you got there now?
There's about seven core members and then a couple, two or three others who show up.
We have a couple who actually aren't even from the rationality community originally.
They just saw our events on meetup and thought we were cool people and started hanging out with us.
So we have, yes, we're recruiting, I guess.
Slowly we will get the whole world in our collections.
Yeah, yeah.
Raise that sanity waterline.
Yeah.
Sorry, go ahead.
Okay.
Thanks for sharing.
That's awesome.
And I also love your username.
Yes.
For anyone who doesn't know Bayes Theorem is called like BAE, apostrophe S.
Like Bay.
Yeah.
Which apparently I just recently found out, I think you told me it stands for best of
better than all everything.
What does it stand for?
I've never heard what it did.
Before all others?
Before all else.
Before all else, yeah.
Okay.
Which I, until just recently, I thought that it was like a shortening of babe.
Me too.
Yeah.
Well, that was cute.
But then everyone thinks that it's short for babes or babes.
So now I still can't use it.
Oh, you can't use it?
Well, because everyone has the wrong idea, short for babe.
And that sounds stupid.
So I thought it was kind of cute.
But Bayes, I don't know.
It sounds great.
I love it.
Yeah.
Especially at Bayes Theorem because it's a pun.
Right.
And I'll get up better for a pun any day.
So.
See, the atta is with me.
Also thought it was just babe, shorted.
Yeah, me too.
I've also got the chat here.
Oh, cool.
Yeah.
So.
Cool.
Yeah.
I'm also hoping to visit Denver here within the next six to eight months or so.
Awesome.
Or whenever you guys feel like you'd be available to hang out and talk about stuff.
I could always use.
I'm wanting to kind of do little short vacations to all the biggest rationality hubs and see
how other groups do things.
Yeah.
And you guys are definitely number one on my list.
Oh, wow.
We should not be number one on that list.
Yeah.
Just by sending annual pilgrimage to rationalist Mecca.
So next time you look one of those, you can just put an asset out.
As important and as prolific as the rationality community in the Bay area is.
It's, it's very close to the last on my list because I, I don't really care for the Bay
area that much.
Yeah.
My car got jacked.
Last time I was like.
Like that's a whole car.
Just all the day.
I'll go step inside it.
Right.
Oh yeah.
That's us.
But yeah, no, the, so I'm kind of almost embarrassed when we talk about the Denver
rationalist area because we have like this podcast and we have the group of us that meet
together, but we don't have like any of these cool dojo shit that you have in Kansas.
City.
Yeah.
And the Bay area has like their own community center, which is amazing.
But anyone that wants to visit at any time, I'll let me know.
I can't always like drop everything and meet, but if it's at all possible, I'd love to
meet people.
Yeah.
If anyone's in town for more than two days, I can probably make it happen.
So.
Yeah.
Just let us know and we will absolutely meet up when Ray was here at GSB.
We had a great time.
Yeah.
At least I did.
And I was also introduced to a beat saber.
Oh yeah.
Fantastic game.
See that right there?
That is entirely your fault.
He's pointing to the VR headset.
With the Santa hat on it.
Well, okay.
The Santa hat is not your fault, but the VR headset is.
I was, is there a way to download other songs for the PS?
Because I saw someone doing like a Gungham style with beat saber, but it.
Oh, I don't think so.
I was wondering that too.
Maybe we'll try our Google food on it.
Yeah.
Because PS is basically just a computer.
You can maybe jailbreak it if you're feeling that.
Maybe.
Yeah.
That is exciting about it.
Anyways, yes.
Someone said they're in Texas and what's happening in Texas?
Someone asked if there was a rationalist communities outside of the US.
And Sonarman 720 says they're in Texas, which is basically outside of the US.
Yeah, there's so many.
There's some of Russia.
Yeah.
There's a small one.
I think they're, I think they're around.
Russia has its own like rationalist coffee house thing, which I'm currently supporting
on Patreon because just looks like they're doing good stuff.
Conchirka, I think it was.
I don't know if that's the right pronunciation.
I'll take your word for it.
What kind of format is the coffee house?
Like is it actually?
It's a go in and pay per minute just to be in the house thing.
Nice.
That's a good one.
Is the rationalist movement start in California?
It arguably started either wherever Eleazar was when he was writing his blog posts or
at George Mason University.
Right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Where Robin Hansen was writing...
That's a good question.
He must have been in Georgia.
No, he was never in the university.
How did those two get in contact?
Part of your economics online, I'm guessing.
Okay.
Yeah.
I would trace it back to either Robin Hansen or Eleazar and I'm not sure.
Eleazar was in California the whole time, wasn't he?
Yeah.
I think that's why his founder effects ended up in Berkeley.
Yeah.
Well, it's also a great place for programmers.
Yeah.
It's also very expensive.
Right.
Okay.
It's kind of unfortunate that it ended up in Berkeley because a lot of people can't afford
to live there.
Yeah.
It's kind of hard to get around.
I was just in downtown Denver earlier this morning and yeah, it's an exciting place to be.
Oh, I know.
Well, I had to pick up some stuff, but it's like, it just feels full of life and there's
people around and everything's exciting now.
Yeah.
Like when I'm here, I want to do things and I go back out to the suburbs.
People...
Denver is a city of like 30 somethings.
It's weird.
We still live in New Jersey.
It was a very like Asian population area and it's weird just going around and seeing
a lot of people at an age everywhere ago.
Yeah.
It's things that cater to the interest and taste of people in their days.
It's so weird.
Denver is a really booming city right now, so people are coming here to make their fortune.
When I had a house and rented out one room, three different times I rented out to people
that were just coming to Denver or staying in the room for six months while they found
a place to live because they were getting jobs here.
Yes.
Yeah.
Although you didn't stay with them.
Well, I stayed for like a week that I visited.
Yeah.
I stopped sharing my house for a night.
Yes.
It's perfect.
Don't sweat it.
These are supposed to say that they will say something.
It's not my cat.
Hello.
Roommates cat?
I'm not a friend's place because last night I was staying over at his place and then
we got snowed in.
So I'm just doing this all in his basement.
Cool.
We can turn the alerts on and off.
Let's see.
Why are we turning the alerts on and off?
Because every time something comes in there's a balloon and apparently that's recording
stuff.
Okay.
Both patients are.
Cool.
Does Beat Saber count as HIIT?
High intensity integral training?
No.
I wouldn't say so.
It's not nearly intense enough.
It definitely is when you're in expert class.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
I saw you and Phoenix crushing it next to me.
I was playing yesterday.
I won't usually sweat.
It looked like somebody jumped above me with water on my head after I was done playing.
Oh, nice.
Okay.
I was playing for like an hour.
I got this embarrassing TDCS, like narrow stimulator thing that's supposed to train
muscle memory.
So I was playing with that.
Cool.
And it's hilarious because it's a large headset with these electrodes on top of it.
So I'm wearing this large VR headset with another headset over top of it.
I'd love to get into Beat Saber sometime, but my computer technology consists of a phone
and a Chromebook.
So the threshold, the barrier for entry is a lot higher for me.
I really wish they had Beat Saber in our case.
So people who don't want to buy a headset, I'll go play it and I'll just still have
the night pick with a bunch of friends and play it.
So should that be really cool.
I was in one of those VR setups where they have a ring around you.
Why?
So you can like walk and turn around and stuff.
Is that here in town?
Yeah.
That was like during our convention.
Yeah.
But it was like $5 for 10 minutes.
Like it was not a cheap thing to do.
Yeah, that sucks because the only thing I mentioned was playing in that sky room and five minutes
and that wouldn't get me through the car battles.
So it was really neat though because I saw, there was just the same 10 minute scenario
for everyone.
It was a run around shoot zombie kind of thing.
And I saw two people before me and I knew both times at the end there's like a noise
behind you and you look behind you like something jumps out, right?
And it's a jump scare.
I was like, okay, this is cool.
And I knew it was coming and I got into the game and I got into the room and I heard
a noise behind me and turned around.
I jumped.
I was like, damn it.
I knew this was coming.
I got tricked.
You looked like a high laser.
You shaped to turn the light on.
Yeah.
Very cool feature.
Yeah.
It sounds like a really high-maging.
I mean, if I took an accident while I was there.
You can blind people with that undobling abs.
So I almost never turned it on accidentally.
I literally do not hold my phone while I'm excited and making hand gestures.
Yeah, right.
That's why I hold a mug.
It keeps me nice and calm.
I can't just stick it sharply.
A mug full of steaming coffee.
Right.
just be shaking over my expensive laptop.
The kinds of issues, the kinds of fires, yeah.
Yeah, now it's like 50 bucks.
Well, I would love to talk to you guys
about the Dojo experience that we've had
in Kansas City sometime,
but there's a lot to talk about there.
Yeah, that would probably-
I don't want to hear your vibration now, but-
Would you be willing to be a guest
and talk to us about the Dojo thing?
I would love to.
That's definitely something that would make my year,
that's for sure.
I suppose the short version is that
we're currently in the process.
Since we were originally started off
by doing the Hammer Time sequence on Less Wrong.
Hammer Time?
Hammer Time, yeah.
It's a sequence made by, I don't recall the username
of the person-
It was the hammer.
They had attended a CIFAR workshop
and this was their attempt to convey
a lot of the lessons they learned,
as well as practice writing.
You can look it up on Less Wrong,
it's just called Hammer Time.
Yeah, I'm gonna do that.
Yeah, I'm gonna do CIFAR and then-
Mm-hmm.
I'm gonna-
So what we're doing-
I'm gonna put it off when you're talking.
I have to kind of put it on when someone else is talking.
You can mute yourself or deafen yourself.
I would do it for you, but I don't want to.
So you started with the Hammer Time sequence,
like going through it?
Yeah, we started going through that.
Now we've transitioned into something else.
We currently, our core membership
are pretty much all seasoned rationalists.
We have all the sequences under our belt.
We have a couple of years of being
in the rationalist community.
We have the background knowledge.
And we even, one of our members is a licensed therapist
who knows a lot of great information
about cognitive behavioral therapy and ACT
and internal family systems therapy.
So he has a lot of information
and knowledge under his belt about-
You're gonna have-
Is it nice to hear that?
I can hear it, okay.
Sure, what?
Can you hear me now?
How am I-
Yeah.
Am I cutting out again?
No, what I'm hearing is-
What I'm hearing is bass,
so it's working fine and good.
What are you hearing?
I'm hearing nothing.
I'm hearing nothing.
I'll figure it out.
Hi, Jess is working on making her thing work again.
But yeah, so how often do you guys meet?
We meet every Tuesday evening.
And yeah, we provide free food to everyone.
And we meet it for a couple of hours.
And our current format is more of a life workshop
kind of thing where we all bring our skills
to bear on each other's problems.
It's really, really interesting.
And I have a lot of really interesting stories
about how that has worked out.
It has been a very positive experience.
I'd love to share more details.
I would love to hear more details.
That sounds awesome.
Yeah, we gotta have a whole episode about this.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
I think one of our problems is that we only meet once a month,
which is, it's hard to meet more than that
because we're all busy and half of us
are in Colorado Springs and shit.
Yeah, we have people coming from like an hour north
and an hour south.
And so they're gonna be on a Tuesday night at seven,
which means usually we leave by 10
so we go to work the next day.
We tried weekends earlier on.
Then of course, I keep telling people
we can do as many as we want
and just people show up, show up.
And the thing is, if we were meeting every week,
it wouldn't have to be as long.
I always feel like I really gotta get a lot in.
So I'm always there until 10
because it's only once a month.
Yeah, but then the people,
it was only an hour long
if we were meeting from Boulder, Colorado Springs.
So it would be worth it to meet them.
And also, I forget the carry runs
that they have up over here.
Yeah, yeah.
I forget if it's plus or minus
or if it's good, but whatever.
I think it started as a slick circle mix.
So it's probably a good identifies ass.
I mean, yeah.
And the thing with once a month,
like if you meet, maybe if you miss a meeting
because you're sick
or something comes up, whatever.
It's like three in a row at one point.
Yeah.
And I didn't see anybody go three or four months.
And then it's hard to like get back into it.
You've lost touch with people, you know?
Yeah.
Yeah, that was the exact same problem we had
is not only do you have those practical barriers,
those practical failure modes when you miss a meeting.
I'm a very extroverted person
and I really need to be around people,
especially sane people.
Yeah.
But so when I miss a meeting
and I go two months without interacting
with another sane person,
I feel really bad and just emotionally drained.
It's a positive experience talking to the rationalists.
It's not always a positive experience interacting
with the non-rationalist.
Yeah.
You know what I mean, Sam?
I'm trying to think of it as an extroverted.
But yeah, I completely agree.
And if I'm more of an introverted person
and basically before every meetup,
I'm tired and worn out and don't feel like doing it,
but I've dragged myself there within two minutes.
I'm excited to be there.
It's just, I think I mentioned something like that before,
but yeah, it's just a matter of training myself
to recognize like you enjoy doing this,
get out there and do it.
And then I always do.
So, I would-
I had to look to-
Right.
I looked to hear anybody has about getting over that.
I had that same issue with, for example, martial arts
where I love it when I was doing it,
but it's so hard to get the motivation
to do it.
I don't know.
Motivation has always been a mystery to me.
It's actually something we've talked about at the dojo
is the concept of motivation and what it really is.
And the short, the tentative conclusion
that we've come to is that motivation
is a bunch of constituent things,
especially the most important part of motivation
is that it is the alignment of your behaviors
with your stated values.
And when you reframe it like that,
it's a little easier to think of ways
that techniques you might use to figure that out.
You might just need to reexamine your values
and repeat, dig deep into why those values mean so much to you.
And then I don't have a whole lot of actionable advice
on that, I'm afraid.
I haven't solved it crazy yet,
but when you think of it as an introspection issue,
there are some, it's a lot easier to make headway on.
I find motivation much easier
when I'm in a really optimistic mood.
It seems to me a lot of motivation
is expected consequences.
When I think I'm terrible at everything
and nobody likes anything, I don't wanna do anything.
It's just gonna be a failure, why even bother me now?
And then when I'm all excited about something,
this is gonna be awesome, everyone's gonna love it,
and like, oh my God, my listeners went from seven to 17
in just one week, that was the coolest feeling.
And the other motivation is just like,
when I don't care if I'm gonna be successful or not,
but I want someone to suffer for what they've done to me,
that's the other one that works very well.
What, is it a revenge?
Yeah, it's just sort of a revenge, you guys.
I don't think of it as a revenge,
I think of it as burning down the system
and building up something better,
but really when it comes down to it,
it's just I'm going to kill myself and destroy everything
so that this one asshole gets his.
I'm not going to play anymore,
which is why I don't have much motivation anymore.
This was more of a teens 20s meeting.
One hack I've tried is whenever I'm feeling low on motivation
or just feeling bad in general,
I have a pre-made list of all the things
that typically make me happy or make me motivated
or give me more energy.
And I just list them in descending order
from easiest, from most accessible to least accessible,
and I just work my way down that list.
And my results can sometimes be mixed,
but I have a couple success stories with that
where it has given me the motivation necessary
to continue working on whatever it was I was working on.
Nice, yeah, I don't have much to offer here,
otherwise I'd do more stuff, I guess.
The only thing that works for me is
like publicly committing to something,
so like making plans.
Sell them, break plans.
And so if someone's like, oh, we should get together,
I'll try and pin down a time,
because then I can't like put it off.
I mean, teaching is helping with your reputation
to really help.
Commitment and consistency, chapter two, right?
Or wait, no, what chapter was that of Sheldini's book?
In any case, commitment and consistency was one of the things
and it's something that you can use to like huxter people
or to huxter yourself when they're doing things.
Yeah, this is the book of influence.
Oh yeah, influence, science and practice.
It's mentioned in methods of rationality.
Did I tell you guys about how the military
seems to build people up
and make one a better life course?
If they need, yeah, I think for some predispositions
or I think you talked about once, yeah.
That a lot of people who join the military
are not from the greatest backgrounds,
you know, it's trying to escape from a shittier life.
Yeah, if shit's going for me, you don't want to go,
you look at it five in the morning
and being told when you can take a shit.
Yeah, yeah, but they don't have a lot of wins
under their belt and the military will like
give them specific jobs to do and tell them how to do it.
And after, you know, seeing themselves complete goals
and be successful months in a row,
it starts, you start to get over that helplessness
and start getting some more motivation to do things in life.
I don't know, it's weird.
I just wish it didn't come with the destruction
of countries and the murdering of people.
I really actually was interested in what was it,
the dragon army house,
the dragon army house in Berkeley
where there's an experimental sort of camp style household.
Like I would have actually really liked to participate
in that.
Did you read about the lessons learned afterwards?
Oh yeah, they pushed more down.
That was really good.
I was like, now that they know these things
would be a great way to start another dragon house, you know,
but apparently just don't want to go through
that whole thing again.
Well, I think Duncan, who organized it originally
said that he might do it again someday.
And the reason he wrote the postmortem
was mostly a bunch of myths to himself
or to other people who wanted to try it
as far as, I remember, I think he said that his main issue
was just choosing around with people to be part of the house.
It's one thing for like somebody to say,
oh yeah, I'll do a six month boot camp
and like commit to daily exercising together
and splitting up various chores
and working on various projects.
But then he gets somebody who just sits in their room
on their laptop.
He gets somebody who's doing all the chores
and then got mad because they were doing all the chores
and stopped doing all the chores.
It might be just easier to start a cult.
Isn't that what we're doing?
Wait, what?
Duncan blocked me on Facebook and said, what happened?
Oh, I saw that, did something about the screen
about dietary advice?
Just Duncan, the dragon army guy?
Yeah, at least I take that to be the same guy.
I don't know for sure.
Yeah, the ETA, to me, the military wasn't very helpful.
But I also think it wasn't the point.
I wasn't at the point, I thought, please.
Not going well.
Yeah, I was, when you were talking about the military
building people, I was thinking of other examples where
people I know went to the military and like,
it kind of made things worse for them.
I love the people who are surprised
that this is not a cult for them.
I have asked this aspiration of starting a rationalist group
home here in Kansas City at some point in the future.
And I'm not going to call it dragon army for sure.
I'm thinking more of the Sunshine Regiment.
I wouldn't say still that name.
Yeah.
We can always be chaos army.
Yeah.
I mean, honestly.
I enjoyed it.
Well, guys, I don't want to take up all of your time.
So I will go and let someone else jump on in.
It's been a pleasure talking to you guys.
Yeah, likewise.
You guys are awesome.
I think that's what I'm going to be on for a while.
Yeah.
Cool.
Oh, my gosh, I'm still hearing myself that cut.
Yeah, you guys can actually move their headsets every time
they're talking, because I don't know if you've ever
done this, where you hear yourself talking
in a second delay.
It's impossible to go through a sentence.
They've actually done experiments
where they drive people fucking crazy with it.
Yeah, totally.
Yeah.
Did they actually weaponize that for our control?
Yes.
I heard about that, too, which, yes, we did the job done.
That's so funny.
They just record people and play back a quarter second
afterwards and fuck everybody up.
That's hilarious.
Anyway, thanks so much, Alex.
If you prefer, we'll have to have you on for a full episode.
Talk about Dojo's, and that's part of the community.
I think that sounds fantastic.
Absolutely.
That'd be awesome.
Well, you guys have a wonderful day, and you keep being awesome.
Thanks.
Thank you so much.
You, too.
Bye, guys.
Bye-bye.
We got to take a new color.
Somebody, oh, yeah, got a YouTube mail.
Cool.
Anybody in the chat, would you like to have your voice broadcast
to literally dozens of people?
There's so many people typing.
Nope.
No.
Ooh, within a reason, we'd go for it.
We got one.
Wes.
OK.
All right, Wes, you're on next.
Let me find you, and add you in.
Maybe we'll get many more after that.
I thought there was going to be a whole bunch of people.
I was like, I don't know, I feel like maybe we
should have picked people out to be on here ahead of time.
Probably, but what kind of dogs does your dad have?
And then the thing I've got to go find you, Wes, on YouTube.
Yeah.
All right, Wes, can you hear us?
Hello, hello.
Can you hear me?
Oh, yeah, you are on the thingy.
What is it?
Is that a broadcast?
All right.
Hi, guys.
Long time listener, first time caller.
Nice to hear you.
I believe, Jess, you already know Wes personally, right?
I'm going to stand in line and give you some more water.
OK, cool.
Is Jess in, not Jess, is Wes in New Jersey?
Yes.
Awesome.
Was Jess and Wes ever confusing?
No.
Was it confusing because of the name Rhymes?
Yeah, I don't know.
I find someone who's named like Beanie Osh that might be me.
That was dumb.
I'm sorry, Wes, how are you?
We're just by comparison.
I'm good.
I'm here in New Jersey with my new baby and my wife
for here and my mother for the baby.
And we're also watching the Eagles probably lose this game.
OK, that football thing?
That is a football thing.
OK, cool.
Is that very saddening or do you not really care that much?
I mean, they're bad this year, so it's not that sad.
OK.
It would be more sad.
They won the Super Bowl like two years ago.
Oh, yeah.
OK.
I remember them being pretty bad most of my life.
Yeah, they've been bad a lot.
Cool.
I think they lost a major game on my 21st birthday.
And my parents took me out to a bar
because they were going to buy me my first drink.
And everybody was so sad.
Someone's yelling.
Sorry, bar.
People are just crying into their cups.
I hear cities can get bad after a major loss.
Just the overall mood of the cities go down
and you don't want to be a bar instead.
Yeah, I think it's city by city.
But Philly is definitely a football town.
Wes, please tell stories about, oh my gosh,
I think you're going to say, Wes,
tell stories about the Super Bowl.
I forget who was the Super Bowl, but there was one game
where they were greasing light poles
because people were climbing light poles.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah, that was the Super Bowl.
When they won the conference championship,
everyone climbed all the light poles.
So the Philadelphia Police Department
greased them all for the Super Bowl.
And well, but Philly, of course, being Philly,
we just took this as a challenge.
There were definitely people up on those light poles.
Cool.
I can see competitions to climb greased poles.
Yeah, there was, I remember a video of Wes playing
at Trumpet and leading a crowd of people singing the Eagles
song.
Yeah, I had two weeks between the championship
and the Super Bowl, so I used that
to learn the Eagles fight song on the trumpet.
Did the city clean all the grease off after or should
this light pole just be grimy?
It probably cleaned.
I think you know the answer to that.
The grease probably cleaned them.
They don't call it dirty Philly for nothing.
Isn't gritty?
For gritty, it's for Philly.
It's for gritty, it's for Philly.
The best mascot.
He really is.
So it really makes the Eagles mascot ashamed
because we've got gritty for the Flyers
and we've got the Philly Fanatic for the Phillies, which
are both great mascots.
And then the Eagles just have this dumb Eagle guy
and he's terrible.
Isn't it just a dude with an Eagle head?
Yeah, it's just like a football player with an Eagle head.
They got up 13, man.
Yeah, I know.
I really, I really want to help you.
Is that more or less on par?
Yeah.
All right, low functioning sociopaths left and right.
Yeah, he's so sad.
I only got through like most of season two, I think,
before they took it off Netflix.
It's on Hulu.
I know, but I'm not dating anyone who's got Hulu right now.
I can give you some Hulu.
All right, I'm dating Steve.
It's on BitTorrent.
Yeah, yeah, that's true.
Don't be a lumpy-mush.
Just probably commit to stealing it.
Man, I feel so bad about parting things.
Like, I use QB, which is a friend of ours, a Plex server.
And I don't know.
I don't feel as bad about that because that's
more like sharing a book between friends.
There's only like a dozen of us on there, right?
It's like he stole all the books.
Damn it, you're right.
I just befriended a thief.
Somebody just posted a gift of pretty, like, spinning around
and staring with its cold dead eyes,
and I just can't stop looking at it.
Nice.
Oh, there's no way to.
And see, I don't know why Slack and Discord both exist.
In Slack, you can minimize gifts that they already have.
Well, this one's going to just scroll off in a second here.
Torrenting is not sharing with the world.
So you have a brand new kid, which is like, what, three months now?
She is one month.
One month.
OK, time is real.
And yeah, she just came home.
She's looking at home for a week.
OK.
And you are going to be doing the whole unschooling thing.
Hopefully.
Awesome.
That's the plan for right now.
I'm a divorce attorney.
I work from home.
So the plan is just I'm going to be like the stay-at-home dad.
So hopefully that'll work out.
We won't need the free daycare aspect of school.
And if that's the case, my plan is
to leave it up to her whether she wants to go.
Yeah, that's reasonable.
I have a co-worker who does something.
They don't do unschooling, but they
have their daughter enrolled in some sort of program
where the kid picks whatever they want to learn.
Is it a free school?
I don't know.
I would think it would have to be because they, up until like five
months ago, were desperately poor.
Oh, no.
I don't mean like a free of God.
There's a certain kind of.
Who do I have to pick out of here?
David, that's your last gift.
You have been warned.
Oh, it's a dog.
Thank you, Ovaldiven.
You're saving us from the worst of the two orange monsters.
Oh, God.
Oh, man, whose pills is it?
A dog.
Whose pictures are your dog?
Yeah, everyone posts spam spam some pictures.
Anyway, so yeah, I'm not sure how that works.
The kids five, so they don't want to learn much yet.
But I'm wondering what that looked like in five or six years
where I see.
I don't think that's true.
I think five year olds want to learn the most.
Let me rephrase.
I don't know how they're going to get a like.
I'm assuming they have to have some sort of disciplined like
core education, but I haven't talked to them much about it.
Yeah, so if you want to homeschool,
there's a certain curriculum you have to cover,
but you could cover it in like two weeks.
It's not rigorous.
Once you're able to read and write, that's like the problem.
Yeah, and like the important things for a kid to know
are reading, writing, and doing math.
But there's so many ways to learn those.
I just want the most interesting thing.
I read them just a few days ago, I think.
The most interesting, not really studies,
pseudo randomized observational study, I guess,
of people who were delayed one year going to school.
And overall, the people who started school one year later
did better in life than those who started earlier.
They not only had better overall GPA when they graduated
and better life outcomes, they even had less jail time.
Was it you that I was talking to about this or what we hear
about this?
Because this was when the schools closed,
when they like when people were forcibly withdrawn
because they were resisting segregation, right?
Was that a desegregation?
I don't remember the details.
Yeah, so that I just remembered,
someone would be able to point me to where I just heard
about this, where, let's see, I guess in the 60s
when they desegregated schools, there were families
who had forced their kids not to go to school for a year
in protest, or maybe even schools who shut down.
And those people got the, sorry, distracted by the chat.
I love, hold on.
Oh my God.
This guy, Nathan Pyle, does these comics,
Little Aliens, and they're all my favorite.
Yeah, the chat is trying to destroy our live episode,
distracting us with gifts and dogs.
Yeah, oh, it's definitely working.
I think it was something along the lines of children
just are naturally, like play is how hunter-gatherers
evolved to learn the initial skills they need.
And with that being suppressed and forced into
more rigid learning stuff early in life,
it damages, I guess.
Yeah, school is like anti-play.
Yeah.
Like I hated school, and I loved learning.
I never hated school, but for me, the school was the play.
Like when I was, when I was in Chicago,
there was apparently a gifted talent program
that my mom got me into in, I was in kindergarten at the time,
but they had us doing like these,
we had one digit math problems, like eight plus four, right?
It was a 10 by 10 grid of them,
and we had five minutes to do all 100.
And I rarely got all 100 done, but when I did,
it was amazing.
And I just, it was, it was a game,
like learning was my player, right?
And like seeing how good I could do on those.
And then when I did get all 100 done,
how many of them I got right?
It was, so I think I was unique in that my games
was trying to seek the approval of my adults,
and the way I did that was by brainy stuff, you know?
Yeah, well, there's some good,
there's some good programs out there
that let kids learn at their own pace.
Like I did that when I was in third grade,
they had us do math to just gave us books.
And when you would finish one book,
you would start the other one.
And, you know, the kids all competed
to see who could finish them faster.
Yeah, you would start out with math,
or you started with addition,
and then when you finished addition,
they give you some traction book,
you finish that, you go to multiplication,
division, and then fractions.
And it was like, it was fun to see, you know,
how fast you could get through it.
But that was pretty aberrant in my education experience.
Most of it was like, here, learn this,
or just sit there and shut up and don't do anything.
Lorak asks, was the other hypothesis
that the older kids were favored
above their less developed peers?
And I don't think, I mean,
I believe that was taken into consideration,
but this is like after 20 years sort of thing
where everyone's gotten through high school already
and what the overall life outcomes were,
as opposed to just, you know,
is this kid one year more developed
than the other kid in the same grade?
It was like rates of being put in prison.
Yeah, anecdotally, I'm, my birthday's in September,
so I was, you know, almost a year old living
with many of my peers,
and I didn't do any better than any of them,
but that doesn't obviously count for anything.
Yeah, no, I don't, and I don't favor on schooling.
I'm also born a month later.
Because, I don't know, I'm kidding.
But yeah, I don't favor on schooling
because I think it creates better outcomes,
like in terms of anything measurable.
I think everyone's who's looked at it
has found that it's not,
it doesn't really make much of a difference.
The unschooled kids do fine,
but so do the kids that go to school.
You know, I just favor it
because that sounds like a better childhood to me.
And if it's not gonna,
if there's not really compelling evidence
that putting kids through this pretty miserable experience
really helps them out, then I don't wanna do it.
Yeah, totally agree.
Yeah, I did, I just liked most of school,
probably for the first, I don't know,
right up until high school.
So however many years that was of primary education.
And, I mean, I had nice parts,
but for the most part, I was unhappy there.
And I totally, this is kind of fun.
This comes up in the next,
We Want More episode that comes out tomorrow.
Like my co-host Brian wrote software in the 90s
for a prison that was in the Netherlands.
Is that where they just learned?
And that prison's name was high school.
Well, that's where it gets funny,
is they actually ended up transitioning
that software to managed schools.
And I thought that was relentlessly entertaining.
And he was like, oh, well, you know,
tracking people is important.
I'm like, yeah, but it's really funny
that prison software transitioned so smoothly
into high school.
Yeah, not surprising.
So I don't necessarily agree,
but I don't disagree either.
Cause the thing is, I think there's some things
that it's super important for children to be taught,
even if it has to be forced taught
in order for society to keep running.
And I don't mind if there's a little bit of suffering
to get that done.
But on the other hand, you know,
Wes's kid is just one kid
and I am more than happy for him to experiment with that kid.
And it turns out better, we can adopt it
because it works whatever it's one kid.
Well, I think the important things
that kids have to learn are math, reading and writing.
But I think that kids, you know,
most kids will learn those things without,
you know, I couldn't play the video games I play
without doing math and reading and writing.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
I just kids, kids learn best through play
and there's a lot of play that teaches those skills.
Ooh, the Bayesian says that he or she,
they is in high school right now
and learns more on breaks than during school.
That is not surprising.
Keeps into dogs sooner or later.
Yeah, the instruction said as many dogs as you want.
An amazing log in said anecdotally,
I've always needed school to find friends.
Might be something that can be better optimized for.
And April said that high school isn't ruining their mental
health or anything,
but they could be doing better things with their time.
And I completely agree.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Why would Kerr said asked if I could say again,
what I was doing with my kids' education,
which I don't actually remember if I said,
it's called unschooling.
It's basically you just, you don't do anything.
You keep the kid home from school
and let them do whatever they want.
And it's very self-directed learning.
And the idea is to have a lot of educational materials
around that they can use if they want to,
but you don't force them to do anything.
I really want to get West back on the podcast
and I've been looking five years
and hear how the unschooling thing is going.
Cause that would be super interesting.
Remind me, five years.
All right.
There's people who have gone through unschooling
and we could probably like been unschooled themselves.
Yeah. This is not a new thing.
People have done it.
I mean, it's, it's not a mainstream thing,
but it's definitely been done before.
And that's where I get the information from
that it doesn't seem like it has much of an effect
on anything.
I think the main outcome for me,
if I had to guess from like a foreign chair
or psychoanalyzing is that the main outcome
for the children involved would be like
how much do the parents care?
And if you care enough to like look into education
to unschool your kid or private school
or whatever it is you're doing,
the kids probably gonna turn out pretty good.
Yeah. Most of them.
Just like run with the flow and I don't know,
just do whatever, or, you know,
obviously the ones who don't care
and are detached that cause troubled kids.
But the ones who actually, like my, my sister,
let's see, my niece would be like a year and a half now.
And she called me a few months ago asking if she,
if I was aware of anything like huge judgments
involved with having her daughter go to a daycare
that she is worried that the kids just plop down
in front of the TV for six hours a day.
And she's like, I think that TV is bad for kids,
but you know, it's like literally half the price
of the one that I know doesn't do that
and times that by five years.
And I was like, yeah, that pays for a lot of therapy
if there is any damage involved.
But the other thing is that like my sister's concerned
enough to care about screen time for her kid,
which I think bodes well for the kid's outcome.
I also think most kids are not going to be happy
six hours for the TV, they're going to get up
and do other things.
Well, the kids like, at this time was like a year old,
I'm not sure how mobile she was, right?
How did a year old do the pay that much attention to the screen?
I have no idea.
Yeah, right, a year old.
But my thing was just like, the fact that you care
is put to a head and shoulders above,
not every parent, most parents care,
but like the fact that they're willing to look
into like research and beyond whatever Facebook stuff
most people do.
I don't know, I'm not a parent.
So I don't have the temperament for parenthood.
I'm way too neurotic.
I'd be so nervous among other things.
You'd have to ask her what the situation is,
but imagine there's other kids there
that the kid would just end up playing with.
Several, yeah.
So I guess I'm not really sure how it works.
I've never seen, I've only seen one daycare
and it was one that was called the unlicensed home daycare.
And it's kind of like a living room, your size,
they just put it like a doggie gate on either side.
My mom, I'm one of those actually.
Yeah, and it is, I'm sure there's worse places
bigger kids during the day, and better places.
I mean, like if you're, well, what am I trying to say?
Like, it seems like a pretty good situation.
Like you're socializing with other kids, right?
So to the extent that you can socialize,
I'm not sure if they're not talking yet,
whatever the counselor, but they're around them
and looking at the same things.
You learn a lot before you learn to talk.
I mean, like they need to just follow
the learning issues that they're interested in.
Yeah, it's pretty much all they're doing.
Yeah, it's the most plastic difference
will be in their lives.
I got it for a month.
But yeah.
There's like a whole separate conversation going on
in the chat that's really interesting too.
Yeah.
Oh, about boot camp?
I tried to divide my attention.
Is that, do you want to be our chat person?
No, okay, it's fine.
I'm reading through the chat, yeah.
Sure, I guess.
Yeah, but so the thing about unschooling
is that all the data that people have collected on it
is all survey data.
Does no one's done any longitudinal studies
or anything?
Oh, so there are self reports?
Yeah, so all the self reports are good.
I think it was like, I saw a survey of like 300 students
and only three of them said they had
a negative experience with it.
And those were from like either super religious families
or like one family that it was just totally checked out.
And like the, you know, 250 or 300 other people
had said it was great.
They learned plenty and felt no disadvantages in life.
A lot of unschooled kids end up going to college.
But typically they go to community college
around age 16 or so and then transfer after that.
I know I've heard of, I was reading a blog for a while
where the, I think it was called Raising Three Thinkers
where I think they were doing radical unschooling
and they would take their kids to college courses.
Like, when they were pretty young.
I got a question.
So I don't remember now who it was that said
that they went to school to meet other three friends,
three kids.
How did you guys meet other kids
and make friends when you were young?
I didn't have friends until I was in the 20s.
Like, oh, when I was like, I had like one friend at a time
I was really introverted when I was a kid.
And mostly I was like by myself though.
And I just read books.
Yeah, I tend to say I didn't, but I had friends.
It's paradoxically I met them all through other friends
which kind of has like a first mover problem.
I'm not sure who the first person was,
but I would connect with my friends
through like my friend or friend group already, but.
The first mover was obviously God
as per the ontological record.
Of course.
Yeah, I had a lot of bad role model friends.
Oh, that's how you make friends, God.
Yeah, of course.
I, yeah, that scene where her mind was on the train
and the morning that adults wouldn't just say
YouTube will be friends.
I think that's actually what happened to me.
You know, my parents did that.
They were like, just, we want you to get it like off
the computer and go over to the house costs.
Like it was like in a different neighborhood.
But like, what do you call it?
Like blocks, I guess?
Blocks?
Development?
They were like one development over it.
And there was a kid my age there.
My parents were like, you need the house
and like don't come back until you've like gone
over this kid's house and hung out with them.
It's just the most awkward, bad thing.
They knocked on the door and they're like,
do the hell are you?
And I was like, I'm from over there
and I'm your kid's age.
And apparently I got to hang out with your kid.
I know.
Yeah.
I mean, they were like, we were definitely
different types of people.
Like I think it was Morgan.
She was perfectly nice.
But like, I was like a little town boy
and I liked to climb trees and stuff.
And she was a girl, a girl.
And it was just a bit of nothing in common.
My parents, they always like, I don't know,
found a friend for me in church.
Cause you know, they'd go to the Jehovah's Witness church.
They call it King of Halls, the church basically.
And they'd meet another parent with a kid around my age.
And they're like, kid doesn't have any friends.
Your kid should have be friends with our kid.
And so like his parents would go to him.
My parents would go to me and they're like,
be friends with that person now.
And it surprisingly worked out for the most part.
I suspect that like with arranged marriages,
arranged friendships could work if the people actually
have like their kids' best interests in mind.
Like, okay, my kid is this type of kid.
They like to do these things.
Let's actually be mindful and search for like
somebody who seems compatible.
It didn't ever work for very long.
I like you, I only ever had like one friend at a time.
Really, it was a good friend.
And always after a year or two,
they would move or disappear or something would happen.
Spend a while friendless and then have one friend
and then they would move.
And it was kind of like that.
It was like the constant life of abandonment almost, right?
And he or military grads could do the same thing.
Yeah.
And the parents move every year or two.
No, a few people were military grads
and said that it was just really rough trying to,
I guess make new friends every year and uproot yourself.
Although some people did say that they've learned
how to make friends better and like how to do social skills
better by constantly having to do that.
So, yeah.
I never got through that.
I mean, I guess I eventually when I became an adult
got better at that.
But yeah, in high school,
the things I did was just find the nerdy kids.
It's so embarrassing now looking back on it.
This one time, I was like talking D&D
with a kid a year older than me.
I'm like, they didn't believe that I was a nerd
and that I was into D&D, right?
So they started quizzing me.
They're like, what's FACCO?
I'm like, to hit armor class zero.
And then, you know.
I said to the like, dude, I don't even know.
Yes, right.
And I went through that for like 15 minutes.
And I was so proud that like I passed the test
and I was loud in and everything.
But looking back on it, I'm like, oh my God.
I should have been like, fuck you.
I don't got to put anything to you.
No, that's the most nerd thing ever.
I was literally kind of shaking by the end of it.
Trenton, not let them see that I was shaking.
That's how nerds bond.
No, what, sorry?
I said, that's how nerds bond.
Yes.
Sometimes.
And now no one knows what FACCO is anymore
because they don't use that.
I know it's FACCO is just now.
To hit armor class zero.
Come on, guys.
Yeah, they, they faced that out with a third edition.
It's probably smart.
Yeah.
I made friends.
I just made friends with the kids in my neighborhood
because I grew up in a, in a rural town.
And there were only like five other kids within a mile.
Oh wow.
We just, that those were the kids I hung out with.
Yeah.
What did you say last choice?
Switching headsets.
Westland had a kids within,
five kids within a mile group in a very rural place.
So that's his forced friend group.
Yeah.
Now, thankfully, I met my, my, my long, my, uh,
lifetime best friend.
Uh, I met, he was in my neighborhood.
We just got along really great.
So that was awesome.
But yeah, we did not have a lot of choice.
That's weird because I don't know,
you know who your friend group is then.
And it's kind of like solid and steady.
Whereas in a city, there's just too many people
in a five mile radius.
And so people who tend to splinter and isolate,
we do get people who are completely left out
of social circles like you never would in a rural area
because everything, everyone within five miles
is your friend because there's only 10 of them.
Yeah.
And the culture there is different too.
Like you can't, if you tried to exclude anyone,
your parents would yell at you.
Cause it'd be like, no, you have to,
you can't just like not hang out with that person.
Yeah.
Or like you can't, you can't, you know, isolate them.
Which I guess.
I don't know, it seems like a lot of these structures
that we're talking about, there's gotta be person cons.
Yeah.
As far as I know, as far as.
But also you'd have to be like, friendships.
You'd probably have to be from an established family.
Like if it was a new immigrant family moving into town,
they probably wouldn't be forced into friendships
the same way that a kid of a family
that's been there for generations would.
I mean, the new families were, I don't know.
We didn't, we never really, it was, it was pretty white.
How was it?
What was that?
The new, new families, that, that's what happened to them.
Like my best friend moved when I was in,
right before first grade.
But we were pretty, it was a pretty white area.
So there were no immigrant families.
So I don't know what would happen there.
Yeah.
Where do you live now?
Philadelphia, that's right.
Jersey, right outside Philly.
Okay.
The rural area or like a suburb thing?
It's a suburb.
It's like a small town.
It's like a small town.
I was introduced to me to the book, Happy City.
Or was that your pick or was that?
Yeah, Happy City.
Yeah, that was really a good guide
about how to pick where to live.
I had some considerations from that book
when I was choosing more to move as well.
They talked about having a, like a downtown area.
It's really important for your mental health.
Having a anywhere.
Yeah, I think, I think their big recommendations
are walkability and nature.
Okay.
Yeah.
I'd see if I was to make a intentional
nationalist community, I would like something like that.
But the problem is that requires also a lot of land,
which is very expensive if you want to be near
major employment areas.
So you've got to go out to the suburbs
within everyone's two hours before they would work.
That's why you do the three thousand.
I've been looking at them.
They're just a house with five bedrooms
that I've got my own.
I don't think that that's quite in the cards just yet,
but I definitely want to make a three thousand.
Maybe next year.
Okay.
Do it.
Yeah, that would be awesome.
Just sit down and take that picture.
Lorke said that they grew up in a small town
and it was half immigrant, so it was very splinter.
Maybe you're sitting here and more about that at some point.
Why is Elon Musk laughing about a,
is that a drowned deer?
It looks like it's the bottom of a swedicle or something.
I don't know what that is.
Okay.
Please explain this picture.
Soderman is trying to get us to go to Texas
because they have cheap land there.
I am not going to Texas, Soderman.
I'm going to Austin, Illinois, and West Texas.
Nice try.
Although All Hail West Texas was a great album.
That's true.
That was a great album.
Yeah.
All right, guys.
So I'm going to check out
because I have childcare stuff to do
and I think my mother's getting ready to leave.
So, but I'll be listening for the rest of it.
All right, awesome.
Thanks, Liz.
All right.
I'm not going to come visit Jersey,
like probably in January.
I don't know.
You've been saying I'm going to visit next month
for like six months.
Yeah.
Just avoiding the parents.
I'm mostly avoiding the parents, but...
No.
Well, don't visit your parents.
Don't visit me.
Yeah.
All right, cool.
All right, I'll see you guys.
I'll adjust.
I'll see you soon.
And I'll talk to you guys on the Discord.
All right, later.
Nice talking to you too.
Thanks.
Bye.
Bye-bye.
I'm going to go to the most group house.
Interesting.
Cool.
Who?
You're the only thick.
Who goes on next?
Who wants to talk?
There's a bunch of people I'd like to talk to,
but Emmanuel said me next,
please, can we go on and put on Emmanuel then?
Yeah.
All right.
Emmanuel, you can come next.
If Averyl wants to talk at some point,
Averyl's active in the chat a lot
and will be fun to talk to.
Yeah.
I'm guessing if she feels like it.
It would be really fun to talk to.
A bunch of people that I see around all the time.
Right, I can't do anything
because I got to push the top down.
You can do the thing.
Stand by.
We are switching up people.
It's not an alphabetical order.
I'm literally touching it.
There we go.
And it is an alphabetical order?
It is?
Yeah.
Well, it wasn't.
Okay.
I'm an idiot.
That's true of him.
All right.
You got a server on mute as well.
All right, Emmanuel, you should be live.
Hello, Emmanuel.
Hey, how you guys doing?
Hi.
Can you hear me?
I can hear you.
Yes, I can hear you now.
I have to talk about my extended omatic again.
Have whatever you want.
I see, I see.
So, I'm Emmanuel, you can see by the way.
Discord name, I'm currently in Bristol, in the UK.
Oh!
I'm originally from Bermuda, like the triangle.
Awesome.
When did you move to the UK?
About nine years ago for university.
Okay, cool.
Do you prefer the UK or Bermuda?
Definitely Bermuda for the weather.
It's a bit small though.
So, I'm probably gonna be out in the UK
or the US somewhere for a while.
But what time is it there right now?
9, 9.20 PM, I just looked.
Okay, that's not sure.
9.20.
Okay, cool.
I did not intentionally pick something
that European people could listen in on,
but we've got it worked out.
Is it Monday over there or Sunday?
Sunday.
Sunday, okay.
This is a nice time for the call
because it's Sunday evening, fairly relaxed.
Cool.
I just wanted it late enough in the afternoon
that I could be awake and functional,
but not so late that it would go too long.
I probably made it here on time.
Yes.
I got back to my concert before,
unless I was gonna do that shit.
Oh, what concert did you go to?
Happy Park.
Happy Park.
Okay, okay.
Steampunk?
That was really great.
There was a lot of people there in the Steampunk outfits.
Sounds fantastic.
I felt so underdressed.
I need to...
Up your Steampunk game?
Anyway, we should talk to Emmanuel.
Yeah.
Stuff.
Emmanuel, do you have a topic you wanna talk about?
Yeah, I wanted to talk about something
that's not been bothering me about the rationalist community,
but communities in general,
and also partially the rationalist community.
And that is inefficiencies in information consumption.
And by that, I mean,
one of the things that bothers me about,
like, what's wrong in the Slate Sarcotics
and that sort of stuff is the amount of verbosity
that a lot of people have in their posts,
in their sharing information and knowledge.
And I have a lot of different sources of knowledge
that I like to read from and watch videos from,
and it's hard to allocate time towards the rationalist figure
as much as I'd like to.
You know.
Yeah.
There's, I'm sorry, go on.
Now go ahead.
I was gonna say there's a, I can't remember what it's called.
There's a newsletter.
If the rationalist and newsletter,
they kind of call it what things have been posted
and various like rationalist, like, you know,
unless you're on Slate Sarcotics on people's side blogs.
So that's one way to kind of stay caught up.
I've found that to be helpful,
but also I agree with you.
There's a, it's, I have like a bunch of these,
these lawyers that I just didn't even read
because I was too busy and I'm just like, oh my God,
there's like 40 like book length things this week.
So I don't know.
One of the things I really like about Scott's posts anyway,
Slate Sarcotics and a bunch of Eliezer's
original Sron post is that they have some extra words
to make it interesting and to draw me in
and to make it fun.
Like for me, getting the information just born style,
I can't do because all it is is data and facts.
And I need some Sky Alexander in there
with his sarcasm and his joking to keep me going
or, you know, Eliezer with his popular references.
But I think on the whole, they're much less verbose
than what I read in the rest of media.
Like just someone just linked on Facebook.
Apparently there's some kind of 37 year old mom
that pretended to be a 11 year old on,
what is it, put some new Tumblr, TikTok I think.
Snapchat maybe and yeah.
Anyways, and there was apparently some whole horrific thing.
And I read down like 400 words
and still hadn't gotten past the part
where she was like putting on clothes
and talking about her own life and stuff.
And I'm like, fuck this, I'm out.
At some point, you got to get to the point.
I don't care about your,
I know everybody needs their own personal life struggle
and this narrative to be woven into the news story.
I'm like, it's too much.
The worst is cooking when you're trying to find a recipe.
That's what I was going to say.
There's my grandmother's recipe for potatoes.
Yeah, I was first taught this recipe
when we lived in the Mediterranean
but I still remember the smell.
I'm just like, where's the recipe?
Yeah, scroll down 80%
till you find the bullet points at the numbered list.
Yeah, it's, I think that's a tough,
I don't have a lot of strong thoughts on that in the annual.
I think the hard part is like,
information dissemination will be tough,
like a weak contingent on groups
or at least correlate with group size, right?
If there's a lot of people,
then there's a lot of information going around
and getting a chat with buddies pretty hard.
If your group is six people,
it's not hard to keep everyone fully in the loop,
like a text, you know, group text chat or something, right?
Well, at the same time,
I know you guys have mentioned this before,
that if Elias is writing,
it's not an example of writing,
the amount of like insights to work is ridiculously high.
And so it's not necessarily verbose
in the sense that they're just waffling an ad
and all this extra stuff to make it a bit more interesting
and adding some carousel cousin,
which makes it less dry per stay.
But it's more about,
like there's just a lot of content.
Yeah, so like some of the posts
I've read on LessWrong recently,
or like I say recently, like over the past couple of months,
I've gotten really good insights out of,
but at the same time,
I only read like one post every other month
because it's just, it didn't read any one post.
It just takes such a time commitment.
And it's sort of hard.
I agree.
BaseTheirImponentPost says basically the same thing,
that most LessWrongers are cute for both.
And it's, writing these posts is a skill.
It's something that takes a lot of practice to get right
or maybe inherent to natural genius, I don't know,
but I assume it's a lot of practice.
And it's just, it's not a skill most people have.
So their posts usually tend to be too high
of a word count to information ratio.
April said, I have an idea about writing something
that's sort of halfway between rationality
of written sequences,
which I was going to suggest something like that too,
or say that I wish something like that existed.
Like somebody, it would be great
if there was somebody or like a group of people
who are really good at picking out the like,
best quality essays about a variety of topics
and then summarizing them.
I haven't heard of that.
Go ahead.
We need more like, I really love rationality of Bridge
because I still haven't finished all the sequences.
I've only done about half of them, if even that,
after like my, how long have I been part of?
I think I came across a few more in 2011.
So that's about when I got into the last strong community
in the rationalist community,
and I still haven't finished,
even as much as I'd like to and would have the desire to.
But I came across rationality of Bridge
and that suddenly sped up
how much I was going through the actual posts themselves,
and not even just the Bridge versions,
because I can see the Bridge version,
I say, oh, this post is useful.
Can you read my email in your phone to discord?
I tried to do some science,
I forgot that I was trying to do this.
Stephen's just having a technical issue.
Well, that's not what we're gonna...
I, you know, I hadn't even heard of Hammer Time,
which now apparently I'm regretting
because it sounds like it's really good.
But one of the reasons was because, like you say,
the posts are, they can be a lot to read,
and it sometimes doesn't feel like it's quite worth it
when I have other things competing for my time.
But I mean, like, I'm glad I read about the Dragon Army stuff.
That was really interesting.
It wasn't quite as tight as like, you know,
the people who've been doing this for years,
but it was still good.
So I try to get on less wrong every now and then.
Yeah, another one of my main concerns with this
is that we're trying to raise a soundly borderline,
as you say, so get more people into the rationalist community
and reading about these ideas
and staying a part of the community.
But if I'm someone who's like really believes
in the community and really gets a great value
out of the things I read and the people I encounter,
it's still hard for me to come in and read specific things,
post that people say,
oh, this is a really good post you should read.
And I'm like, yes, I will get on that.
And then I get on it like a year later.
Yeah.
How do you expect people to get into this?
You don't even like reading as much as I do.
I'd probably say I'm in the minority in terms of people
who actually like reading that sort of stuff
and still find it high, like a challenge.
Yeah, I don't know, I read pretty fast.
And I have to read a lot for my job.
I'd really like to, I'd actually be down to collaborate
with a group of people if anyone's interested
in trying to launch a certain project like that.
Yeah, I'd be happy to contribute
to something like that as well.
That's honestly, that's part of my vision
for why the podcast exists
because there is so much information out there
and it's hard to get through it all.
And I like the podcast is just a way
of putting some of these things out there in an audio format,
which hopefully is also entertaining.
It was so useful for me, honestly.
You had not just recorded methods of rationality,
but a bunch of other rap thick and some sequences
and I was able to listen to a lot of that
while doing other things, like multitasking.
Like honestly, if I could just read all day,
like that would be great, but it's hard to get time sometimes.
And audio books are one way that you can kind of read
something while doing something else.
It's really weird.
I didn't do audio books really for a long time,
aside from what I could get for podcasts,
but recently I got an audible subscription
because I was starting to fall behind with my book club,
that sci-fi science book club that meets twice a month.
And like I recently, for the first time,
was reading a book and listening to it just interspersed
because it'll sync up to whatever page you're on.
Oh yeah, I like that feature.
Yeah, it's really cool, but I noticed
that how I experienced the story reading is different.
It's very different actually.
Yeah, and I don't, I prefer the reading experience.
It feels much more like I'm in the world
and I just, I feel like I'm part of the story more,
but I just don't have the time to read everything.
Yeah, I don't prefer one over the other.
I think that they're both different.
I'm trying to think of the way they're going to explain it.
I think I'm a bit different from most people in that.
I actually, I find it easier to listen to audio
and like generate the scene and be immersed in it
when I'm listening, because for some reason,
it requires more of my mental brain power
to like convert words through looking at them on a page
versus just listening to someone speak.
Listening to someone speak just frees up my brain
so much more to just imagine things.
And especially I just close my eyes as well,
which makes it a bit easier.
Yeah, I don't think that's unusual in manual.
I think a lot of people experience that.
So much so, I actually, sorry,
I actually, one of the reasons I got into HP more so much
is because my friend recommended it to me.
I got up to Alex.
I got up to Alex.
I'm hearing a bit of that echo.
Whoa, whoa, whoa.
I think it goes on your end.
Okay, you didn't touch anything, you didn't touch anything.
Oh, I think, I think it's something
from what the recent clinical case was.
I needed it.
I needed it.
There we go.
What was the thing?
I lost my trigger though.
You're talking about listening to audio and visualizing.
Oh yes, so yeah, I want to thank you specifically
because I was putting off reading HP more
and I probably wasn't ever going to get around to it.
You're going to get by.
I noticed that there was an audio version of it.
And then I just finished the whole of HP more
as much as I could until I caught up
and then just listened to every episode.
People in the chat are saying that the audio is messed up.
Is it still bad?
It's fine for me now.
Okay.
It's okay, yeah.
I think that was a crazy echo thing.
Yeah.
Yeah, my smart, I need to remove my headsets.
Just you're right.
This is happening.
I'll switch back in.
No, I don't mind at all.
Yeah, my experience, like I have a hard time
sitting down and reading stuff and not getting distracted
or even just kind of translating what my eyes
are glazing across to like processing my brain.
That said, listening to stuff is easy to get distracted too.
So I find my optimal way, which unfortunately
is like the least time efficient is to force myself
to read something and then listen to it the next time.
Then I'm able to really retain stuff,
but I haven't been able to almost really retain
fully audio stuff before.
I think it really depends too on the quality.
Like a good quality audio book is like watching a movie
basically, you know, to just painting the pictures yourself.
But I struggle to like listen to essays.
That said, I guess it just depends.
What really sucks is the text to speech,
like trying to do that.
Oh, yeah.
But anything that people have read out loud,
I think I do just more or less fine with.
I really can't wait until, I think it was good,
it was experimenting with the new text to speech program
that sounds really good.
It sounds like a human talking.
And yeah, Chloe is saying it too.
Can't wait for that human like text to speech.
I'm not going to have AI models.
Sorry.
Now that I'm not doing.
Oh, go ahead, go ahead.
Sorry.
Give me a little bit of delay.
They even have neural network models right now
that can take like five seconds of your voice
and replicate your voice fairly accurately.
So it's pretty much hard to tell the difference just
from like a five second clip of you speaking.
Oh man, I want to be able to.
Well, send you guys a link to that too afterwards.
Please send a link.
That sounds like something.
I love playing that kind of thing.
Because I actually work in AI and I don't do that.
He said it worked like, was it the past tense
or do you currently work in AI?
I'll undo my PhD at the moment.
Ah, OK.
What is the subject?
I remember seeing a news story about that thing
where you could record like those back when I heard it.
This was like four or five years ago.
It took a lot of hours of audio in order
to get someone's voice perfectly.
The fact that they can do it now with five seconds is amazing.
It's pretty disinteresting.
They can even replicate, like you can say something
and then they transfer it on to a video of a politician,
for example.
So you could have a, you say something
and it gets transferred into Trump's voice
with Trump saying something and it actually looks really
natural to the human eye.
Yeah, he's not that far from being able to claim
that all the shit that he said was all fake.
Basically.
Well, I thought you were going to say he's not that far
from being incomprehensible anyway.
Well, no, I mean, people point to things like,
hey, here you are on video saying this.
Oh, that's fake news.
That's what I was going to get at.
In two or three years.
Yeah, people have been able to say, oh, that is fake news.
But not to be all doom and gloom.
There are ways of detecting if things have been edited
like that, just like this is the REM models
that can create that sort of thing.
There's AI models that can detect
if AI models have created it.
So it's not totally.
The downside is there's a layer between like the person
who sees the video clip or whatever
and then someone having to like go through the analysis.
So like, if you're just getting your stuff from the news,
you know, just take their word for it
that it was auto generated or not.
And people are able to lie about that.
Let's say that all shakes out.
But yeah, at least it will be possible
for intelligent people to figure out
if it was real or not.
So I backtracked in just a little bit.
I had my Luddite moment a few years ago
when I was still doing the audio fiction.
And, you know, people were talking about the whole,
I wish there was a Texas Beach sort of robot thing.
I was like, no, this is the one thing in the world
that makes me special.
Don't replace me with a machine, damn it.
Honestly, I felt that way when they started coming up
with art, art thoughts.
Mm-hmm.
Like they have,
Now I won't be special to anyone.
You're special to me.
Oh, thank you.
I don't know.
I actually like, I feel like robots being able to do stuff
doesn't mean that humans doing stuff is less valuable.
As long as, you know, maybe the robot has good ideas
for art, but like I could also have good ideas for art.
No, not only that.
I was just gonna come to the world.
Yeah, ultimately, I know it's a good thing for the world.
Like it's a better world now that we have photography.
It's a friendly idea.
Well, yes, okay.
But technological progress, good.
Even if I personally, yeah.
Quasas, don't worry any more.
When the robot voice era comes,
we'll use your voice to read everything we,
everything we want.
Cool.
All right.
I'm gonna use your voice to guess.
So let's, I will say.
Where you go.
I was curious to know what your PhD is in.
Oh, my PhD.
It's in helping to explain artificial intelligence models
like deep networks by creating visualizations.
So for a lay person, for example,
one of the data sets I work with is student water usage
in a campus.
And I trained a neural network model
to sort of predict what's gonna happen
or what's changed over time.
But the problem is the people that normally work with
water data, the statisticians,
the people in the water data company,
they don't understand how these models work.
Cause they're just a whole bunch of neural network nodes
doing some linear algebra and coming out with an answer.
So I create visualizations which are how people like that
who don't necessarily know about machine learning
to sort of understand is the machine learning model,
does the machine learning model think something is wrong?
Is there a water leak?
Do they think students are having bad behavior
without having to explain machine learning to them?
Basically.
That sounds like a super valuable thing.
People are really gonna need people to help them interface
with our new robot overlords.
Definitely.
Indeed.
Yes.
Just security for myself.
It's ready, because I'm desperately curious about it too.
Yeah.
All right, well, thank you.
Thank you for joining me.
I'll send you guys the link
for the AI voice integration thing.
That's awesome.
I'm not joining them.
But yeah, that would be fantastic.
Thank you.
Once again, thanks to Indiana Ash
for getting me into this community.
It's made my life a lot better.
Awesome.
Thanks, I'm so glad to hear it.
Thank you, Daniel.
Appreciate talking to you.
See you.
All right, who's next?
And we gotta put Daniel back on server
so we don't get that echoing thing.
All right, so do we have someone else
who would like to come speak with us about something?
Or did you have something, Steve?
It doesn't matter if you have anything interesting
to say, just like...
Well, I'll tell you what.
You guys go between yourselves for a second,
because there was one quick topic,
or we've got like four,
but I'll try and do one at a time and reject them.
Let's see, the shortest one...
Oh, these were the questions
that people sent in for us to answer.
Yeah.
People are voting for April.
Well, don't feel pressured.
Don't let people push you into it,
so you do whatever you want.
Let's see, in the meantime,
I've got like five questions here
that people either wrote in,
that have a mean to get around it,
or other things.
So the quickest one, Emilio Alvarez,
it's also supporters, they get dibs.
I want to discuss the anthropic principle.
And when I asked for clarification, I got this.
Let's see.
So I was just about to ask people about it.
HPBase says,
shit rationalists say part two would be awesome.
Yeah, so basically,
I guess I can summarize really quick
my understanding of the anthropic principle.
And then I had like this weird sub-thought on that,
that I've been throwing around the last few years,
and forgot about,
and didn't remember again till this question.
So I think the anthropic principle is just basically,
how would you summarize it?
We're here because we're here having this conversation.
We couldn't be if we weren't.
Like that sounds like a circular reasoning,
but I remember as a kid being like,
really young and wondering like,
why we were on this part of the universe,
not another part of the universe,
or like, why are,
why the earth was where it was in relation to the sun,
not somewhere else.
But the simple answer is,
is like, if it were somewhere else,
like closer to the sun,
it wouldn't be up.
I wouldn't be having this loss on that earth.
The weird,
and there's actually a name for this,
because I know I came across it at some point
in the last 10 years,
but I can't remember what it was called.
Where,
anthropically,
I'm living the timeline where I've never been killed.
And I've almost been killed several times,
like car accidents,
or whatever,
spawning misadventures.
And there's a name for this
that I'm not sure what it is.
The closest I've heard is quantum immortality.
I think that's not the same thing.
It's related.
No, but that actually might have been
what I came across then.
Because currently I'm living the timeline
where I've never died.
And if there's a timeline where I don't die,
I think I might be in that timeline.
Does that make sense?
Well, I mean, you're obviously in that timeline
because you're not dead.
Yet, but, right, so like,
Oh, one where you never die at all.
Yeah.
So that's like a tricky part.
If we hit left-wing technology,
I think all people want to hit it.
Right?
I don't think that means,
although when I say that,
it doesn't seem to follow.
But anyway, you guys take your jump
on anthropic principle
for our writing question.
Or does anyone want to talk about
the anthropic principle live on air
or on the cyber air?
When did cyber stop being a word?
That was such a fun word.
I'm going to cyber spice, man.
Would Trump really did?
No.
What would he do?
He calls the internet the cyber.
I remember what it was called cyber sex.
And I was like, this is just going to be amazing.
I could have sex with a cyborg.
No, it's just chatting and masturbating.
I mean, I think that kind of exists
with the technologies, not quite there yet.
So you could have sex with one really,
like disconcerting doll.
I have a fun proposition here.
Why don't we put the ITA and April on at the same time?
Why is there?
Oh, because they're fighting against to go first.
Ah, OK.
But if there's feedback, we'll meet one of you.
So we are not fighting.
No, who's on second?
Let's see.
Got to add a role because reasons.
I thought when I made that role,
I thought that it would automatically
on server use anyone who's given the role.
That's yeah.
The lesson has been learned.
Oh, hey, I heard that.
I heard somebody.
Hi, this is me.
Hey, April, what's up?
I just sitting here for the last hour or 45 minutes
listening to people talk.
So are we as boring as I fear we are?
I mean, I haven't been fully engaged the entire time,
but you have boring.
No, I have like the long pause.
It's like, yes.
I spent I spent.
No, you're not boring.
I just spent a lot of it reading Hammer Time.
So, OK, oh, shit.
We're still on live YouTube.
I forgot about that.
And we are not synced up to what is going on right now.
It's really.
How late is this?
It's made to late.
Three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10.
It's at least 10 seconds delayed, man.
This is crazy.
Oh, there we go.
Like 50 seconds.
Yeah, well, that seems pointless.
I can cancel the YouTube thing if you guys want.
But anyway, it's cool.
Oh, yeah, stop looking at the YouTube
to delay a superness.
Sorry about that.
Oh, the day.
Today, are you on here as well?
They ought to be.
Did I not?
Successfully, I don't think you unmuted.
Oh, did we lose people?
No, you're you should be good.
They might have it muted on their end.
Yeah, you've muted yourself.
OK.
Yep, because the server is not muted.
I guess it is just waiting for April
to be done with the April talking.
I thought we were both going to go at once.
No, apparently, you got to go first.
Congratulations.
Oh, boy.
Hi, I thought it was red.
So that means I'm silent.
Sorry, I didn't understand the way that this code works.
Oh, that's OK.
How do you know?
This whole last two hours has been us
not knowing that this code works.
Don't sweat it.
By the way, it's a tie for the actor.
It's a tie.
OK.
Yeah.
OK.
Oh, the competition was a tie?
No, the name is pronounced.
Their handle.
What is the start from?
Dang, my pundit land.
It's a name.
It's literally the name.
Oh, OK.
Cool.
Well, welcome aboard.
How long have you guys been listening?
Yeah.
A year?
Oh, no.
I haven't kept track.
Yeah.
OK.
Indeed.
Same here.
The anthropic principle or what?
Or what have you guys been talking about?
I mean, I am not writing, what, is it a PhD paper
or something?
Yeah.
Just a paper, a paper in general,
on the anthropic principle.
So.
Oh, at this moment, you are?
No, I am.
Oh, OK.
No, I am using that.
That was the context, yeah.
All right.
I mean, it's not specifically.
The anthropic principle is a part of it.
It's about the cosmological constant, which
is sort of the real proof we currently
have that the anthropic principle is something
that's well accepted.
So the cosmological constant is this thing that I'm saying.
Oh, sorry.
Can you hear me?
Yes.
OK.
Sorry.
So the cosmological constant is this thing
that controls the expansion of the universe.
And it's a lot smaller than what physicists expect.
And about 120 orders of magnitude small.
So that's really, really a lot.
And the first prediction we had of it before we measured it
was because, OK, if it was so big,
no one would be here to measure it.
And that is currently the only real reason
we have why it's so small.
There's no other accepted solution
to why the cosmological constant is so small.
And the big question is, OK, but how do you really
measure whether it's possible to live with it and so on?
Because if a Boltzmann brain, which is basically
a brain that exists for one second,
thinks that I think therefore I am,
would that be, if that's a very probable event that
happened in the history, that means that maybe we are
that Boltzmann brain that is right now thinking
and is about to die in a few seconds,
just a quantum fluctuation in the empty universe.
And that would really suck.
And you wouldn't know, right?
Because, yeah, I mean, because creating just a few neurons
that are existing and then stopping to exist
is not that hard.
But then, of course, there's a question of,
if you have long enough time period, yeah.
With the cosmological constant thing,
that I mean, the only way I can accept
that sort of anthropic principle is to also accept
that basically all possible universes
exist in the sort of tech market universe
sense that all realities, well, yeah,
if you want to take the brain that way out.
But the tech market and universe idea
where all universes are just expressions
of mathematical equations and the only ones with observers
are the ones that have the right parameters
for a type of observers, which is neat.
But I also hate infinite multiverses.
Yeah, I was wondering when you were going to get to your hatred
of multiverses.
I do.
That's just a personal thing, but.
Yeah, that's a very extreme theory for what
we call the landscape here, right?
That is a theory, but a more reasonable theory
of the landscape just gives you sort of a bunch of universes
with different cosmological constants
and not an infinite amount.
And the thing that I am working on,
the real, what my actual paper is about,
is sort of a way to have that without an infinite amount
of universes, like to have a finite amount of universes
that are of finite size and still have all the guys
with the large cosmological constant
destroy themselves fairly quickly.
Because I agree, if you have an infinite amount of universes
exist for an infinite time, then statistics
sort of become really meaningless, in a sense.
It's very hard to really think about these things.
It's called a measure problem, by the way.
Yeah, so you are working on a way
to show that maybe there doesn't have to be infinite universes?
Yeah, we're working on.
So not only are there not an infinite universes,
but they are also not living for infinitely long times.
And yeah, and the ones with a large cosmological constant
are going to die very quickly.
And that's why ours is sort of long-lived.
Sorry, you just talked about it.
And it's really what we are publishing in the next few days.
So it really.
Oh, sweet.
Well, if you send us the link, probably an email,
because I'm sure it'll get lost in the Discord,
if you put it on the Discord.
Then we can include it when we put this episode on the website,
because this thing is going up on Wednesday,
I guess, with minimal editing,
so everyone can get the awful experience.
We'll cut out all via the Discord technical issues
at the beginning.
OK, when I get it, I will find a way
to send it to the masses, to the good people of the podcast.
Fantastic.
Where are you doing this right now?
Is that what university?
All right.
Tel Aviv University.
Oh, cool.
I don't know much about it, but I've heard that it's a good one.
Yeah, it's very nice.
So you live in Tel Aviv right now, right?
Well, very near Tel Aviv.
What is the situation like down there?
Because I recently, I guess in the last episode,
talked about wide shift.
And in wide shift, he mentions that Jerusalem
seems to be falling under the sway of ultra-Orthodox,
right-wing Judaism.
Are you having seen any of that sort of thing?
Nothing.
Well, in Tel Aviv, there's actually now been a very good sign
very recently.
There's a big issue with, what do you call it,
public transportation, where it's illegal to have
public transportation on Saturdays because of the Jewish
whatever.
And right now, they just started to have public transportation
in central Israel.
So that's actually a very good sign.
However, you're right that there are bad signs
in other places.
Like Tel Aviv is sort of a good place to be in,
but other places, not so much right now.
We have a lot of right-wing protests and so on.
You know, recently, we had the worst periods to be in Israel,
I think.
Like, this is sort of mild.
So I don't feel that bad about it.
But yeah, you're right.
There are problems.
OK.
Well, I hope you keep the rationalist front strong
over there.
Right.
Yeah, I might have missed it.
By the way, April, yeah.
There's only two right.
You can talk.
I mean.
So what is the doomsday argument?
The doomsday argument.
I don't remember exactly how it goes,
but I believe it's essentially, if you sample randomly
from some amount of a set, you're
going to probably get something somewhere in the middle.
And therefore, since we are sampled randomly
from all humans, we're probably in the middle,
chronologically, of the human length of the human race
will survive waited for a number of people alive.
Yeah.
So the world is probably ending soon.
Right.
Because the number of people alive now
is just absolutely massive compared to all of our history
up to now.
And what I was saying in chat is that this is probably
a good argument, but I think all the other evidence
is outweighs it.
Yeah, and also, I don't know, if you
take the entire possible future history of humanity,
where there could be millions of us spread among the stars,
we're still in the way, way, early tail end of the population,
which I guess is statistically very unlikely.
Right.
I don't know if that's part of it.
But someone's got to be in the front, right?
Someone's got to be in the front.
But what, sorry?
That's only assuming you're sorry.
OK, I'll guess.
I think the theorem say argument is like some evidence
say that there won't be just trillions and millions.
Impending dog attack.
You just got my mic.
Oh my god, it's a dog.
Are they dead?
Like they can still talk?
Because it sounds like they disappeared.
Yay.
We took over the base in conspiracy.
