Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Bronsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, oh my god Stephen
Zuber, you sound so different, I'm just kidding, Stephen's in Cancun with his wife, so it's
just us, okay, but for people who are first-time listeners and may not know who you actually
are, did you already say you're just Dickie? Oh I didn't, this is just Dickie, I'm just
Dickie, yay welcome, I think I am anyway, oh that's true, you don't remember your birth,
someone could have just been telling you you're just Dickie this whole time, yeah, everyone
can be on on the conspiracy, right, that's what the Bayesian Conspiracy is actually named after,
oh no, it's you guys, yep, this is silly, so what are we talking about today? We are talking about
this article at Pladium Magazine written by, oh crap I forgot to get the name, Natalia Deshaun,
Natalia Deshaun, excellent, it is an article that at the less strong meetup I was talking with
friend of the show Matt Freeman who also has his own podcast which we will plug right now,
it is We've Got Ward and the Doofcast. Yeah, the Doof Media, so if you go to doofmedia.com you
can find all the stuff he works on and his other co-hosts, they have some great podcasts,
Tyler recommended, yeah, but we were just talking about you know elites in America and he recommended
this article said it's a really cool, I said okay I'll read it and then I read it and I was like
this is really cool, we should do an episode about it, so now that is what we are doing,
and the name of the article is the real problem at Yale is not free speech.
And it's by Natalia Deshaun on palladiummag.com. Yes, and I believe according to Matt Natalia Deshaun
was back in the day Nyan Cat over at less strong. Oh yeah, so old time contributor.
Before we got into that though I wanted to quickly mention this idea that I recently ran across which
helped put things a little bit into perspective. It gave me some background to go on and I'm just
sharing this background now. So I read Context Machine's Tumblr now and then and Context Machine
had this awesome post on Bruce Wayne Republicans. Okay wait, who's Context Machine? Context Machine?
Yeah, spelled with a K. I mean what do they post about? What's their thing? Oh, their thing is
basically posting about 90s culture. Okay. Yeah, and since you know I also grew up in the 90s,
I'm like oh yeah this is fun, so I enjoy reading that. And occasionally you know making interesting
snarky parallels to the modern day. I'm like cool, this is right up my alley. Sounds neat,
you should link to it. Okay, I will do that, and people who didn't live in that era weren't growing
up around that time probably won't be as interested, but maybe they will be. I think a lot of us
in this community probably grew up in the 90s too. That's true, and also he has a thing for
Taylor Swift. Is that the big singer? That's a big singer. Okay, then I got the name right,
like red lipstick blonde hair. That describes like mini pop stars. That's a good point, I'm sorry.
But yeah, also a fair bit of Taylor Swift stuff. But anyways, had this post about Bruce Wayne
Republicans, where he was saying that most people nowadays, and this included me, think of Republicans
as basically kind of evil environment destroying rich people who are racist and want to keep down
the pores. And he said that there used to be a concept of Republicans, which probably a
of specifically upper class Republicans, which a lot of Republicans still probably hold to,
being the Bruce Wayne Republican is what he termed it. Okay, what does that mean?
Bruce Wayne is the alter ego of Batman, as you probably know. Okay, and Bruce Wayne is also very
rich. But Bruce Wayne and his parents didn't, well, Bruce Wayne less so since he uses his money to
punch people, but his parents specifically used their money to help make Gotham better. They
found they felt they had a responsibility and they were, you know, keeping up a civilized
demeanor and always had proper manners. And they would spend money on helping to uplift the city
and fund programs for the poor and those sorts of things. They were yes, specifically elite and
rich. And they did, I don't want to use the term exploit the labor of the poor, because
they were trading money for labor. Yeah, exactly. They were the what a lot of people think of as
evil capitalists, except without the evil parts so much, they were they were like billionaire
philanthropists. Yeah. And and he said that's basically how a lot of people who vote for Republicans
and who are anti tax tax and that sort of thing, view them that way, that they're not these evil
people like in the Marxist class conflict, taking advantage of the proletariat, they are
trying to carry society forward in ways that they have the ability to and other people don't. So
anyways, that that was basically it. It was a short little thing, but it helped me think of
those sorts of people as not evil, which is always a good thing, I guess. Yeah.
I know a lot of Republicans that I like. And I don't agree with a lot of stuff that the Republican
party likes, but I don't hate all of it. And also, you know, the whole two party system,
I think is kind of screwed up for both sides. I do feel a little weird about the Bruce Wayne
Republican idea, because it's like, have you met rich people? I have not made rich people.
You haven't. Okay. Not that rich. I've met a few different kinds of rich people. And there are
billionaire philanthropists. And I think that they are in the minority, or except to the extent that
they're donating to receive tax cuts, or tax kickbacks, or to promote whatever their company
is, make it look better. And I can, I have no idea if they're the minority or majority or what.
Yeah, I don't actually know. My impression is that they're the minority, but I don't have
numbers on that. That would be interesting to look into. And I do have a lot of respect,
though, for the ones who are doing good stuff. I think there's this like Slate Star Codex post
that was against, against billionaire philanthropy or something like that. And I
agreed with a lot of the points from that too. I guess I needed that sort of background because
I came from a very much class warfare kind of background where I viewed all rich as evil and
the enemy. And it was just nice to have other perspective because this post that we're going
to be talking about is specifically about the elite and the rich and why they are important and why
things are a problem right now. And I mean, things are always a problem in society somewhere.
There's never a time where we don't have problems, but why there is this particular
problem that this article is talking about. Yep. Cool. The article starts out saying that the
campus free speech debate is just a side effect of the real problem, such as also as are the debates
about diversity and inclusion, and that the real problem is a lot deeper than this so-called free
speech debate that we're having. And I don't know if we need to touch on that. Probably everyone's
already aware of the culture wars and the free speech debates. I'm going to assume that everybody
is pretty familiar with the culture wars. I guess the TLGR version, if anyone isn't, it's the
pro-diversity, anti-sexism, social justice side of things versus people that are traditionalist
or against these things for various reasons. Yeah. And the various ways these
battles are happening on college campuses and throughout society. Yeah. I kind of want to bring
up the story that opens the article, because I think this summarizes kind of the next point that
you were about to make about what's this article about, what's this problem. Sure, do it. So this
starts out with a personal story. Natalia starts the story about Marcus, a fellow Yale student who
dressed and behaved like a poor writer. And one day she sees that he looks starved and he's sitting
there chain smoking cigarettes and she offers to buy him a sandwich. And he says, you know I'm
rich, right? It turns out he's super duper rich. He only acts poor because he likes the aesthetic.
Yeah. She pointed out that she was about to buy a sandwich with what little money she had left for
this guy who could buy and sell her entire family multiple times over. Yeah.
With his trust fund, not even with the rest of his family's money. It was his trust fund.
And she says that in terms of Yale, I was in the bottom 2%.
Yeah. That approximately 2% of students hail from the lowest income quintile,
while 69% come from the top 20%. And she also mentions that basically all of those
bottom quintile students are moved to the top quintile after graduating Yale.
That going to Yale is the fastest way to join the upper class.
Which is interesting. She didn't really go into why more people don't do it, did she?
Why what? Why more people don't do it.
Don't go to Yale? Yeah. I mean.
Yale only has a few slots. I guess that's it.
And they got to take most of them from the elite rich classes.
She did point out that Yale costs 50,000 a year. But if your family makes under 60,000 a year and
you're one of the very gifted and very lucky people to get in, it's free. So or basically
free. So it's actually cheaper than community college if you're poor and you can get in.
And if you can get in, yeah. Yeah.
I guess that's the hard part. Yeah.
Yeah. So she says the big universities like Yale can't stay out of the culture wars news.
Left versus right. Political correctness versus free speech.
Empathy and inclusion versus economic realities.
Students for fighting social and racial justice against morally bankrupt faculty and administrators.
But she says after attending Yale for some of the larger scandals in recent years,
these dichotomies ring hollow.
Okay. And yeah, this is her explanation of why the rest of this podcast and the rest of this article.
She did mention in the when you were talking about the the rich people pretending to be poor,
that basically everyone on campus was like that.
Yeah.
To the point that it was, you know, she wouldn't have known any of them were rich,
aside from the fact that there's some tells that, you know, pretending to be poor is not
a 100% accuracy thing.
Yeah. Well, she says while she was attending Yale that she realized that the others that
were in the bottom 2% would complain really vocally about how broke they were all the time.
Want to go out for brunch? Oh, I can. I'm so broke.
Wow. You took a taxi to the airport. I always have to take the subway because I'm so broke.
Yeah.
And she says real poor people don't talk that way.
Yeah.
She found out that they're not real poor people.
These are members of the upper middle and upper classes who compared to the real hyper rich people
maybe do seem poor, but they're not poor by anyone's standards besides that.
And then the question was like, why? The first question was why are they pretending to be so poor?
Yeah. Actually, could I get into the signaling thing that she said about after that?
Yes.
She says pretending to be poor is a lot easier than pretending to be rich,
but there's still some small quirks that you have to get right.
Social class doesn't just influence how you walk and talk.
It influences how you interact with others.
The stereotype is that poor people are improper, but sometimes it's the opposite.
They try to do things as they think they're meant to be done.
Spending 100 hours building bat wings for a Halloween costume,
renting a limo for their child's prom, but lying about anything's tricky.
You risk being found out.
So what are these people trying to accomplish by acting broke?
And this raises the broader question of why pretend to be part of a social class that you're not.
So she points out that the Saudi billionaires want to avoid being kidnapped,
so they keep a low profile.
And then the regular rich probably are following the common impulse of trying to emulate people
that are in a class above them.
But like you said, they don't actually know how the real poor live.
She said once she was shamed in front of a crowd for not donating to a society,
even when they had, even when she donated a different gift just a day ago.
And once she confided to a friend, he was like, so you're upper middle class?
And no, not not at all.
But the fact was that like no one at Yale really had any sort of context of poor people.
They hadn't met them.
They didn't know how they acted.
They had at best these kind of caricature stereotypes that they were trying to enact.
Yeah, they never met them.
There was this other instance where her class was comparing the cost and benefits of being on food
stamps.
And Natalia commented on her own experience with the program.
And her professor was shocked and said, you don't really mean your own welfare.
You just were supported by your parents, right?
Like you couldn't actually believe that somebody, that he met someone in real life who had really
been on welfare, which just shows how insulated they are.
The thesis of the article seems to be, which is where this is going now, that these are the
people with power who fail to comprehend the meaning of that power.
That they're abdicating their responsibility, the responsibility to be like the Bruce Wayne
Republicans I talked about before, and they don't even know it.
Yeah.
At first it seems like distorting your wealth signals is just this like funny signaling game
that upper class people do and that shouldn't really have any effect on anybody else.
But Natalia says, if you put on an act long enough, you end up forgetting that it's an act.
That just kind of super rich.
Forget that they have power and privileges that others don't.
Yeah.
And Natalia actually claims that this started happening before Yale and talked about an
incident from her high school where she thought that this rich friend of hers was being bullied
for being too rich because these kids were making fun of his high class accent.
Turns out the kids doing the bullying were even richer than the kid that they were bullying,
and they were actually making fun of his undisguised tells of class.
Like, oh, you're not faking being poor well enough.
She says that when these kids grow up, they end up at conferences where everyone lifts champagne
glasses to speech about how we need to tear down the man and usurp conventional power structures.
Apparently not realizing that they are the man and the conventional power structures.
So she says, this is a problem because we forget the extent of our own power and start
blaming an ephemeral elite beyond ourselves for the ills of society.
And when something does need to be changed in elite thought, we bail.
We forget our own position of strength and assume we cannot bear those risks.
We give up the fight before it even starts as if someone else can or will fight it.
Yeah, she brings up this thought experiment about what it would be like being the biggest
strongest person in a hunter-gatherer tribe and therefore needing more food than anybody else.
So what happens when you have this power but you don't take responsibility?
You'd be in trouble. Resentment would grow.
Why do you get to eat so much of our hard-won food? What makes you so special?
So if that person took on a leadership role, they could use their strength to protect the tribe
and then earn their extra share of food. But would you want to be the strongest
in the village right at the moment when you failed to use that strength properly and the
village is dying and the rivals are out for blood? Or would you rather be the average person just
eating the normal amount of food without being hated?
She says the rich and powerful are expected to take responsibility for things and blamed when
they go wrong. And she says that the check your privilege is a line which just about everyone
has heard. What it means is kind of evasive but there's some point to it. The rich have privileges
and with great privileges come great responsibilities to quote another superhero.
So they therefore have responsibilities and the responsibilities are not always so fun.
So they say that the recent scandals at Yale had to do with race and social justice
but Natalia thinks there's something else going on that members of the ruling class aren't sure
what to do with themselves. They're not even sure they want to rule. They're expected to use their
power to help society and rule benevolently because what she says the reason they're expected
is that if they don't no one else can or will the middle and poor classes don't have the powers
and privileges they do and can't afford the necessary personal risks but the elite are
not stepping up anymore. Yeah and Yale in particular is different from other Ivy League schools.
It has this history that's rooted in public service. It started in 1701 when a few ministers
were disappointed by Harvard and left to start a more pure, more good, more proper university.
The reason that Harvard's motto is veritous whereas Yale's is lux at veritous,
light and truth. Truth without light is pointness. Knowledge without an aim is at best not useful
and at worst destructive. So they have this kind of high standard that they claim to stand for
but it's happening. This thing is happening at all the big elite universities and
and I didn't realize before I read this article just how influential Yale is.
Like I mean I knew it was a big college but like you know so big college rich people go there and
get good jobs right. That is in my middle class upbringing that is what I associated colleges
with. Colleges are where you go to learn how to get a good job and apparently not so much once
you're in the very high levels. Colleges are where you go to learn how to use your power and be
a good elite person and Yale was like the top of these. The list of presidents that came from
Yale and the list of people who went on to be on the Supreme Court or in other positions of high
power was just it was astounding. I was like holy crap and she points out that people who graduate
Yale go on to write the American Psychiatry Association book whatever that's called.
DSMV? No. Yeah. Diagnostic for whatever it is but they write that which decides which conditions
are covered by insurance right which is a huge amount of power. They go on to become presidents
of the National Art Society and decide what artists get funding which is also a huge amount of cultural
power. Most people who graduate from Yale go on to really make a difference in society through
that one point of their job going forward. I guess Yale is a bigger deal than I thought it was.
Yeah. I had always had this impression that the elite colleges kind of the reason that
you go there is to network with other elites. At least I know a lot of people say that about
business schools like you don't really learn there to learn how to run a business. You
go there to meet your future business partners or your competitors and I guess also it makes
sense that you would go there to be among your peers and kind of learn the social norms for
being rich which apparently are pretend you're not. Backtracking just a little bit about the
elite's responsibility to keep society running. She does point out that societies exist in a
pretty fragile balance. The Rwandan genocide only ended in 95. Syria was a flourishing nation
just one decade ago and is now in total war and Venezuela was stapled just six years ago.
And now you know has what the average wage is not enough to buy enough calories to live.
People are emigrating in mass to surrounding countries because the whole place is falling
apart. So yeah it's kind of important not to fuck your entire society over. The elites at least
the current generation that's coming up and I would say more than just that like this is starting
to spread everywhere are just kind of abdicating that responsibility. They aren't doing their thing.
Natalie says was it Natalie? Natalia says that something is wrong in elite circles
preventing clear examination and correction of ideological errors. And this creates an
atmosphere of impotence and guilt that contributes to rich young people pretending to be broke to
escape that responsibility. Yeah well this is dangerous. This is kind of she said replacing
the old type of class signaling which had to do with what designer handbag you wore,
what accent you had, what prep school you went to and now they've got this new class signaling
where they find any reverse privilege points they can. If they're cis white men they pose as allies.
On an institutional level the old ways of legitimizing powers are gone and the new motto is this
diversity is legitimacy. Can I mention the cool anecdote about the position of master at Yale?
Oh yeah that's important. Yeah which feeds into this. It was really an interesting position which
appears to be unique to Yale at very least Harvard and other colleges don't have it.
The role of a master of the school there's apparently like a dozen different schools
within Yale or colleges or whatever that are their own self-contained. They've got their own
gyms and libraries and dormitories and all that and each one has a master. And the master is kind
of like I don't even know what you would call the master. Well they renamed it to head of college
and it sounds like the person that you talk to when you have concerns about the way the college is
run. Yeah but not just that like the the master always has a tea time that they put on. They
welcome all the new students to the to the school. They teach them. They show them the ropes. They
like they're like I almost say like the live-in butler house master. I just looked it up. It says
the master is the person who memorizes students names, meets with the parents and is a welcoming
presence. Memorizes all the students names every year. I can't I can't even memorize the names of
my friends. I'd love to learn what their mnemonic techniques are. There's 12 of them. There's one
for each of the residential college. The dean of each of the residential colleges handles
administrative and academic concerns. The master is involved in all cultural matters. So they throw
the master's teas where they curate and welcome special guests. And the etymology stems from the
word magister. Yeah so they're this this awesome position that is like perpetuating the culture
and making everyone feel welcome which honestly sounds like an awesome job. I would love to just
make people feel welcome and happy and do things to make their lives better. Which I guess you
could only get in a really rich society that has the resources to spare for that kind of thing.
Yeah well apparently it's a unique because Natalia says that that's one of the reasons she
chose Yale over Harvard and Princeton. At Harvard the sense of culture was non-existent. A welcoming
party with the president. Wine. Forget about it. We picked up our welcome packet and we're
sent on our way. Exactly. Yeah so this is this is a cool position and there was apparently one of
the culture war war things battles broke out over the term master because that is also the term that
slaves had to call their owners in the American South. Yeah specifically African American slaves
in the South. Yeah and so instead of I mean I guess the administration pushed back for a couple
months and then completely folded and now it's called head of college or head of school.
Head of college. Now it's called head of college instead of master and I guess they still do the
same thing but why what was the point. The you've just destroyed a unique interesting piece of culture
a small part of it like the title but the title itself has culture to it right. It's it's
yeah it's been around for a while and it's a neat piece of flair and there was like something that
the author said that maybe it would have been better to have educated the students about their
academic heritage and the administration could have explained that the term has nothing to do
with slavery in America and actually derives from a rich history that makes Yale unique
but apparently they just caved in immediately. Yeah I said after a little bit of debate the
title was very quickly changed and she says that they weren't they didn't take any pulls of the
student body either right there was no authoritative process they just said no and then caved after a
bit and they could have pushed back but instead they folded to demands of a small number of students
willing to make noise. They also had this Halloween costumes incident. Yeah which they also made
national headlines because of course it did. I guess I didn't hear of it because I guess I try to
avoid these sorts of things but I guess there was there's so many of these things happening all the
time it's hard to keep up with who's offended by what but uh someone I I guess was like offended no
no no it wasn't even anybody offended it was the intercultural affairs council uh wrote an
authoritative email to the entire student body right before Halloween telling students to be
mindful about offensive costumes so a few students approached Erica Christakis uh Christakis a
professor child psychologist and the wife of Yale master Nicholas Christakis and told her uh it's
kind of weird that the council can just email the entire student body and tell it what to do
so Erica wrote her own email proposing Halloween costumes should be policed not from the top down
but from the bottom up with students having conversations with each other and of course
the entire internet attacked Erica and her family and they both resigned right uh they were calling
for them to be fired uh I'm not sure if they were it was apparently yeah no they they stopped
teaching both her and her husband stopped teaching yeah right and he really kind of fucked up uh on
the national scale I guess it did make some headlines uh but overall a pretty small news story
like went away after a few days like I said I missed it entirely but Natalie says that or Natalia
says that it changed the entire dynamic on campus that for the entire year the issue was debated
in dining halls it split apart friends and it formed a mist over everything else for the entire
year she then asks like why what was the point of all this happening right and in short the point
was that it was it was claimed to be to help poor people immigrants people whose parents are from
distant lands people of color uh changing master firing those professors all that was for this
except of course it did so little to actually help any of those people that it couldn't possibly
have been the motivation uh first of all there are almost none of those people at Yale to start with
and none of what happened is actually to the benefit of any of these poor people or people of color
the only people who really benefited are a few activists willing to invest time and energy into
that game this leads to her next point that this is a an ideological revolution that's that's coming
over Yale and the the elite sectors of our society in general she says that this is a small example
of that it's a small clique of agitators seizing more and more power perching their enemies by
virtue of their superior internal solidarity and a bold and demanding ideology with some lukewarm
popular moral support and no real organized opposition uh so that's that's just like any other
you know revolution right after a revolution a small circle of insiders have a bold ideology
some ambient support and no real opposition so they start perching yeah and so what's the result of
this um on Yale or I guess any of the other big institutions where this is happening well uh
the result is an institution increasingly unable to carry out its own mission as tuition rises to
pay for more administrators and ideological drama makes it harder and harder to actually teach
now we're back at the original question what was the point of Yale what was the point of going to
Yale what is the point of elite institutions uh Yale's currently having this as existential crisis
students are taught to break the system but Yale doesn't even want to teach them what the
original system was or what it was for or how to productively replace it the university itself is so
lacking in vision it doesn't even know what the ideal student looks like or what it wants to teach them
and then she says so what is the point of the new ideology uh it's not ideological rigor obviously
so it seems to be an elaborate containment system for the discontent generated by the failure of the
current system and an absolution from guilt for the elites and a new form of class signaling
shouting from the rooftops they aren't doing enough is much easier than following any traditional
system of elite social norms and duties let alone carefully re-engineering that system to
re-establish order in a time of growing crisis so yeah coming back to society is in crisis elites
are shirking their duties to do something about this because it's scary and and uh having responsibilities
is less convenient than not having responsibilities and so joining this ideology uh is one way to
absolve that guilt yeah i like this description of it when you live with this mindset what you
end up with is not an establishment where a woke upper-class rallies and advocates for the
rights of minorities the poor and underprivileged groups what you have is a blind and self-righteous
upper-class that becomes structurally unable to take coordinated responsibility you get stuck in
an ideological mode of coordination where no one can speak the truth to correct collective
mistakes and overreaches without losing position so this obviously is not ideal no again saying
Yale students if they weren't powerful when they came in and most were they gained power uh by
getting a Yale degree what do you do with this power you don't want to abuse it you're not
evil you want to do something different you want to be absolved of your power you are ashamed of
your power why should you have it and not somebody else maybe someone more deserving you never signed
up for this you would rather be somebody normal but not normal normal more like normal with options
and vacations and money so you want to be something even better than normal you want to
be the underdog which is kind of the whole ideology net right now right they're like you were saying
the um instead the oppression points or whatever what what it was yeah something like that i keep
being reminded of something my Philly lesser on group uh had as one of our readings talked about
fashion um in the same kind of sense uh how fashion trends change with uh striping or
or a stratification in class and uh so you imagine wealthy people own expensive brands
and then less wealthy people buy the same things because they want to look like those wealthy people
and then poorer classes by cheaper knockoffs of those things and it trickles down and it's not
cool anymore if like some poor kids wearing the same sneakers that you have so what the wealthy did
is they invented norm core which is a fashion style that is composed of blue jeans sneakers
and a gray hoodie over like a plain t-shirt or otherwise just uh dressing down if you're super
elite the thing is you don't have to dress like it actually people if you're wealthy enough people
know who you are they know everyone knows you mark zuckerberg is regardless of what he's wearing
and people can't copy that and yeah that's just weird interesting signaling stuff yeah she ends
with um saying that this isn't just Yale and this isn't just colleges this is reflective of the entire
american elite society and uh i think i agree it seems to be more and more in our political sphere
as well that people are very interested in woke signaling and less interested in coming to well
the lesson just didn't actually doing anything exactly about the causes that they claim to care
about yeah they want to use the power responsibly yeah i mean sadly the article is just here pointing
out a problem it doesn't offer any possible solutions which is always kind of a bummer but um
well it yells it yell though it sounds like what she's trying to say is yell needs to grow some
balls yeah actually like stand up for actually like the reason we use this word master and maybe
that's not the best example but like she's kind of saying like you know you used to stand for
something yellow used to be like this place that would teach you as someone who's elite and wealthy
and powerful how to behave well and how to use those powers correctly and responsibly and
why aren't you doing that anymore why are you just caving into all of these at like there were
more there was like a i think the dean somebody found all of the uh previous deans yelp reviews
there was the student newspaper yeah um they found all the worst reviews that she had ever
made and yelp collated them into a pdf and then published it in the student newspaper and it was
just a hit job and basically she seems to be yelling start being more like Bruce Wayne's parents
and stop being lame stop abdicating your responsibility start realizing you have a
lot of power and you have to use it for good or donate all your wealth to somebody who's doing
good stick it all into the top charities you know like there's other things you can do to be good
donate 10% of your income to like get small area foundation or whatever yeah so reaction time
how do you feel about this whole thing because i for one have always until recently hated the
elite and if i saw something like this i would be like good i hope they all fucking drown in their
own filth and we can wash them away um and uh i feel that less so nowadays and specifically be like
it feels really weird to say anything for me personally it feels really weird to say anything
in support of the elite and powerful so i just feel really weird reading this and being like yes
you should use your power and be good as opposed to just being wiped out so i don't know i'm very
conflicted i don't know uh communism's not really a viable strategy right or like we haven't found a
way to make it a viable strategy um and so there's human society is always going to structurally
turn into a system where there's elites and where there's middle class maybe and and then
lower classes um we're a hierarchical species and that's going to be hard to break out of
and uh i don't hate rich people because you can't paint with a broad brush like that i'd
my cousins are ultra rich and i kind of watched their lives be ruined like uh
i was jealous of them because of all the stuff they owned and their nice clothes and their expensive
schools they went to and then i actually like spent some time living with them and i was like
oh i don't i wouldn't want to live like this it was very uh awkward in the sense that they were
really being taught how to present themselves at all times they weren't allowed to be kids
they were like my my cousin was wearing little suits with like short pants and speaking with
a fake british accent he had to pretend to be interested in economics and i don't know if he
had to pretend but he's just this like child businessman that's that's the kind of thing i
would i would want harley to be doing to their kids i don't know he's gonna have to take care
of the economy when he grows up i guess i mean there's probably better ways that you could
like but it's again it's teaching them signaling it's not teaching them how to
like what are the most effective charities and here's moral theory um and i guess that's yeah
where i take issue um and yeah i agree with the article in that yeah maybe maybe uh elite schools
should be taking on some of that responsibility that used to be what they were for what are they even
for now although uh also i kind of wish colleges would go away and then maybe maybe that's how you
get rid of it i don't know like that's kind of an interesting idea if college does go away and um
education starts to take the form of more of boot camps or online learning i wonder how
that's going to affect this and what other institutions are going to pop up as replacements
do we even does something need to replace it well i think that my idea of college going
is the place where you go to get the training for a good job is kind of like what boot camps and other
training institutions should be and they should wipe away most colleges but then there's
these universities which like you said are basically training the elite how to use their
power in a way that's to society's benefit and i think those would should stay around because
that is an important thing and they should work like they did you know a hundred years ago back
before all this crap started happening i don't think they should work the way they did a hundred
years ago because probably or even thirty years ago outdated shit well okay yeah but you know
before they gave up all responsibility on training the elite and powerful into how to
use their powers for good because i think that's an actual important job still and someone needs
to do it yeah i wish something like that existed in general like i wish there were there was enough
emphasis on things like teaching social skills to kids or like how to deal with trauma instead of
you know schools are still structured in this like training you to be an office worker or
factory worker kind of way and college my college education was useless it was not the thing you're
describing uh where you go to learn how to get a good job or how to do a good job i didn't learn
any job skills i learned lots of theory i learned lots of abstraction that was cool i like learning
things but uh i didn't i didn't graduate college feeling ready to start and like i didn't know how
to do anything it took me a long time to learn how to do things like repair my car or pay my taxes
or and i know there's there's a chorus of people that'll say like we need to school needs to bring
back home back and they need to teach kids real skills and but like yeah i think to some extent
yeah um there's a lot of kids that never learn how to do anything and then suddenly they're in
their 20s and they're living on their own for the first time and they don't know how to fry an egg
that is a bit sad and they also don't know what to do about their depression which is sad or like
their abusive boyfriend or girlfriend or you know it's just i think a lot of colleges like the
middle-class colleges uh style themselves after the elite universities like Yale because they're
like oh we're offering the same sort of service but they're not at all because their their user base
is so drastically different that modeling themselves on those universities was a huge mistake and
doesn't help anyone i didn't it didn't strike me that uh the school i went to was modeling itself
after Yale or anything like i didn't get any of you tried to teach you culture and theory and crap
right no they didn't really i mean um i you know i picked what classes i was taking and i started
as an environmental science major and then switched to a visual arts major and then learned
flash and other random stuff but uh no there wasn't any like cultural studies really or like
there wasn't any kind of instructive cultural studies like this is what is good this is how
you should behave um it's more like completely abstracted like here is how some cultures in
the past have behaved the thing i remember most from my year in college was basically the culture
of college and it was a beautiful wonderful thing and i really liked it and it was just this
this sequestered place away from the rest of society where everyone just liked to
live the life of the mind you know and it was amazing but that is not what my experience was
like and that sounds cool yeah but i mean that also and in that environment they try to teach
you job skills which it's not a good match and i think boot camps are much better there you know
here's your job skills we're not bothering with all these like dormitories and quads and greens and
after class activities this is just here learn your thing yeah my boot camp was like okay here's
an intensive uh here's an intensive walk through the material that you need to know um and for me
it was clinical research so it's like here's medical terminology here's fda regulations here's the
belmont report here's how to do there's how to draw blood and stuff and then like right and then
they brought in uh career coaches who were like here's how to dress here's how to write a resume
here's where to go to put your resumes here's how to network i never learned any of that in school
that would have been useful if they were teaching me actual job skills like how do you get a job i was
never taught how to get a job yeah maybe my school was especially bad but where did you go uh stocked
in university in new jersey there wasn't like a campus feel to it at all uh i mean i commuted so
maybe i missed out on that okay yeah maybe but uh i didn't i don't know i never got a sense that
there was any kind of like even the have you seen the show community uh yeah you showed me some oh
that's right yes even that show like it's a community college but it still kind of has the
campus feel while they're on campus you know this is a separate area yeah i didn't experience
any of that okay i'm like trying to project the future if uh universities do start going away
and like how things might change maybe it would be a good thing i could see um kind of it democratizing
education in a way and everybody but like it also could do the opposite where i think that um
our culture currently has this problem where nobody has taught what to do um what your place
in society is like i think that this is kind of a narrower this article is kind of a narrower scope
of uh this this overarching people kind of are like all right here you go to school you learn math
you learn history you learn whatever and then it's like all right go off into the world and you're
like i don't know how to be a good person i don't know what my job or my role in society is supposed
to be i don't know how to be or feel useful and that's like very isolating and kind of crippling
for a lot of people there's other societies that have these uh kind of coming of age rituals where
and and structures to them where you grow up like knowing okay here's here's what your job is going
to be like here's here's what your role in this community is here's how you achieve your you know
here's how you get to your rate of passage here's how you earn it we don't really have i think that's
a big problem is we don't really have community here in the u.s everyone breaks up and moves to
wherever the jobs is so much that there's no like shared this is where we as a people have lived for
300 years and we help each other out and i know the guy across the street yeah i grew up in a
suburb where there was no sense of community there was no gathering place um i went to church but
we didn't really hang out with anybody else from the church so like i didn't have any like church
friends i kind of hung out with like some of the kids on my block but it didn't feel like the adults
were connected in any way or that like once we got older we were connected with anybody in any way
it was pretty uh i don't know everybody kind of lived in their house with their family and that
was their whole network i wonder if it's like that in europe i think my impression is i'm like
i guess it depends on the country but europe seems like they have more a little bit more
kind of history of their being cultures that are more closely tied together yeah i mean they're
also a capitalist system so i imagine it's weaker than it used to be but it they do seem to be
yeah more closely tied together than us in the u.s obviously there's some bad things about cultures
like the one i was describing to where if you are assigned a role in society that limits your
freedom right and some of these rites of passage were pretty horrific like i think there's this one
in south america where you have to put your arm into a glove full of bullet dance that sounds
terrible yeah bullet dance bite feels like being shot yeah so the kid just has to deal with being
basically shot in the arm multiple times and then they're like congratulations you're now a man
that's like child torture but right but also gives this kid this feeling of all the adults in
my village have done this thing and if i want to be an adult i have to do this thing so it's a
commitment device and it's like now you know i'm an adult and i accept my role in society and that
i'm going to do the good things and you know so there's got to be like some ways that we could
kind of replace that in a better way that than the way that our schools are trying to do it or
that our communities are totally lacking it maybe there's a little bit of that and like
boy and girl scouts i don't know ensured suffering ensured hardship really brings people together
too yeah so if you know everyone else has gone through the same painful experience i mean and
then afterwards when someone else does it you're like i was there too you know i know what you're
feeling yeah i like the solstice that i went to that was about smallpox yeah or it was about us
overcoming smallpox because i did feel kind of the the thing they intended was we were talking
about how terrible it is and lighting up like blowing out all the candles and then talking
about the defeat of smallpox and how humanity came together and we used the power of science and
not knowing us to die anymore from this stupid disease lit all the candles again and sang happy
songs and it's like you can generate that kind of feeling without having to put your arm in a
a glove full of bullets you can get it you can get some pretty strong emotions from just like
kind of doing little rituals which uh have their own set of problems the rituals yeah i mean you
were the one that was uh he felt squicked out by the idea of doing rituals yeah in general because
they can brainwash you yeah i mean like anything that's trying to intentionally manipulate your
emotions i would like to like i would like to like rituals yeah that's the first step
well yeah i think we've exhausted this topic though okay onto the less wrong posts then
okay cool and if anyone has any other comments about this topic we have both the uh basing
conspiracy subreddit and a discord which are always linked in the show notes at the basing
conspiracy dot com let us know what you think the future without colleges might look like
or the future within elite class shirking their responsibilities well there does seem to be
some pullback from that now like i think it was at its nadir in like somewhere in the 2016 2017
range things feel like they're pulling back a little bit from there what's that the whole um
everything succumbing to wokeness i guess okay maybe i'm just seeing it less yeah i know i'm
definitely seeing it less because i'm just not on facebook yeah exactly all righty so
less wrong posts the first one we have is religions claim to be non-disprovable which is one of my
favorites yeah it's a good one uh so it starts with uh this biblical story the people of israel
are waving between jehovah and bail so elijah announces he'll conduct an experiment to settle
quite a novel concept in those days the priests of bail will place their bull in an altar
and elijah will place to hovis bull on an altar but neither will be allowed to start the fire
whichever god is real will call down fire on his sacrifice the priest of bail
serves the control group for elijah the same wooden fuel the same bull and the same priests
making invocations but to a false god then elijah pours water on his altar ruining the
experimental symmetry but this was way back in the early days to signify deliberate acceptance
of the burden of proof like needing a 0.05 significance level the fire comes down on
elijah's altar which is the experimental observation the watching people of israel shout
the lord is god peer review i i'd yeah i love this whole explanation of history's first recorded
experiment which it isn't technically but you know it was it was beautiful it was all the parts
of an experiment are there laid out and and it was just really fun to read yeah especially this
and then the people haul the 450 priests of bail down to the river kishan and slit their
throats this is stern but necessary he must firmly discard the falsified hypothesis and do so swiftly
before it can generate excuses to protect itself if the priests of bail are allowed to survive
they will start babbling about how religion is a separate magisterium which can either be proven
or disproven firm but necessary stern but necessary you know every now and then just a little bit of
mass murder to get the experiments going it was it was wonderful and it is in the making of this
broader point that as he says back in the old days people actually believed their religions
instead of believing in them and saying something like the local religion could not be proven would
have gotten you burned at the stake the vast majority of religions in human history tell stories
of events that would be that would constitute completely unmistakable evidence if they'd
actually happened uh i actually i'm not sure exactly uh why this post appears here in the
sequence of posts it seems a bit disconnected from the rest of them but i love it so much i don't
really care um but yeah it's it's uh one of those this was still the early days early ish days of
the new atheism and there were still fights going on as to you know whether the new atheists should
just shut up about things and uh religion is its own separate magisteria that science can't say
anything about it and so forth so this was this was pushing back on that points out that early
Egyptologists were genuinely shocked to find no trace whatsoever of Hebrew Hebrew tribes
having ever been in Egypt they weren't expecting to find a record of the 10 plagues but they
expected to find something and they found out that during the supposed time of the exodus
Egypt ruled much of Canaan ad is a huge historical error but if there are no libraries no one can
call you on it the roman empire did have libraries and thus the new testament doesn't claim big
showy large-scale geopolitical miracles like the old testament did do we want to say anything about
the whole experiments in in religion thing uh why did you have something in mind what i have in
mind is that i agree completely with all of this that people always say crap like you know science
can't you can't test religion with science or whatever but then as soon as this is like the
old montan bailey thing then as soon as you're out of an actual formal debate they're going back to
their church and all their religious friends and family and being like yep this god miracle
gave me a winning scratch ticket or cured my child's gout or whatever it was you know like
they're they always act as if god really is there and is present in the world and is doing things
which if it was the case would be testable because anything that has an effect on the
real world can be seen in the real world right you can measure it yeah i was earlier telling a
indian steven this story about watching one of my cancer patients receiving CAR T cells
and they had a priest in the room who came over and blessed the cells
and they blessed our hands i would have kindly like i bless these cells yeah i would have kindly
said i'd rather not have my hands blessed and i blessed the hands of the healers oh my god it's
like now let us all bow our heads in prayer and i was i had no idea any of this was going to happen
apparently the patient was religious and had requested this happen so we all had to kind of
just go along with it but it was it was awkward dude we've got these like bioengineered high tech
cells that are being injected and it's waving his hands around them like doing his magic on him
uh anyway yeah uh yeah when i uh was a kid i was told that if you pray and you are good and
you know you go to confession because i was catholic god will give you whatever you want
like god will answer your prayers so i'm like okay i got on top of my desk and i was like
i wished to fly and then i fell and i got back on the desk and i was like oh i really wished
to fly i super duper believe and i've been good and said my confession and i don't think i've
ever done anything bad because i'm a little kid anyway so i just just let me fly just for two
seconds fell again got back up and i was like all right god if you let me fly i will do extra
chores and i will be so good i'm gonna donate money to charity i'm gonna then fell again all
right god i'm gonna stop believing in you if you don't make me fly oh threatening god yeah and
then i fell again and then uh my young self didn't come to the conclusion that god doesn't exist but
that he exists but he's an asshole it took me a little while longer to write my head around the
atheism thing because i've just never heard of it i didn't know that that was an option right
but yeah i definitely kind of was like god after that yeah that guy all right sure jerk
that's cool yeah there's also the whole uh women can't do stuff part of or like i don't know weird
outdated shit was that still in part of Catholicism oh yeah like i mean that you read the bible yeah
then you're supposed to kind of double think the bad shit that you've read out of the bible
but like oh but that was back in the day and like now we do things this way but that's fine
and i'm just like yeah but what about what the slaves were okay but we're just gonna not talk about
that okay all right we're just gonna pretend god's not a jerk just like when he didn't let you fly
god's a jerk yeah thanks this goes into the next point uh that i was actually gonna that i pulled
out uh the post says not only did religion not only did religion used to make claims about factual
and scientific matters religion used to make claims about everything religion laid down a code of
law the sexual morals the form of government answered scientific questions from biological
taxonomy to the formation of stars the modern concept of religion is purely ethical derives
from every other areas having been taken over by better institutions ethics is what's left
or rather people think ethics is what's left ethics has not been immune to human progress
why do people think that ethics is still fair game which yeah what the fuck i think because you can't
just prove ethics ethics is still like you can still debate about it and you can still have
two different ideas so the fact that you can't um do an experiment and be like well animals evolved
or no stars are created by big burning clouds of gas uh you can argue with somebody all you want
about whether ethics are evolved or whether god sent them down and you can't really do anything to
prove it yeah i mean i guess you kind of can but it's it's much fuzzier but like when the bible
says grasshoppers have four legs people are like well the bible isn't supposed supposed to be a
scientific document right so no big deal but then the bible says you can't uh that it's okay to keep
slaves no one says well the bible isn't supposed to be an ethical document they're still like
it's an ethical document we just ignore that part yeah no but you were used to be allowed to keep
slaves yeah yeah but not anymore right so yeah but just the fact that people still say that it's about
ethics is weird when they don't say that it's about laws of governance or about scientific claims
because it's just as wrong on the questions of ethics as it is on all these other things
it's yeah super wrong uh where were we if you say the earth is flat
people will look at you like you're crazy but if you say the bible is your source of ethics
women will not slap you most people's concept of rationality is determined by what they think
they can get away with they think they can get away with endorsing bible ethics so it only requires
immanageable effort or self deception for them to overlook the bible's moral problem yeah
and the idea that religion is a separate magisterium that cannot be proven or disproven
is a big lie a lie which is repeated over and over again so people will say it without thinking
yet which is on critical examination simply false it's a wild distortion of how religion
happened historically of how all scriptures present their beliefs of what children are told
to persuade them and of what the majority of religious people on earth still believe
and there we go it's giant montan bailey lie and we should call people on that crap when they try it
yeah actually like if i really think about it the thing that finally made me an atheist was
reading the bible yeah um and it was in college i actually took a bible as literature class because
i had a lit minor and uh we read it with accompanying i think they were like the dead sea scrolls and
there was um a feminist interpretation of the bible and a couple of other different feminist
interpretation of the bible yeah the the instructor really wanted us to analyze it through various
lenses and that takes some mental gymnastics oh no it was like not pro bible oh okay it was very
much like this is a horrifying book that tells that like tells terrible stories about women's
suffering and being disenfranchised and okay i thought it was somehow a feminist pro bible thing
i'm sure that probably exists i'm sure lots of those exist yeah but uh yep that that did it
i think i wish more people would just read the damn thing there's parts of it there like a lot
of the old testament is just animal sacrifice yes so much animal sacrifice because it's endless
detail about what color the cow has to be and how old it is and whether it's got spots and
it's awful on the altar and what time of year you're allowed to do this and yeah yeah ethics
i liked the post and it made a good point and it stuck with me especially the first ever
scientific experiment part that really made it memorable yeah i think i wish that it had actually
gone into why it is disprovable why which is disprovable religion okay well i mean anytime
religion makes a claim and that claim is contradicted by reality it's partially disproven
right yeah and you get enough of those claims and you're like this is just a giant blow to
horseshit isn't it i think that somebody who was not already convinced of the atheist viewpoint
wouldn't read this and come out of it like feeling like that this was a good argument right yeah this
is kind of a preaching to the choir like maybe that was its purpose and it's more about um it was
definitely preaching to the choir in the uh in the effect of because there were a lot of people who
are basically or there still are i guess a lot of people who are basically non-religious in their
day-to-day life but will still go to church a couple times a year and say that they are like
christian or whatever and when this separate magisteria stuff comes up they're like oh yeah you
know you bible is not a scientific document i still believe that there's some kind of big god
thing out there and and the the jesus helped us out or whatever i just don't bother with all the
little minutia because the bible writers probably got that wrong you know and i think this is a very
good counter to that um if someone was exposed to this being like no that's just you lying to
yourself and it is a very big lie because i need a lot of people like that i'm friends with a lot
of people like that yeah i just wish this article would be something that i could point to them
i remember having a co-worker who was religious and actually asked like well if you can prove to me
that evolution happened then um i don't know i've never encountered anything that i thought was
good proof so i spent a really long time sending him documents showing like dna and fossils and like
it's literally and yeah there's there's so much evidence that was just like spamming this guy and
then like i think he kind of like pretended to read a little bit of it and then closed it and
then stopped reading any of it and was just like i'll read that another time like okay yeah you
want to be proven wrong all right all right okay i wish yeah that there was like a place that i
could have just sent him one link i had like the knockdown argument for here's why the bible is a
lie maybe that exists now if anyone knows where that is yeah there's there's no such thing yeah
religion is such a deeply entrenched in your emotions and your mind kind of thing that it's
in my opinion literally impossible to send someone one link that would change your mind
it's a process that takes lots of time and some social support but i just want there to be one
website that has all the evidence for the fact that life evolved there's there's many websites
like that there's many yeah but that's intimidating but if there were one link that
i could send that just had all the information and you could go into uh history and mathematics and
just like no wouldn't wouldn't matter worst case scenario they would accept that evolution is true
but it was guided by god but that would still be a step forward i think okay anyway let's go on to
the next one okay the importance of saying oops which religious people don't do until
eventually one day it starts out with a comment on enron enron for people who weren't around at
the time was a big energy firm based out of texas i believe who were doing gangbusters
making lots of money great great company and then all of a sudden it turns out the entire
thing is a fraud they've lost five billion dollars and the whole thing collapses overnight
lots of people are out a lot of money and it was a huge financial scandal and of course
no one went to jail because no one ever goes to jail for stealing five billion dollars you only
go to jail for stealing 10 20 bucks um but uh uh eliaser read a book about it and he said that a
unsurprising feature of enron slow rot and abrupt collapse was that the executive players never
admitted to having made a large mistake when catastrophe number 247 grew to such an extent
that it required an actual policy change they would say too bad that didn't work out it was
such a good idea how are we going to hide the problem on our balance sheet as opposed to
it now seems obvious in retrospect in retrospect that it was a big mistake from the beginning
if we only admit to small local errors we will only make small local changes
the motivation for big change comes from acknowledging a big mistake this is a post
that is pro epiphany basically uh it's saying you know what every now and then take major stock
of your life and this i get the feeling this is how most people actually do abandon religion so
maybe it was related to the previous post but uh it it it takes a lot of little small errors and
mistakes and oops is over a long period of time until eventually you're like holy shit this whole
thing was wrong right or at least that was the case for me i think that is probably the case for
most people i expect that there's a few people who converted on the spot or deconverted as the
case may be but probably more often there's more and more questioning over time yeah but at some
point you gotta you gotta acknowledge you made a big mistake and eliezer says a traditional
rationalist upbringing tries to produce arguers who will concede to contrary evidence eventually
there should be some mountain of evidence sufficient to move you this is not trivial it
distinguished sciences it distinguishes science from religion but there is less focus on speed
on giving up the fight as quickly as possible integrating evidence efficiently so that it
only takes a minimum of contrary evidence to destroy your cherished belief there is a powerful
advantage to admitting when you have made a large mistake it's painful it can also change your whole
life and i don't know entirely how i feel about this because i mean sure if you're wrong about
something especially something important you want to stop being wrong as soon as possible right
yeah like if you're wrong about whether slavery is good you want to change your slavery position
as soon as you can i want to change uh whether if you're wrong about whether global warming is a
thing and that we need to do something about it i want to very quickly change to hey let's
do some mitigation yeah let's very quickly try to do what we can to fix this i hear in business
it's always best to if you're going to fail in something fail fast that way you don't spend a
lot of time and a lot of money on something that's going to fail yeah i mean that's kind of um more
related to agile sort of structures where you're coming up with lots of different ideas and trying
to move quickly and really quickly like test them all figure out which ones don't work throw them out
keep moving towards the better ones the ones that work the ones that test the best um
and so i agree that's a big advantage and something one would want but i mean the problem is if you
knew the thing was wrong you would already not be doing it right well when you find out it's wrong
is what he's saying you have to be willing to be like oops i was wrong i fucked up big time
and i'm gonna acknowledge that and move on and i agree i remember um somewhere in the rational
sphere i read people talking about wanting to norm uh if people admit that they have made a mistake
that everybody cheers and high fives them and i love that and uh actually i've started like a
little habit of doing that with my friends cool where like oh i realize i realized i messed up or
like uh leaving my last job i got cheered and high five by my friends i was like yeah that was
a mistake and now i'm unemployed i gotta find another job and it's like it felt great for them
to be like yeah that job sucked get out of there you did it you now you can find a better job and
it's like yeah well kick this idea in the trash now i can find a better idea something that you
should feel proud of and that i wish society like didn't punish us so hard for like the
societal norm wasn't that it's embarrassing and you lose face if you go and publicly say i've
made a mistake that should be something that we're like you know uh if a politician comes and says oh
i i realize i've made a mistake about this policy and that science shows that actually this is better
that should be something that people are like yeah like i want to vote for that politician
you know it's like uh we have this like weird idea that people need to always be right and
always look confident and but i also think giving up on things too quickly can be a problem too like
that would make you a easy target for like get rich schemes mass whatever what do they call those that
i'm a multi-level marketing schemes or uh i think the point is religious claims and cults and
things like that once you have evidence that shows that you were wrong then you unless like somebody
faked some evidence or something no i mean people often do fake evidence yeah i guess i mean and in
general like you want to investigate and really find out whether you were wrong and i think you
should be really rigorous about that but yeah some things are not that clear cut and you can be
confused about something and i think that's a case where you wouldn't throw it out if you're not sure
you have to keep investigating eventually you'll find enough evidence one way or the other right
well i mean but that's that's that that is what what eliezer is sort of arguing against he did say
that there is everyone agrees there's at least everyone in the rationalist sphere agrees that
there's some mountain of evidence that can change your mind on some things but eliezer is saying
that that level might should maybe be a little bit lower so people don't hang on to ideas for too long
which on the one hand is true but on the other hand is also a bit of a defense mechanism i think
it's also fine to be able to admit that i used to have absolute faith and confidence in this
hypothesis but now i'm reading this stuff that seems to say the opposite thing and i'm not quite
sure which one it is yet so i'm kind of holding off on saying which one i'm going to support until
i have collected more evidence and that should also be fine i think that's yeah i think that's
the biggest advantage of of this whole Bayesian rationality movement is the idea to have degrees
of confidence and beliefs rather than being just like i'm a capitalist or i'm a communist you know
it's more like you know give 80 percent credence to the capitalism thing and uh i'm not i'm not
being on one side or the other yeah so much because you know there was there was a time when
it was easy to convince people that uh socialism was the best thing to do because it hadn't been
tested it hadn't been tested on on paper it looked great you know everything would be better
if this worked out so people are like yeah i find this convincing and that uh turned out to be bad
so people were some people were too easily swayed in that regard uh this article ends with
don't indulge in drama and become proud of admitting errors it's surely superior to get
it right the first time but if you do make an error better by far to see it all at once which
is kind of the thing that i disagree with i think that we should as a society norm it being fine to
admit when you've made an error especially the whole fail fast thing too like i like that that's
becoming something that's more widely known that businesses are using that people developing
software are using try lots of stuff if it doesn't work move on to the next thing
oh i do think he's right that i mean it is better to be right the first time but yeah but yeah you're
right admitting error should be a celebrated thing he says i have watched others making their own
series of minimal concessions grudgingly conceding each millimeter of ground never confessing a
global mistake where a local one will do they do their best to minimize their embarrassment by saying
i was right in principle or it could have worked or i still want to embrace the true essence of
whatever i'm attached to defending their pride in this passing moment they ensure they will again
make the same mistake and again need to defend their pride so yeah i in general i think he
makes a good point about failing fast when you can you're failing publicly and owning up to it
yeah yeah next time we're gonna read focus your uncertainty and the proper use of doubt yes and
there are links to those again at the basin conspiracy dot com and going on to listener
feedback yes yeah let's do it all right all right we've got one from zcaran which was on
are the bayesian conspiracy on death lists
lee yeah i know but i'm saddened by how katlyn dowdy was represented in a previous discussion
it seems unfair to paint her as an enemy of immortality seeking transhumans
she's a mortician with two main goals prevent grieving people from getting scammed by expensive
mortuaries and to help grieving people have a healthier view of death to get them through
the grieving process quicker she focuses on natural burials that are better for the environment
better for your wallet and better for your relationship to your dead relatives okay and
i think that's a fair point people are complicated and i don't like to take one bad thing that someone
has said are done and then throw them under the bus hole you know hole hog uh i actually believe
i have watched some of her videos and i think they're pretty good but i do still not like the
pro-deathism yeah i i am happy to say that uh i would be you know i would be happy to say that
she's probably a good person and probably doing a lot of good work overall yeah and at the same
time say that her statement that uh life is meaningless without death or whatever it was
that we were um harping on that one time is a morally abhorrent statement and i is just wrong
and people shouldn't say that and should feel bad for saying it yeah i hear a lot of i hear this
phrase a lot that death gives life meaning and i'm like no like living gives life meaning i could i
could see um um the idea that something is impermanent gives it more value this is true
but um there's even if you live forever there's still parts of you there in permanent you're
you grow up you change you get different jobs um you get different lovers and you're in different
relationships you have kids your kids grow up i mean lots of things are impermanent but like
change is great when you're dead that's you're not changing anymore you're you're done
and i i don't like the idea that uh death gives life meaning is like kind of put as this overarching
thing that gives life meaning i think what gives life meaning is are the experiences you have while
you're alive the things that you care about the people you care about like what you see
what you accomplish your hopes and dreams i mean come on we can do better um but yeah like the other
things that zeke mentions about helping people avoid getting scammed and especially the thing about
the like natural burials i really hate the whole process like and bomb you forever in the ground
that's another thing that like rationalist should support though i like yeah cremation pumping like
a whole bunch of um or or cryogenically freezing your brain that i am a big proponent of that one
yeah that's because then maybe you can be brought back i don't know how environmentally friendly
that is but i think it probably still beats uh being embalmed and stuck in a box that's never
going to biodegrade i mean i think you're allowed to be a little environmentally unfriendly in the
interest of not killing yourself yeah that's that's the thing most people i i believe would get
behind aside from extinctionists so yeah i'm okay saying katlin dowdy probably a great person doing
good work who said one or maybe several morally abhorrent things which uh doesn't make her a terrible
person or invalidate her work but those things are still bad i kind of want to email her yeah i wonder
if i could kind of i mean you probably could find her email address yeah probably why would you say
oh just hey it i love your show but this one thing you said like here's my take on this i
wonder if she'd respond or if she gets so much email that i mean probably but it's worth a shot
every now and then people have a chance to get to an email and you might be the lucky one
yeah i mean i think it is an interesting uh assuming that uh you know she's not just going
to throw out anything that goes against her um core beliefs or whatever yeah that there's probably
like less interesting emails that she gets okay let's go on to why weaker i think oh go ahead
okay uh this one was in response to i think it was two or three episodes ago
where we mentioned scott's scott from slay star codex scott's post about how society has basically
taken away a lot of people's ability to support themselves they can no longer go out and uh
forage and do those sorts of things that people used to be able to do because society has paved
those parts of the world and replaced it with this hierarchical structure where the only way to
live is to work in a factory or be you know useful in some other way yeah exactly and so that uh
society does owe people things because it did that um and why weaker would like to point out uh
saying if we were if i were to guess i'd say hunter gather societies had basically the exact same
problem but at a smaller scale i very much doubt that a human could venture out of his tribe alone
into an area with good resources without being forced out by another group claiming that area
i think as a human you're always dependent on some sort of society since no human can live
alone and compete against other humans who cooperate and i think i mean first of all
that's a good point if anywhere where there is other humans also find for the same resources
you're gonna have an issue and you're going to need to be part of a society and uh i would like one
i would like to once again um bring up the movie noa which i thought was a fantastic
representation of that that uh noa and his his family were super rich because they had this
really fertile area of ground that they kept all to themselves and then these people that were
literally starving to death were like well fuck you we need this or we're gonna die and then he
loses everything because they come in here and they take all his land and now he's not rich anymore
which uh i'm not sure that's the story the the movie was trying to tell but it was it was really
interesting and i enjoyed that aspect of it but yes uh first of all yeah you any any group of humans
could push you out so you do need society anyway and even if there were no other humans around
if like if your tribe was on the frontier here and the first one's there uh i i don't think you
can live without a society anyway you're gonna be eaten by an animal or you won't be comfortable
anyway yeah some people can live as a hermit most people do need uh human contact for social
animals and not just for the social stuff i think even for survival it'd be really important it would
yeah it definitely helped survival but i think that this is kind of missing the point of scott's
statement there where what he meant wasn't that you could go off on your own and forage like what
he meant was that the system that we have built is incredibly complex and we would it didn't evolve
for it there's a lot of people that can't hold down a good job and make good money who would have
had no problem living in a hunter gatherer society where they had just have to collect
acorns all day or you know one to do one thing which is build arrows or you know um slightly
better standards of life in some cases slightly worse i mean if you uh look at a lot of anthropological
studies they show that hunter gatherer societies people tend to be a lot happier than we are
there's almost no depression or anxiety uh because they're living in the environment we were
that we evolved in originally now does that mean that people don't still die in childbirth all the
time and have totally preventable diseases or a cut to your knee yasher so benefits drawbacks but
also society was rather unequal and horrible so that part sucks too but i mean if you're used to
the hunter gatherer society was it was pretty uh egalitarian uh was i mean it continues to be
there's still hunter gatherer tribes yeah yeah well i mean i guess in terms of general hierarchies
yeah pretty egalitarian but it was once our agriculture uh developed that the inequalities
started becoming really intense although yeah when when i read about the levels of um i guess
nowadays we would call it domestic violence of just like men abusing women and and hurting them
using power over them in those societies i'm like holy fucking shit i this is horrible and i
do not want to ever go back to that sort of society this morning i was uh i'm actually
gonna get a playstation uh vr because i want to play beat saber and as i was looking at this
ridiculous k-pop music video where this k-pop star is like playing this really intense beat
saber in vr and just like running up walls and i was just like man i really like the time that
i was born into and it's like well of course i don't know any kind of like future time periods
that might be even cooler than this one but if i look back at the past nope i'd probably be a mom
of nine kids or dead of malaria all righty next next one just reply to this shit just to reply to
this shit yeah i think the framing of people as means versus people as ends helped clarify somewhat
my own values and this is on the same topic yeah what's the point of the system the whole system
society ask the system how do we measure progress what are we trying to maximize gdp it's not that
the people don't care about anything else it's that the suicide rates can keep rising and if the
gdp also rises at least something percent head of state can stand in front of the people and
boast of progress and prosperity the utility function of society is currently misaligned with
human values if the system's ever been good to you it's only because it has been thus far necessary
to keep you a compliant productive member of society a lot of things are capitalized in this
i'm trying to convey that i don't know if i'm doing a good job this is why automation can feel
like such an apocalyptic threat in the current economic system because suddenly you're not even
that necessary to society's goals and you know its goals don't explicitly include you your means to
an alien end society is an alien god and i think that really put into perspective exactly why
automation does seem so threatening and ubi does seem so important because
yeah in theory the gay space communism is what we all want right uh yeah the the uh nobody has to
work because automation has completely replaced all labor and we're all happy but uh in practice what
it looks like is automation replaces all need to work and therefore we all die because the only thing
the system needs us for is producing things and when we aren't even useful for producing things
anymore there's no point in keeping us around i think there's two arguments though if we've got
intelligent ai it's not going to care about our values anymore or other people say uh if we automate
away all the jobs then people won't know what to do with themselves and they'll be sad i think the
second one is dumb i yeah super disagree with that um i don't like the evil ai version uh i'm not a
fan of that one hopefully it doesn't come to that i think what he's saying though is that society is
already sort of a um or the system in caps is already a sort of weak level uh ai that is
unfriendly it is not aligned with our goals because as humans we have a lot of goals like
happiness and the prosperity of our loved ones and so forth but all society currently cares
about is gdp and uh since that's what society is working towards that is what all of our human
labor is more or less being put towards it is misaligned with our values and this is becoming
a problem yeah i mean like bringing up global warming again because we're all gdp maximizers we
can't admit that we we aren't allowed to go on air and say actually 90 something percent of
scientists all say that this is real and it's a problem without having to have somebody else
on there who's some crackpot that got paid off by not in around they're gone but uh oh we're
gonna give them both like equal time to debate with the global warming debate and it's like
meanwhile we all know that this is happening uh and we really should have started doing something
about it years ago but considering that we're gdp maximizers that's going to hurt the gdp we
can't do anything about it and yeah since society is the aggregation of all human effort it's much
bigger than any one person and thus having its values misaligned to our own values is kind of a
problem yeah we've got like old people in nursing homes i don't know i could think of a lot of
examples of ways that society is scoring people over and the reason people put old people in
nursing homes is i guess because it's more economically efficient yeah to pay somebody else
to take care of your elderly parent i guess the same thing with daycares too i mean it's more
economically efficient to have both parents work full time and have an any take care of your baby
yeah you're very busy out there being productive and keeping that society gdp on target yeah well
now i'm sad thanks uh just to reply to this shit yeah jerk send a nice you're just like god next
time i'm just kidding that was a good comment yeah it was all right um how about we like
thank some patrons let's do that so this week we would like to thank our patron dan wall
as our patron um every other week thanks dana we appreciate you gratitude being sent your way
yes you are helping redirect some of society's resources to things that are more aligned with
our values as opposed to simply maximizing gdp because this show as far as i know does not
produce any gdp although i guess it does provide entertainment value which is a big part of gdp
too yeah you know what the more money people give us the greater a percentage of gdp we will be
so someday if all the money comes to us we will be society what i'm saying is everybody should
give us all of their money i don't know you don't know about that i'm not sure if we become gdp
okay we should still give some money to this cancer research place you're working for
uh i would appreciate that actually we live in a terrible little office right now and they're
putting off the renovations to the new office because the college across the street wanted money
for their renovation and they anyway well i didn't know that i assumed since it was like
leading tech edge stuff you had fancy offices and shit i don't know research is crammed in like the
fourth floor and a little closet oh damn dude yeah we totally got to get more money towards
this cancer research thing then sounds pretty awesome all right anyways dan wall thank you
and uh thank you all for listening and we will thank you guys yeah we'll be back in two weeks
with more stuff and with a steven zuber oh yeah steven should be back from cancun unless he decides
to just stay there i mean i wouldn't blame him i wouldn't blame him anybody's gotta come back
right he's gonna run out of money eventually yeah we need him he needs this portion of the gdp
we need him to go on more tangents i think we're like making reasonable time yeah i know all right
goodbye
