Hey, this is Eniosh with just a couple notes before we begin.
First, Steven is not in this episode.
Due to overlapping travel plans, he ended up in Japan while we were recording this episode.
However, he will be back next time.
Secondly, after recording this, I realized that it's going to air one day after Stanislav Petrov's day.
Stanislav Petrov was one of a few people in history who were under orders to launch nuclear missiles
and defied those orders in order to not destroy the world.
September 26th is the day we take to commemorate this achievement,
and hopefully everyone had a chance yesterday to stop for a few moments and not destroy the world themselves.
Okay, back to the episode.
Hello, and welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy.
I am Eniosh Brotsky, and today I have with me Shelly.
Hello.
And Thomas, Audi.
And hey guys, guess what I just got back from?
What?
Burning Man. The grocery store?
Okay, so actually it's been a few weeks, but I was recently at Burning Man and I thought it was really neat
and I wanted to talk about it a bit because I thought maybe other people might be interested in hearing about it as well.
And that is one of the reasons also that Thomas is here because you went to Burning Man a few years ago?
Yeah.
And how long ago was it that you went?
It was either 2012 or 2013.
I can't remember exactly.
Okay.
The one that was caravansary themed, if any listener can remember what year that was.
Okay, that is a word I just learned yesterday too.
And it is so weird that like you brought it up today.
That is the only context I've ever heard that word.
Like caravan I've heard before, but caravansary, that's the only time.
Yeah.
So what is that?
That is...
I think it's the adjective form of caravan.
I think it's like a place where caravans go to like get their horses watered and fed and like...
Like a truck stop for caravans almost, back in the day.
That is not what I would describe Burning Man as being like.
But if you are seeking to acquire more water, that is not a good place to try to do that.
Right.
Yeah, well, I mean, it's a dry place, but if you are running low on water, people will give you water.
Which is nice.
Yes.
So, yes, the reason that you specifically are here is because you said you did not like Burning Man at all.
I wouldn't say I didn't like it at all.
I'm saying I would say that it didn't live up to my expectations.
And in particular, it did not live up to the expectations that like all of the burners and the Burning Man organization, BlackRock, whatever,
go out of their way to tell you that it will be.
Oh crap, I now have severe doubts about this podcast, even though we just started it.
Because I went in with like no expectations at all.
I had no idea what to expect, and so I was fucking blown away.
So that seems like a really good way of doing it.
Okay.
I would say that I learned two major lessons, and that's about going to Burning Man, and that's basically a rephrasing of one of them.
Okay.
So I guess our number one piece of advice is turn off this podcast and don't listen to any more of it, and just go to Burning Man and re-listen to us a year from now.
Well, I don't know if I'd go that far.
I would say that this is advice, these are things that I've learned that I would give as advice if someone is going to go to Burning Man.
Okay.
But also, I...
You wouldn't recommend it?
I am down to offer alternative suggestions if you want the same sort of things that you can get out of Burning Man.
Okay.
Well, I have always kind of wanted to go, but at the same time, I don't like the outdoors, and I don't like things.
It's rather broad.
Also stuff.
Don't like stuff either.
Both pretty awful.
Yeah.
So I am curious to hear the pros and the cons of what it's like and whether I should consider going or not.
Okay.
Out of curiosity, what is one of the things that attracts you to Burning Man?
I guess the art specifically, and just new and original things to see.
Maybe not so much to participate in.
I'm not that much of a participator, even though Burning Man is really all about that, right?
It is.
I mean, you don't have to if you don't want to, but you get a lot more out of it if you do.
Just jump in and participate.
Yeah.
I would agree with that.
And I would also say that the art is a great reason to want to go.
The art really is spectacular and incredible.
And both in terms of quality and quantity, that there's an enormous amount of it.
Lots of the pieces are physically enormous.
And almost all of it is really quite good.
I mean, the one thing I heard about Burning Man was that there's a lot of drugs there.
And so...
I'm not telling you when it's again.
No, no, no.
That's just what I had heard.
And so I was like, well, there's probably going to be a lot of drugged out hippies there.
And that was my only real expectation.
But I have a number of people who I respect that have gone and have afterwards said,
guys, this is really amazing.
You should go.
And so with that like loaded in my brain, I was thinking, OK,
eventually one of these days I'll go right get around to going.
And then a ticket kind of fell in my lap.
And so I was like, well, this is perfect.
I am currently unemployed and got nothing else going on.
I should go now.
And so I went.
And yeah, the thing that really surprised me was the art is amazing.
And there's so much of it.
And I did not.
I don't think I saw even half of it, really.
And I spent at least half my time just biking around from one thing to another,
trying to look at all of it.
And part of the problem is that it changes, right?
The art looks different during the day than it does at night,
because, you know, a lot of it is self-lit with neon or fire or something.
And during the day that without that there makes a difference.
And just the environment gives a different air during the day.
Yeah, you brought up a lot of things that I would like to comment on.
So I'll go through them a bit and try to remember them.
Yeah, I would say that Burning Man is one of the best art museums I've ever been to.
And by at least an order of magnitude, the most expensive art museum I've ever been to.
And I'm not sure I would say that it's an order of magnitude better than the other art museums.
I so I've only been to a few art museums.
I think the the biggest one is the one we have here in Denver.
But if other art museums are anything like them,
they're nice air conditioned buildings that display art pieces, right?
That depends enormously on which art museum you go to.
OK, I find that the Netherlands has several of my favorite art museums.
And one of them, the name of which is escaping me right now,
is in the middle of a national park that you have to bicycle to
in order to get to the museum.
Half the exhibits are outside.
They have a bunch of vangos in there, which are amazing in person.
So much more impressive than any photo you've seen of them.
And that whole park is a deliberately
like much like most of the Netherlands deliberately constructed used to be underwater.
And it is designed to show off all of the landscapes that occur in the Netherlands
in one like several square mile park.
Oh, neat.
So like that's the sort of thing that I'm comparing Burning Man to in my mind.
Now, but you have to fly out to the Netherlands to go to that.
So is it really in order of magnitude less expensive than Burning Man?
If you're not, if that's the only reason you're going to go to the Netherlands,
no, then it's probably about the same cost or maybe half as much as going to Burning Man.
OK. And I guess there would be some other
attractions for me besides the art, if I decide to go.
Like I like the whole counterculture vibe and I enjoy some dirty hippies.
The the culture.
Well, actually, before I go on, you will you had some more things you wanted to address.
I do. Yeah.
So you were talking about a lot of people doing drugs at Burning Man.
Burning Man is in Nevada, where all the fun drugs are illegal,
which means that by far, by far, the most common drug there is alcohol.
And alcohol is fun and I like it and I indulge in it every now and then.
I am drinking a screwdriver right now during recording of this podcast.
But also Burning Man is in the desert and it is very hot and very dry.
And alcohol is not a good choice of drug for that environment.
But because there are a lot of cops at Burning Man,
if you openly do other drugs, you will get arrested.
Or at least there's a decent chance you will.
And so one of the principles of Burning Man is a gifting.
It's supposed to be a large portion of what goes on is people giving free things to other people.
And I was led to expect that that would be similar to the gifting marijuana culture
that I was familiar with from going to college in Oregon,
where there's a whole lot of people standing in a circle, passing a pipe around
and inviting but not pressuring anyone who happens by to join.
But instead, I found that all of the illegal drugs were done in secret
and not open to outsiders.
And instead, there was a lot of people drinking openly and offering alcohol openly.
And I found that much less pleasant and chill.
And I encountered easily 50 times as many drunk, early 20-something
frat boy rave type people as I did aging stoner hippies.
And I say that as a man who is in a fraternity.
OK, so I was going straight this year, so I did not take any drugs.
And therefore, I mean, part of that reason is because, as we said earlier,
when we did our drugs episode, I didn't want my first use of an illicit substance
to be someplace where I was not comfortable and familiar with the people.
And I had never done any of those drugs before.
So I was like, I'm not going to do them for the first time at Burning Man.
But I also kind of get the feeling that a lot of Burning Man is what you make of it.
And since I wasn't there for the drugs at all, that didn't bother me.
If someone was going for the drugs, they'd probably want to bring
their own or go with a group of people that they trust.
I agree. And I did bring my own.
But a part of what I was frustrated and disappointed by was that I deliberately
brought enough that I could share with strangers.
But then it was quite difficult to because whenever I was thinking like, OK,
I'll I found a shady spot.
I'm going to set up camp here for a few hours and give away free drugs to people.
And I would start unloading my backpack and get ready to bring out a bong.
And then a cop would walk by.
I would hide everything, wait a few minutes, think, OK, maybe now I can.
And then a cop would walk by and I go, all right, screw this.
And I would get back on my bike and go somewhere else. OK.
So I wanted to be able to share that experience with other people.
And as someone who's already has done quite a lot of drugs
and is very comfortable with them, I wasn't looking to have a first time
experience or looking to mooch off of other people.
I was looking to give things away and then I couldn't.
Oh, I'm sorry to hear that.
I when I when I went the I worked at a tea house,
which was kind of a come and relax here if something's, you know,
if you're stressed or something's going wrong.
So I saw a number of pretty wasted people, which was interesting.
So there were plenty of drugs and I went with my camp.
I don't know, it's very much sort of a bonding experience.
And you're told in all the primers on Burning Man,
do not offer drugs to anyone you don't already implicitly trust, right?
Because there's lots of undercover cops there.
And but at the at the last day when they were burning the man,
several people in my camp who I'd only known for seven days were like,
hey, I got some of this MD&A, you want to try it?
And I was like, oh, thank you.
Yeah, that's nice that you trust me that much.
But no, and that was that was nice.
So I mean, I guess maybe go with like a group.
It's weird because you are supposed to make a lot of connections with strangers,
right? That was the other half of what I did there.
And it was such a huge part of the culture.
It was nice.
But if I was into drugs, I would have been sad.
You're right that I couldn't also share drugs with strangers.
Yeah. And you sort of tangentially brought up what I would say is the most
important lesson that I've learned that I would do differently.
Should I go to Burning Man again, which there's a good chance I will,
which is that I would take much more care in selecting what camp I go with.
I basically went with the first camp that invited me.
And it was a bad choice.
It was a bad fit.
That camp was almost all
Australian early 20s, something drunken rave types.
And we were like Australians and we ruin everything.
And we were camped next to several of the largest sound camps,
which is what they call places that put on concerts the entire time,
like literally 100 percent of the time.
And so boots and cats and cats and cats and cats just constantly
the entire time I was there.
I actually spent more nights at Vivian's camp than at my camp
because there was a sound camp nearby.
And it was a bit of a problem.
Yeah. And so I think if I had been with a camp that was more chill
and like you talked about working at a tea shop or not shop, but giving tea away,
that sounds lovely.
And I think I would have enjoyed that a lot more.
So if I had been paired with a camp that was more my speed,
I bet I would have enjoyed it a great deal more.
Why did they even have the other camps around the sound camps?
I don't know exactly how the placement was done.
I don't know anything about that really.
The guys in our camp said that usually they are not near sound camps
because they are a tea house, a place to chill and not have,
you know, over stimulation and something happened
where this year sound camp was put across the street from them.
You have a small amount of control of it
if you are the organizer of your camp,
but largely it's up to the whims of the organizers of Burning Man.
And they only have a finite amount of space
and all of the sound camps are enormous.
So somebody has to be next to them.
Yeah. How big is it anyway?
So that was the thing that surprised me.
The the official estimate is around 70,000 for this year, I believe.
But that's just a number and you don't really get a feel for it, right?
So I don't know. I came in, I think, around one a.m. on Sunday
and parked the car and set up a tent and just crashed out.
And the next day I got on my bike, I rode out to the man.
I kind of was around a little bit, but I didn't go that far.
And so I was like, OK, this is a decently large place, whatever.
The day after that, I rode out to the man
and then from the man I went to center camp, which is
the whole thing is kind of a raid in a large sundial around the man in the middle.
And the man is, I think, a half mile from any any actual camp.
I think it's a mile across.
So yeah, a half mile from where anyone can set up camp is where the man is.
But I went to the man and then cut over to center camp.
And when I turned away from the man and looked like just the entire place
was set out before me and it was it was massive.
I was shocked at how big this is.
Just it's very large as far as I could see.
Yeah, I was like, this is a huge amount of people.
How long to bike across it, do you think?
I don't know if you were to start at one end
and go all the way to the other in a straight line, maybe.
And you don't encounter difficult terrain.
Yeah, yeah, maybe 15 or 20 minutes.
It's not too bad.
But you're not just driving a straight line from one end to the other.
You're going all over to all the cool places.
Yeah, I should probably add another vocabulary
because I might use the word play a few times.
But they call the grounds that the burning man is on, the playa.
So that's that's a thing.
And if you go out of where people are not camped,
like around the man and even further out, they call that deep playa.
And that's where a lot of the best art installations are.
And for anyone interested in the specific vocabulary term,
a playa is an empty lakebed.
Well, this playa is an empty lakebed.
Doesn't playa mean beach in Spanish?
Yes. And in English, it means empty lakebed.
Does it? Yes.
Fuck, I didn't know. Yeah. OK, neat.
I've learned another thing.
So when I first heard about burning man, like 15 years ago,
I had been told that the cops go easy on the drugs at Burning Man.
But I guess that's no longer the case.
I heard that it was the case originally.
And then they had a change in sheriff about a decade ago.
And he was much less copacetic with the drug use.
And also, as the event has grown,
there's necessarily been more people who cause trouble.
And while it might be difficult to bust someone for being a jerk,
it's easy to bust someone for possession of an illegal drug.
And so people will use that as an excuse to bust people.
Well, I am curious to know if there's any
rationalist angle to burning man or your experience.
I have two things about it that I would think might be of interest to rationalists.
The first is what I was going to say earlier is it has a
to me what was a very interesting culture that I'm really glad I experienced.
But it is it is a culture of like basically trying out everything
and being very open and just involving yourself whenever you want.
And everyone around you is really supportive.
And the thing is, this place is out in a
it is it is a desert that is like most deserts
are have scrub and cactuses and some life in them, right?
But this is like the desert you think of when you see Lawrence of Arabia desert.
It is just a dried out lake bed with fine dust everywhere and nothing is alive.
So it is hot and uncomfortable and dry.
And you quickly get the understanding
of why there is such a hospitality culture among
among cultures that are in the desert, because yeah, you you could die quite easily.
And people are always around to help you and give you water or shade or something
if they see you're in trouble or give you some food if you're dying of hunger.
And that so there's a sense of safety.
And since there are some people that are like fucked up and everyone wants to have a good time,
there is this feeling that if something bad happens to me right here, I am not alone.
Like out here in the suburbs of Denver, if something bad happens to me,
I guess I can call 911 and pay my life savings to be taken to a hospital.
And then I miss work and everything's awful.
But out there, it's like people are going to rush to my aid.
Everything's going to be OK.
I saw people.
Well, I saw one guy specifically leaping from one giant granite block
to the other at this awesome art installation.
Yeah. And I was like, they were just far enough away
that when you're standing on top of me like I could make that jump.
But I'm not sure I want to try because shit.
I mean, you'll still have to be driven to the hospital.
Yes. Even out there.
But just just the feeling of everyone being there to help you is nice.
And I saw someone in the middle of a dust storm.
There was a lady who was like having a bad skin reaction.
Her hands were really chapped and someone like these cool raver light up gloves.
Just handed her gloves over and said, here, yeah, you need these.
And the old lady was like, well, not old, I guess, middle aged lady.
It was like, I can't take these from you.
And she's like, no, you need them more than me.
Take them. And people just give everyone each other stuff and are really supportive.
And it's it's a great culture.
And so that in my mind, it fosters what I call it's the luckiest place on earth
because everyone is just willing to help everyone else.
And you talk to everyone, you open up pretty quickly.
And so there's all these opportunities to make connections and find out neat things
and just experience life in a whole new way.
If there were more cool coincidences in that one week there
than I have had in, you know, any year, basically, of my life elsewhere
because everyone's just open for cooperating all the time.
It's like a high trust society.
I would definitely agree that there's a lot of helping people out.
And in particular, I remember an incident where Allison started overheating
and several other people noticed this.
And like one of them went off to soak a rag in cold water
and then bring it back.
And another one went off to get a water bottle because I'd already given her all of my water.
And yeah, I agree.
There's definitely a significant and effective culture
of helping out other people when they get in trouble, which I really like and really appreciate.
I do want to sort of quibble about a minor thing that you said.
You were talking about T.E.
Lawrence and the deserts of Arabia that he was in.
I will dispute that it is actually similar to that
because the deserts of Arabia are sand dunes and the Playa is flat and has no sand.
Yes.
It is rather it is an alkali flat, which means that it is completely level
with no like there are mountains on the outside of it.
But within the Playa itself, there is no change in elevation at all.
And also everything is alkali, which is the opposite of acidic
and has the same effect as acid, basically,
which means that everything gets slowly corroded,
which is why that middle-aged lady had trouble with her hands
chapping is because there is alkali powder everywhere
and it will corrode everything, including your body.
So you're just getting corrosive dust all over you the whole time.
And it lungs.
And don't bring any electronics with you that you value.
Right.
I've heard that the number one thing about bringing stuff to Burning Man
is don't bring anything that you would be very upset if it was destroyed.
Yeah, except yourself.
I brought my depends how you feel about yourself, I guess.
One great benefit to being alive is that we can heal from things
better than plastic can. Yeah.
I brought my DSLR and spent a long time putting
electrical tape over any space that could possibly get dust in it.
And that was pretty effective.
But if I depended on that DSLR for my living,
I would have gone to much greater lengths to protect it
because it did end up getting slightly damaged.
What is the DLSR?
DSLR is a digital single lens refractor camera.
If you picture a large, fancy still photo camera as opposed to a video camera,
you are probably picturing DSLR unless it actually takes film,
in which case you're picturing an SLR, but they look the same.
OK, I will say that the alkaline is not like it's not like the blood from the aliens.
You don't feel like you're melting at all.
It's just that after a few days, you'll notice your skin is starting to crack
if you haven't been, you know, doing vinegar washes or something.
Yeah. Is that what you did?
Yeah, yeah.
Some vinegar washing every night will help with that immensely.
The most important thing to put it on is your feet.
Yeah, especially if you walk around barefoot or in sandals at all.
Earlier, you mentioned not being a huge fan of the outdoors.
Yeah. And I would say the aspect that we've been discussing now
is definitely the most arduous part of it, and there is no escape from it.
Let me say that I am also not a fan of the outdoors.
I am very much an inside kind of person and I don't have a tan.
The sun burns me.
I actually have a little bit of a tan now because of Burning Man.
But in general, I do not do outdoors either.
I don't go on hikes even though we're right next to the mountains here in Denver.
And I know I should, whatever.
But it's not that bad.
It's certainly uncomfortable.
It's uncomfortable to the point that when someone hands you a cold water bottle,
yeah, you feel thankful.
You're like, I get to hold something that is cold and this is so nice.
And oh, my God, there's water inside it.
So it is it is definitely uncomfortable, but it is not horrible.
I agree. Yeah.
I was never like in pain or anything.
I was just like, this is, you know,
at one point I tripped and cut my leg and then getting alkali dust inside
of a cot is fairly painful.
But I but that was not one of the things that made me upset.
I think I'm also not hugely into outdoors, unlike almost everyone else in my family.
And so I had a similar perspective.
I also don't really go hiking very much despite living near the mountains.
But I think that Burning Man is just difficult and uncomfortable enough
to make you really appreciate the moments of ease and comfort that you get and not
so difficult that it actually makes you miserable or puts you in serious danger.
It is like just the perfect level of uncomfortable to make you not take things
for granted and appreciate stuff.
I agree. Like someone said, you know,
you could go to an art museum and have a hotel vacation and, you know,
on a beach or something, but then you take the hotel for granted.
It's air conditioned. It's just always there.
Whereas out here that you take, you really notice the small things
and you appreciate them.
You know, taking things for granted is something that I appreciate in itself.
Taking a break for it for one week out of your lifetime might be nice, though.
So are you familiar with the 10 principles of Burning Man?
OK. So do you want to go over them like really quick?
Sure. So radical inclusion, which is the idea that anyone can participate
in anything that's going on, gifting the idea of giving things
to other people, which ties directly into the next principle,
which is decommodification.
You are not allowed to sell anything at Burning Man and you are strongly discouraged
from, for instance, meeting up with the other
with the many VCs who attend and trying to pitch your startup to them.
Yeah. But that doesn't mean that doesn't happen because it definitely does.
Can I interrupt you real quickly? Sure.
The thing I was talking about earlier with the culture,
I just remind that the commodification thing reminded me
and which is another thing that I think all people should experience
at least once in their life is I have very much the sort of achievement
based view of life and I don't know where exactly that comes from.
And I think maybe it's even good for human society in general.
But I know the last psychiatrist often said things along the lines of
you want to be noticed and special and have everyone love you,
but you're just like seven billion other people on earth.
Go out and do something special.
Give them a reason to actually care about you.
Right. And that's very much like how I view life in general.
I'm like, yes, I would like to go out and be valuable to society.
I'd like to do accounting or put out a podcast or do something, you know,
that actually makes people want to be around me.
And the really like bizarre thing about Burning Man is that everyone
simply liked me and accepted me because I was a person like that was it.
I was there and they're like, you're a human welcome home,
which is actually something they say, which weird me out at first.
But I got used to it pretty quickly.
Like I was accepted simply because I was a person.
I didn't have to do anything or prove anything.
And no one really has anything on the desert.
Everyone is living in faux poverty and you're giving away anything
that you have anyway, because none of it has much value
and it's not going to last very long.
And the whole thing is like there's only people left.
And there was this one point where someone was dancing with me
and afterwards said, thank you just because I was dancing with her.
And I was like, that is that is insane.
You don't know who I am.
I've never done anything for you.
What's going on here?
So it was really a unique and weird experience
to be liked simply because I exist.
And it's probably the first time I've ever felt that
because even even for my parents, I would get stuff like, you know,
go out, do something with your life.
Why should anyone care?
And having I thought that was normal.
But I mean, they still love me, of course, but they just don't like you.
You're right.
But I still got to be useful.
Yeah. And it was it was that really blew my mind.
And I just once I really grasped that it made the entire week
amazing and magical for me.
And I was like, you said the radical participation.
I was involved in the opening ceremonies just because one of the
the the the main lead dancer carrying the big silk thing around was like,
follow me and the thing was dragging on the ground.
So I picked it up and went with her and I was part of the ceremonies all of a sudden.
It was that's wonderful.
Yeah. So that that definitely ties in with the next few principles,
which are skipping over one of them, radical self expression,
which is the idea that you should go out there and do something
that shows everybody else who you are.
And communal effort, which ties in very much with what you were just saying
about participating in the opening ceremony because there was an opportunity for you to.
Civic responsibility, which is basically just don't be a dick.
Leaving no trace, which is don't be a dick to the place you're in,
in addition to not being a dick to the other people.
And participation, which ties back in with what you were saying earlier
about how you might want to be more of an observer than a participant.
That's discouraged.
Yeah, that's my impression.
And I think that's probably a good thing because there were a fair number,
especially in the group that in the camp that I was in,
there were a fair number of people who had no desire to participate,
but just wanted to watch.
And several of the people in my camp had no desire to do anything
other than see the famous DJs who had come to DJ at the sound camps
and were basically treating this as a music festival that they had to camp out for.
And that's discouraged.
And I think it's a good thing that that's discouraged.
And also, I think that even though it's discouraged,
there's still quite a lot of people who are doing it.
And at least when I went, the Delta was in the direction of more people
coming and not participating.
And personally, I didn't create any art for the purpose of displaying it there.
I participated in the art.
I danced.
I dressed up, but I didn't come with an art car or build an exhibit or anything.
And I kind of wish I had.
I don't think you have to necessarily.
I didn't either.
There's almost nothing you have to do here.
It's just what's encouraged.
Yeah, I actually didn't even come with a costume because I didn't realize that.
But I just I just dress away.
I normally do what people think it's a costume.
Right. No, but I went to the costume cult camp and they gave me a free costume.
And that really made my week.
Costume cult is one of my favorite camps.
They do they're doing the Lord's work.
Also, shout out to BJ Kramer and Mars.
You guys are awesome.
They're from costume camp.
Nice. And they have done voices on the Methods of Rationality podcast.
Oh, good.
Yeah, Hannah Abbott and Barry Onehand.
I feel like I could participate in like utilitarian things that, I don't know,
just odd jobs that need doing, but.
I, you know, I serve tea at the tea house and I think just being present
and talking to people is also somewhat participatory.
I don't want to do that.
Yeah, and it's a big part of it.
Well, a lot of the time, since everything is given out for free,
there's generally lines because correct me.
If I'm wrong here, but one of the impressions I got very early on is
that you aren't just taking things that people are giving away for the most
part, you are paying for them in quotes through appreciation and socialization
with the person that gave them to you.
Like, yeah, let's chat for a little bit.
Like when I went to get my free soup, there was a line of six people in front
of me and I was waiting for about a half hour because every person got to the
front, they would chat with the guy.
They're like, hey, thanks.
This is how my day went.
What's up with you?
And, you know, afterwards I heard here's your soup.
And then the next person went on and like you could not live in the
real world like this.
I could not wait half hour to get my coffee at Starbucks, even if it was free
because I got to talk for five minutes with the server.
But it was fun this time.
And so you get to talk with a lot of people.
Like I said, that's part of the luckiness aspect.
And since you're in line all the time, not all the time, but you're in line
somewhat, you start conversations with the people near you and you pass out
some snacks you brought or some water or give them a beer or something.
And you make a lot of connections in line too.
So that seems cool.
But the idea of like, I socialize with you in exchange for soup.
It's not literally an exchange for soup.
It's almost that, right?
Yeah, almost kind of.
Yeah, yeah, you don't have to have to.
But people are going to start looking at you.
Yeah, they are.
You, yeah, it's the social norm is that you'll be open to participating
in conversations or what have you with strangers.
And you were talking about doing odd jobs.
I would say there's not actually a lot of that because for anything that has to
Sorry, what?
Carrying or cleaning, you can volunteer actually with the organization.
If you wanted to, yeah, there's a census bureau and a number of other.
But really, for anything that has to get done, yeah, they need people
who are already committed and reliable.
And so they aren't really going to have space for people who just show up.
Exactly.
So like, for instance, I volunteered at my camp, like, I mean, I say volunteered,
but it was a requirement of being in the camp.
I helped build a geodesic dome.
And then inside of that dome, I had a few shifts where I made cocktails
and handed them out to people for free, which is fun.
I enjoy doing that.
I often do that at parties because I'm fairly good at it and I enjoy it.
Kind of wish I was handing out something other than alcohol.
Like the tea would have been probably preferable to me because I'd prefer
to hydrate people than dehydrate them in the middle of the desert.
But that was not really something that someone could have just come up
and volunteered to do.
Yeah.
And also, a brief aside, not like a lesson or anything, but just a funny
thing that happened, because it's alcohol, I had to check IDs.
Yeah.
Most people don't carry an ID with them at Burning Man.
No.
So some of them are naked and have no place to put their ID.
Oh, well, what you do, you have to bring your own cup to Burning Man.
Usually most everyone brought their own cup.
So you get one to shed or resist.
You don't have to.
You should.
You should.
You get one of those shadow resistant, heavy plastic ones, and then you
photocopy your ID and just tape it with clear tape to the front.
And I accepted that when people had that.
And if they had gray hair, I accepted that.
But I was really surprised by the number of women who offered to
flash me in exchange for free alcohol.
You know how many tits I see out here.
Yeah, and then I said no, and then they flashed me anyways and demanded
the free alcohol and I continued to say no.
But yeah, I would have given it to them if I hadn't been confident that
there were cops around again.
Were I designing this, I would have left it in California.
Though, of course, at the time that they moved from California to Nevada,
there wasn't actually much difference in the laws.
Yeah.
And now it's so strongly associated with the playa that you really couldn't
move it anywhere else.
Yeah, it'd be really hard at this point.
Does anyone know when it started?
Yes, I don't have it memorized, but someone certainly knows when it started.
I mean, either of you two.
Okay, it was the late 90s and it started on a beach in San Francisco.
Uh, don't know the exact date.
The late 90s.
Yeah, and you know, just a few hundred people in tents, they would, you know,
make like a eight foot, nine foot man out of wood and set him on fire.
First held in 1986.
86.
Yeah.
Oh, wow.
That was even earlier.
Yes.
Yeah, it's been going on for a while longer than I've been going on.
Yeah.
So, for all you know, you were conceived at Burning Man.
I was not.
That would have been a several year pregnancy.
Um, uh, so we, when we were talking about the 10 principles of Burning Man
earlier, did you say you skipped one?
We did.
Yes.
Which I want to go back to now, which is radical self-reliance, which is the
idea that you are not dependent on anyone else there.
And it's like more leaning in that direction.
If not completely, right?
I'm sorry.
Say again.
Leaning in that direction, not like completely, right?
Yeah.
It's something that's encouraged, but in reality, not enforced in any way.
That was the one that I afterwards, I was like, I'm surprised this is a principle
because everyone relied on everyone else a lot.
The intention.
Have you heard the phrase sparkle pony?
Do they still say that?
Yes.
Well, you didn't say it, but they, they were talking about it there.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, um, for any listener who's not familiar with this, a sparkle pony is
someone who shows up to Burning Man with no intention of taking care of themselves,
but instead just wants other people to give them all the things that they need,
like shelter, food, water, drugs, all of that stuff.
And the idea, the reason I think I'm not certain about this from a historical
perspective, but I strongly suspect that the reason that radical self-reliance is
one of the principles is to discourage that sort of behavior because you can't
have everyone behave that way.
If everyone expects everyone else to take care of them, nobody's going to get
taken care of and all of a sudden there's 70,000 corpses in the desert.
In fact, you don't actually have to take care of yourself.
People will take care of you, especially if you are as the stereotypical sparkle
pony is a scantily clad young woman.
But that being said, it seemed like most people brought enough stuff to be more
or less self-reliant and everyone kind of like shared informed a net.
I agree.
No one has exactly all this stuff to be completely self-reliant, but when
everyone does it more or less than it works together as a group.
Yeah, I think it I think that having it as a norm, but not as something
that is strictly enforced is a good middle ground.
And I think that they do a good job of doing that.
But you could also arrange that someone who comes with you could be more
responsible for you.
And that kind of counts as like bringing what you need.
You brought your person sort of.
And a lot of people do do that.
But personally, I disagree with that as a I think that's a bad way of doing it.
And I think I know that a lot of other people agree with me on that
because it sort of breaks the decommodification principle.
And the sort of camp that I think you're describing where someone just pays extra
money and doesn't have to work and doesn't have to take care of what they're
bringing, but instead someone else that they're basically hiring to do it for
them, does it for them.
Those are called turnkey camps.
And those are popular and becoming more popular.
Actually, I'm not sure how it is nowadays, but certainly when I went, a thing
that a lot of people were concerned about was that those were becoming more popular
and it was becoming in vogue for, you know, VCs and wealthy startup guys.
Yeah, that does sound like commodification.
Right.
I was thinking more of like your friend.
I feel more like it's camps are radically self-reliant because you don't
need everyone to bring a gas stove.
But, you know, have someone bring a gas stove, have someone bring the butane,
have someone bring some food.
I made the mistake of thinking, hey, I don't want to be like filling up tons
of space and with coolers and ice and all this various food.
I'm just going to get the most calorie dense foods I can.
Which is what?
So I got a large jar of peanut butter and several pounds of dried apricots
and a lot of oatmeal and by the second day, I was really sick of peanut butter
and apricots and oatmeal.
I can see that.
I was like, I was like, look, just in such a small place, all the calories
I need for a week and I was like, oh God, I can't stomach more of the shit.
But it was nice because, you know, I gave some of that to other people and
they're like, hey, here's some eggs, here's some fruit, here's some things
that you won't feel like just, you're choking it down.
I wonder if anyone brought Soylent.
Yes, I did see Soylent around.
Yeah, you were talking about rationalist aspects of it.
I don't know to what degree you meant that as the community that calls
themselves rationalists and to what degree you meant that as like the set
of skills and ideals that they aspire towards.
But certainly when I went, there was at least one, probably more than one,
explicitly rationalist camp.
Oh, was there?
Yes.
Neat.
And I hung out with them a bit, but I was not a camper with them because
while I was invited to be one, I had already been invited to be a member
of a different camp.
And so I was, I went with the first one that invited me.
I will totally look up this camp and say hi to them next year.
I was the camp I was with, I was invited to it by a rationalist.
So there are at least two of us there, which was neat.
But it was certainly not a rationalist camp.
Yeah.
I was invited to the camp that I was in by a guy who I would say embodies
a lot of the rationalist virtues, even though he doesn't consider himself
a member of that community.
And it was of the people that I got along with very well at the camp.
It was him and Allison and myself.
Okay.
And that was about it.
And that was about it.
This is a total tangent, though, but even though he doesn't consider
himself a rationalist, is he like aware of rationalist topics and in the existence of it?
Yeah, definitely.
I mean, if nothing else, he's talked with me and Allison a lot.
And yeah, he's definitely aware of them.
He's like, I'm pretty sure he's read at least part of the sequences, unless wrong.
He just doesn't participate in that specific self-identified community.
I mean, you've heard the argument that anyone who has opinions about anything
rationalist-adjacent is rationalist, even if their opinion is they hate it.
I have heard that argument.
I have not.
I'm trying to, I hope I bookmarked that because I want to link it in the notes.
But I don't know if I did.
Yeah, but it is, it is.
So in addition to, I mean, I think rationalists would like it partly because it is
just a unique experience.
And I know, like Jenkins was talking earlier in one of our earlier podcasts
about how he likes just doing and trying out unique experiences.
And this is definitely one of them.
You don't run into this sort of thing in the outside world very much.
And I would, I would recommend everyone tried at least once just to give it a try
because it is neat.
But the other thing, because you were wondering what other things
rationalists might get out of it.
Yeah.
This, this I can't say I came up with this on my own, although maybe I would have
thought something similar to it by the end of the week.
I went to see Corey Doctor while I was there and he said that Burning Man is
like a dry run of a post-scarcity society.
And, and I think he kind of has a point.
And it's, I mean, it's obviously not remotely sustainable.
But as I was there, I was like, this is kind of fun.
We all just hang out and get to know each other as humans and like try to
impress each other and entertain each other with art and what other things
we got in the transhumanist utopia.
You don't need to be productive or achieve things except on an interpersonal level.
Yeah.
And it was, it was very, I really enjoyed that.
And I got to thinking, because before I probably even talked with you about this.
In fact, yes, I don't know now saying like humanity has to have some
control over our destiny and I wouldn't want the AI to avert the asteroids
because then the AI makes all the important decisions in the galaxy, right?
Humans don't even matter anymore.
And after I went to this, I was like, I could totally just have non sapient
robots doing all the labor and providing us with all the materials
and food and stuff that we need and just enjoying this, enjoying other people
and trying to like put up flashy new art things or whatever.
And man, it wasn't bad at all.
I'm sure it's not how an actual post-scarcity society would go.
But as a, as a taste is like a dry run, it was really neat
and kind of eyeopening.
And I have, this is one of the reasons I wanted you to be on here,
because I now have much less the feeling that we must be in control
and we must be the ones doing things because man, that was an enjoyable week.
And I'm sure there will still be people who want to be doing things and doing
science and pushing frontiers of knowledge.
But that really was not a bad way to live.
And I, I have much more sympathy for your cause of I like other humans
and just hanging out with them.
Yeah, I don't even like humans that much.
But still, like, friendship is magic.
And that, that's a good basis for meaning the life.
So.
So I would highly recommend anyone who wants to get a taste.
Like I felt more optimistic for humanity afterwards too.
I was like, this is what we could potentially aspire to once we have solved
all the other problems and the human, the, the future of humanity looks
not too bad taking this as, as a sneak peek.
If I can briefly plug a nice role playing game that I think does a good
job of also evoking that post scarcity feeling.
I want to plug free market, which is a role playing game set in the
transhumanist post scarcity future where your goal is to be as entertaining
to the other people in the post scarcity future as you can, because that
gives you access to even more resources.
But there's no way to like die or run out of resources.
It's really fun.
And I recommend it to any listener who wants to get that, get a
sensation of what that possible future might be like.
Cool.
So I want to ask you, Thomas, my impression is that you're a traveler
and you've gone to a lot of places and tried a lot of new experiences.
Yes, this is true.
Yes, my life motto is I'll try anything twice, which is why I said earlier
that I will probably go back to Burning Man at some point.
Okay.
Huh.
And Eneash, are you, I kind of didn't see you as like a, a trying
lots of different things.
No, no, I've not been outside of Denver very often because I dislike the
outside world.
Denver is my home space.
And every now and then like, I think about how it might be nice to live
somewhere else.
And then I'm like, but I would have to leave Denver.
So I won't do that.
That's it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, I mean, do you feel like you maybe have moved more in the direction
of, of being more like Thomas?
I would gladly do this one week out of every year.
I plan to go back at least once more and hopefully more than that, but I'm
certainly not to the point where I can like just cause like Thomas, I know
none of our listeners know this, but like literally just travels the world.
I, I do.
And does things and it's like, well, I'm going to live in Thailand for a
year and I want to see what France is like for a year.
And I'm like, how can you live like that?
I need to know where my paycheck is coming from and where I will sleep.
And oh my God, it's, it seems incredibly stressful.
Well, I've never, well, okay.
That's not true of, I have gotten paychecks before, but I, I own my own
business and the fact that I can do everything I need to do in order to
make a living over the internet is a big help in that.
And I've, I've deliberately structured my life so that I can do this.
And it's a lot of effort and requires a lot of sacrifice.
And if I had decided to do what a bunch of my friends did and stay in the
San Francisco Bay Area and get a job as a programmer, I would probably
have a lot more money, but a lot fewer memories.
And so I've deliberately made that trade off.
It's not for everyone, but for folks who do want that, it's easier and cheaper
than you think.
And so I, if I may, I would like to use this as a, an opportunity to
segue into, uh, alternatives to Burning Man, other things that you
could do that would provide similar experiences, uh, that perhaps are
cheaper or perhaps just similar in amount of time and money that they take.
Yeah.
Um, and I would say the most, uh, the general principle from which we
derive all the options is go to the third world.
Uh, the third world has a lot fewer of the, uh, niceties and infrastructure
than you are used to.
Um, it's more difficult, it's dirty, and it's more exciting.
You get to see things and do things and that you wouldn't normally
and you have to rely on yourself.
Isn't the third world also a rather low trust kind of society though?
I mean, I guess that's a broad way to speak about half the planet, but, uh,
that depends on who you are and what your background is.
For example, I'm a white American, which means that if I go to the third
world and a government official mistreats me, I can complain to the
American embassy and that government is not going to like having worsened
relations with the American embassy, which means that most government
officials will at most want a bribe from me.
And honestly, the fact that government officials take bribes in the third
world is so convenient, like really just being able to hand someone $20
and they leave you alone is amazing.
That's one of my least favorite things about American police is that they are
like they'll vehemently and stridently enforce unjust laws and they'll do,
uh, civil asset for for sure to take your things, but they won't just
take a fucking hundo in order to leave you alone.
Whereas if you go to Egypt and you give someone a hundred dollars,
they'll be a personal servant for a week, even if they're a cop.
But do you not feel any sort of a cringy poverty tourism kind of vibe about
doing that? Well, the specific scenario is just describing was bribing
an official to leave you alone, which no, I don't feel any poverty tourism
aspect of that going to the third world instead of Burning Man.
No, because, um, so if I was paying someone to get rid
of resources that they had or paying them to act in a degrading manner
or something like that, then I might.
But honestly, what I'm doing, what anyone is doing, if they go to the third
world and spend money is that they are giving money to poor third worlders.
And I, it's kind of difficult to make me feel bad about that.
I think that, um, money goes a lot further in the third world.
That's how I've done so much of the traveling that I've done for as little
money as I earn is that earn money in the first world, spend it in the third world.
You're giving money to people who are poor and are going to be able to
make that money go a lot further.
Like, so you as, as an American, as someone who's identifiably foreign
just by looking at you when you show up in Burma or Cambodia or Morocco,
you're clearly not a local.
You will get things much, much cheaper than you will in America, but also
much more expensively than any local would.
And if you're jerk about that and you try to haggle things down to the price
that a local would, I mean, well, first of all, don't feel guilty about haggling.
That's part of the culture in a lot of parts of the world that Americans are
not used to.
Um, but if you're spending more money than a local would, you're injecting a
large amount of cash into the economy, you're extracting what is to them a
relatively small amount of value by like staying in their hostel or hotel or
Riyadh or whatever it is you're staying in, um, or buying a meal,
buying some sort of souvenir, buying clothing, whatever it is that you're
buying, you're probably paying more than a local would.
You're paying less than you would to buy it in your home country.
You're giving a lot of money to the people who are there, who are then going
to spend it on other things in their local economy.
And really, as long as you're not paying anyone to do anything unethical, you're
just putting a lot of money into the economy.
Aren't you?
Okay.
So one of the things I really worry about the third world is, uh, being, you
know, basically the crime being victimized, like you are a foreigner.
You don't really have any support structure there.
I would be scared.
You do have a support structure.
You have quite a few.
So, so I'll take the example of Thailand, which is a wonderful place for people
who are concerned about, uh, traveling and who maybe who are inexperienced.
Thailand is a great place to start because Thailand is according to the
technical definition of third world country, which is to say that they were
not allied with America or the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
The America allied with America means your first world allied with the
Soviet Union means your second world.
So unimportant that you were not allied with either means you are in the third world.
Thailand is, first of all, quite safe.
Second of all, if someone within the government mistreats you, then you
complain to the embassy and they will cause a shit fit on your behalf.
And they have all of the resources of America and nobody else can match that.
And so they don't and, and, and related to that.
And more importantly, they don't want to mistreat you because they want
you to come there and spend money and they want you to have a good time.
They want you to come back and do what I'm doing, which is encouraging
my friends to do the same thing because it's great and they benefit from it.
You benefit from it and everyone wins.
And also in Thailand, specifically, and also in some other countries, but not
all, there is a thing called tourist police, which is a entire branch of the
police force specifically designed to protect tourists because they really
want you to go there and spend your fancy American dollars.
And so basically, as an American, less so if you're a person of color, but if
you're white and even if you're not white, but you're identifiably not tie
or whatever the other dominant ethnicity of wherever you are, people will
treat you better than the locals.
The locals will treat you better than they will treat other locals because they
want to be nice to you because there's a chance they'll spend money on them because
they want to be nice to you because they know that you could rain hellfire down
upon them if they behaved badly towards you.
Now I'm getting a lot of privilege guilt.
Well, don't feel guilty about it.
If you want to feel, if you want to assuage your guilt, buy things.
Okay.
I mean, money is the unit of caring.
If you want to show that you care about the locals, give them money.
Don't just hand them money.
That's not good.
Give them a fair, what you consider a fair amount of money in exchange for the
goods or services that they provide to you, which is totally fair and everyone
encourages it.
But I think that this does sound like it would be a valuable experience, but you
would also be missing out on that dynamic of Burning Man, where almost everyone
there, unless they're one of the powerful organizers, is kind of the same.
Like they come there with the same amount of power.
That was a very unique part of it, the equalization.
That's certainly true.
And I'm not saying this will, that any of these alternatives, which kind of
got sidetracked, didn't talk about, but I'm not saying that any of these
alternatives will perfectly replicate the experience.
I'm saying that for some of the things that you might want to get out of Burning
Man, there are other ways to do it, which are perhaps more effective and perhaps
cheaper.
I do want to say that, I mean, Burning Man certainly isn't cheap, but it's not
third world cheap, but it's not that expensive.
I think my ticket plus camp plus all my supplies together came to a thousand
dollars or less.
Right.
Which for the same price, I could fly to Cambodia, go to Angkor Wat every day,
and Angkor Wat.
Goodness.
Is it the capital of Cambodia?
It is.
No.
Phnom Penh is the capital of Cambodia.
Angkor Wat translates as ancient temple.
It is the largest religious building in the world.
Oh.
It's this phenomenal temple that is within this ancient city called Angkor
Thome, which translates as ancient city.
And it's, I would say it's one of the modern wonders of the world, except it's
also how much of an experience that is because I was down in the ruins, the
Aztec ruins, like one of the really large ones.
And it was, I mean, it was impressive.
And when I went, you were still allowed to climb up the pyramids.
You're not allowed to anymore, but I actually got to climb up the pyramid and
be at the top and like serve be ruler of all I survey, you know, it was kind of
neat, but I mean, as an experience, it, it did not compare at all to, to even a
few hours at Burning Man, or maybe I am, I don't want to overplay Burning Man,
but the, the culture of it really made a big difference to me and, and all the
art installations everywhere around and the harsh environment, like everything
together made it special in a way that seeing the, the Aztec ruins wasn't.
So I've never actually been to South America or even Central America
outside of Panama.
So I haven't, while I'm interested in Mesoamerican cultures, like Aztecs and
Mayans, I haven't experienced that firsthand.
But speaking specifically about the ancient Khmer culture in Cambodia, yes, I
would say that it does compare and that the, the rules about what you're allowed
to do in Cambodia are much laxer than the impression I've gotten from Mexico,
which is where I'm guessing that you saw Aztecs things.
Um, and so specifically in Corwatt, I said that one because it's the most famous
one, it's the one people are most likely to know the name of, but the other
temples, uh, in the other, not even temples, but like just city, uh, and,
and other things in Cambodia or in Myanmar slash Burma, whichever you feel
like calling it, um, are less supervised than that.
You are able to just go wherever you want.
You can climb on the buildings.
You can go inside of them.
None of it is off limits.
Um, and you can explore everything.
And, uh, so a large aspect of Burning Man is the fact that it's in this playa.
It's in the desert.
You can see as far as light can travel.
Um, and that is a similar, but distinct experience from being in Cambodia,
which is a rainforest.
It's a jungle.
You can't see more than a few feet in front of you until all of a
sudden there's this enormous stone temple rising out of the jungle.
That's like a hundred feet tall and you can climb up to the top of it.
And there's in specifically in Angkor want, there will be hundreds of other
people there, but if you go a few hundred meters away to a different temple
that you have to find in the jungle, there's no one there.
And to me, that is a thing.
I enjoy a great deal.
Um, at Burning Man, there's always lots of other people around, uh,
which has its own benefits and lets you participate and commune with and,
and talk to and dance with and all that other, other sort of thing.
And the other people were like half of my experience.
Yeah.
Yeah, definitely.
And so I would say that aspect of it is not something you could get with by
doing this, but the, uh, wandering through a difficult environment
until you find amazing art that you can definitely do by going to Cambodia.
Yeah.
Oh, do you have other alternatives?
Uh, yeah.
So the three places that I would recommend the most to try to get the,
um, uh, to recreate some of the experiences of Burning Man are Angkor
Tom in Cambodia, Bagon in Myanmar slash Burma, which is a, uh, what used to be a
capital of the Burmese kingdom.
And it was a tradition for more than a thousand years that the king would
build at least one temple there.
And it was sort of a matter of pride that you would build more or better
temples than the previous king.
And now Bagon is this tiny village that barely anyone lives in.
And the number of temples far out numbers, the number of humans there.
And so that is an incredible experience there.
You can, uh, it's a desert, except it also has trees.
I don't know a lot about ecology, but I'm surprised that it manages to combine
the amount of sand with the number of trees.
But, um, but you rent a bicycle, uh, whereas in Burning Man, you bring your own
bicycle and then you bike around from amazing art thing to amazing art thing.
And maybe you meet up with other fellow travelers and hang out with them, or maybe
you don't encounter anyone all day long.
Uh, but in either case, you get to see fabulous, incredible art in both places.
Um, and the other place that I've been that I would recommend, if you want to
get the, uh, incredible art and people in feels a little strange to use the word
exotic, but exotic clothing and mannerisms, um, is North Africa.
Uh, I would say that if you want to go experience what it's like to be in an
incredible desert, go to like, go to an oasis in North Africa, go to Marrakesh in,
in Morocco, if you want to see, um, people with stands, uh, excitedly trying to get
you to participate in a conversation with them.
Um, definitely doesn't have the decommodification spirit of Burning Man.
Cause the conversation they want is always, do you want to buy this thing?
Right?
Well, eventually, first they want to give you free tea and then they want to talk
about your family and their family.
And then they want to talk about the stuff that they have and then maybe they
want to sell you something, maybe means yes, but they'll phrase it as maybe.
Yeah.
Um, and so you were talking about how all of this stuff at Burning Man combined cost
only a thousand dollars for a week.
Yeah.
And including plane tickets.
That's several times what I would pay to go to Cambodia for a month.
So I still, I mean, if I had a thousand dollars, I still
think I would pick Burning Man in large part because I now know a number of the
people that are going there and I get that and it was, it was really neat chatting
with absolutely everyone about everything.
I got to meet someone who is pitching NASA, trying to convince them which one
of the three sites that they're down to on Mars, the next rover is going to land
at and, and he was like, I really want to go to this one because it's kind of like
the Yellowstone of Mars.
And like he got into the whole thing and I was like, oh my God, and you're
actually working with NASA.
And he's like, yeah, this is, and right, you know, that was, that was amazing.
And just, it was a random hippie dude that was in our camp.
I thought that he was like cheat or something.
You know, I, I, I definitely agree.
And I think that's a very strong point in favor of Burning Man is that the
people that you meet there are not the same people that you would meet in any
of the locations I described.
The stuff I was talking about is more in terms of if you want to have the
being in a slightly physically arduous situation and looking at amazing art.
Okay.
Um, I would say another big aspect of Burning Man is that it is more dense in
terms of the number of experiences that you will be able to have per unit
distance or per unit time.
Yeah.
Um, and so for me, I have structured my life such that if I want to live in
Cambodia for three months and spend every day at ancient temples, I can do that.
And like my first game, Professor Pognatius was play tested in one of those
temples just because that was where I wanted to hang out all day.
Cool.
And so if you have only a week, right?
If you have one or two weeks of vacation time a year and you want to get as much
experience as you can during that time, then yeah, maybe trying to spend a month
in Cambodia isn't going to work as well for you.
Yeah.
Have you been to many music festivals or art festivals?
Um, I've been to a few.
I wouldn't say many.
I'm not one, like I know people who go to as many of those as they can.
And I'm not one of those folks, but I've been to a few.
Do you find the same kind of value from those at all?
Or same as Burning Man or same as something like similar to?
Um, so I would say a large portion of what I found unique about Burning Man compared
to those sort of things is the 24 seven aspect of it, that you go to sleep with
stuff going on and you wake up with stuff going on.
And you will never see in one trip all of what there is to see in Burning Man.
Even if you just stay up as late as you can and do nothing but try to experience things.
Yeah, certainly.
And I would say that like when I've been to other festivals, they were things that I
would go to in the morning, leave in the evening, and then maybe I'll go back to
them to the next day.
But in the meantime, I go home, I go to sleep in my bed, I wake up the next morning
and then I go back to the festival.
I haven't been to another camping festival like that.
But I would be really curious if there are any listeners who have been to
something like Pensac, I would be really curious to see how they would compare them.
Maybe this is an example of another thing that you tried that because you like trying
things and and do you think that like?
Well, let me just ask you, like, where does this come from?
Do you just have like an instinctive urge to do new things?
Yeah, I do.
So your values, maybe, or how do you view this?
Yeah, so I do have a very strong desire to have new experiences.
And I consciously decided that my life motto would be I'll try anything twice
because the first time you might just mess up or have a bad example of it.
But if you try it twice and you don't like it either time, then it's fine to decide
you don't want to do it anymore.
So, yeah, I'm naturally very open to new experiences.
That's one of the big five personality traits.
And I score pretty high on it.
And also I've made a conscious decision.
To cultivate that in myself and deliberately expose myself to a variety of experiences.
For example, around age 13, when I was entering puberty, I became pretty confident that I was gay.
But I made the conscious decision that at some point in my life, I would experiment
sexually with a woman.
And then later, when I was in my early 20s, I did.
And to my surprise, it turns out I like ladies, too.
And now I'm married to one.
I didn't see that coming.
Was it really that surprise?
Just like the empirical evidence was what it took to let you know.
Yes.
Yeah.
And in fact, there was a very strange and surprising change in my internal
experience that I had previously not noticed that like one woman was more
attractive than another one or like just the thought of them as a sexual being didn't
naturally occur to me until after I had experimented with one.
That is so weird.
Like I would previously look at a woman and not have any sexual thoughts the same way
that I look at a giraffe and I don't have any sexual thoughts.
Or I look at a car and I don't have any sexual thoughts.
But then after I'd had sex with one, it seems kind of dehumanizing.
After I'd had sex with a woman, which wasn't even PIV, it was just or whatever it was.
Sorry, what?
No, no, go ahead.
After that, my automatic, instinctive response to looking at a woman changed.
And now I instinctively evaluate them as a potential sex partner the same way that
I do whenever I look at a man.
What age were you?
22.
Do you think the same thing might happen?
Do you think the same thing might happen if you did have sex with a giraffe?
Maybe.
I can't tell.
Okay.
Because I have heard of people when they were taking testosterone specifically, that
they found themselves much more susceptible to sexual imprinting after trying like masturbating
to a thing once or twice on testosterone.
They suddenly had a fetish for that thing, whereas that wouldn't have happened before.
I've never taken...
Well, I've also heard that and I agree.
That's definitely a real thing.
I was not taking and have never taken any sort of testosterone supplementation.
And I would assume that based on my rather limited knowledge of human biology, that the most
like increase of testosterone in my system was happening when I was going through puberty.
And this was like a decade after that.
Yeah.
But this is like surprise, but also you are the kind of person who would do that experiment.
So I don't know.
Well, another little bit of information.
I had already previously had sex with a woman like penetrative PIV sex professionally in a porn
scene, and that is not a good environment to experiment in.
That is nothing like real sex.
It is not.
It's very much the director telling you exactly what to do.
And hilariously enough, the premise of that scene, the storyline was that there was me and
another man and a woman, and we in the story both wanted to have sex with the woman, but she
would only have sex with us if we had sex with each other first.
But in reality, me and the other man were both gay at the time.
And so we were totally rock hard for having sex with each other.
But then when it came to having sex with her, it was more difficult.
So that I counted that that that is an excellent example of why I'll try anything
twice, because that was the first time I tried it.
And I was just like, you know what, I don't think this is a very representative sample.
I'm going to try again in an environment where there's nobody telling us what to do.
It's just the two of us and we can, you know, figure things out.
How the hell did you stumble into porn without, like, trying to get a job in porn?
I did try to get a job in porn.
Oh, you did? Oh, OK.
Because he wanted to try new things.
All right, it sounded like you just somehow found yourself on a porn set.
Oh, no, no, I applied and got the job.
OK, cool.
Would you like to hear the specific story of how that happened?
I'm interested.
Are you interested?
Sure. Hit us.
All right.
So what would have been sophomore year of college?
My mom did not fill out her taxes on time.
She filed for an extension.
You can't file for an extension on the FAFSA and you have to do your taxes
before you can do the FAFSA.
So all of my scholarships evaporated.
So I had to take a year off.
So I was like, OK, I'm going to try to get a job while I'm taking a year off of college.
So this was in 2008, which was the height of the Great Recession.
And it was hard to get a job.
So I applied to everything I could find, didn't get anything.
I was talking with my dad and I was saying, I can't get a job.
I can't find anything that's anyone that's willing to hire me.
He says, hey, have you looked on Craigslist yet?
And I went, no, I haven't.
And at the time, they no longer do.
But at the time, Craigslist had an adult jobs section.
So I was going on Craigslist.
I looked and I saw adult jobs.
I'm like, that sounds good for a laugh.
I'll click on that.
So I clicked on it.
And the very first job that popped up was we are looking for
white men ages 18 to 25 who are willing to have gay sex on camera for money.
And I thought that sounds like a perfect description of me.
So I applied and I got the job.
Neat. Yeah, it was pretty good.
Yeah. Were you were you living in California?
No, Denver. Denver. Yeah.
I didn't know they shot porn in Denver.
Well, technically, the shooting didn't happen in Denver.
Shooting happened a bit north of here.
But it was in Colorado.
Yeah. I was under the impression like almost all porn was either Nevada or
California, no, Berlin, obviously.
No, there's a lot of indie porn that happens all over the place.
It's local laws vary what you're allowed to shoot in different places.
But within America, it's not.
I don't know of a lot of places that are super restrictive.
Fun trivia fact in Australia, it is illegal to shoot what they consider
hardcore pornography in any of the states, which means you have to shoot them
in the capital territory, which is Australia's equivalent of Washington, DC.
It's technically not a state.
And so in Australia, if you're a porn actor, you will get you will be able
to do solo shoots where it's just you masturbating wherever you are.
But if they want to do a shoot with penetrative sex, they have to fly you
to the capital territory, which basically consists of the capital hotels to support
the congressmen and people who go there and a lot of porn studios.
And that is so bizarre, because like in America, you cannot pay for sex
unless you're filming it.
And in Australia, you can only pay for sex if you're not filming it.
Right. Weird.
Yeah, it's pretty odd.
None of these laws make sense to me.
I got to say, though, this story updates my credence, I guess, a little bit,
not that much in the direction that if I were to experiment with, I'm going to say
people who read to me as a woman that it would be surprising to me.
I mean, slightly more in that direction, although I mean, I just I'm generally
not the kind of person who is surprised by liking something.
But give it a shot someday with a willing subject.
Yeah, I definitely think that folks who think they might want to experiment ought to.
I think it's a valuable experience that if you do it with someone else who is also
fully informed and aware and into that, which is what I did, then there's a
not a large chance that it will be really bad, and there's at least, you know,
a moderate chance that it'll be really great.
And probably the largest chance is that it'll just be kind of a comedy of errors.
But that's fine, too.
Yeah, I mean, I'm kind of the opposite of you.
Like I'm very low on the openness to experience.
And I remember you saying that you were unwilling to take acid because you didn't
want to increase your openness.
No, I mean, I did take acid.
But but and actually it was mushrooms specifically in that study was on.
But yeah, that was one of the things that I was a little worried about.
I did take mushrooms also.
But did it increase your openness or were you safe?
I don't think that it did.
But I don't want it to. Right.
I don't. Yeah.
Stephen said that he is as much as he said he did enjoy it,
but he didn't feel like there was any major change in his life after either.
Yeah, I don't want major change to my personality.
This varies by the person.
I did not. I don't like mushrooms.
First time I did mushrooms, the guy that I did them with just sort of left as soon
as they started kicking in. Oh, that's shitty.
And then I got lost on my college campus because it's hard to find your way around
when you're on mushrooms.
And I ended up in a basement of a dorm that I was not a resident of watching.
Like all the lights were turned off and people were playing Pink Floyd's The Wall
on a giant screen television, and it was terrifying.
Oh, no.
So that's my primer for mushrooms.
I've tried them since then.
One additional time.
I'll try anything twice.
And I basically just had flashbacks to the previous experience the whole time.
So to follow Terran's guide.
What's that? Being a familiar place with people who love you.
Yeah, that would have been better.
Oh, before you left, you were going to tell us some other things
that you disliked about your experience at Burning Man.
Yeah. Right.
So, yeah, the reason I brought up the the 10 principles of Burning Man is that
I found that I think I went in expecting the event
to conform to those principles more than it did, in particular
with the radical inclusion one, and that earlier you were talking about
how you basically just sort of wandered aimlessly, found something cool,
did it for a while, and then went off to something else.
Cool. Yeah.
That's a much better way of doing it than what I did, which is I spent
a long time poring over the list of events and figuring out which ones
I wanted to go to, and of the things that I decided I wanted to go to.
I only managed to successfully find one of them, which was a
make your own armored bikini event.
And yeah, that was my reaction.
I'm like, that's super cool.
I bet I would look good in an armored bikini.
Let's let's do this.
So I went to it and I was not allowed to participate
because I don't have boobies.
Oh, it was this middle aged man who wanted to look at a lot of 20
something topless women.
I wasn't one of those.
And so I wasn't allowed to participate.
It's not even hard to find topless women.
Yeah, you walk around in the playa and they're just there.
Yeah, I mean, dude, that sucks.
Yeah, it did.
And that was I think that and part of the charm of burning man for me
was that you just go and no matter where you go, there's something neat.
And you're like, I will do this for a while.
And every now and then it'll be an amazing thing.
And other times you're like, well, that was neat.
And you go back to camp and someone else is like, I was at this intersection
where this amazing pianist came out and gave everyone headphones.
And like, so it muffled everything else, but you could hear his awesome solo,
but only the people with the headphones could hear it.
And I was like, that sounds fantastic.
I wish I'd been there.
But part of burning man is that you don't get to see everything.
You know, yeah, and you hear about cool stuff.
Yeah, but I also heard a lot of events happen on playa time in air quotes,
which means we're aiming to start it for.
You'll be lucky if it's started by six kind of thing.
Yeah.
And so I would say the two lessons that I would
encourage anyone who's considering going to burning man to to learn
are number one, pick your camp very carefully.
Make sure that your philosophy and your camps
philosophically mesh well and that you like the people in your camp.
And second, don't try to go to any one specific event.
Unless it's like an enormous one, like the burning of the man
or the burning of the temple, those are reliable and you can go to.
And it will be what it is.
Dude, even the opening ceremony started three hours late.
Yeah, like, I don't even remember if I went to the opening ceremony when I was there.
I went at first and I wandered off because it was so long.
And then by the time I wandered back, they were starting.
Yeah.
That worked out well.
Yeah. So I think that in general, something that is very powerful and
not necessarily neglected, but not focused on as much as maybe it could be
is the peak end effect, which is the idea that for an experience,
what you remember and what impacts you the most is not what the
like what your average emotional quality and it was, but rather what the most
significant emotional feeling you had and what the last one you had were.
And so for me, the most significant one was going to all the effort
to find and go to that armored bikini thing and then being turned away.
And the last one was the organizer of my camp being extremely negative
towards another member of the camp who had been more less a fair and just sort
of go around and not want to stick around the camp and hand out alcohol all the time.
And so while there were a lot of other really wonderful things that happened
at Burning Man, those are the two that stuck with me the most and formed
the majority of my opinion of it, which is what made me have the negative
effect towards it that I do.
OK. But there was a lot of other things that were really incredible,
like the veil that Allison wore at our wedding.
We found just blowing through the air on the playa and it like just sort of
connected with like the wind sort of blew it into her face and she kept it.
And that was the veil she wore at our wedding.
That's awesome.
Yeah. And there was a, you know, those fortune telling robots,
where you like feed them, normally you give them a dollar and they well,
they had one at a card.
Yeah, exactly. They had one at Burning Man that was a quest giver.
You didn't have to feed it a dollar because decommodification,
but you press the button and it gives you a quest.
And the quest that it gave me was give Allison a massage.
It literally said the name Allison. Oh, awesome.
I was like, well, more easily accomplished than perhaps expected.
Luckiest place on earth.
Swear to God.
Yeah. So it was a really, there really is an incredible amount of wonderful things there.
And I don't want to make it seem all negative.
I just also think that a lot of people make it seem all positive.
And that's not what it's like because that's not what anything is like.
And knowing what the negatives are that you should expect and that things like,
oh, no, I've, it's things are too expensive.
Well, no, you know what?
All the expenses are up front.
That's not the negative you have to worry about.
The negatives are things like, can you sleep because it is very loud?
Nobody told me about that ahead of time.
So I did bring earplugs, but if I hadn't, that would have been obnoxious.
Yeah. Even with earplugs, if you're next to a sound camp, it doesn't matter.
You can feel it through your air mattress.
That's true.
Did you have any other questions for us regarding the Burning Man?
What about the Burning of the Man?
How is that?
Oh, that is really neat.
It's, I mean, again, Burning Man is what you make of it, but it is a giant,
like fire ritual with fireworks and all around it beforehand.
There's a lot of fire dancers.
There's literally over a hundred fire dancers, I think, around the ring,
just doing awesome fire tricks, and then they light it up and fireworks start going.
And this, you are at least a hundred yards away from the man.
There is a large perimeter for safety reasons.
And yet when it is really going, it is still kind of painful.
I like put my hands up to shield the rest of my body.
It's like, oh God, too hot.
It's already burning hot.
And then there's a fire, right?
Well, it happens at night.
Okay. Yeah.
And it's, yeah, it happens at night, but it is just, I did not know
that wood fire can get that hot.
I was like, I would have believed it of jet fuel, maybe, or the sun, but I, like,
I felt like I was going to get a sunburn.
And I was like, all right, there's no UV coming out of this, but it's crazy hot.
Yeah.
I found the, I found the burning of the temple, which happens the day
after the burning of the man, even more affecting personally, because I spent
a moderate amount of time in the temple and there was a lot of.
Uh, I think probably don't tell people on air what's at the temple, because I
had no idea what to expect along all this art and partying and stuff.
And then I walked into the temple and it hit me like a ton.
I would say that it's a, um, I'll respect your wish, but I will say one thing,
which is that, um, even as someone who didn't personally participate in the
stuff that is in the temple, except as sort of like an observers or going
there to meditate, um, it was a powerful moment of catharsis.
And I think that for people who do actively participate in it, it would be
even more so.
And so I think my time at the temple was the most powerful of my week there.
And, and then the burning of it afterwards is quite something.
Um, also this year, I don't know if you observed this directly or not.
In fact, I was, I was sitting right there when I, he wasn't like right next to
us, but I saw him running all the way in.
I thought he was streaking at first.
Yeah.
You, okay.
So for anyone who doesn't know the event we're referring to, uh, a man
committed suicide by running into the burning man, um, so that gives you an
idea of how emotionally powerful an event it can be.
Um, though going back once more to, uh, the themes of disappointment and
things being different than you expected, I expected quite a bit more
fire at burning man than I actually encountered the amount of, of things
illuminated by neon, I mean, not only rarely by literally neon, but like by
electric lights, uh, was easily a hundred times the amount of things that were
illuminated by fire.
That's true.
But was it not fucking gorgeous?
It was, uh, I there, so there's no public lighting in burning man and it is a
huge area and a lot of people get by on bikes and even the people, and there's
some art cars that drive around too.
So it is everyone's civic responsibility to keep themselves lit at night.
Yes.
And since it's burning man in some art place, a lot of people do it with cool
like neon lights and stuff.
And oh my God, it is so pretty.
It is, it makes Vegas look like shit.
I don't know if I'd go that far.
Well, I already think Vegas is kind of shitty, but man, just the
authenticity and the individual expression on display as well.
Fair enough.
This is another example of the sort of thing that you can get in, uh, specifically
Southeast Asia.
Oh, yeah, they're, yeah, they're very much into incorporating, uh, beautifully
colored electric lights into religious ceremonies and religious, um, uh, like
you'll, you'll see ancient temples with a giant Buddha statue covered in gold
leaf and then also covered in fire in fairy lights because it makes it look
awesome.
Yeah.
And if you are not, I think here in America, we have sort of a tendency to
consider lights like that to be tacky.
Yeah.
Um, but gorgeous.
Yeah.
I agree.
I think they look spectacular.
And as someone who's a big fan of visual spectacle, I like that a lot.
I liked the, that aspect of burning man a lot.
And also I like Las Vegas a lot.
Okay.
So I'm going to go ahead and address this because I'm pretty sure someone is
going to bring it up.
And I asked a number of people at Burning Man themselves this opinion, but, uh,
while I was going there, I kept being struck that this is like literally a
city in the desert.
It's not a ton of infrastructure.
It's more of a tent city, but there is a lot of effort being put into like human
labor and ingenuity and, and just resources being burned, putting this stuff
up, right?
Certainly.
Yeah.
And, um, and then some of the things that you put up are literally destroyed in,
in a fire ritual, you know?
And then once it's all over, everything is taken back down again and all that
labor just disappears and it seems, it seems so wasteful.
I'm like, if you're going to put all this effort into something, there should
be something remaining afterwards.
Infrastructure, you know, but I was like, what is the justification for all these
resources being spent here on, I guess, what could be called hedonism and some
of it, and some of it being literally destroyed for the fun of destroying it.
And when, when this could be used for something more permanent and good.
So this is one of the reasons why I sort of think like, so the reason I brought
up the 10 Burning Man principles before is that, uh, there was at least one
noticeable instance for me for each of these where the principle was blatantly
violated and the idea that, oh, Burning Man is a decommodified thing that
costs a thousand dollars for one week of participation.
And that's on the low end.
Um, it is like absolute bare minimum.
If you don't expend any of your own resources and you just mooch off of other
people, it's $400 for the ticket.
Right.
And then it's probably another $400 for your camp.
If you're staying in a camp, which almost everyone does.
My camp is only $150.
Okay.
That's pretty cheap.
Yeah.
Um, I mean, you have to work 18 hours throughout the week to, to contribute
but, and bring, you know, food and everything.
Right.
So, but, but even so, your total ended up being around a thousand.
My total ended up being around a thousand.
Um, and then, uh, I also object to people referring to it as a city because it is
not sustainable.
It is only possible because people are willing to expend far more resources
per individual there than any other city.
Like the one I would compare it to that is a real city is Las Vegas because they
are both, uh, absurd glowing spectacles in the middle of the desert that are man
shaking his fist at the heavens and daring Zeus to strike him down for his hubris.
And Las Vegas makes it work 24 hours a day, 365 days a year for however many
decades Las Vegas has existed now and Burning Man makes it work for one week a
year.
And I find that there's this sort of idea among many burners that like, oh, look,
this is an example of what we could make a post capitalist post scarcity society
look like.
And I'm like, right.
In the sense that this sort of environment is only possible either in a situation
that is post scarcity or where people are willing to expend far more than their
average weekly expenditure of resources.
But you can't make that sort of society exist outside of that.
You couldn't do that 52 weeks a year because unless you are independently
wealthy and willing to expend a large amount of your resources or if robots do
all the labor and gather all the resources.
Well, yeah, I used, I used the present tense to literally, you can't do that now.
Maybe in the future we'll be able to, but right now you can't.
And so I think that holding Burning Man up as this sort of garden of Eden where
no one needs any money, man, is a lie.
Yeah.
And I think it's a harmful lie that deludes people into thinking that this
sort of thing is a more ethical or more efficient.
Isn't quite the right word, but I also think it's far less efficient because
a lot of the electricity is run on gas generators and camps.
Oh, absolutely.
Which is far less efficient than having a large central generator or, you know,
you certainly aren't going to have little nuclear generators in your camp.
Right.
So, yeah, the pollution per megawatt is, I'm sure, much higher in Burning Man
than most glasses in the world.
Burning Man generates, I'm absolutely certain, an enormous amount of waste
compared to any other city of the same amount, well, village of the same size.
And I think you described it as hedonistic a moment ago, and I agree with that.
It is very much a festival of hedonism.
But it can be hedonism in the good way too, like the hedonism of seeing art
and interacting with other humans as real people.
Oh, I agree.
I don't think hedonism is a bad thing.
I just think that we should not delude ourselves into thinking that it is
something other than what it really is.
It is a fun vacation that people do for fun.
Yes.
It is not a getting back to the true spiritual nature of the world
and living more in harmony with the Gaia Earth Mother.
Yeah.
It is spending $1,000 to party for a week.
And if you hurt yourself, you're not going to get an infected limb and die of that.
You're going to be helicoptered to a hospital.
Yeah, probably.
Yeah, definitely.
Well, I saw the ambulance take the man away.
Yeah, I mean, unless you hide it from other people.
Right, yeah.
But yes, yeah, you're not actually forced to be self-reliant the way that you are,
if for instance, you camp in the woods.
So, yeah, I think that if people who go to Burning Man,
especially people who identify as burners and go to other smaller burn events,
need to be more honest and forthright and upfront about what Burning Man
actually is and what you can actually expect from it and how you should go into it,
then at least then they were when they were talking to me before I went.
But of course, that was several years ago, so I don't know how much it's changed.
I haven't been living in the Bay Area, which is the cultural center of Burning Man activity
when Burning Man isn't actively going on.
I also had the advantage of not knowing anything or having any expectations.
Like I met at least one person who very much bought into what you're saying.
He was one of the guys that was telling me, man, the money's all a lie.
Nobody really has to work for anything.
Look at how Burning Man works and I'm doing the stoner voice,
but dude, he literally had the stoner voice.
It was crazy, but for the most part, the people I interacted with all knew
that this was not a sustainable thing, that this was a and this is why.
I'm going to go ahead and defend Burning Man, that it is a unique experience
and the fact that it is so temporal or temporary, it's part of the ethos of Burning Man.
It's sort of like the whole, whatever the, is it a Buddhist thing or a Zen thing
that all things pass away and don't hold on to anything?
That's definitely a Buddhist thing.
I don't know very much about Zen.
Okay, but it was that sort of thing.
Like everything is temporary, enjoy it and let it go.
And that is why we're burning this at the end and that the entire culture
of that really helped me to embrace that for a week.
I'm not, I wouldn't build my life on that, obviously, but because I am who I am.
But having it for one week was, I think, really worth the trip.
And I would recommend it to everyone and seeing all that art was amazing.
And in the end, having, getting to get a little sneak peek at what a post-scarcity
future might be like is also worth it.
And I'm willing to, to pay $1,000 for a week for that.
Yeah.
And I think since you didn't have false conceptions, like misleading preconceptions
about what you would be experiencing, I think you went into that with a healthier
attitude than I did.
And I actually have some questions for you about how it's changed since I did it.
Oh, let me also toss in one thing.
And for anyone who does feel guilty, dude, remember Scott Alexander's 10% thing.
As long as you're giving your 10%, you can spend the rest of your money on anything
and you fulfilled your moral obligation.
Okay.
But sorry, go ahead.
So I'd like to briefly describe the culture and what people perceived as how the culture
was likely to change back when I did it, which was four or five years ago.
And I'd like to hear how it has changed and what the cultural perception was from you now.
So back then, there was very much a concern that the original ethos and the people who
had been coming to Burning Man for 20 or 30 years, that the culture was changing out from
under them and that it was turning from people come and build art that is largely made out
of fire into, and they participate in the 10 principles and do a lot of communal art
and everyone participates and everyone generates art, even if that's just dancing, that's an
art form.
And the fear was that it was turning into people pay a bunch of money in order to have
servants take care of all of their camp's needs.
They show up and never expend any effort.
They just watch the art.
A lot of the art turns from fire into neon and a lot of, and there are like big name DJs
who put on sets and people, the same sort of person who would spend $1,000 to fly to
Europe to go to a rave instead, or in addition, spends $1,000 to go to Burning Man to go to a rave.
So how much do you think that it has turned into that?
And how much do you think the direction has changed?
So as a caveat, it's 70,000 people there, and I saw only like a tiny slice of it.
So I don't know if I'm representative.
However, what I saw was a larger mix of people.
There were definitely the Old Guard.
Our camp elder has gone 18 times, I think, and he skipped a few years.
So it's been at least like 23 years ago was his first time, I think.
And he was very much of the original ethos still.
And he promoted that to the rest of our camp.
And I saw that being lived for the most part with the people that I did meet.
However, since I was there mostly for the art, I didn't really go to the big
rave or stuff.
I did one night go out to one of the huge soundcams, like massive towers in the
sky. It was like a fucking tower of Babylon that was blasting boots and pants
and had fire dancers in front of it.
It was it was kind of cool, actually.
But even the people that I met that were doing that seemed pretty cool
for the most part.
So there was there was a similar sort of fear, though.
There were I heard a few times people saying, man, did you hear about that
camp where you just pay $20,000 and they do everything for you and you get an
air conditioned, you know, jacuzzi inside your RV and everything.
Like, man, that is against the ethos.
And then there were also some people that complained that apparently this
year for the first time you could rent bicycles with money because you've
always been able to buy coffee and ice, right?
Yes.
You can buy coffee at center camp.
That's the only commodity you can buy and then you can buy ice in a few
locations, which I consider really just a necessity of life kind of thing.
But those are the only things you can spend money for in Burning Man up
until this month or this year where now they also had one place where you
could rent bicycles for $100.
Yeah.
And they were purchased a bicycle for less than that.
I did, too.
Yeah.
But I had to carry it on my car.
So I don't know.
Maybe it's worth the extra money to not have to bring it in.
But so there was, there was some complaining about that, too.
There was like people like, that is against the decommodification.
And it's kind of neat to, to have the fact that people are against it.
Still talking about like, I don't think this was right because that helps
keep the culture a little purer, right?
I don't know.
So it seemed to me like basically I would guess it sounds very similar to
what you were doing where people are worried about it changing, but it
doesn't seem like it has changed.
Except I do think that there is a larger mix of newer people.
There were definitely, I'm at a fair bit of virgins myself, and it seems
like the people that have been going for 20 years are coming less often nowadays.
That was also true when I went.
And so I, it might be at the same ratio, stable, or it might have continued
along that trajectory.
I don't know.
I know that one rule change they implemented the year after I attended
was, which I'm not sure if it's still in effect or not, is that sound
camps were not allowed to advertise the DJs that would be playing at them.
Cause the year I went, Darn, the DJ's name escapes me, but it was, it was a
DJ who I had heard of and listened to their music before.
Like they were a big name and they were playing there.
And so that brought people who just wanted to listen to that DJ and didn't
want to do anything else.
Um, and so I think that making that rules change is a good idea.
And I'm curious how much that affected things.
Hey, I, I don't know.
There, there wasn't any, I don't know, because I didn't go very much.
I would the party people.
So I really can't say the one time I did go to the tower, I suspected
there was probably some big name DJ up there, but I don't know that there
was the whole, um, a running gag thing that Skrillex is playing out by
the trash fence because apparently last year Skrillex played out by
the trash fence, unannounced.
People also said that the year I went, so maybe it's just a long time thing
happened at any point.
Damn it.
I was sucked in by an urban myth again.
Uh, the, the trash fence for anyone who doesn't know is there is a fence out
in the deep play far away from everything else that is meant as a wind
break to catch trash that has blown away from people's camps so that at the
end of the event, people can go there and gather up all the trash.
And I do recommend going out there.
It's pretty impressive.
I mean, there were, there were obviously the people at night that just went for
the partying, uh, and I met a few people who were like, yeah, we sleep all day.
And then we go out at nine party, but that's what they want to make of
burning man.
That's one of the experiences available.
So that's your thing.
Go for it.
Um, have you been to, or would you consider going to a regional burn?
I have not been to one.
I would consider going to it.
Uh, I spoke with Vivian who had been to Apigia, which is the local Colorado one.
Uh, just a few months before she went to burning man.
And she said that it is distinctly different that there is a, and I mean,
it's smaller, obviously, but she said that the culture just isn't the same.
There's not as much of the sharing, uh, openness vibe that burning man has.
And I don't know if that is just a thing for Apigia or what exactly the
deal with there is, but I have not been to any myself.
Uh, I have also not been to any myself, but I know a fair number of people who
have, and I have mostly heard that, uh, the ones that they have been to.
And I thought Apigia was one of them, but I'm not certain now, uh, had a stronger
vibe, more like the, the earlier burns.
Um, and in particular, I forget the name of it, but the one that I appears to be
the most highly regarded is the one in South Africa.
Hmm.
I heard a number of people talking about that.
Yeah.
Um, there you get a very similar physical environment.
Like the Transvaal is similar to the Playa and then they're both big,
flat deserts, um, Transvaal much, much bigger than the Playa.
Uh, and I've heard that the ethos there is amazing, but I've never been.
It is interesting that, uh, the, it's possible that the
environment kind of shapes the attitude, right?
Um, I will say that my parents, uh, where they are from, I don't want to say where
it is because it would make me too easily identifiable.
Um, but, um, where my parents grew up, uh, they, they were pretty poor, quite poor.
And they did have a fair amount of this, like sharing, uh, ethos in their community.
It was not like a total gift economy, like, like Burning Man.
But yeah, and also it was, it was highly connected with the Christian church as well.
But yeah, that, I mean, that, that kind of thing does exist, released it did when
they were children.
And, uh, I think it is associated with certain kinds of, uh, hardships that would
full give rise to those kinds of cultures.
Yeah.
It could be that the Colorado one is just not very much of a harsh environment.
It's, yeah, if it happens and not the winter, then it's not a very harsh to
be in the mountains.
Yeah.
Um, that's an interesting talking about your parents growing up poor and, uh, that's
an interesting aspect of Burning Man is that there aren't really poor people there.
You, you, you need like a thousand dollars disposable income and the ability to
take a specific week off.
There are some, I met a few hippies.
I'm one, what there was a person in my camp in her mid, mid to late twenties that
has lived in a van her entire life and drove that van there.
So apparently there's like, um, certain tickets that are reserved for people who
have very low incomes.
Um, but you're right.
Overwhelmingly, it is a place of people with a lot of money to go and be
full poor for a while.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yeah.
We will live in poverty, but it won't be poverty, poverty, because we know we're
going back to safety in a week.
Have you heard the song common people?
It's a very good song.
I recommend listening to it later.
Uh, in particular, I recommend William Shatner's cover of it, which is legitimately
excellent, I've heard it.
I've heard the William Shatner cover of this song.
Is it legitimately excellent?
It is so Shatner.
I mean, it does what Shatner does best, which is conveying powerful emotion of like,
perhaps over the top, but for the subject matter.
But there's a line that stuck with me, uh, in, uh, I forget exactly how it goes, but
it's something along the lines of you'll never be like common people, even as you
stay in your, um, you know, shitty apartment while roaches climb the walls.
If you called your dad, he could stop it all.
And in Burning Man, no matter how harsh the environment may be, no matter how
deprived of whatever modern comforts you are used to, it's going to be over in a week.
Um, we are Jesus, we're at two hours, but is, uh, is there anything else that you
wanted that you're asked?
Um, no, no, I think that was it.
Did you have anything else you wanted to say?
I would like to conclude by reiterating the two lessons that I learned from it,
which are one, pick your camp very carefully.
Make sure that your philosophy and what you would like to get out of Burning Man
aligns very well with the camp that you're going with.
If you want to go there to attend a rave, don't go with hippies who are going to
hand out tea.
If you want to go there to commune with other hippies, don't go with the group
that just wants to go to raves.
Uh, and second, don't have specific events that you want to attend in mind.
Instead, just wander.
I would go a bit further and say, don't go with any real expectations.
Just go there and see how things turn out and let things go as they go.
Cause it's not going to be bad.
Um, yeah, but no, I, I, I had a great time and I, I wrote a number of things about it
when I got back, which are up on my blog, which I guess I'll link to as well.
Uh, do either of you want to quickly promote anything before we go?
No, no, uh, Thomas, I'm pretty sure you have something.
Uh, buy my board games.
I have one of Thomas's board games right next to me on the shelf right there
called Cultists of Cthulhu, and it is quite fun.
So I recommend his games as well.
Yeah, sixpence games.
You can find us on amazon.com or sixpencegames.com or your friendly local gaming store.
Before we go, our regular weekly segment where we thank a Patreon supporter.
This week, we would like to thank Adam for being a supporter and helping make this
possible and letting all you guys hear this awesome stuff.
Uh, admittedly, we would still do the podcast even without support, but don't
let that get out there.
Adam, thanks to you.
Thank you.
You are wonderful and many cheers.
Um, so we got a number of feedbacks on the rituals episode.
Are we okay talking about that?
Yeah, I'm, I'm curious to hear what people said.
And also I listened to it a while ago and I don't remember what all is in that episode.
Okay.
Uh, hopefully this will help to remind things a little bit.
Uh, since Steven is not here, I am having my guests help with the listener feedback this
time.
Leibniz, Leibniz integral cax says, I have the same or very similar objections as
you guys to rituals, but listening to people try to express them makes them sound
really stupid, especially towards the beginning.
It sounds like robots trying to integrate into human society.
I agree with the objections, but I know not to voice them to normal people now.
So I guess mission accomplished.
We, we, we helped you not do things the wrong way.
So you will be slightly less wrong now, right?
Hey, well, you kind of already know not to tell the normal people these things,
right?
It's true.
That's why we leave it in our little secret podcast that only we have access to.
No, but I, you know, it is kind of in sealer since no one else listens to it.
Right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, Jenkins, who is actually the Jenkins that we had on for the ritual, uh, says in
the subreddit, we really should have tabooed the word ritual like four minutes into the
conversation and gone from there.
To be fair, I didn't see defining ritual as a critical point of the conversation.
I really should have tried harder once I realized that's what Stephen was looking
for, but my main goal was to point out that there are things we already do that could
be considered rituals.
And even if you don't consider those, you could conceive of something that we would
be fine with participating in that almost everyone would call a ritual and that's okay.
Um, and taking it back to what we were talking about just now, like a lot of Burning Man
felt like ritual sort of things too.
Uh, one of the things the, you mentioned that the burning of the temple is very
significant to you.
Uh, for me, it was almost a bit of a letdown because after the burning of the
man and me and my camp went to the temple, uh, we walked there and then we had our own
little like ritual of talking about how the week was and gratitude and like building
like a campfire, not a real campfire, but we, we had our own little group ritual.
And that was my sort of like, this is the end of the, of the week for me.
And this is the ending ritual.
And so the, the temple burning on top of that the next day was like almost
gilding the lily at that point because I, yeah, exactly.
Cause that was, I mean, it was interesting and it meant a lot for a lot of people.
I could tell, but my, my, um, I almost want to say clan now, but my camp wasn't
there with me for the burning of the temple.
So it wasn't, I didn't have the group feel anymore, whereas we all went to the
burning of the man together and made an event of it and then had a closing
ritual afterwards.
Well, uh, I want to go back to what, uh, Jenkins was trying to say, he was
saying that there are already things that we do in everyday life that could be
considered rituals.
Do you, do you, what do you think about that?
Yeah, I don't know.
I, there's a comment that I'm going to read soon that I agree with a lot, but I
do have like, um, it's weird now that I'm unemployed because I've been employed
my entire life since I was 19 and I developed a lot of rituals around that.
And, uh, when I decided to finally start taking care of my body and paying
attention to the physical aspects of being alive, uh, every Monday, Wednesday,
Friday, when I came home, first thing I did when I came home was work out for an
hour and then I would go on to eat dinner or do whatever I want to do.
And that became like a ritual of its own for me.
And, uh, it was, it was sort of the taking away of the option to do other things.
Like I will come home and I will do this and that's all there is to it.
And now that I'm unemployed, I still keep with that Monday, Wednesday, Fridays
and the evenings I'll work out for an hour.
And I think the reason that works is because I had so many years of doing it
as a ritual that it became ingrained.
Whereas if I had been unemployed from the beginning and just decided to work
out for an hour on those days, it never would have stuck.
It was the coming home, taking off the work clothes and jumping straight into
that that became sort of a, a thing that constrained what I do.
And so I think there are some rituals like that.
Do you, do you have any rituals you are thinking of that you do?
Uh, I, I'm really feeling the, the, the need to define ritual at this point,
which I don't think ever really happened.
How would you like to define ritual?
I don't fucking know.
I, my instinctive thought about what makes something a ritual is that has a
structure that you keep to that doesn't have a direct utilitarian value, but
instead is sort of done in order to give it a consistent structure.
And I think that's something that is traditionally has been a crucial aspect
of rituals is that they're repeated.
Um, and that, so for example, the fact that you do this every Monday,
Wednesday, Friday makes it a ritual.
Whereas if you just one week, you were like, this week on Monday,
Wednesday, Friday, I'm going to work out for an hour.
Then it would not really be a ritual.
And so something that I think, um, the, that makes it really interesting
to do rituals for the first time.
Um, and I think the fact that like we've each been to Burning Man once,
um, perhaps makes the ritual aspects of it less powerful.
And I was thinking about things that were definitely rituals that I've done.
The one that sticks in my mind the most is my wedding.
Um, and that was very powerful for me and was very customized for the two of
us that we were in the park.
We were barefoot, which is not a standard part of the traditional marriage ceremony.
We had vows that we wrote ourselves.
We were our mutual friend.
Um, Raymond is what you might know him by from the internet, uh, officiated.
And all of that was stuff that was very customized to us.
And that caused it to be significant and powerful in that way.
But also to a degree removed a source of power that, that, that the marriage
ceremony that ritual has had for other people, which is doing it in exactly the
same way that their parents did and their parents did and their parents did.
And the fact that ours was so different.
I think is, um, as well as being a strength is also a weakness.
And I think that something that, especially for contrarians and
meta-contrarians, like many rationalists are, we sort of break with tradition as
a point of pride that we want to be different.
We want to be unique.
We want to not continue doing things the same way as they've been done before
just because they've been done that way before.
And I think that in many ways that's a good and wonderful and powerful thing and
a source of strength.
And I approve of it.
But it's not only that.
And I think it's worth keeping in mind that a large source of the power of
ritual is that you know that your community has done this same thing hundreds
of times before going back far longer than you've existed.
And that your weight of time really adds something to it.
Yeah.
You're, you're bringing a meme into the future.
And that is something that I have not really experienced and I sort of can't
experience because even when I'm, you know, like invited by someone to
participate in their holiday, which has happened a lot of times, I'm always sort
of coming at it from an anthropological perspective that I'm not someone who is
raised in this culture.
I'm someone who's observing this culture.
And I suspect that that's a very common point of view among people listening to
this and I would be really curious for later feedback if there are people who
aren't coming from that point of view, someone who was raised Orthodox Jewish
or strongly Catholic and still does that.
And I'm curious to hear what that's like for them.
I know I personally also always felt as an outsider within my own culture.
And part of that was, you know, because I was an immigrant and I didn't know
anyone here, my parents didn't have any roots here, you know, and we joined
a fairly young religion and all that helped, but also just the fact that I
was really nerdy and that wasn't a big thing yet at the time.
And I don't know if it is even nowadays in elementary schools, but I, I felt the
more the weight of tradition when I saw one of my friends who has kids, which
is pretty rare, passing on the tradition of watching Star Wars and passing
on this whole Luke, I am your father.
And like that's like a shared mythos that the nerds have, right?
And at this point, I guess it's infiltrated the wider culture as well.
But that I actually felt some connection to, like these are my people.
These are our mythological stories.
Yeah.
I'm kind of the same as you in that, uh, if I can't like fully buy into the
tradition, then, then I don't value that sense of, you know, of that history
because it's not something I believe in or approve of.
I will say, I do think it was a mistake to deritualize marriage and put it
in the hands of government because the, I want to do an entire episode on
marriage at one point, but I, most people don't realize that you give up a
portion of your legal personhood when you enter marriage.
And I think for something that dramatic as giving up some of your personhood,
there should be a large ritual that is like, you're sacrificing a chunk of you.
This is important.
And going down to the courthouse and signing a paper doesn't have the
emotional weight that a ritual should have when you're doing, giving away
something like that.
Yeah.
And on that particular subject, um, Allison and I did the ritual and didn't
go down to the courthouse and sign the piece of paper.
Oh, so you did it the better way.
In my opinion.
Yeah.
Are you happy?
Yes.
Awesome.
I would have done that, uh, if there were not like legal reasons for me to, you
know, to not do, yeah, to, to actually do a marriage license, but part of me
really did want to do just the wedding and not the legal.
Yeah.
That would have been the real marriage.
Yeah, exactly.
Did you have some sort of ritual, a wedding or something?
Yeah, I had a, uh, traditional Christian Protestant wedding.
I feel weird because I would not want to spend the thousands of dollars
that one of those weddings always entails.
And, but I think a large part of that is because I have such a objection to
the Christian Protestant sort of, uh, aesthetic.
And I, I recognize that for a ritual like that, sacrificing a lot of personal
value is an important part of it.
So.
Well, also you don't need to spend that much.
Like, you don't need to.
I mean, Alison and I spent about $500 on our wedding.
Yeah.
All, all everything included.
Yeah.
You know, including her dress, for example.
So, I mean, I had a, I went to a friend's marriage, I was in his backyard
and I think he spent less than $200, just some food for people and some drinks.
Yeah.
We got those.
We actually used drinks.
We already had my aunts and her grandma made food, uh, and there was not a
whole lot of money that we needed to spend.
Yeah.
Um,
I also want to bring up, and I wish I had watched this before the podcast
because I don't remember a lot of it, but it's a scene from Star Trek.
And it's when, which one?
Uh, next generation, the best one.
No.
And, um, data is talking to Dr.
Nune and Sung soon.
And I think, I think Dr.
Soon is dying at this point or something like that.
Anyway.
And, uh, data is like, I totally forgot, like what exactly you asked him.
I think it's something like, why did you create me?
Cause, um, that is the creator of data.
Um, and yeah.
It's a good thing we put that out there because all of us were like nodding along.
Yes.
You go keep going, but not everyone has seen it.
And Dr.
Soon, uh, turns the question back on data, which is kind of a long conversation.
Have when he's dying, I don't, I don't remember.
Um, and he's like data, why do humans like old things and data responds that they
liked feeling the connection of themselves back to history and their ancestors in a
sense of their lives being, uh, more than their own short lives because they're in
a sense part of history and their ancestors.
And then Dr.
Soon says, yes, that's right.
That's what the humans think.
And also that's why I created you because, and why people have children, I guess,
because they also want to do it into the future, not just in the past.
Same thing.
And I was listening to that and I was like, you know, that's a real thing and it's
powerful and I hate it because, um, like having connections to people is cool,
but your life is still just your life and you can't claim their lives as your own,
even if they wanted you to, like even if you're their kid, they wanted your life
to be like a part of theirs and theirs to be part of yours and you both want it.
But no, it's just not true.
Your life is your life.
And I, I don't really like this idea of like extending yourself through other
people and making them part of you and you're part of them.
And it's, yeah.
I, I kind of think that even though it's sort of true that you can't have anyone
else's life, I think that it is a useful fiction and that it is maybe good and
psychologically healthy for humans to have that sort of feeling that they are
part of their community and a larger thing, a larger organism that will keep
going and that their children are an extension of that.
I just.
But I also feel that maybe has like benefits, but also some real negatives
that cause people to sacrifice their identities to the group and, and for
people to think of like the, like I don't matter, individual people don't matter
as long as our group continues into the future.
I think in some ways that's a good thing though.
In some ways it's good and in some ways it's bad.
And I mean, like a crucial thing to remember about the group continuing
into the future is that the group is necessarily made up of individuals.
So if the group's continuing into the future, then so are individuals.
But if the individuals are sacrificing every individual value or most of their
individuality for this thing that's not even a person, it's just a structure.
It is, you know, it, it doesn't have its own feelings.
It is, it is a structure.
But without the group, the individuals would die too.
I think it's sort of a balancing act.
And also that question of whether or not a structure like that can have feelings
and preferences is worthy of a whole nother episode.
Um, but also, also you reminded me of something that I wanted to mention earlier
and forgot to, uh, which is, um, talking about history and things going into the past.
When I was talking about alternatives to Burning Man, they can give you some
of the same experience, a large part of what I enjoy about going to, uh, ancient
places like Bagan or Angkor, uh, Angkor Wat or Angkor Tom is that, that is not
replicated at Burning Man is that all of this stuff is very old and has quite a
bit of history behind it.
And everything at Burning Man is transient and new.
Um, even if it's something that someone has been bringing from since the very
first burn, which I'm not sure if there are any physical objects that actually
have survived that long, even if they did, that's 31 years, which is not very
long in the grand scheme of things.
And on the subject of participating in rituals, if you ever want to, uh, participate
in longstanding rituals like that and you don't have ones available to you in
your community, uh, and you are plausibly Jewish looking, go to
New York City and eventually a Hasidic Jew will ask you if you are Jewish.
And if you say yes, they will invite you to participate in rituals with them and
you can go and it's awesome in the sense of literally awe-inspiring.
You know, I went to a Catholic church for the first time this year.
Okay.
Uh, I had to.
It was paid too.
Oh, okay.
And also like it was part of my regular job.
I couldn't just be like, no, I don't want to do this thing.
Yeah.
So I had to take a client to his church, which was the Catholic church.
And it was the ritual was very like formalized and stylized.
And there was like bells being rung at certain times and everyone knew what to
say.
There was probably some places where you could read like a book where you could
read what to say, but most of the people just knew what to say.
And the fact that it was like the social atmosphere that everyone thought of this
important and normal and not hokey really just legitimized it so much.
And I got to say the Catholic church knows what it's doing with ritual.
It is an expert at that.
Wow.
I agree.
I was not brought up Catholic, but Alison was, um, and she's not Catholic anymore,
but we will occasionally go to like midnight mass for, uh, on Christmas Eve.
And yeah, the Catholics have spent literally thousands of years.
Refining and perfecting their rituals and they know what they're doing.
I agree.
This is very effective.
Like even on me, I was just, you know, had to be there for, for, yeah.
You mentioned how it didn't seem hokey.
Yeah.
And I think that that is a virtue that in modern society is largely neglected.
And the idea that like, I think things have moved a bit more in this, in, in a
good direction here over the past few years, but certainly several years ago,
it seemed like everything was ironic and you couldn't risk being sincere about
anything or else you might get made fun of.
And I think that we lost a lot in that regard.
Um, we lost the opportunities for sincere emotions that can be really powerful
and important.
And so seeing places like Catholic mass or the, um, Shabbat dinner, uh, where, I
mean, especially at the, at, uh, Shabbat's, um, people might laugh, but also everyone
is very sincere, uh, about taking it seriously and not making fun of what's
going on, um, was a unique experience for me that, that it's pretty rare for, for
things like that, uh, to be completely without a trace of irony for me.
And yeah, I'd like more of that.
Yeah.
Uh, well in, I'm jumping ahead a little bit on the feedback, but in line with
that, the great Nick, when your question was, do we have any ritual things that we
can go to, uh, the great Nick says, um, with a couple of things Inyosh was
saying about church and ritual and singing that I was wondering if the panel was
aware of Sunday assembly.
Have either of you guys ever heard of some Sunday assembly?
I've heard of it.
Is it the, the, um, humanist assembly?
It sounds like it.
Yeah.
He says it's, or the great Nick, Nick is probably a guys name, right?
Anyway, they say it's a movement trying to replicate all the great stuff about
church, community, talking about big things, coffee and cake, but without
touching on anything supernatural.
It's sometimes described as an atheist church, but to use a definition from the
podcast, I think it's more of a post-theist church type thing.
There's no bashing of religion in the same way.
There's no bashing of vampires.
We're just past that as a society, right?
Anyway, you have that element of singing pop songs together, which is fun and
silly.
You can hear talks from academics.
Seems like something the panel might see the benefit of.
Uh, I am familiar with it.
I've been several times.
Oh, you have?
Yes.
Um, and there's another thing, which is not technically Sunday assembly, but is
trying to do the same thing.
And the name escapes me at the moment, but my dad goes to it every week.
Are you thinking about secular hub?
Yes.
Okay.
I've heard about that.
Sorry, what?
Coffee and community every Sunday morning.
Maybe it's definitely secular hub.
I'm not sure if it's coffee.
That's what they do.
It's on Sunday mornings.
It's coffee and community.
Um, I've been to that once.
Yeah.
My dad goes every week and I've been several times.
I love that song there.
Oh, yeah.
Tall guy, bald, goatee.
Yeah.
Yep.
That's him.
Um, he, uh, he likes it, uh, obviously, since he goes every week and he
volunteers and does things for them.
Um, I have been to that several times.
I've been to these, uh, Sunday assemblies several times in New York.
Um, neither of them comes anywhere close to what a church does.
Um, the great Nick said that they do the silly thing of singing pop songs.
Church is not silly.
It's not supposed to be anyway.
Exactly.
And if you're doing it right, it's not, it's serious.
It's solemn sometimes.
And yeah, you can laugh like Purim is a holiday that is intrinsically comedic.
Um, but I've not been to those things, specifically the ones that happen
every week and had anything like the sort of emotional experience that I've
had going to Catholic mass or Jewish Shabbos or, uh, Buddhist temple.
Um, and anything like the actual solemn, moving experience that I've
had in a religious context.
But I will say that growing up in a Protestant religion, it, it does most
Protestant churches, they are serious, but they do not have that sense of like
moving and sacred quality that the Catholic church has.
Uh, and I think the Protestant culture is one that prefers it that way.
Yeah.
It sounded more familiar to me too.
Cause Jehovah's Witnesses are also Protestant sect.
So I was like, Oh yeah, that sounds like it could be neat.
Yeah.
I, uh, I agree.
And I think you're definitely right about that, that Protestantism, I mean,
it's right there in the name.
It's specifically a revolt against Catholicism.
And so they're deliberately doing things differently.
So I guess it depends on what you want out of your Sunday experience.
Certainly.
Yeah.
But on, on the subject of specifically ritual, I think it's pretty
undeniable that Catholics have a better grip on that than Protestants.
Yeah.
Um, are either of you familiar with Quakers?
I mean, I know of Quakers.
I considered becoming one when I was de-converting from Christianity.
When I was like, wanted to step my toe a little bit out of, yeah, but.
Have you been to a friends meeting?
And I really wanted to do it, but I researched it a lot, never did.
So you know the, the format of it?
I know that there's two different formats generally, but I think the one you're
talking about is one that has like the, the sitting in silence.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Uh, so, um, the ones I'm.
Quaker groups here in Denver, probably for a friends meeting house on, on Google.
And you'll probably find something.
Um, yeah, the, the specific, uh, the one I'm familiar with, I didn't actually
know there was two different ways of doing it.
I think this one is maybe the more common.
I'm not sure.
The one I'm familiar with, my grandparents on my, uh, father's side are, um,
we're Quaker and also atheists.
Um, and the specific format that the Quaker friends meeting follows is, uh,
there is no priest or anything like that.
No one is any higher or closer to God than anyone else.
So you, everyone sits in a circle in silence.
And then if the Holy spirit moves you to say something, you stand up and you
say it, whatever it is, and then you sit down.
And if anybody else is moved to say anything, they do that and you just do
that for two hours every Sunday.
Huh.
And it's very weird and very boring and very different from any other church
thing that I've ever done and definitely worth doing.
If, if that's the sort of thing that you're interested in, definitely we're
doing at least once.
Should I get back to the feedback?
Okay.
That does sound very interesting though.
I will someday see if I can find a Quaker person.
I have at this point been to a, I still haven't been to a Catholic mass, but I've
been to a, uh, satanic mass and that was interesting.
Yeah.
I went to one of those in Berkeley.
Okay.
Well, which, uh, which sect of Satanism?
Uh, Lavaian.
Okay.
This, this was, yeah, similar.
Uh, are there other sects?
Yeah.
There are, there are actually a number.
Oh, like there's an actual theistic kind of Satanism.
Yeah.
When those guys are badass and I want to interview them someday for a podcast
because I'm a supporter and I just, I love everything they do.
But yeah, uh, the, the mass I went to was the, what does OTO stand for?
Order of the Temple of Orientalis.
Thank you.
There we go.
Yeah.
And that was interesting.
I was like, this is, this is not a thing I would do often, but I'm glad that I
managed to participate one time.
Yeah.
Uh, so Googleplex bite says, um, in relation to what ritual is breathing my
walking gate, the way I open a door, et cetera, are all actions I do repeatedly in
the same way, but I wouldn't call them rituals nor would any significant
number of people.
I'm not even sure repetition is needed for ritual.
It's still a ritual.
If it's the first time you're doing it and if you end up not doing it again,
my best shot at defining ritual is a system designed to reduce decision space.
So Christmas day is a ritual because instead of deciding when to give gifts or
bringing family together or celebrate Jesus, you just set the same date each year.
So you don't have to think about it.
Morning rituals are rituals because rather than deciding what you do each morning
and what order to do them in, you set through, you go through them in a
pre-specified list repetition becomes a common, but not categorical element
because repetition is good at reducing decision space.
And I actually really kind of like that definition because I think there is a
lot of value to reducing decision space.
So like a restaurant menu is a ritual by this standard.
I don't know if a restaurant menu is a ritual.
I mean, it reduces the, I mean, I would say it's not.
I'm using this to demonstrate a flaw in the definition.
Okay.
Gotcha.
That it, that is an example of a thing that reduces decision space.
What are you going to eat for dinner?
Well, there's an infinite number of possibilities or you can pick from this
list of 20.
Yeah.
I guess it would be more actions that shit.
Fine.
You and your stupid being right about things, but I like it because it did.
I mean, my workout ritual did constrain my, my list of options.
It was just, I will do this and morning rituals are the same kind of thing
cause you have the same things you have to do every morning, but just having a
ritual way that you do them in reduces the decision fatigue and the having
to think about things and keep a list that you check off.
If you're like, well, I just brushed my teeth.
Now I go on to combing my hair or whatever.
That's I, I've recently been reading this V a lot and he makes an argument
that decisions are bad and gives a number of good reasons for it.
And I am, I am being very much one over that not decisions are bad options are
bad, having a large decision space that you can choose from is generally
bad. You can like maybe one time narrow down the thing that you want.
And then after that, having to be faced with decisions over and over is a bad
thing. And I think that rituals serve a very useful function in that they
reduce that sort of thing that wears on your life and your mental, mental
processing every day and lets you do the things you actually want to do with
your mental energy.
I agree that that's a valuable thing.
And I do agree that that's a thing that rituals do.
I do think that the repeated aspect is a very important one.
And this person was saying that even if somebody, even if it's the first time
you do a ritual, it's still a ritual.
I agree with that.
But then they said that even if nobody else or does it ever, and if you
don't do it ever again, then it's still not, then it's still a ritual.
And I'm less confident about that.
I would say that that makes it sound like a failed attempt at starting a ritual
that if you're not maintaining a connection between different points in
time, if you're not repeating actions, then I'm not sure it is a ritual.
And obviously all of this is, you know, hair splitting and arguing over semantics.
But in as much as ritual is pointing at a real cluster, I think that the repeated
aspect is an important part of that cluster.
And I think that, so to take the restaurant menu example, going to a
restaurant is not a ritual, but going to the same restaurant at the same time
every week with the same group of people might be a ritual.
And so for instance, my dad was telling me about how he would, his family would
go to Arkansas for the summer, every summer they would take the same route,
they would stop in the same diner, they would order the same food, they would
stop at a corner store and buy Fig Newton so that when they went into the town
of Newton, they could all eat a Fig Newton together.
And those are rituals.
That's the, hey now.
An adorable boy.
Yeah.
I feel like it's when the repetition or sameness takes on some kind of special
significance or meaning is that when it's a ritual, because we all have repetitive
habits and not all habits are rituals.
To me, the defining element of a ritual is the way that it evokes a certain
significance or meaning.
I almost want to say that there must be some kind of form over function element
to make it a ritual.
I think that's a good way of, yeah, that's a good description.
I do, I do really empathize with his choice of Christmas as ritual, which I
think was probably an accident on his part, but Joe's witnesses obviously have
no holidays, aside from, you know, the one, the, the Passover, but I was once
complaining about this to my, my mom.
I was like, when I was a kid, of course, I was like, you know, I never get
presents and she's like, but everyone else always has just the one day when they
get presents.
And so there's no, I know also birthday, but there's no like caring or thought
that's put into it.
It's just like, well, here's your present day.
So now you get a present.
And I was like, oh, that's, that's a good point.
She's like, yeah, you could get a present any day.
Like every day could be a special day when you get a present and then you know
that there's actual love gone into this present because you got it.
Not because I had to give you a present on present day, but because I love you.
It's like, oh, that's neat.
And out of my entire childhood, I got a present one time.
And so there is a lot because when every single day could potentially be present
day, you can't give a present every single day, right?
So you're like, okay, not this day, I guess.
And eventually just fades from your mind and having a single or one or two days
of the year that you get presents is incredibly handy because you have that
shelling point when you get the presence.
And going into the temporal aspects of it again, that lets you look forward to it.
Whereas if you, and it lets you plan ahead.
So like, if you know that you should give people presents on that day, you can spend
time beforehand finding people presents, putting thought into it, putting love
into it and figuring out something good to give.
Whereas if it's just, hey, I saw this thing on a whim, I'm going to get it for you.
Then one, maybe less thought goes into that, or maybe more.
But two, the other person definitely doesn't get to look forward to it.
Yeah.
Oh, I just want to tell a little story.
I had a piano teacher who was a jojo's witness and one day she just gave me a
present and then she was like, I'm a jojo's witness and we don't do
birthdays and Christmas, but we just give presents when we want to.
So here's your present.
I was like, wow, that's really nice.
So you enjoyed getting the present.
It's nice.
Good.
And it certainly seems to be memorable.
Like how long ago did that happen?
I still remember the one present I got.
I got to admit it was a monopoly game.
And your parents told you that they didn't like you unless you achieved things.
I mean, also to be fair to my parents, they gave me life and shelter and food and
all that.
So I don't want to sound ungrateful.
You didn't seem to turn out that bad.
They probably would have had the government punish them if they didn't do those things.
Jesus, man, way to bring everything down.
My parents were decent parents, damn it.
Sorry, I don't mean to insult your parents.
Popemobile 2 agrees with you on the definition thing, saying, I think a good
definition of ritual is a situation where the way in which the activity is
performed has importance beyond its usefulness.
And that's what separates going to the movie in general from going to see the
room by Tommy Wiseau.
Yeah, that's a great example of a ritualized event.
Oh, I enjoy that movie so much.
You know, I didn't.
I'm glad that I saw it the one time, but I can't say I enjoyed it.
Did you see it in proper surroundings?
No, I didn't.
I have not seen it in its ritual manner.
I have not seen Rocky Horn its ritual manner.
Both times I just kind of watched it on TV.
Like on your own or were you at least with other people to laugh with?
So the room I saw with two other people, so we were laughing together,
Rocky Horror Picture Show, I stumbled across on accident.
Oh, goodness.
I saw, I did not realize it was right at the beginning of the movie.
I managed to stumble into it like two minutes into the movie on Bravo Channel
back before they had like commercials and shit.
I was like, this is interesting.
I'm just going to keep watching until the next commercial.
And I saw the entire movie and I was like, oh my God,
that was fucking tragic.
What the hell?
Like, goodness.
I had feels for this movie.
Wow, all right.
But no, I've never seen it in the cool like throwing rice at the screen
and shit kind of way.
So a virgin.
I am, yeah.
Someday I'll have to go.
Yeah, it's worth it.
I've heard from other people that it's not that great.
Okay.
So the actual movie itself is quite bad.
The experience they were talking about like, yeah.
Which one?
The Rocky Horror or the...
Yeah, Rocky Horror.
Rocky Horror?
Well, I think that the quality of Rocky Horror experience varies a lot from crowd to crowd.
I've been more than once and I've been to ones where the crowd
didn't add much and I've been to ones where the crowd added quite a bit.
May also be kind of like Burning Man where if you come in with expectations,
it never quite lives up to them.
That's possible.
But also I think that like if you go to Burning Man in 2015 versus 2018,
they won't be hugely different.
Whereas if you go to Rocky Horror in like a town where it's just a thing that happens every now
and then, that's not a big deal.
But if you go to Rocky Horror where there's a dedicated community that like they dress up,
they like there are ones where like they will act out every entire show live in front of the
screen as it happens.
And that's pretty incredible.
So I'd like to see that.
There's a wide range.
That was also one of the things, I mean, I know there's some people that have watched
The Room over dozens of times and written like things about it.
But The Room didn't give me any feels, whereas Rocky Horror did.
With The Room, I was just like, oh man, Tommy was so went through a really bad breakup and
wanted to movieize it.
It's the impression I got.
I don't know if that's what really happened.
No one knows.
That's what's so fascinating about that.
He's this mystery character.
Like I'm really looking forward to The Disaster Artist.
You know about that?
His next movie?
No, no.
It's the movie about the making of The Room starring James Franco as Tommy Wiseau.
Oh, I thought that already came out.
Has it not yet?
I don't think it has.
Oh, I usually don't hear about things until they've come out.
So I have heard about this and I thought it was already out because of that.
I don't think it's out yet.
Okay.
If it is, I'll be surprised and looking to buy a ticket.
Let's see.
Oh yeah.
And then the final bit of feedback on Ritual,
Jurist McCurbel, I hope that's how you pronounce it,
says,
So there's that.
Interesting.
Yeah.
We moving on now to the this was in our sacred cows episode.
Googleplexbyte says regarding the power dynamic in relationships,
ancestral relationships have a very unbalanced power dynamic because of the barriers to exit.
It leaves the other person with a massive amount of leverage to destroy your life.
You can't just escape them.
They're part of your family.
You'd be forced to abandon everything.
Which I thought was a good point and something important to bring up as well.
Did you guys have any comments on the incest thing?
My impression is that there is a real,
one of the elements that goes into creating like incest taboo is the Westermark effect.
And if people,
I think that they identified it as the thing that happens when a child sees
another child being fed by their own mother.
But I feel that there's probably a lot of other things that could maybe just part of
growing up with the child as your sibling creates that as well.
Not just that, that particular act.
But so it came from the study of kids growing up in a kaboots, I think.
And these kids were not actually siblings,
but they had organized the child rearing such that they would go through like child rearing
as if they were siblings.
Yeah, as if they were siblings.
And none of them wanted to marry each other when they grew up.
Yeah, so that's like the Westermark effect.
And I think that probably when people who grew up together as siblings,
like they probably should get this effect done on them.
Is in terms of grossness sort of feeling?
Yeah, and then if it doesn't,
it's a symptom of something that prevented them from getting that.
That's like a sign of something wrong.
Or if they did get it, but they still have sex despite having that,
that's also a sign of something wrong.
So I think there's some some legitimate reasons.
And also like if there's this thing wrong and you're doing this,
it's probably exacerbating whatever it is that's wrong.
I think that
there's more than one thing that's called incest.
So like there is an adult having sex with a prepubescent child.
And that is definitely bad.
There's also two adults who are cousins or siblings
having consensual sex with each other.
And that is much less bad.
Like out of all the things that Cersei and Jamie Lannister have done,
boning each other is not on my top 10 list of things I would have prevented.
And you know, hashtag life goals or wife goals.
But like, I mean, seriously, I think that I've read a number of like anonymous confession things
where there's stuff like me and my sister got married and things like that.
And honestly, it's really difficult for me to find anything morally or ethically wrong there.
And I think that certainly having sex with someone who doesn't consent or
because they're too young to consent or because they explicitly don't consent
or because they're in a power dynamic with you where they can't safely refuse consent.
All of those things are definitely bad and you shouldn't do them.
But having sex with somebody who does consent and is in a position where they can safely choose
whether or not to consent and they're mentally mature and together enough to actually make their
own decisions. It's really hard for me to say that that is wrong.
I think I think I have the same sort of intuitive thing. And I think that may be kind of common
among the the rationalist people, a lot of them. And the so I'm going to go ahead and just read
this Jenkins who is with us on our ritual podcast. I was not with us for the sacred cows podcast,
but he commented in the subreddit, I'll go ahead and identify myself as the person who
was getting upset when this topic was brought up at a recent meetup. So I'm going to go ahead and
let him have his say right here. But Jenkins says, my main reason for being mad about people
disagreeing with me on it was that it was like the fifth time I'd seen the incest is just fine
and not at all problematic and the people that are grossed out by it, blah, blah, blah,
in a rationalist context. But this was the first time I saw it in real life rather than some online
nebulous figures. Since this is a group I've come to identify with, it was really frustrating to
see an argument that I think is very wrong and would have actual negative repercussions if settled
on by the majority of society to be thrown around so casually in a we figured this out before the
rest of the world sort of way. It still makes me upset, but I think it's justified. I'm also
bothered by how often this topic tends to come up in rationalist type settings. I strongly suspect
that the reason for this is what I alluded to above, where smart people are attempting to look
smarter by being contrarian on a topic that is typically only only the socially conservative
who are often very wrong on sex things would come out strongly against. By being pro gay rights,
we're trying to protect a small subset of the population that isn't allowed to be sexual
by the previous set of rules. Who exactly are we trying to protect by removing the taboos against
incest? Are the potential good relationships that could come out of this worth the amount of
socially restructuring, i.e. throwing out the nuclear family or something, that would be required
to ensure that those types of relationships remain safe and on balance good? I think the answer to
this is clearly no. Can we please stop bringing this up as another sexual taboo that eventually
will be removed please? And obviously the answer to that is no because we're talking about it again
right now. So first of all, I think they're actually wrong about some stuff. The idea that you
would have to remove the nuclear family if a brother and sister get married and have children or
adopt children or whatever, that sounds pretty nuclear to me. And I think his contention is that
for those sorts of incestual relationships to remain safe and on balance good if they were
commonly accepted, that the nuclear family would have to have some massive restructuring
in order for there not to be all these intrinsic power imbalances and inability for someone to
exit that relationship without also exiting the entire family and their emotional and financial
support structure. How many adults are still dependent on their extended family for their
emotional and financial support structure? You know, it depends on how you define adult. You could
get in a sexual relationship in your teens and some people are still living with their parents
when they're going to grad school at like 25, 26. Certainly. But I'm saying that that seems like
pointing at the possibility of edge cases in order to deny the entire category.
I'm on your side, but I'm also thinking that he would say that the real edge cases are the
ones we talk about with the brother and sister who fell in love in adulthood, whereas the majority
cases are abusive things in families. Right. Just like how if you talk to people in the 1920s
about gay relationships, the vast majority will be pedophiles that they'll bring up,
and the idea of two adult men loving each other is absurd and nobody's ever heard of that,
because you can't do it openly. And a thing that I always instinctively do when hearing an argument
is I try to come up with a specific example and work through it in my mind, or I try to
see if I can come up with a one-to-one relationship between this argument and a
different argument. And that's like why I came up with the restaurant menu example of a ritual
and why I'm immediately comparing this to being openly gay. And that the argument that this person
just gave against accepting and allowing public, ancestral relationships, maps perfectly onto the
argument against accepting and allowing public gay relationships. That, oh, if you came out as
gay, your family would abandon you. If you allow two men to get married, that's fundamentally
restructuring the nuclear family, which has existed for how many decades, and all of the
same arguments apply in exactly the same ways. And so if you want me to accept your arguments,
you either need me to also accept that we should look down upon gay relationships,
which I don't. So I don't accept these arguments.
I am still torn on this because I don't have data as to what the prevalence is of the really
abusive type of relationships versus the ones that are not. On the one hand, obviously any
sort of relationship between consenting adults, I'd be like, who is it harming? And if it's not
harming anyone, do as you will. I know I heard that somewhere else, but again.
That's the pagan thing. Oh, is that what it is? Yeah.
Okay. If it harm, do as you will. Right. Okay. But yeah, the thing is, if there's no victims,
I don't care. Do your thing. But like his argument that if this was implemented society-wide,
there would be issues, especially with society being somewhat dysfunctional. I don't know,
maybe. I just, I don't want to take a hard stance one way or the other because I don't,
like you said, there's so many, if there are relationships like this, they're in the closet,
so we don't have any data as to how many there really are.
Yeah. And it's not like this relationships that we currently consider acceptable don't
ever end up abusive. Right. And you know, it's not like because we're accepting of gay rights,
that doesn't mean we're accepting of a man having sex with a child, right? Just because
they're of the same gender. So we could be accepting of incest between brothers and sisters
that are adults and yet still not be accepting of children having sex. Yeah.
But I think that like empirically, if gay relationships had been shown to be inherently
like unhealthy, that would be important to know. Right. And that would affect my approval of them.
I personally have come to believe that gender doesn't affect whether relationships are
inherently healthy or not. But I think adults should be allowed to do things even that aren't
healthy. I think drinking alcohol is unhealthy. I think that they should be allowed to, but I
don't approve of them. Like I'm not sure that I should feel bad about disapproving of things.
Although I would, like there are things that I kind of disapprove of, which I know I shouldn't
disapprove of. Right. And I want to change that. I can't think of anything right now. Maybe like
fashion or whatever. Those polka dots look ugly. You should wear them. Sorry. But
it's like empirical data changes whether I, like what I think about these things. If it could be
shown that incestual relationships, relationships between people who grew up in the same family,
let's say, to me, it doesn't have to do with the genes at all. Right. If it could be shown that
they're not intrinsically unhealthy, then I would try to approve of them. Right. But currently,
I think that there's pretty good evidence that they are. So a third of gay men have HIV.
An interjection here. Thomas wanted to check his numbers to be really sure about this.
Turns out the one third number is only for certain areas. Overall, according to the source
he found, the number is only one out of every six. That's pretty unhealthy.
And I don't think that's intrinsic. I think that's circumstantial.
What's the difference in function?
Yeah, I don't think the intrinsicality really matters all that much.
Like this is the reason I don't have gay sex anymore because I'm terrified of catching HIV.
I was raped a few years ago and that was a pretty horrifying experience. And among other things,
it left me with literal internal scars that are prone to tearing and bleeding and make it much
more likely that if I were to have receptive anal sex, I would catch a disease if the person
that I'm having sex with has a disease. And I'm really scared of that. And I can't,
or rather I have not yet been able to be confident enough that a person that I want to have sex with
and who wants to have sex with me and has a penis is not going to give me a disease.
And so I'm choosing not to engage in that activity. And I am fine with other people
choosing to engage in that activity. But I'm not fine with the large amount of gay culture that
is like against condom use and things like that. And I think that, sure, if people with
people who are, I mean, like Charles Darwin married and had children with his first cousin,
and up until quite recently, and even in many places in the present, first cousin marriage was
totally normal. It wasn't even considered unusual. And if people are direct siblings with one
another, yes, it increases the odds of them having children with birth defects or whatever,
almost as much as a woman who's 35 having children. So are we going to ban that?
If we're talking about health in terms of like literal physical health,
it's actually quite dangerous to have gay sex as a man. Lesbians are even safer than straight
people. So kudos to them. Have as much sex as you can to bring up our averages.
And so I think that talking about harm and health and things like that is almost a red herring,
because when it comes to things, I am very confident that there are people who are listening to me
right now and are horrified at what I'm saying. Because how dare I compare people who are unfortunate
enough to catch a disease to people who are deliberately choosing to engage in this activity
that the listener considers unethical. And my point is that by having that reaction,
like observe that reaction in yourself and realize that the harm going on is not the
thing you care about. I think that would be a good argument for people who want to ban things.
Right. And so I think that the fact that I don't want to ban gay sex means that I must reject
this argument and means that I can't apply this argument to other things like ancestral sex.
And I don't think I want to ban it either. But I do give it the side eye.
You're gay sex, you mean?
No, the incest.
Not even the incest, the having sex with people you grew up with in a family situation.
If you grew up with them next door to you, that's probably, yeah. And the experiments have kind
of shown that even living on a commune, if you're raised in separate families, it works out much
differently than I worked out in the kabuts.
Yeah, I was wondering what's your opinion on folks who are not genetically related to each
other, but were raised together on a kabuts?
Yeah, that is, to me, that that's not good.
That's quick to you out the same way.
Yeah, and I honestly don't care if they're genetically related.
Like Woody Allen marrying his daughter, even though it was legal because she wasn't genetically
related to him and of age when they married is still gross because he raised her.
Wasn't she like 16 when he adopted her?
Oh, he never adopted her.
Not legally, the person that he was dating at the time adopted her.
And she was older, but not as old as that.
But she was still an older child when she was adopted.
I thought she was still prepubescent when they first was adopted, right?
I think, I don't know exactly.
But anyway, yeah.
And she insists to this day that she was never really, she never saw him as a family figure,
but he was a family figure to her siblings that she lived in the same house with.
I don't know.
It's weird, but I guess they're not hurting anyone and so they can do whatever they want.
I just think it's kind of weird and gross, but they are free to do weird and gross things.
And that is part of being an adult.
There is also an actress that you can see in TV shows, I don't know her name,
whose parents were adopted brother and sister.
And I think that's, I mean, that is also one of the reasons I would not be against gay sex,
even though it may be dangerous.
It's like, it's your body.
You have, as long as there's no victims, you can do what you want with it.
Yeah. So I'm not, I'm not like making a strong argument for banning or anything,
but I definitely have a prior probability.
Let's say that there's something not good going on when that happens.
It could be at least a sign that maybe look into this.
Well, I mean, I'm not going to look into it.
They're probably not going to look into it either.
Maybe a sign that think twice before being friends with this person.
What is it? What is it that if you found that out about someone,
how would that change your interaction with them?
Oh, I maybe change my opinion about them in some nebulous way, I guess.
Yeah.
All right. We've been doing feedback for about an hour.
We could probably stop that.
Okay. All right.
It's so fun.
It is. It's a lot of fun.
And you guys are amazing.
Also, mad, mad thanks to our sound engineer, Kyle Moore,
who makes the sound amazing and who does a lot of the juggling
when weird things happen in the-
