Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy. I'm Niasz Brotski. I'm Stephen Zuber. And today we have a guest,
Aaron Bolton. Hey there, Taren. How are you doing? I'm doing wonderful. How about you guys? I think
you're doing wonderful because you're very high. That's usually what it is. Yeah. Our topic today
is going to be. All right. I don't know if I'm pronouncing this right. Neutropics? So the official
pronunciation is nootropic. Nootropic. If you speak Greek. Yeah. If you speak Greek, the community
usually says Neutropic. Okay. Yeah. All right, then we're going to go with Neutropics because I like
my community more than like ancient Greeks. It's like a whole less syllable. I think it's a little
bit more marketable. So Neutropics, for those who are unfamiliar, are drugs that increase the
functioning of your brain? Am I getting this right? Yeah. Or just generally alter your mood. Some
things don't really try to improve you. They just actually pulled it. I pulled up the formal
definition for this just because I knew that there was one that was fairly stringent. And
speaking of pronunciation, I'm never going to get this. It's a Romanian psychologist and chemist
named Corneliu E Georgia. Throwing that out there. He coined the term Neutropic in 1960s when he
invented paracetam. So there's like five criteria and it's they should enhance learning and memory.
They should embrace or excuse me, they should enhance the resistance of learned behaviors and
memories to conditions which tends to disrupt them, e.g. electroconvulsive shock, hypoxia,
whatever. So it's supposed to make you able to learn and retain stuff even under like physical
duress. They should protect the brain against various physical and chemical injuries like
barbiturates and scopalamine, whatever that is. They should increase the efficacy of the tonic
cortical, subcortical mechanisms. Not sure how he knew that in the 1960s. They should lack,
not that they don't know what those things are, but I don't know how you'd measure them
whilst taking a pill. Drill holes in your brain. I guess. And then just look, yeah, whatever.
And then they should lack the usual pharmacology of other psychotropic drugs
and possess very few side effects and extremely low toxicity. So most, I think, when people talk
about Neutropics, they're talking about cognitive enhancers, because very few things fit all five
of those specific things in case we had to pick her. And as a community that values intelligence
and mental functioning so highly, these drugs are pretty popular. Oh, yeah. Crazy popular. So do
we want to start in with the more common ones, or did we want to jump straight to the good stuff?
I always like starting off small, because my deduction transseminism related is wearing
glasses, like I wear glasses. I'm like, then that's on the same track to transseminism. You
don't like what biology gave you. So in the same way, people are like, oh my god, brain
altering drugs, that sounds terrifying. Until you say like, no, we're talking about
at base things like caffeine, nicotine. Brain altering drugs sound amazing if they
make your brain better. It's like people are like, why would you want to change your body
chemistry? And I'm like, sometimes an infection will murder me. And that is why I want antibiotics.
To you and me, it sounds great. Better living through chemistry.
Yeah, to you and me. But to the way, the wayary skeptic, they might think that, you know,
tampering with what Mother Nature gave you is, you know, dangerous and stupid.
But they don't realize they do it all the time. Yeah, I hate that sort of thing, because if someone,
if someone was born with some sort of congenital defect, okay, so for example, there are people
who have very poor attention spans based, not poor, but different from, from the baseline that
makes it hard for them to function in society. And so we give them medicine, like ADHD, what is
the medicine? Adderall, yeah, to, to return them back to normal functioning. So a person that I
know has schizophrenia and he only functions because he is on antipsychotic medicine. So people
all the time are willing to give people medicine to bring them up to baseline if they are what,
what is considered below baseline. But for some reason, they draw the line at making you better.
I'm like, why, why is that if, if, you know, if 80 IQ is, is bad and 100 IQ is better,
then why isn't 120 IQ better than 100? There's, there's no reason. I mean,
if you wouldn't make someone who's at 120 IQ dumber to bring them down to 100,
then why wouldn't you increase them the other way around if they wanted it?
I can give, I think the answer, although it's not the answer I agree with to this,
which is there's a difference between helping somebody hit average peaks versus giving them
a leg up against the average person. And then I guess you can, you can,
the men people have the intuitive difference between like emitting and committing crimes
or acts. And so, you know, it's helping one person is one thing, but hurting a person to
make them more average is, is another. So they're like, well, we won't, we're not going to hurt
people, but we're rolling and help people up to, you know, average. I don't see why you wouldn't
help them up more if they wanted it. I don't either, but you and I are too, too into it.
I think that that is the common mode that people are operating in, right?
I think there is generally like a fear that it could increase, you know,
inequality and stuff like that. I mean, those are the big social consequences of,
of drugs like these is like whenever you put it in school systems or places where a performance
enhancer can just completely separate one child, you know, kids from another kid,
because one of them was taking a drugs, right? Then all of a sudden everyone has to take the
drug. Yeah, totally. We should get into that later when we get into our downsides section.
Well, since I can't resist jumping on it really quick, I knew somebody in high school who could
survive great on like four hours of sleep. Oh my God, I hate those people. And yeah,
I'm super jealous of her. So I don't hate those people. I wish I was those people.
But the rest of us could take Adderall or Ritalin and get to where she's at for the most part.
You know, there's a couple downsides. Our sleep wouldn't be as restful or whatever,
but people, that's like not, you know, as far as talking about like making the
Xaverage or whatever, that doesn't seem to be like enough of a reason to get someone on drugs.
It's like, all I need to be as awesome as that, you know, outlier is. So I think the whole point
is to kind of make it, you know, somewhere in the middle. So like if you couldn't function without
it, like you said, if you have, if you're taking psychotics or if you're taking, well, it's basically,
you know, like speed with a PG rating, if you're taking Ritalin or Adderall, but if you're a person
with ADD or ADHD that like chills you out rather than speeds you up, it's actually really interesting.
If you've seen somebody who on with pretty severe ADD, not having taken their meds,
they're just like you are, if you've taken too much Ritalin, at least a couple people that I knew,
but then they take it and they're like, God, I feel better and it's like the opposite of a cup
of coffee for them. I see. Okay. So I understand the downsides of, of getting reliant on a drug.
For example, steroids. If we're bringing this back to body stuff, which is much easier to
understand than mental stuff sometimes, because you can see the effect that steroids have,
they literally grow the muscles on your body. Athletes that use steroids outcompete those who
don't buy a mile. If you're in a, if you're in a sport where story, steroid use has been normalized,
you have to take it to compete. Like bicycle, bicycle racing is famous for being
one of those sports where you have to cheat because everybody else does
not necessarily with steroids, but in some way. And that all that does is now make it so that
originally when people have sports competitions, it's so that we can see who's the best, right?
We, we want to see people competing and being better than each other. And so if one person
takes steroids, then he's the best now and everyone has to take steroids. So basically,
we're all back to where we were before with everyone being more or less than the same
relative field, except now everybody is taking steroids, which might not be that bad a thing
if there's no downsides to steroids, but unfortunately there's a lot of downsides to
steroids, which is why you want to keep steroids out. If there were no downsides at all, it might
not be that bad of a thing. If there were no downsides to steroids, it might be a good idea to
give everyone steroids from birth so that everyone is much more physically fit and able to do a lot
more things in their life than they would otherwise be able to.
Totally. And I think that's where Neutropics were originally. Like one of the things that
he put in his definition whenever he invented pyroacetam was that it was a really, really
low risk profile. And I think for a long time, the community really kept with that. And they were,
you know, a lot of people just researched stuff that had really, really low risk
profiles, but gave you only like marginal gains. And then people would come in with
Medafinil and it doesn't have a non-existent risk profile. It has the risk profile of a
proper prescription drug and it gives you a much larger boost. So people are now willing to accept
stuff like micro dosing and prescription drugs that have just huge risk profiles on long scales
whenever you're talking about taking them. Yeah. I basically don't believe in a drug with no risk
profile at all. Yeah. Because from what I've heard, caffeine has more of a risk profile than
Medafinil does. Oh, I would totally believe that caffeine's risk profile is huge. Yeah. And,
you know, a lot of people whenever you hear about Neutropics think that a lot of them are going to
have risk profiles that are around like caffeine and stuff, but like Neupept, it's incredibly low.
Pyracetamide's lower than sugar, you know, as far as your like lethal dose for 50% of a population
of like rats and stuff like that. So it's just incredibly safe. So let's discuss the first
Neutropic that basically everyone is familiar with being caffeine. I wanted to say when you said
risk profile, I think we should expand what that means a little bit because the first thing I would
say to argue that is like, well, I know a lot of people who drink coffee every day and live to be
95, right? Well, I don't know that many 95 year olds, but a handful. So risk profile doesn't
necessarily mean will kill you, but has negative effects. Like one of the major negative effects
with caffeine is that it is addictive. That's only negative if you can't get any more caffeine.
Said every drug addict. But that is definitely a downside because the withdrawal symptoms suck
and because due to the body's natural ability to get used to anything, eventually the caffeine
doesn't have that much of an effect anymore. And you're just taking caffeine to stay baseline.
And that blows because you wake up in the morning and you're like, I'm a zombie and I have to take
caffeine just to get back to normal. Whereas if you'd never gotten addicted, you just wake up
and be normal and have the exact same thing as the guy after he drank caffeine without that
beginning area where you have to dose in order to be normal. That's where I try to be with my
caffeine usage is to have it where it's a boost for me and not a get out of bed thing. Now basically
I take like 100 milligrams in the morning and sometimes more later if I need a boost.
Yeah, you're an addict.
But well, yeah. But I mean, I don't know if addict is the right word. I mean,
it's it's the accurate word, but I don't know if it's the right word to throw around in the
situation just because I mean, it's not what I mean, it doesn't paint the picture of, you know,
a a crack addict, right? So yes, do I need it to feel good? Yes. But
in it's not, I think, I mean, yeah, the withdrawals suck. What am I trying to say? It's not
it's addiction, but it's not that bad. Come on. Okay. No, no, I mean, there's a lot of things
that aren't that bad. You can lose a finger and that's not that bad, but you'd still rather have
the finger, right? I feel like we're we're I don't feel like that's a very fair comparison.
See, I kind of think it is a fair comparison because I maybe this is just me,
but I would be willing to risk one or lose one or two knuckles of one of my pinkies
if I was not addicted to things anymore. I think maybe this is just due to my experience of having
been a cigarette smoker for, I don't know, 10, 15 years, but having that leash around you,
that this chemical controls your mood and requires you to go out and have some more of it every
few hours or you are just grumpy and unhappy. The freedom when I finally broke that addiction
is amazing and that is the same reason I try to avoid things like caffeine because having
having my neurological state controlled by something else really sucked. And I mean, yeah,
like you say, it's not a big deal. You can just go out and smoke or go out and have caffeine
whenever you want, but you still feel that leash around you all the time. It's the lack of freedom.
I feel the same way if I don't get lunch, right? Like I'm not trying to be pathetic,
but I can't break your lunch addiction or a good night's sleep or something.
Yeah. So, all right, point taken. And I see where you're coming from. Certainly
that dependency is kind of annoying. I guess it sort of depends as far as where I'd say,
if I have a problem with it, like how much is impacting my life? I spend, let's see, 180 pills
is like $10. So sometimes two pills a day. So I spend maybe 10 bucks every two months on caffeine.
So like that's not really hurting me that bad, right? If I spend eight bucks a day,
you know, getting two Starbucks or something. Hey, I'd have more problems than just my caffeine
addiction. Huge Starbucks drinker. Well, no, I meant like, because I, oh yeah,
this isn't something that I should have spelled out. When I drink coffee, I need to feel the
diabetes coursing through my veins with every sip. So like I get the, give me all the sugar,
all your cream, I want it to hurt. So if I was drinking two Frappuccinos a day, I would probably
die. So not from the caffeine, right? But yeah, okay. Where were we going with this caffeine
something? Risk profiles. Yes. Right. But it's also not stuff that you have to necessarily see
immediately. Like whenever you came off a caffeine binge and you're really exhausted and stuff,
the brain is something that we don't really understand a lot on a neuroscience level about
how it works. And so there's things that can increase like markers for tumors. And that's not
necessarily they're saying that they're increasing the likelihood of tumors. They're just increasing
the thing that we look for whenever we're looking for tumors. And so it's hard to really see what
these chemicals are always doing. And a tumor is not going to show up for 20 years. So I mean,
you can do some real long-term damage just because a lot of these things aren't really,
really scientifically looked at with the microscope. I don't know. It's the long-term damage that I'm
kind of most afraid of. I honestly, with my experiences, it's been the really long-term
damage has been the stuff that I've been least afraid of. And maybe that's just me being ignorant.
But it's part of the whole longevity community is we're kind of waiting for
leaps in science to be able to cure a lot of the things that might come up hopefully. And if it
can help me perform better and just generally, not even just performance wise, just generally have
a better quality of life. That's a small sacrifice. Yeah, the idea that like, well, maybe in 20 years
when my liver finally dies, I can totally be 200 bucks in the weekend off work and bam, new liver.
So yeah, fingers crossed, fingers crossed. And if not, you had a good run on your way.
So I guess the first new topic everyone is familiar with is the caffeine. And the effects
of caffeine are generally to help you think faster and concentrate easier. Yes, is that the case?
Yeah, pretty much. It stimulates you. It just kind of wakes you up in a more like
slapy in the face kind of way. The alertness kind of ties into all that too, right?
This is pretty much a good example, but it's hard to be labor or that sounding pointless
because everyone probably is familiar with the effects. So it's the opposite of waking up tired
if you have too much caffeine. It's your, you know, instead of being sluggish and withdrawn,
you're kind of like jittery and just super awake. So yeah, caffeine, I think is one of
those things everyone's pretty familiar with. I read a hypothesis that one of the big boosts
of the Enlightenment era was that back then access to clean water was kind of restricted.
And so people would have to drink things that made the water purer. And the big popular one
before was always alcohol. It killed the stuff in the water. You get a nice buzz. Everything's great.
And around the period of the Enlightenment, people started switching to coffee and tea instead. And
so all of a sudden your thing that purified your water instead of making you slower and
dumber made you faster and smarter. And people started getting together and just talking about
things and they're like, oh, hey, let's do some science on this. It's kind of no surprise that,
I mean, historically looking back that the light, the Enlightenment didn't take off 500 years earlier
because everyone was drunk all the time, or at least buzzed. Like I couldn't imagine
waking up and only drinking wine all day. I mean, even if it was like lightly watered down,
you know, whatever, but even so, you're just getting a, you start the day with a buzz and it
never, you know, just, it stays there. You probably are desperate for it in the first thing in the
morning. So, you know, as long as you're comparing addictions, Enyosh. Yours is much better. Mine
kicked off the Enlightenment. It's got that going for it. The other one, people are fairly
familiar with is nicotine and I am not a big fan of calling that a new tropic, but a lot of people
do. Oh yeah. Would you like to explain why? I honestly don't know. I think it's just the stimulating
nature of it. Whenever you're talking about like lower doses, like a full cigarette is
nuts. As far as doses, we just found out when we googled how much nicotine is in a cigarette.
Eight to 20 milligrams per cigarette. Yeah. And then like, I mean, on a new,
new tropic level, you're looking at like one and like maybe like two milligrams or something
like that that people typically dose. So, I mean, it's, it's a lot lower, but it's stimulating.
You know, it wakes you up kind of like how coffee does nicotine does this interesting thing too,
at least in my experience and some reported online, but it wakes you. It kind of makes me
more alert when I'm tired and for most, for many people, they smoke when they're stressed
because it chills them out when they're stressed. Yes, I've heard that it's sort of just kind of
maybe if you're, if you're, you know, like if you max out at a hundred, I'm trying to draw this
whole scale on my head. If you're too high, it brings you down. If you're too low, it brings
you up, but whatever that midline is, is above average. The thing about nicotine though, it
lasts very short. Oh, yeah. It's half like a few minutes. Yeah, nothing. Yeah. I don't think it's
worth it for that and that regard. And also it just isn't nearly as effective as anything else.
And no, I say it's probably on the higher end. Whenever we're talking about at least like the
original definition of these things, like the things with really low risk profiles, it's
leaving that space and going into the thing that, you know, as a higher risk profile, but it has a
much higher effect. Like a typical dose, there was a point where I was in that really low risk
profile stage and I was taking like maybe eight things a day and that was almost bringing me
up to maybe a cup of coffee, you know, or a little bit of nicotine. So it's, most of these
are sub-perceptual. You can't really tell. The other thing with nicotine that I would stress
is that we're not necessarily talking about smoking cigarettes. So like, well, there's a
whole bunch of baggage that comes when you're burning stuff and inhaling it that way versus
other ways of taking it in. vaping is one common way that has by far less medical complications.
My current way of taking a nicotine is I chew a little bit of nicotine gum now and then,
a little bit most days, but I buy packets that are two milligrams per piece of gum and I have
half of a gum at a time. So I'm looking at like one milligram of nicotine, maybe three,
four times a day. And how long does that last you? How long does like the feel of it? Oh yeah,
just a few minutes. Yeah, maybe half an hour tops. But that's because the release on the
gum is way slower too than like a puff on a cigarette. I know this is my own prejudice
speaking, but I really don't think it's worth it for the mental aspects. The thing... Okay,
have you guys read Friendship as Optimal? Yes. Okay, so I never finished Friendship as Optimal
because one of the protagonists is a researcher and she points out how dedicated she is to this
because she is smoking cigarettes to increase her mental abilities. That wasn't like the first
chapter. Yeah, I know. I didn't... You didn't get far and far. And to me that was like,
this is an excuse that an addict uses. Smoking a cigarette is not a good way to get nicotine at
all and it frustrated me. I think the, in my opinion, probably the most useful thing about
nicotine is the addictive profile of it. Nicotine, one of the most addictive substances that there
is psychologically speaking, when I was quitting smoking, lots of times I would simply like put
a paperclip or a pen or something in between my two fingers like you hold a cigarette and bring it
up to my lips and that would help relieve the craving a bit because I had a bit of a psychological
addiction to the physical motions that happen while you're smoking. And I've heard that the
nicotine can be very useful for that if you don't like exercising but you really feel you need to
take nicotine when you get on a treadmill. And after a couple weeks of this, you will start
having a physical need to go and get on the treadmill for that. So yeah, if you want to condition
yourself to do stuff in an obsessive way, the nicotine is great for that. But it is just so
addictive that even the things you're doing while you're taking the nicotine become addictive and
I don't think it's worth the risk in any sense. I'll just qualify on friendship is optimal. The
protagonist started smoking because she anticipated her lifespan on earth being a few more months.
Yeah. So she was like, well, I'm going to burn the candle hard at both ends to get this shit done
and get it done right and work 16 hour days or whatever, right? Yeah. So agreed. That sounds
like, you know, addictive speaking, but I didn't get that impression at all from where that character
was actually going. Okay. And from what we were talking about before, the how fast you get the
nicotine in a cigarette and how much there is is really counterproductive if you're not already a
smoker. Like every now and then I'll still have a, we were just saying, every now and then I'll
still have a cigarette at a party and I will take one drag and I will get lightheaded and have to
hold on to something because you get a lot of nicotine really fast if you're smoking it.
And so the scientist lady, if she is taking that as a smoking to to be an enhancement,
she is getting dizzy and not able to do things for a while or she's already a smoker and she
has a tolerance and therefore it isn't helping her in any way except to keep her from getting
really grumpy due to not feeding the addiction. Maybe the author didn't smoke.
Well, yeah, or possibly he really enjoyed smoking. I don't think there's too many people that would
argue that smoking specifically like smoking cigarettes is no tropic. Okay.
That that's obviously like like it's not measured. It's just like
I feel. I feel like the obviously addiction. I feel like the dare officer who comes into
your school now and tells you not to smoke. Sorry. You're also eating this horse. You're
also an anti caffeine. Are you pro anything? I am pro clean living and exercise exercise
my new tropics. It is it's it's one of the more powerful ones and that's
you know there's one more time consuming ones to yeah totally and that's the thing is you're
sacrificing right so so much time like if you want to I mean so I like I'll triple down for a test
within tropics if I'm taking an exam or something or if I've got something really important I need
to be doing but you can't like well I'm gonna go for you know 90 minute run and then I'm gonna
sit down and take this test or I'm gonna try to take it while running two years before I take
this. Exercise really is awesome. Yeah. I mean I meant it as a joke but
totally sleep is another one that people don't realize it's just like that's really the most
you can do as far as increasing your ability to think straight is just getting the proper
amount of sleep drinking the right amount of water and then you know eating right and exercising
that's that's by far and not not damaging your sleep like do not look at any backlit screens for
at least a half hour before going to bed preferably an hour or an hour and a half and do not drink
caffeine within six hours of going to bed because it can damage your sleep too. I try to do all the
sleep hygiene things but I haven't I sleep through the night maybe twice a year oh yeah I'm typically
like by that I mean where I go to sleep and that I have no awareness until I wake up in the morning
that happens every six months tops huh I wake up two three times a night usually just to toss
like just to rotate or something or whatever but I'm I don't do really that thing in movies where
they're like huh where am I what time is it I'm always like either I'm unconscious or I'm like
fully alert but I can you know if it's the middle of the night I can turn it back off and go right
back to sleep most times I know I always think about like I wonder how that impacts me not sleeping
well all the time I'm probably that can't be great I would imagine not I I know that I move
when I sleep because when I wake up I'm in a different position but unless I'm sleeping with
someone I don't ever like remember it I don't wake up enough I think I just do it while I'm
unconscious I'm sure I flop when I'm like unconscious too but there are times where I'm
like oh I rolled off my pillow and I'll get back on Twitter something but yeah I don't know it's
it's a thing you might just be one of those like unicorn people who only needs four hours I'm not
though I'm so tired but no I mean I I get by it's not debilitating it'd be one thing like if I
was up for an hour every time this happens two three times a night but that's almost never the
case how long have you been using stimulants I mean I've probably been drinking coffee for
12-ish years middle of my teens do you think if you're like to wean off over the next few weeks
and then just take a month with no stimulants at all see how your sleep is affected um as far as
like caffeine part I think I mean like I said I'm on 100 and 150 milligrams a day right now which is
less than a medium cup of coffee so I mean I don't know and I have it first thing in the morning
I don't know if that's gonna hurt my sleep that much I mean I know the half life is six or so
hours probably not a few just only have it in the morning yeah I mean I could give it a shot
but then I'd be then you're asking me to go without caffeine so we already talked about
how much of a problem this is yes but maybe I'll give it a shot maybe it'll be a lame couple days
but couldn't hurt so so we've been beating around the bush for a half hour because what everyone
really wants to hear that came to this podcast is midaphanel midaphanel is like the star child of
the new tropic community and I have never used it as far as I know and so I am coming into here
as far as you know I I'm yes maybe I used it once and blacked out because it was so intense you
are so in a flow state that you just like the whole day we've gone what we really should have done
was I should have brought over some this morning nope you could have had some and then we could
have talked about how you felt on the air not sure I want to take that experiment right before
we record a podcast for science for science in your fine for science I mean it's too late now
but it's next time next time yeah so I am going to be the noob in this situation and you guys are
going to explain midaphanel to me and why it's great and what it does and etc I'm a noob deterrent
so you're up it's it's where it really shines is probably whenever you're sleep deprived so any
anytime that you didn't you know get a good night if you were out partying or something like that
you can pop one and it'll usually take you back to like around a hundred percent like if you if
it would have been like a 50 percent day you can get pretty close to fully functional if not just
a little bit higher functioning so I think that's really where you know the original intent of the
drug is and then where it was originally developed for narcolepsy yeah okay yeah or like night shift
workers and stuff like that like people with weird sleep cycles um not weird but just like you know
against the norm so it helps a ton if you miss sleep it's incredible can you just not sleep ever
if you keep taking it no no totally it's it's more displacing sleep it's taking sleep from
somewhere else it's taking energy from your next day and just applying it today essentially so you
could go like I'm sure there's people who've done like three-day binges or something where they just
didn't get any sleep and and you can operate at a really high level for those three days
but then those three days are up you're gonna crash hard and you're gonna you're gonna need to rebound
and get a lot of that sleep maybe not all of it but you're gonna need to get quite a bit of it back
I think there's less to do with the medallion a little more to do with skipping that much sleep
yeah totally so if you have like a good sleep cycle um you're willing to not like overdo
the drug and and you know you just go about your day regularly it can be pretty pretty cool how
it brings you above baseline could you take it regularly to cut your sleeping down to four hours
a night or is that not a good idea either no it's any anytime you're messing with any of these I
would say always get a regular amount of sleep just just to be safe so what happens if you take it
on a day that you are fine you don't have any sleep issues does it help in other aspects
yeah you just perform better that's really the only way to describe it is just like most things that
you do are easier to do and and happen I'll say that I know at least one person that doesn't do
anything for and I think yeah totally yeah there's non-responders yeah your mileage may vary but for
me it you like I said it makes it easier to do things and I I love it if I could get it every
day I totally would oh well I guess like I could get it every day I'm not sure why I'm not taking
it every day so don't do it so don't definitely don't do that yeah because that's that sort of it's
I want it to be you know a treat for my brain if I need a good day so what it what it does for me
is it doesn't take me outside the bounds of a day that I've had normally but it puts me in like my
best cognitive days that I ever have so I mean I have one of those you know maybe it's on the same
days that I sleep through the night a couple times a year I feel just great I'm sharp I'm on point all
day this just it's one of those in a pill wow so yeah it's it's awesome it's not like taking
Adderall where any amphetamine for that matter yeah like in fact even the current ones like
Vivance they're incredibly clean drugs Modafinil is is just so much cleaner it doesn't bring you
to 150 it just brings you to like 110 yeah it's awesome I think even when I've seen it marketed
like for unlabeled use it's it's labeled like under this weight category of non-stimulant
alertness aid and that's that's a good way to put it doesn't make you jittery it makes it just really
easy to focus and just whatever that you know that feeling you get in your head when you're burning
energy doing something cognitively it just feels like you have more of that like a lot more like
I've never run out on a modafinil day so I mean you can sit there and whatever it is you're doing
you know I think one of the things to keep in mind is that you might want to plan what you plan
to work on before you take it because it makes it pretty easy to get for some people makes it
pretty easy to get immersed into whatever it is you're doing uh or whatever it is you're
you're going to end up doing anyway so planning your day out and be like all right well I'm going
to take this then I'm going to go and write for six hours is a lot easier than saying well I'm
going to take it hang out for a couple hours then go right for six hours because the next thing you
know you've spent a lot of time focusing on something unproductive yeah spent the last eight
hours optimizing your operating system right or like one time I had to take it and I stayed home
and played Skyrim all day and it was probably the most immersive Skyrim play I've ever had
and uh like so it was a lot of fun but it wasn't I think an optimal use of my time
but it yeah I mean it's you know some people you know I don't I don't typically use a lot of marijuana
but actually I never use a lot but um I don't typically use at all but I know people you know
who smoke and play a video game or something it's kind of like that but this is the opposite of
the opposite effect probably I'm you know you're just I don't know it's it's hard to it's it's
like having too much caffeine but minus all the side effects you're not jittery you're not
uncomfortable you I mean as long as you're drinking enough water you're not going to get a headache
let me qualify that for for my personal experience once again your mileage may vary we're not doctors
etc so that's that I've also only overtaken 100 milligrams at a time yeah so typical
doses for neutropic use are between 50 and 200 and I think the prescribed dose is between like
two and six hundred so depending on how bad your narcolepsy is or how bad your work shift
disorder is they could give you you know three four five hundred milligrams a day I've only taken
a hundred so one of these days maybe I'll take you know two three hundred and just see how I
roll throughout the day but uh Taren is shaking his head I have no idea why you're shaking your head
all right so let's talk about the risk profile in mid-alpha now uh well or why are you shaking
your head first then we'll just because you can have I mean overstimulation is a really bad day
you're you're constantly dehydrated the headaches are crazy I mean on modafimil days I usually try
and drink at least double the amount of water and I drink about like two nalgene of water
a day normally so I mean your water intake goes way up your your body burns really hot
on this thing and honestly we really don't know anything about how it works um so it was
interesting that you said it was a non-stimulant what it was like awareness promoter is is that
what I think though the the it was this was amongst my other medical dragon but it said
non-stimulant alertness aid alertness aid yeah so I think what they mean by that is that you
don't really get increased heart rate so I took uh let me jump on this really quick as far as
stimulant alertness I took um co-worker a couple years ago gave me I don't know how much
whatever he took and he's a 220 pound bodybuilder a fedra and if he hadn't told me this is going to
feel pretty intense I I and like if I just felt this way without knowing why I would have gone to
the hospital and what is a fedra it's it's been banned a couple of times I have no idea how in
what form he's still getting it legally but either some legal way to get it it's basically uh I should
have looked up the the fancier definition adrenaline yeah it's basically adrenaline like it but like
caffeine is kind of basically adrenaline this is more more of that yeah but it's it's the point
where oh yeah yeah like some some like professional athletes had heart attacks and stuff so they
banned it at some point and then now it's back in some other form anyway the entire time like my
palms are sweaty like I felt like tunnel vision is probably too dramatic but I definitely had some
perceptual impacts my heart was just pounding like I could feel it I could I was perspiring and I
don't I'm not a very sweaty person so like the fact that like I'm wiping my forehead and noticing
that I'm sweating was like I said if I didn't know that I was to expect this I would have gone
straight to the hospital it was like a four-hour panic attack it was I mean you know well the
shortness of breath was I mean panic attack might be too severe but it was like a very mild panic
attack for four hours it was a nightmare I can see the benefit if you're trying to push through
that last eight hours and a 56 hour shift or something insane if you're driving cross country
and want to put on and go but I can't imagine using that at anything like a regular that was the
one time and I'll never buy it crazy so as far as medofinal being a non-stimulant this this was
I don't remember the cognitive benefits of the fedrics the physical ones were so bad
just remember crappy time yeah it was it was my mirror and I don't remember what the hangover
was like either I'm sure there's one of those I don't really experience a hangover with medofinal
either yeah but I take it moderately isn't really any hangover they're like I said they're totally
is um if if you're abusing it if you're skipping sleep yeah totally if you're skipping sleep like
the hangover is is your sleep essentially so if you skip that out so what do you guys use it for
I use it to have good cognitive days should I have the need to have a good cognitive day and
like not be able to since I've never been able to pin down over the years what factors lead me to
have a great day this is just one on demand so you know whatever it is crunch time at you know
work or school or whatever but I don't know what is your yeah yeah the the same thing it's just
a good day in a pillow I won't usually take it on days that I'm not working one of the nice things
that separates medofinal and most of the other neotropics is that those are going to be kind of
like a rolling better like you're just kind of kind of always be a little bit better um whereas
medofinal you can flip it on and off so if I want to have a day like go to the botanical gardens
or something and really just enjoy something like that obviously you don't want to be like
trying to count how many flowers there are in the botanical gardens that's not really the point
but but for a work advantage it's just a crazy distinct advantage often do you guys use it probably
two or three times a week somewhere around there um usually on like the weekends or
like my really busy days um but then some days I'll just or some weeks I'll just take the entire
week off you know I'm sure there's been like a month at least where I didn't do it at all
it just kind of depends I haven't used in at least over a month uh it's a I don't have that much and
b it is the sort of thing where since I'm not doing anything currently that demanding that
taxing it just feels like a waste yeah um definitely but there's one more thing I was going to say
about medofinal and it's not coming to my oh this should be I guess disclaimer this is a prescription
drug yes that you can only get prescribed for for a couple of the you know the reason that we
mentioned otherwise you know and the this use is off-label it's not like you can't go to your
doctor and be like I want to feel good all the time great here's some endorphinil um let's have
a really cool doctor but and and and just but loads of cash um this is it's incredibly expensive okay
so um I've heard that it's incredibly expensive if you get it through the prescription round like
between two and twelve dollars a pill or something yeah but I've also heard that India does not really
give a shit about the copyright claims on the medofinal molecule and that is where most people
get it how much how much does it cost when you're willing to you know hit the gray markets speaking
purely hypothetically of course because you know that right from from the people you've talked to
from the people I've talked to it it's about a dollar a pill um and a pill would would for
people like Stephen and I being about uh two doses okay so about fifty cents fifty cents a
dose um but yeah if you were expected what it's still more than I expected yeah I thought it was
in the order of sense well I guess fifty cents I mean fifty it's if if you experience that it's
totally worth it fifty cents a pill or a fifty cents a dose I would say that if I if it if I'm
you know weighing it out and I was taking it you know how many times a year I'd probably five
bucks a pill sounds at least fair oh yeah like I mean when you think I'll pay you know five bucks
for a cup of Starbucks I mean this is this is a whole different level of different performance so
yeah and and I would certainly even if it wasn't so ridiculously cheap I would still probably be
doing it on the same usage schedule that I use now because it's so helpful yeah oh definitely
but yeah it's it's about fifty cents or a dollar a pill on on the gray markets
and then like four hundred dollars about for thirty of them on on a prescription
I've heard that if you get your prescription useful that Costco is way cheaper for whatever
that's worth and I believe people can just google biomedafinal and it'll bring them to places where
they can get that right yeah okay so I've heard is there anything any places they should avoid
I would I would say avoid getting midafodil unless it's prescribed to you by a doctor
probably it is something or unless you're willing to be a guinea pig but but you definitely need to
know full well going into it that you're guinea pigging yourself this is something we literally
don't know how it works we don't even know how to begin we think that maybe it has something
to do with dopamine but it's just there's so little that we know about it but it's effective
enough that people are like you know screw it I'd rather just be a you know make a lot of money and
then pay for whatever problems that would arise from biomedafinal usage so do do you get it in
pill form because I've heard a lot of people just buy the raw powder really cheap and cap it themselves
yep there is other analogs to medafinil that are completely legal you can buy the the doses are a
little bit higher and it's so much less predictable and I think that's really where that at least has
has a big con but denture question I've never heard of buying powdered medalfinil of you
yeah yeah there's I mean there's the the afanil's little asterisk afanil's family there's
tons of them there's at least 10 I thought powdered a draffinil before yeah a draffinil's the
the analog specifically moda the the stuff that you can describe medafinil I'm sure you can get it
but there's I mean there's flow medafinil or flow daffinil a more daffinil like flow there's
just a bunch of different afanil's are you guys familiar with Guern at all
Guern okay so Guern has some notoriety some level of fame in the community for
writing really long data heavy intense posts on things that he gets interested in just a
treasure trove of data and too much for a noob like me to hack through in an afternoon but
he did a whole thing on new new new tropics and he has special sections for modafinil and for
melatonin specifically because he says those two are amazing needed a whole lot more on them
but when I was reading through his new tropics post he said that the adafinil is just really
kind of hit and miss and so not nearly close to modafinil that you're better off not even
bothering with it yeah oh I wouldn't I would never bother with it it has to be metabolized
before it can actually turn into the modafinil and that's the part where it gets really unpredictable
is you don't know how long it's going to take for it to hit like your liver and stuff like that
and so it's just it's really hard to know what to expect whenever you take that that said a
drawfinil is perfectly legal you can buy it at licensed distributors online totally like new
tropics depot or other places and I took one this morning 300 milligram pill but the thing is
they're like a buck a pill too yeah not a bite in powder form mainly because the powder is pretty
expensive and the little mechanism that I used to have when I did pack my own pills with powder
is it's slightly wasteful and all of those were like basically small crystals too this is just
straight powder that I knew I was going to get all over my keyboard all my all over my desk or
carpet wherever it ended up so I figured that you know I'd save the time and no doubt wasted
product and just get it in pill form that said I get an effect from modafinil and I do get an effect
from or I do get an effect from modafinil I wonder if there's a one-to-one or a near one-to-one
relationship there because I know the same person that I know who doesn't reflect reacts to moda
all this doesn't moda is short for modafinil because alpha nil sounds A it's hard to say and
B it sounds the same in all of them but the edgrafinil didn't affect her either yeah so totally
edgrafinil is just an analog for modafinil so what happens is you ingest that drug it goes into
your your body and then once it hits your liver it actually just turns into modafinil that's like
a really simplified explain it like I'm five version but essentially yeah so she just is
a non-responder to modafinil and then once it turns into that it's not hitting her just the same
for sure I guess what I was getting at too is that if you wanted to guinea pig yourself without
breaking the law this would be a way to try it yes oh definitely but you know side effects you
know are there you may waste your money you know it use responsibly all that I hate to
put out stuff and then have someone you know write in and be like oh my god this was the
worst thing ever you know I lost my job or you know like I was chewing my fingernails and whatever
freaked out you know like I don't think that'll happen you know the rush from these things is
pretty small but you know just just use responsibly you know like it would any you know if someone
came to you at a party and you're like hey I've got this cool new drug you want to try some
dual you know what would you do you do homework you would you know use small if you're to use
some after your homework you know you'd start low and then you know whatever so just be smart and be
safe I can't I can't not trust that technically illegal to have it without having a prescription
as well apparently some guy got was in his car he'd been drinking a lot I don't know he shouldn't
have been in his car if he'd been drinking a lot right but the cop stopped him and he had some
Madafnil on him and I mean it's it's basically a harmless drug right but he got a slap Madafnil
or Draftnil Madafnil oh okay but he got slapped with a felony charge yeah totally yeah for
holding it and I thought well that sucks so I guess don't carry it with you yeah in your house
yeah it's a prescription drug yeah Madafnil is a Draftnil the stuff I was talking about
that you can get online is not so not technically like there is there is chemical analog laws
that would probably if I mean somebody really wanted to argue it they could they could do that
unfortunately that's the case with almost everything right totally like you know if you
get a judge you know who really wants to fuck you you're gonna be fucked whether they have to make
up charges or not so so this new tropics depot is there like a community there people that talk
about the stuff um that was just I mean I was googling around for places to buy stuff and that
came up I don't know if I I'm not prepared to plug that as the best place to go to maybe Taren has
a better better resource I've heard that slash our new tropics people talk about their experiences
there a lot yeah there's a subreddit they probably have great links so there is a
longevity it's like longevity but the viddy is changed to city and that I think is is very much
an informed and they take a very scientific approach to testing this out so that's what I
would say if you're looking to really get into like get into the woods of this stuff that would
be a good research to or a good resource to to learn a lot I wanted to mention I haven't taken a
I haven't taken a draw for nil for at least over a month either but I took one today because I wanted
to have some very fresh in my mind conversation things to hit so and you know I also woke up
tired this morning so it was like perfect let's do this are you feeling the effect yeah this one
is much more of I mean it's almost placebo like like especially once you've had the real deal
it's this sounds like you know this sounds like you're talking you know waltz or white meth versus
whatever but like it's like yeah I guess you know it I mean it's kind of like double caffeine tea
you know like you probably won't notice the big difference you know just because it's well you
know it's still my usual thing this one it's hard to say probably a bit but it's not as pronounced
so it's I mean if you get anything from this you'll probably get something from from madalphanel
but you know again your mileage may vary are there any things that you would warn people
away from doing I'd say if you if you're looking at this field you made a pretty compelling argument
for nicotine yeah stay stay away I would stay away from the stuff with the with the higher risk
profiles anything specifically about madalphanel in general anything specifically about madalphanel
that people should avoid since that's probably the really popular one so if you're going to do it
if you're if you're absolutely like you're dead set on it your water intake is just incredibly
important like I was saying sleep and actually making sure you're getting the right amount of
good sleep and not just like closing your eyes for eight hours those are the two big things that
I would say to really watch out for and then take it lightly like it is a very good experience
for most people so you will want to just live there and and you know that can get unhealthy
really fast in quaren's article he mentioned a poker player who would use it almost daily
two to three hundred milligrams and he said after about a year his body simply adapted
and it doesn't do things for him anymore maybe I did read that post because that exact sentence
sounds very familiar okay maybe I read a synopsis or synopsis of it somewhere um the other thing
with madalphanel is take a first thing in the morning oh yeah I don't think we spelled that out
the half life is like 15 hours it'll be with you the whole day okay for a lot of people if you if
you do like like he was talking about doing a 300 I bet you probably wouldn't sleep if you did that
yeah and then you'd be going through a work day the next day just kind of screwed that's why I
would do it soon because I don't have I don't start my job for a month so congratulations by the way
Steven is now gainfully employed again
but yeah so a hundred milligrams you know I always take I always take my nitropics
after breakfast yeah because I eat first thing you know 10 minutes after waking or not 10 minutes
but whatever ish should you take it with food that I think people's that's gonna my my impression
Taryn went no more is that with just about everything it's you're gonna get like a slower
reaction a slower and a softer hit if you take it after food then if you take it you know before
you eat just because then it's working with everything else you've taken in do you want
the slower thing to to space it out or I found just for the only reason I did it this way is
because I if I take caffeine pills before I have I take my coffee with caffeine pills I don't know
if I've I think I mentioned that but the reason is because I can control my dose I take it with
L the alanine which reacts nicely with caffeine to help with the performance boostings that caffeine
gives you and I found that if I did that before breakfast I would just kind of feel nauseated for
a few hours you know for a period of time so I don't want the hard hit with that I don't know
what you're just standing with my Dauphinil or not see tongue twister if you say it eight times
in a row I think L theanine is also a really good thing to have on hand um yeah that that
definitely does calm the jitters if you do overdo it but it's it's not so what is this thing
L theanine it's it's what's in tea it's the other psychoactive substance in tea that a lot of people
don't talk about but our society consumes just as much um as L theanine um and it basically is
is a relaxant is it in uh coffee as well or just in tea I don't think it's in coffee I think it's a
tea thing okay and so that helps counteract the the the the jitters if you take too much
a little bit but certainly not to any level where I would say oh you take a 300 and you take a
little bit L theanine you'll be fine like um it's it might take the edge off it might if you just
barely go over if you go over a lot it's it's just there's not too much that'll help you okay so for
waiting it out is can you get L theanine in like pill form okay illegal um you can get it I I'm a
big fan of bulk supplements um I think that you know this entire hobby is extremely expensive
and and so bulk supplements really bring costs down so what other uh supplements and
new tropics do you take really quick I wanted to interject it correct me two more things with
with medallionel one I usually take one or two of your profan throughout the day
just to kind of act any possible headaches coming in and anticipate that your pee will smell weird
kind of like sulfur which it's I mean that sounds like a scary symptom but it's just since it's
going through your body but if you're if you're you're in is a very dark color that's a scary
sign of liver damage and some people do have an adverse reaction that can lead to that so
keep in mind that it's never not worth going to the hospital if you're very sick so if you have
to explain yes I broke the law but I don't want to die it's worth it I did that just occurred to me
but yes I wanted to ask about you said you take you did take or do take about eight a day um no I
did at my height uh I want to get back to that though that is all stuff that like you really
should be at least doubling water intake whenever you're taking one of these things at least doubling
it really makes your body learn burn really hot so you have to you have to certainly compensate
for that with water and none of this conversation is a comprehensive summary of all the stuff that
you should know do do your own homework spend you know at least half an hour an hour reading on
this stuff and be like okay avoid the pros and cons I'm not going to do it or I'm going to do it
but don't don't take this as the full package nor do we like condone use none of us would ever do
this sort of thing it's all hypothetical yeah tearing our both lying about our legal drug
days yeah we're just reading off of a script we you're talking about your cyberpunk characters
in the LPG that you play a friend of a friend we both know possible deniability maintained
great caller is it still maintained if you point out that you're maintaining possible
deniability I'm gonna go with yes yeah for my own gratification so what other things do you take
I really honestly don't take much of anything right now I think I think modafinal it really
is a lot more time efficient as far as the amount of research you have to do into it
the amount of balancing you have to do whatever you're doing like the smaller things you have to
do like one at a time for weeks on end until you add another thing and then you have to see
how those synergize and so like you know if you're just doing two that's not a lot but if you're
doing like 14 or something like that a day it's just a ridiculous time investment and then
measuring out each day and dosing and modafinal really condenses that down and just like cut this
pill in half and and pop that and you get most of it I'm hoping to start micro dosing soon
so what is this micro dosing that you speak of so micro dosing is where you take typically
they're done with psychedelics but other other people are doing them with like mdma and stuff
like that but you take a psychedelic like lsd and you cut it down to about a tenth of a typical
dosage so so like 10 micrograms which is which is incredibly small and and then you'll you'll
take that on on some sort of regular schedule and it's supposed to improve quite a bit I think
that's that's where a lot of the community is moving towards now that we've gotten out of the
whole like this needs to be all super safe like we're guinea pigging ourselves so we have to
just like have everything incredibly safe and we're starting to branch out because things like
modafinal open that door and they say hey we can be safe and get like a one or two percent increase
in our performance or we can be less safe and get like 10 or 20 percent increases in our performance
and that's I mean it's just incredibly valuable so the micro dosing you would do on a daily basis
I don't know yet I haven't it would certainly be something that I mean with all of these
always listen to your body and and you have to be very in tune with with where you're at
and it is certainly so you haven't tried any micro dosing yet I haven't tried any micro dosing yet
okay you said micro dosing of lsd yes what does that do so because I'm assuming a micro
dose wouldn't give you like the hallucinations and stuff this is all sub perceptual okay it
should be you shouldn't notice any difference in colors anything you shouldn't get any hallucinations
or enhancements it should just be generally like modafinal where it just things go easier and you
get a slight performance increase how do you how do you measure something like that because you
can have random variation performance increase just on based on whether you slept okay or if
you're fighting off some minor bug or something totally as far as like dosage with with lsd typically
well it's harder if you're getting street lsd because you don't know if it's going to be evenly
laid on on the tabs the lsd comes on like little pieces of paper I mean you don't know if it's
going to be evenly laid and then if you cut that up to divide it then you can get one piece that
just has all of the lsd and then 10 pieces that have none of it but with like the black markets
and stuff like that it's made drugs a little bit better and safer because there's accountability
you know and and there's rating systems and stuff like that so you can know that you're
going to get a pretty good laid thing and then you can also instead of cutting it up what some
people will do is they will just drop it in water and then drink a portion of that water
because it dissolves and and in the water fully and does it like is the lsd supposed to make you
more creative or more alert or yeah on both both it's supposed to be it would be kind of like
modafinil except instead of it increases your performance in a similar way except it is leaning
a little bit more towards that creative side where modafinil is is a little bit more of like a
structured side like a hyper focus i i don't know really how to explain the differences
probably because i haven't experienced micro dosing okay yet but the anecdotals out there are pretty
good so and it's kind of hard to ignore is it supposed to be just a little micro dose on when
you want a good creative day or is this like a daily sort of thing i think different people
do it differently um i've heard of a lot of people that will do
one day initially where they're taking the full effect and then three days off where it's like
one the second day they're still feeling it a little bit or like some of the positive effects
and then the third and fourth day they let burn in days so days where they like have to
you know reflect on on what happened and kind of how it was and then there's people that do it
every day and you know people that aren't really micro dosing and they're just going through their
days tripping balls um so there's there's a whole gamut of of people that are doing this
and they have all these conversations at longevity longevity yep dot com i i think the reddit
has a lot more on on the the micro dosing and stuff like that um long city longevity is more
focused on like the longevity and and just like more typical drugs more legal drugs than lsd
okay so go with the the uh new tropic sub reddit then i mean go with whichever one you well you
would want to right but if you want to like read about that kind of stuff and talk with people
better doing reddit yeah is a much less monitored community okay interesting have you done any
micro dosing no i mean not unless you count 100 milligrams of caffeine as opposed to the
two or six that most people are running on every day you sir you disappoint me with your definition
of micro dosing no i i you mean a full dose yeah chest hair you mean sweater i i haven't uh i haven't
micro dosed or full dosed with any illegal substances like i said i've i've used marijuana
a few times and i say it that way because i don't typically smoke it and i got someone laughing
like you use marijuana you dweeb like you know you don't say it you're supposed to you smoke it
or whatever i typically don't smoke it but that's like less than i don't know 10 times a year if
that it's been two three months since the last time i had any any sort of illegal anything
because i've been in the job market so but i i totally get where you're feeling we're like yeah
i am doing marijuana today or i'm using marijuana today rather than smoking or whatever it's i'm
taking a substance exactly those people that micro dose marijuana too really and that's yeah
what would they report are the effects of micro dosing so it can reduce social anxiety
quite a bit which is which is really interesting because it's kind of countering what marijuana
does at a larger scale if you take like a full dose you get a paranoid paranoid but yeah micro
dosing marijuana sometimes brings people's anxiety level down and and that you know there's the
different drugs do different things there is a lot of people that don't look for those things that
allow them to say remember an extra digit in a string and more focus on like fear reduction
and anxiety reduction and that can give you just so much better performance than just being able to
to remember an extra number on a phone number or something like that you know make a much bigger
difference in your life it can make a huge difference especially if you're crippled by
stuff like that yeah in colorado marijuana is legal and you can get it in various forms and
various types at dispensaries every six feet of the state there are more marijuana dispensaries
in denver than there are starbucks really yeah at least that's what i read a couple years ago
which i mean it sounds crazy until i realized that like just on the drive from my place
like in the three and a half miles to the interstate i pass no less than half a dozen yeah
and i pass i think only three starbucks so i see some like gas stations and stuff now that are
like gas stations slash dispensaries damn yeah there's also a lot of places in colorado where
you can't sell marijuana because the local little communities are like nope not in our area and so
i think they probably get all crammed into these the few places that will let you do it i don't
know how they all stay in business when they're competing with people that are literally across
the street maybe it's like a gas station thing you know brand or like this is booming yeah i think
right now it's in the whole you know the boom cycle and eventually the the people who are less
competitive will get weeded out and bought up by everyone else weeded out i did not intend that
so because i hate puns oh pun puns are the best anyway um we will fight after this as far as
different ways to take it i've seen i haven't been i've been in a few of these stores like i've been
shopping for the stuff twice since i moved to denver like three years ago but i remember one
of them had pills yeah of what is that not thc ingredient cbd cbd cbd is incredible it's it's
it's an amazing it's most of the health stuff that you associate with with marijuana without
all the psychoactive high okay you know our our descendants you know 50 hundred years on the line
they're gonna owe us a lot of thank yous a lot of us guinea pig ourselves mechardism with usd and
cbd and ten dollars a day worth of of neutropics just so and in you know a generation or two
they're going to be taking the daily pill and they're going to be operating at 180 percent of
what the grandparents operated at yeah we're right here in descendants we are the spark of the neosapiens
well this is in nick bostrom's book the super intelligence book he was he was talking about
like one of the ways that they could do is through you know drug alt augmenting a society with drugs
and and stuff like that or just having the general population being smarter and not
necessarily doing it through like you know agis and stuff like that so it could be incredible
what some of these things lead to but then also like like we said earlier you're inserting
something that increases performance into a system that judges you on your performance and
that can always have just like crazy societal effects yeah and society in general has been
you've heard of flin effect right no oh so uh the flin effect is the effect that has been measured
that society in general western society has i'm not sure if it extends to everywhere in the world
but i know definitely in the u.s and in europe people have just been getting smarter over the past
five seven or eight decades yeah where where uh iq tests have had to be adjusted every few years
to take into account the fact that the average person is simply smarter nowadays and i mean
there's a lot of hypotheses as to why this is better nutrition better hygiene taking lead out of
stuff yeah but yeah yes but i mean no one really knows exactly what has caused it but people have
just been getting in general low level smarter for a number of decades where at this point i think
the average person is 40 to 50 smarter than someone was seven decades ago which is amazing
keeping in mind though too that the maybe part of the reason that society is less violent now i don't
know just my own personal prejudice there that there might be some correlation there i mean so
i think it depends on what parts of iq tests and i i only know this because a i was listening to
something about this earlier and b it's something that i think about but there are different portions
of an iq test you know part of it is you know this as to this or this is x as to y as b is to or as
a is to blank or whatever but then there are like parts where it's like all right what would this
structure of squares look like from viewed from the top because you can kind of see it from the side
well viewing it from the side and then imagining it from the top might be more difficult 60 years
ago because there weren't 3d rotating objects that you saw all the time on a flat surface like a tv
or a video game screen oh but you know now all the time you know on loading screens for fallout
you're sitting there rotating the little pins or items or whatever while you're waiting for things
to load so you're getting a lot of practice with some of these things but that's true uh flint effect
is a real thing it has its own wikipedia page and this is kind of just like turning a spotlight on
it and it's saying like we're getting smarter now let's figure out how to get smarter at getting
smarter yeah you know and if we could turn that up and keep society getting smarter i i'm all for
that and it seems to be having good effects there is there is the concern that like turn it alluded
to like in the first few minutes of you know some some disparity between and you used to just a minute
again that if if it's if some people have access to this and it makes them better at being productive
people well then those people are gonna it you know could kind of just take off for them and not for
the rest of us yeah but it's it's a positive feedback loop you know you you make more money
so you can afford more pills that make you more money right like those bastards that only sleep
for four hours right god i do wonder though like so that's it's not clear to me how that could
how that might work out in the future because i mean so for example i don't think it's clear
to anybody and that's well exactly i want to give out a couple of examples so like if smartphones
cost eight thousand dollars and almost nobody had them but you know the top two percent could afford
it and they have the wealth of the universe or the world's information at their fingertips all the
time and the rest of us had to go to you know physical buildings and look at books oh yeah
libraries i forgot what they're not kidding but yeah i mean i have all the libraries on my phone
right now i think when phones are first being pushed into the market they were kind of seen
like as this toy for rich people and i forget who put it this way it was somebody ages ago that i
heard on a tv or podcast or something they were like i mean yes this this was pushed out as a toy
for the rich and then now like dock workers in Somalia are using them to coordinate like this
is something that everybody or like you know everyone that's not the body and billion of people
on earth have access to and i'm wondering you know if depending on how these drugs worked or how
this feature turned out it could be that oh cool we'll just put modafinil's super awesome great
grand cousin into the water supply and everyone's gonna have some or if it's gonna be yeah it's
awesome it's like that movie limitless but it's a thousand dollars a pill enjoy right well everything
always starts out as a thousand dollars a pill but then it gets cheaper over time like the first
computers were massive and cost billions of dollars maybe not billions but millions at least
equivalent of billions probably okay yeah yeah fair point i mean i don't know and i yeah obviously
i'm speculating i was just that is the one thing i hear kick back a lot for any sort of transhumanist
progression is that like well yeah but then the society will just all skew towards the first
people to get access to it and i don't know if that the rich always have these advantages yes it's
that's always going to be the case that the people with the most money will get the most advantage
soonest and then it'll slowly spread to everyone else and if we're talking about like a five or
10 20 increase we're not talking about tripling your iq right so if it was the case that being
20 if it was if it was the case that being a center deviation ahead meant that you had all
of this extra sway and all this extra power the world's most powerful people would be the world
smartest people and they're often not oh yeah 20 percent is huge though it is 20 percent is gargantuan
you would you would be the best performing person that you know at 20 increase if nobody else was
doped up well i mean if you're having iq of 100 and you know somebody that iq of 120 that disparity
is not gargantuan oh it's huge pretty big yeah 100 120 is is gargantuan for sure um i don't know if
it's life changing but it's it is a lot yeah it's quite a bit it would be a noticeable sometimes
here this is this is the way that i would say it at least has affected me in my life there are there
are times whenever i take modafin l that i feel like i'm cheating where you just feel like you know
i get such a crazy advantage with it but i don't want to like tell everybody else that this advantage
is out there because it wouldn't it would make me a lot less you know extraordinary or or abnormal
you know i know that feeling you're talking about but i feel like that might be one of the one of
the effects of the drugs or which is one of the effects of having a great day right i mean
because like i said it never put me in a stage in a mindset that i've never been in before
it just it it got me there artificially yeah and immediately rather than you know
throwing the dice every day i work with my job i'm directly compensated based on performance
like i have a commission plan and so it does make it like and and my statistics versus all my
peer statistics is all tracked right next to each other and so it does for for my situation
specifically it definitely makes me feel like i'm cheating and and just gives me an unfair
advantage i think got a question usually the advantages you can get but i guess i do want
to say that i've been pushed back i thought that 20 points wouldn't make wouldn't make or break the
world but it seems like you guys are saying it might it's it's a lot i got a question if everyone
in your workplace knew about modafin l and used it would you support regulation to be like okay guys
let's all just quit it and we'll be you know nothing will change in our relative performance
or would you want to keep using it because you like the performance that you get out of it i think
that i i would like to see something where it's just like you know you you're showing that you
are enhanced you know competing with the non-enhanced though i that way people could differentiate
and then people could choose you know if someone if your boss were to say like hey i understand
you'll perform less you're not going to be judged based on that you'll be judged against the people
who are also not doping and and then you know the people who really want to like you know if the
commission structure if it's all commission and the commission structure were the same the people
that just want to like you know burn really hot 24 seven they can do that and then the people that
don't would do that um but the current state i probably wouldn't vote for uh for getting it taken
away just because i get such a distinctive advantage from it for that reason for the first
reason and in your response there is exactly why i would love a separate league for people
that could be openly on all the steroids i think that'd be awesome to watch football with people
that yes this guy's on all these drugs this guy's all these drugs let's watch these monsters clash
and go my god dude they would turn themselves a lot of doping if you did something like that i
mean i mean you have to that you got to keep that in mind if you want to get into into uh
performance boosting competitive sports yeah you realize your life expectancy will take a hit
and you know your body is going to be destroyed because you're going to be fighting with people
you know that can go toe to toe with silverback guerrillas but i think that it would just be
awesome watching you know a baseball game with super dopers like oh we had to up this up the density
of the balls and bats because they kept destroying these things like they pushed what they pushed
left field out to a thousand yards because like it's too it's too tight but but then you know i
mean would you like if i was going out at my work and i was saying like hey i'm doping people would
see my performance and they would say oh that's that's a lot less impressive now okay you know
and so i think that that would have that effect if if we were to say like hey you can be really open
about these things people would just say well i'm not going to do it because of the negative
effects and i don't feel like i need to constantly one up them would you so would you like to work
on a team where everyone was doping just because the team would be so much more effective you'd
hate that because you wouldn't shine well not just that just because it would be you'd be
having to burn hot to stay competitive but what if you'd like there was a limit of only doing it
two or three times a week yeah i think that'd be fine i would i would be fine with that but
something on mondays but yeah if it were just like allowed whenever and there wasn't a limit on
to on it then it's just it would be such a rat race that that would be really unenjoyable i feel
like it would take away a lot of what life is supposed to be about and it's not always about
just like constantly getting ahead sometimes it's like slowing down smother roses so if you were on
a team where it was twice a week but everyone doped then that would be cool i would i would be
fine with that i would i think that would be a lot of fun yeah you would you would be able to see
some really amazing things societally i think if if this was more widespread yeah do we want to
wrap it up because we are now at an hour and a half yeah i think we've hit just about everything
i'm trying to think of i mean we we sort of focused on a handful but i guess this is we focus on a
handful of new tropics but i guess you know the the point is that this is a
subject of inquiry and and active investigation that's out there that you know if you want to look
into um i mean the sort of the general idea that if you can get a couple percent boost and it's
not all that costly and it's pretty safe that sounds pretty cool yeah look check it out it's
fun do your homework read around it's fun stuff definitely do your homework even if it's just
check the academic i mean for the most part this this is the main takeaway too is like hey will
these drugs make me smarter make me you know better at this or that the answer is who we don't
know yeah not just three of us but the the industry as a whole doesn't like hey if i take
you know 300 milligrams of this 200 of this and 10 of that what's gonna happen well we're not really
sure not because uh you know there's a there's not a ton of research done but b you know your bodies
everyone's bodies work different some people like you said are non-responders to things that
it's weird that they're not responders too because it's pretty intense oh man that would suck if
society was based on people doing that because a non-responder yeah they'd be screwed so yeah i mean
it's it's one of those things that there's a lot of of up in the air still that's why i said our
descendants are gonna owe us for doing all the the guinea pigging down the road so it is it is
genuinely unknown what we don't know what the negative effects of a lot of these things are
on large timescales some of its stuff that you know pharmaceutical companies have even said you
know we just don't feel like it's worth it researching that anymore because the risk profile
we have found is so high and then the the Neutropics community has said you know we don't mind so much
you know so it is there's a lot of genuinely dangerous stuff in this space so just do all
of your research and definitely try and stay as safe as possible i would say and be okay with
knowing that we don't know the long-term effects yet so you might die in 20 years yeah totally and
that's something to accept there's there's a lot of stuff that has happened Sunni Fieram is one that
i think there was somebody who died on it and and it was just what is Sunni Fieram it's it's
called an ampakine it's just one of those various drugs i mean there's hundreds of them out there
but it was one of those ones that turned out to be you know kind of bad for you and and people
were doing it so it is guinea pigging there is real risks involved i think there was somebody who
who was using caffeine but they were using an importer just because it's so incredibly cheap
in powder and you know he took like a tablespoon of it thinking um thinking he'd be fine and his
heart exploded or something like wait you know somebody this happened to i don't know them
no but but i know of of them yeah i remember when think geek uh this this website that
sells just hilarious little geeky toys they were selling like caffeine that came in a salt shaker
and like to add it to your french fries your pizza or whatever totally it's incredibly dangerous
that was my exact first thought i was like i can't wait to i can't wait but i i wonder how
long it's going to be before someone dies doing a line of this on youtube right jeez yeah like i mean
what were they thinking they were thinking oh i bought this from thinking it's not dangerous what
is geek set thinking that like people are gonna i mean i guess they can sell whatever they want
people can be dumb or whatever but like there's no way but they're gonna use that responsibly
in a i mean well it's because when you're selling it in a novel way like that people don't understand
that it's something that needs to be used responsibly yeah you know we think about coffee
and we're like oh shit i've had so much coffee in my life this isn't a bad thing and then some kid
takes a teaspoon dies you know so it is genuinely dangerous you definitely have to do your research
on it and no one's been taking it long enough to know that if it's going to maybe give you
Parkinson's or Alzheimer's or something down the line yeah i take my caffeine in pre-measured
pill form but i don't measure it myself i have it packaged and sets me that way because i'm not
again it's just so incredibly cheaper right well it's cheaper but also like as far as not even
just buying the powder and packaging my own because i also like knowing exactly how much i'm
getting you know even with a cup of coffee you're getting some wide variants if you're doing this
without a scale if you're jumping into any of these no tropics without a scale then you're
doing it wrong anybody who tells you you can eyeball this stuff i mean we're talking about
milligrams and and micrograms and stuff like that you can eyeball it just simple as that right on
i could go on and on but i feel like we are we're hitting that upper time limit so do you
want to move on to listener feedback okay actually not going to listen to feedback just
yet because taren had one more thing um well i just wanted to bring up that it's kind of interesting
in the way it changes how you think it's not necessarily always faster so they did studies
on chest players and they used modafinil in this study and they found out that actually the chest
players were taking longer per move they were making better moves they were getting a net positive
but it wasn't necessarily by like going through it easier or faster it's just they were able to see
more per move um so i just thought that was something interesting to kind of throw in there
it is very interesting that is that wasn't it wasn't my experience at all that things seemed
like they went fast if anything it seems like things are going the same speed and i was going
faster which is probably you know something like this the subjective experience of these chest
players who were like you said running through more moves in their head before they made their
actual one i would be fun to see how they performed on aterol if they're if they made faster moves
that were you know on on average worse yeah that would be a really interesting thing to to cross
exam i know that if it were me that's how it would be on i mean or like on just too much caffeine
you're just speeding through you're not you're not a sharper better thinker you're just a faster one
yeah you're also faster at i guess implementing your ideas before you know having the chance to
run through them all yeah and so i don't know crap we never got to aterol i mean they're
that's the biggest portion of it if you look at like schools and stuff there's some schools that
have like 35 usage of performance enhancing drugs as far as like schoolwork in terms of aterol in
terms of like aterol and riddling riddling is huge and mommy's a little helper yeah and that
with modafinil you don't have a big you have a big risk profile but compared to things like
amphetamines you don't really um aterol is basically speed yeah yeah it is it is and it
hyper focuses you right mm-hmm i call it speed of the pg-13 rating speed legal and packaged for
you right for children yeah for children yeah so i know i hear it just like really narrows you in
on exactly what you're focusing on you don't change your focus to anything else yeah so aterol
now that i'm posing the question this way to myself would be like combining all of the bad
things of caffeine with all of the i guess with too much of the good things from modafinil
so like you said it's it's like with modafinil like i said i spent a day playing skyrim but
i wasn't setting out to anything productive that day anyway i just know that it is kind of easy to
get caught up in doing whatever it is you're doing just like it is when you're able you know if
you're feeling super focused that day anyway that might happen but without at all yeah you're gonna be
you know you're gonna be that kid at recess counting blades of grass right just because
this is super interesting and oh my god like but i don't know in your whole house because you have
to right yeah so i mean i took aterol two or three times during call during my first couple
years at college so like i don't know jesus i'm old like seven or eight years ago yes so old
steven over me currently the oldest i've ever been that's true uh actually my as far as impacting
my sleep this is interesting both times that i took it i stopped fine that night the night after
i was up all night just laying there trying to fall asleep both times i'm not sure if the second
time was i also had more insomnia issues back then but this was just i remember i think the
second time i took it i tried i just laid in bed until i you know i saw my window kind of
light up a little bit and i could hear birds singing and it's like well that's it i'm up for the day
five thirty in the morning the last psychiatrist back when he was still blogging
wrote a post about okay kids listen if you're gonna take aterol at college here's how to do it right
because i see a lot of you fucking it up and it's a really interesting post but one of the big
things that he said is it changes your mental state enough that you want to be in the same
state when you're taking tests as you were when you were studying so if you study on aterol take
your test on aterol as well and if you don't study on aterol then don't take it before a test
yeah state dependent memory is a real thing for everything and that's that's why i mean everything
i'm also kind of super nitpicky with a lot of things that i do but i like sitting in the exact
same seat and whatever like when i was and i'm in a classroom setting i like studying and test
taking in that seat and there was one really hard class when it's getting my undergrad that
was sort of designed as like the senior class fail or like drop out test to see like if you're
really serious about getting this degree you're going to pass this class with like a 25 fail rate
the test room was always different than the lecture room and that drove me insane we would
go to a completely different building and because it was a class with like i think it ran three times
a day or three times a week with different times but it was three classes running concurrently
with like 200 people per class so that but they would all test in the same day so they kind of
just spread out rooms throughout the campus to get people to take this test and i'm convinced
i would have tested a little better in the real in the in the lecture room
anyway adderall experiences i didn't mean to jump in there did you i i haven't had very many
with adderall and i don't see it as particularly i think it is great for mindless tasks
to keep your mind from wandering yeah yeah just for like cleaning and stuff like that but
i don't see much value for it whenever you compare it to things like madaphanel that are
you know a quarter of the price and effective in more of the ways that you want this type of
drug to be effective and doesn't have as many of the side effects that you want that you wouldn't
want from these types of drugs madaphanel is just miles above where adderall is for the
new tropics community i'm wondering my memory of of my time using it adderall like i said is
almost 10 years old and but if i'm remembering correctly or if i'm not just you know inventing
the memory right now i feel like there was more of the uncomfortable mental effects like when i took
afedra a couple years ago um and less of the physical effects although there was still
de jitteriness the heart rate and stuff but it wasn't as bad and maybe the mental effects were
more pronounced but the in the physical effects less pronounced but it wasn't a positive experience
yeah again people take it your mileage varies if you have 80 80 or 80 hd definitely it helps
you out a lot and it doesn't it's not speed for you it's one of those weird things where it
does actually just chill you out if your brain chemistry is different so but it is something
like without the big difference i would say with adderall like you take or vivans or riddolin or
any of those amphetamines you take those and you think like it hits you hard enough to where you
think i'm definitely on a drug whereas madaphanel there's tons of times throughout your day
whenever you can completely forget that you took it just because it feels so much just like you're
in your normal state of consciousness everything is just easier for me i don't know everybody's
everybody's chemistry is is different you know so i for one have been convinced to turn into a
drug using hippie because of you guys or at least experiment with it cool all righty yeah fun stuff
all right i think we're ready for listener feedback for realsies okay listener feedback for
realsies uh the first two things i have are both just corrections so i'll just read them there's
not really much to reply to unless you guys want to jump in uh first mr oliva says in regards to
our episode when we were talking about ai with shan uh when you talk about neural networks
overfitting the data inyash likens it to seeing faces in clouds but that is exactly the opposite
of overfitting overfitting is like only recognizing the faces that the neural network was trained on
as actual faces because the neural network had so much training on those it essentially made them
a limited set of correct inputs rather than trying to find the common traits for faces
this occurs when you train more than once on a single data set because the neural network is
reinforcing its previous beliefs it can also not show up in a test if you reuse training data as
test data to see how accurate it is so i was wrong it is not it is not seeing the data everywhere
it is having such a limited pool that you only see it from from these very specific examples
to make sure i understand so like it'd be like if you train this neural network to recognize
chairs and you only train it on like four legged backed chairs it wouldn't recognize arm chairs
couches lazy boys spinny computer chairs is that sort of what what you're saying yes that's what
it sounds like from from what i gleamed maybe if it's bad enough it might not even recognize the
same chair in a slightly different position gotcha but what you were saying was kind of the opposite
word it was everything with a flat surface as a chair yeah got you okay yeah cool i got it wrong
the exactly wrong direction that's that's right that you get exactly wrong right go cool not without
incident says a quick alpha go clarification alpha go uses neural networks but it isn't really
accurate to say that alpha go is a neural network alpha go uses a search tree like deep blue did
but uses two neural networks to reduce the prune and search space to reduce and prune the search
space so yeah when sean said it is a neural network that wasn't technically correct that
makes sense i remember during the episode that which reminds me i well i don't know if this is
worth mentioning this was the first episode i actually re-listened to in like six eight months
and i think we turned that okay yeah but i do remember when he said that about alpha go and
that uh he says something about a brute forcing the maybe this is before the show but i remember he
says something about a brute forcing the solution which i remember was exactly how it didn't work
unless like i mean it brute forces it but then uses neural network or neural net algorithm
magic to prune down the immense search space with go moves so it's not just like chess or
actually this is an interesting related point i remember reading sometime like a year ago
why there wasn't chess or excuse me checkers championships so the way that there are chess
championships it's because checkers is a solved game yeah it's too easy it's like tic-tac-toe
well it well exactly but the fun thing about it was that i remember it was either in 1868 or
1968 or somewhere in one of those decades probably 1868 and 1968 are a century part i know somewhere
in so it doesn't matter the point is during some of the last times the tried doing checkers tournaments
i think 23 of the 24 games were identical and they ended in ties okay so like there's it is it is
one of those things where yeah like tic-tac it's like a bigger tic-tac-toe board where it's just
like this is there's there's not enough search space to make this interesting okay so now onto
an actual question that we should probably discuss for a little bit uh google plex bite asks
i've always wondered about paperclip general intelligences why does the paperclip intelligence
care about making paperclips it just needs to convince itself it's doing its job like bending
and unbending the same paperclip over and over or erasing the memory of making the paperclip and
counting the first paperclip it made over and over again so this is going to be an ai theorist kind of
big problem for me like just to my my initial impression is that it's never it doesn't care
about making paperclips in the way that we understand the word care to mean anything
it's basically tell it make paperclips for some idiot reason and it's like make paperclips you
got it that's my only value and so that's that's my purpose is to you know cut butter or whatever
you pass butter oh my god whereas but that nobody even had the the the mental faculties to be
horrified at its life right we're talking about the butter transferring transport a robot from
rick and morty um which everyone should have gotten that reference yes uh you didn't get the
reference you should stop listening to the show and watch all rick and morty right now way more
important yes you can get through it in a day there's only a couple seasons so i think the the idea is
that why wouldn't it just trick itself to think it's it's making maximum paperclips i mean presumably
because you asked you you asked it to do the job right it's like if i asked you to help me move
you're not going to carry the same box to and from the truck right i think i think that some
paperclip maximizers might do that i mean it's possible that something could just modify itself
into cheating but on the the purpose is not to set to create this paperclip maximizer the purpose
is to help you see how it could go wrong yeah exactly through that i think that you know it
still stands that the paperclip machine is a pretty good example yeah of things that we didn't expect
to go wrong all of a sudden you have a universe of paperclips it may trick itself but it's easy
to see how if it didn't it could really go right and i mean it also depends on how well it's programmed
because a lot of humans trick themselves into feeling happy wireheading or whatever just using
heroin all the time and a lot of other humans are like that is i don't i don't really care about that
trick i want to actually do something that is that is purposeful so it depends on how good it is at
seeking out its actual goal if it's just a number that is trying to increment then yeah maybe it's
busy to to hack it and it's useless but maybe it actually for some reason cares or or wants
has a drive for there to be more paperclips much like humans sometimes have a drive for
i don't know creating a lasting legacy or having children that like them or whatever
shit people do totally but the whole purpose is just to say like hey this can go wrong can you see
can you see how it can go wrong yeah oh okay this is just a fun one senju says hey there's a project
where they're gathering data on what humans would want self drive and cars to do in trolley problem
like situations and he attaches a link which i will attach as well to the episode when it goes live
on the basingconspiracy.com but yeah i played with it there's 13 questions and they're really fun
it's like do you think this car should run over two dogs and a doctor or three old ladies
it's funny it was it was just it was fun to play through and then at the end it gave me some statistics
as to you value rules more than you value this other thing based on your answers and you apparently
value homeless people less than you value educated people which i was like you got me there
i'll definitely take it if it gives you like slap in the face results like that as far as like
useful implementations i was actually talking with a couple people throughout the show before
about this exact problem like trolley problem trolley probleming with self driving cars and
one of them was just super pissed about like why are we even spending a lot of time burning fuel
on this like this is not the considerations we should be having he he gave this one example
is like if it's going to drive me off a bridge to save three people it might as well just kick me
out and drive itself to a factory for itself and give it money to ea charities
but um i think i think the general point is that like you know whatever it is the death toll
will be so much less than it is now and like you said it's gonna it's not going to be operating at
the same speed that we're gonna be operating at it can stop faster uh there's also the question of
like why should i die because a family three is stupid enough to jump in front of my car
but i mean in a perfect self driving car shouldn't have trolley problems no right you know it should
it should say all right there's two dogs and a doctor and it stops yes or slows down enough so
anything that random might occur it yeah and that's hard for us to kind of think about because
we're thinking if we were in that situation you know we'd have to think about it um but if you
look at like some of the tesla ones they predict crashes before you can even think about there
even being i've done ones where i've like watched the videos multiple times and you just can't
tell that a crash is about to happen and the car has already realized it oh fantastic that's
reassuring i think i thought one of my uh really oh this is cool moments was when uh the car stopped
and wouldn't go forward at an intersection because its radar picked up a bicyclist behind a hedge
which the human couldn't see because it's behind a hedge it's like this is awesome because they can
see through walls yeah i mean they have they have radars or light ours um they can bounce them
underneath the car in front of them yeah they have perfect perception of of the world got that's
the immediate world around them and yeah i think a lot of people don't realize i think taryn i like
the way you put it trolley problems aren't going to be a thing yeah when this when this gets out
there speaking of which that was my least that was my most immersion breaking point in logan
when this isn't spoiler oh yeah the self-driving trucks well no i was finding the self-driving
truck so i didn't like was how they honks and said please move out of the way
they're stopping it's like no no you're not going to have self-driving cars barreling down
the highway carrying cargo and i can just be like moved and i they're gonna stop in our world
obviously but uh the i interpreted that as a world building detail where the director is letting us
know we live in a dystopia where corporations want they value the five extra minutes it takes
their product to get there more than they value the lives of the people on the street and they
just program their resting commentary and they've got to the laws yeah yeah that's actually that
that the the dystopian idea came into my head as i was formulating that but you put it really
poignantly and that's that's a that's yeah right fair enough thanks for rebuilding my immersion
from the ground yeah no problem all right we're saved so go see logan now it's now it's literally
hunted out of really good but now you just spoiled logan so no one wants to see it anymore oh god
they're self-driving cars oh this is a fun one and this is also the last one a gnome i believe
it's gnome on our website said i wondered about your approach to the idea of a race of super
intelligent ai of humanities making inheriting our place in the future i find that notion to be
very comforting as it describes a future in which even if humanity fails to make peace amongst itself
and go on to explore the universe we have left a better being to go on in our stead i find that
many people have very low expectations of humanity's ability to not annihilate itself within the next
few centuries and so if worse comes to worst the idea of humanity leaving behind a consciousness
that suppresses it is quite fetching i think i mentioned this on the show that one thing to
grapple with is that we might be making sentient beings that matter in every way that we care about
way more than we do like we like we matter more than ants i think i said something like that
this isn't something that i want to happen because i really care about my own persistence so yes it's
better than nothing like say if they turned us all into more computers think more of them out of
i mean you know it i guess it's better than a universe where all the lights are off everywhere
but i am not a fan given that like all of my values are kind of tied up in humanity and if
that's extinguished to make room for this cooler thing well then we're still gone right so that i
mean i don't know how coherent that thought is but like i guess the takeaway is that i for me i
feel like it could be worse but it's not desirable so i i have a take on this uh being that i well
first of all i i put my own life at a very high priority level so if something were to come along
and want to disassemble me to use me for parts i would have serious problems with that and you
know try to try to declare war or stab it or whatever i need to do to get this computer not
to take me to pieces because i like living uh but that being said if we're assuming i have to die
eventually at some point and we have descendants i mean that's basically what all of human history
has been right you you're gonna die anyway so you have kids and you hope they carry on the the legacy
and uh i find what he says right here to be very beautiful and romantic in that yes i would like
my descendants to be better than me more moral than me smarter than me stronger than me lives
live a better life and if it doesn't matter to me if that life is you know in a fleshy body or if
it's in a robot body or if there's no body at all it's just distributed across the internet and
various probes are sent out or whatever i i'm i'm not a as i believe they call them carbon
chauvinists where my descendants have to be made out of a carbon in the same way i am uh i'm totally
fine with uh with that sort of ai coming afterwards and taking up the mantle for humanity the problem
isn't that i don't want ai carrying on our legacy and you know hopefully we would be able to coexist
for as long as we can coexist until the human species eventually goes extinct uh that that
is not my worry the worry is that if we create something that takes over for us for it to be
recognizably human if this is a i believe the term i heard someone used before god i can't
remember who it was now a disney land with no children if it is a machine that is like
reproducing these environments and making wonderful places for humans to live but there's
nothing sentient there and it's just making stuff without anything that can enjoy it yeah
that's that's that's a future without any value there there needs to be
something that cares and feels and thinks to inherit it and the the the fear isn't that an ai
will take over for humanity the fear is that there is going to be some sort of machine that
inherits our place but that machine does not have any consciousness or feelings or if it does it
values things that are so orthogonal to us that we just don't see any value in that that they just
want to make paper clips or beautiful carbon crystals or whatever and there's there's nothing
left to pursue anything that we find valuable that's a much more refined version of what i was trying
to say like like if it carried on and it was just us bigger and better than i guess again
aside from mourning the loss of my personal existence that would be i guess somewhat okay you
know or or super awesome depending on how exactly that worked out but you're right like it could be
i'm picturing i forget the kind of wasp that like builds these cool little like clay vases that it
either like lays eggs in or whatever they do lives in and i'm imagining in the head of that wasp
there's not much going on it's just doing what it does it's doing its bossy business and doesn't
it's not thinking and i mean the evidence for like a lot of animal behavior especially lower
animal behavior just being complete autopilot all the time is pretty overwhelming yeah there's
i think you're you're in the distinct minority if you're gonna say no no it's reflecting and
thinking through things like just like you are it's definitely not or it's it's unreasonable
for you to say that it is anyway so we didn't talk we didn't throw around the word the c word a lot
in our ai episode consciousness um which is the c word when you're having a philosophical discussion
because it's um it's this whole other topic uh you know it is completely conceivable to me that
you could have ai's that would be just like this wasp they'd be building super awesome cool stuff
but there's there's not the lights aren't on in its head and there's no lights on in the universe
for to enjoy its creations yeah but it's it's just going to keep on plugging away because that's
what it's supposed to do and there's been a number of great sci-fi shorts that take that
concept they're um swarm by uh bruce sterling well i had that where the there's an erase of
somewhat insectile uh aliens which don't have any sort of thought process but they're reproducing
just taking over the the galaxy uh and um most famously recently uh blindsight by peter watz
is the same sort of thing with aliens that can optimize their environment but don't think
and we could conceivably make an ai that can do that sort of thing but doesn't have thoughts
also we could conceivably make something that does the exact same thing and we can't tell right
you know we honestly can't explain consciousness in humans to on even the simplest level like we
don't even know where to start as far as consciousness goes to sort of create a machine and and assume
that it's not conscious on any level i see steven waggling his head and i'm kind of oh yeah i'm
going i'm going with him on this there's a long running debate on whether you can make something
that acts identically without it actually having the same thoughts and we'll have to do a whole
episode on p zombies someday we'll do that but i was also just going to say that it's not that we
i think you came off a little too strong it's not that we have nowhere to start and we wouldn't
even know where to begin talking about these things we have we have some idea where we don't
have a full picture yet yeah so to say that we have a sample size of consciousness of one
yes you know and and not even one as in like a communal one like each person can only experience
a sample size sure but but to say that we have no idea of what we're talking about would mean like
it'd be equally realistic for me to say that you're conscious and the chair sitting on his
conscious like if i had nowhere to start those claims would be the same or have the same level
of probability right which i don't think is true i think that there's i assigned a much more
a much higher probability of you being conscious than i do of the the chair sitting on being
conscious well i mean like the whole problem goes back to whenever you say conscious what do you
mean yeah well i mean that's that's why it's such a big problem is because whenever i say we don't
know where to start i mean that whenever you say consciousness you you don't know how to define that
but i sort of know that starting by investigating a chair is a bad idea you should maybe investigate
other mammals well i mean i can give a quick answer that i think is pretty accepted at least
in the the philosophy community that uh thomas negle put forward which was in his essay i think
it's called what what it's like to be a bat and i mean this is kind of our field but this is just
the the the quick flyby of this endeavor like you said you don't know how to define consciousness
there is a loose useful definition that is pretty ubiquitous in the field that if you could transfer
your state of mind into something and have it still be like anything then it's then that's what
kind that that constitutes consciousness in some way so like you if we were to transfer as much
of you as we could into a bat body and or like if you if you were a bat for like we could we could
wave a wand at you turn you into a bat and then turn you back and you could self report about
what that was like you could be like man it was really weird i didn't have thoughts but i had
like these drives and i could see with my ears or whatever yeah there's something whatever you say
you like that's the whole problem is what do you mean you well so that's the consciousness is
different than personal identity yeah uh so though you've moved goalposts but we don't just
want to make that clear okay but okay uh yeah so i guess you could say that something's conscious
if there's something that it's like to be that thing or if there's any sort of subjectivity
that it that it could in principle express i don't think for example that it's reasonable to think
that rocks have a subjectivity but i think that probably anything with a brain does or most things
with a brain do like they have something that's like they again i picture it more like you know
drives like this wasp like it's just doing what it what it's programmed to do and it doesn't really
think about what it's doing it's just moving around and it's responding just to external stimuli
but you know i think this is you know thought experimenty but in principle you can be transformed
into that transformed back and report your experience or as if i turned you into a rock
and turned you back you'd be like did anything happen well no because because i mean a lot
if you think of consciousness as an ability to respond like if you if you look at like eastern
philosophies and stuff like that like they would totally say yeah a rock is conscious
it's just a more primitive form of consciousness because it responds disagree it takes in you know
this chair just vibrated it responded to what i did right i disagree not just with that the chair
has any lower level of consciousness but also that eastern religion says that maybe some of them do
but not as far as i know like buddhism or hinduism well i like like i think if that was um i think
if you're taking as your um your metric of consciousness an ability to respond then you've
redefined the word consciousness to no longer reflect at all what people are trying to talk about
because i mean everything people don't know what they're trying to talk about though i think they
know better they have some idea they they don't think that the ability of matter to vibrate is
what they are trying to talk about at all when they try to try to talk about consciousness
like that's not what when we ask if someone is brain dead are are they still conscious
we're not asking will they vibrate if we beat on no but they're saying will they still respond
that's what we're saying we're saying will they still respond and in that sense
that's what i mean by vibe not necessarily vibrate but respond it took an input which was my force
and it responded with an output which was vibration no it didn't do anything the input could be
photons in that case my fingernails are as conscious as my brain is yeah i know and that's a totally
valid argument no it's not just a great that's redefining the word consciousness to be useless
that that's redefining the word consciousness simply to mean exists as matter yeah okay well
yeah you know no it when when in doubt since we've once we've hit this level of obfuscation
with the word like that's again that's why i call it the c word because it draws attention to it
it's the impossible problem no we should just i don't know the word exactly so i think yeah
exactly instead of using consciousness or any obvious like synonyms we just will change it out
for i'll change it out for subjective experience yeah i don't think that my fingernails have
a tragic experience and so then in that case sensory experience
i would even say subjective specifically like again what it's like to have that experience
so like sensory experience you know the the self-driving cars with their with their radars
have subjective experience or they have sensory they have sensory experience in that they perceive
and respond to external stimuli but i don't think there's anything that's like to be a radar right
if if consciousness is is a process and not a thing you know i mean that that's that's the easy
way to look at like ai and stuff like that is that consciousness isn't necessarily like a single point
in their system but it's just through going through the process of like calculating and
stuff like that if that were what consciousness like this is why it's such the hard problem to say
like oh an ai is unconscious it's because we just have nowhere to start we we we haven't even started
to make this has been the biggest problem since people have started talking everything's been
the biggest problem since we said that said this sounds like a great conversation for
a not post two hours episode yeah i didn't mean i didn't mean to jump us into this no this is a
whole episode this this is like a thousand year episode right here if you really wanted to get
into it yeah it is fun stuff but i do think that we are over time even though we don't have a hard
limit we have a soft limit that we've probably passed all right you railed you a little bit
i like rabbit holding at least i like it probably more than most people but once in a while we're
totally fine so so we would like to end by saying first of all thank you to our wonderful sound
engineer kyle he makes a sound great and puts this in a decent format for everyone also if you
would like to comment you can do that at the subreddit r slash bayesian conspiracy the
bayesian conspiracy sorry is the subreddit oh is it yeah okay and or on our website also the
bayesianconspiracy.com or you can email us at bayesianconspiracypodcast.gmail.com that's it yeah
okay good summary and if you'd like to support us on patreon we are always more than happy to
have another dollar that's right and there's a link to that on our website yay awesome thanks again
and see you guys in a couple weeks no way goodbye all right
