This is the second half of our episode on polyamory.
If you haven't listened to the first part yet, we recommend going back and doing that
first to prevent confusion.
As a content note, after the first half aired we received a number of questions about how
raising kids in a poly household works.
This did not occur to any of us to address this, so this is not covered in this episode.
We will be responding to that in an upcoming episode where we reply to questions and comments
sent in by listeners about previous episodes.
And now, part two of polyamory.
Anyways, the last thing that we said was another steelman topic why people might not
choose polyamory is because you exist in a world that is unfriendly to people who choose
that.
It's like one of the best counter arguments, right?
Wow.
We'll go on.
Well, I mean, I guess it's sort of like a counter argument to being publicly atheist
or being publicly anything counterculture, right?
Yeah.
It's like, is that an argument to stay in the closet if you're gay too?
Kind of?
It might have been 30 years ago, and I think that that, and I guess I say this as somebody
who's not gay, but people, you know, somebody with gay friends who are still partially in
the closet that they do it because they're worried about how it impacts their non-sexual
orientation related life.
I think that's the only reason to stay in the closet if you're not, if you're gay,
right?
I don't know.
I've never understood those kinds of things because I'm naturally someone who wants lots
of attention anyway.
Like, I literally am an attention whore.
A good attention, probably, presumably.
I mean, I prefer the good kind, but I don't care.
You want to be yourself.
You want to put it out there.
You want to live, you know, life true to your beliefs and true to yourself.
Yeah, when I was still in that, you know, other relationship, we would go out sometimes
together and like sit together and it was nice.
I didn't care.
I was like, yes, this is awesome.
Let's do this.
We can be part of the world.
To me, I don't know.
That was never an argument against anything for me.
So I guess, and I don't necessarily know it's an argument that I would endorse, but it's
an argument that I wouldn't say is could be readily dismissed out of hand.
So like saying, you know, if you're on your public Facebook page saying I'm married to
these three people, say if it was multiple marriages or something or whatever, you can't
do that.
So I'm shown as in an open relationship to nobody because you can't list multiple people.
So and you don't want to privilege one person by.
So that's fair enough.
But I guess it's not impossible for me to imagine the position that I should stay in
the closet or hide my true self, whether it's my sexuality or my, I guess a religion is
another example because it could impact my higher ability, my social standing with some
groups that I'm in or something.
One position would be like, well, okay, it's worth it to me to maintain my higher ability
and my social standing.
So I'm going to stay in the closet or hide these things.
And another position is to say, fine, fuck the people who won't hire me and fuck the
people who won't be my friends.
I'm going to be who I am.
To me, that's an argument to changing society.
That's like every now and then you see these, these reports that being transgender is extremely
stressful and makes your life worse.
And yes, because society is assholes to you.
And yeah, so people use that as an argument, say that what transgender is bad or something
like that.
Like how sad they are.
It's like, no, they're sad because everyone's a dick to them all the time.
Right, right.
The suicide rate is much greater.
You know why the suicide rate is much greater?
Because of assholes like you.
Right.
So that is not an argument in my opinion.
And I think, I think you're right.
I guess what I was getting at is that I could sympathize with that position of depending
on where you're at circumstantially.
Right.
I am, I am a privileged person by, by many meanings of that word.
And I can get by with, you know, letting people see that I have tattoos or being openly
polyamorous and, you know, being out with, with my partners and, you know, the weird
thing?
I don't think my parents know I'm poly.
I only see them like once every couple months for like dinner and we don't talk about sex.
Yeah.
But it's not about sex for me.
It's not about sex for me.
In fact, all of my close romantic relationships are not sexual.
Wait, all of them?
No, not all of them are sexual.
Gotcha.
In fact, one of, one of them is not and hasn't, hasn't been for a while, but...
To that point though, being gay isn't about, isn't necessarily about being sexual either.
Exactly.
But people think it is.
So my parents are like, why are you talking about sex?
And I'm like saying that I am in a relationship with somebody who is not my husband, is not
talking about sex, it's, this is somebody who is important to me and we spend a lot
of time together and I love them and mom and dad, I want you to know that because I want
to be, I want to be able to be communicative with you and I want you to know what's going
on in my life and how I'm spending all my time.
It's not talking about sex, just like, yeah, if you're, if you're homosexual, it's not
about sex.
Right.
You can be homosexual with no genitals, right?
You could have had your genitals blown off in the war, but you're still gay.
So...
You can still have sex without genitals.
Fine.
But...
I'm gonna link, I'm going to put a link to a Scarlet Teen article about different ways
to have sex.
That's...
Alright.
I feel bad for Steve because he did not mean to step on that landmine.
It's okay.
I certainly didn't.
Unfortunately, I tripped that meter earlier in a conversation via text message on Instagram,
via the messenger.
So he had a previous warning that this was going to be a thing.
I forgot that this was a thing.
So yeah, no, you're absolutely right.
But I guess it doesn't have to be about sex and you could have it whatever way it would
be, right?
And that's what I was getting at.
Okay.
Shall we continue?
Yeah.
Okay.
So, but see, the issue here is that people do think it's about sex and there are a lot
of preconceived notions that people associate with being, with having multiple partners.
One is promiscuity, which is unfair.
You can be promiscuous and be poly, you could be promiscuous.
Most people who are promiscuous are monogamous, monogamous in quotes.
But yes, most people that are promiscuous are monogamous.
Also, most people are monogamous.
I wouldn't necessarily write that.
Most people, right.
Most people are monogamous.
So that's fair.
But you cannot have sex very often, or, you know, not even being promiscuous, but how
often do you have sex?
You can have multiple partners and not ever have sex.
And there's another association with BDSM in kink, because as kind of a marginalized
community that is involved with sex and sex adjacent stuff, there is a higher level of
adoption of polyamory in that community.
But man, do I hate it when people assume that I am into BDSM because I am polyamorous.
I can only assume from the very distant outside they have this one catch all category for
not monogamous relationship.
And that contains everything from bestiality to BDSM to poly to gay, whatever it is, right?
So like they, they just, they assume that if you're one, it's just this whole big catch
all category.
And what if you have an employer and they have a Christmas event and you bring a partner
and it's not the same partner that they knew you to be with from another time.
And what if they have those preconceptions?
It's not like you can sit down.
I mean, it's a special relationship you have with your boss if you can sit down and talk
those things out.
And thank goodness I had that with my last boss.
You were very lucky to have that relationship with your last boss.
She's like, she said, what does it mean that you're going to have that relationship with
your queer?
Does that mean you're a lesbian?
And I'm like, no, let's talk about this.
Well, what does it mean that you're in multiple relations?
Like what is this?
And we were able to discuss that and it was awesome.
That sounds really cool.
That's not often the situation that you're in.
So you might just have to continue in a kind of awkward situation where your superior, your
employer thinks that you are a sexual deviant and assumes all sorts of false things about
you or maybe even doesn't, but still is really looking down on you for that reason.
Yeah.
I don't know.
If they're not firing me, let them think whatever they want to think.
I don't give a shit.
What about your promotion potential?
Yeah, I have.
I may be unique in that I do not give a shit about my promotion potential right now.
I'm making more than I expect it to make and I don't, I'm like, whatever, I don't care
about this job.
What I'm passionate about is not what I get paid for.
Again, we are coming from very privileged positions.
Very at this point.
I want to say that anybody who is closeted, we totally respect you.
Yeah, that's I think the key with really any situation that involves closeting where you're
encouraged if you have the social means to come out and you've got a community there
to welcome you, but no one should be adding people.
No one should be calling somebody coward or whatever, something like that.
Right.
You should also respect people when they want to be open.
So I guess that's my steel man position is against polyamory is while, you know, it might
even be really easy for you to be polyamorous and you might have people where it works out
really well.
Like, like my experience has been in the last few years, there might be other reasons that
it's hard for you to live like that.
I've heard, I think, okay, so I don't know if this is a steel man or not.
This is what I thought was an OK argument for a while.
Someone, well, I mean, for all five minutes and so I thought about it.
Someone put forth the position that if if everyone was polyamorous, then all the really
attractive high status people would get all the mates and no one else would.
And not just not in the polygamy sense, but in the polyamory sense where everyone would
want to have sex with the high status people.
And I was like, I think you're vastly overestimating how much sex one person can have.
Maybe they didn't mean that one person.
Allow me to tell you, it's not that much that obviously not that one person.
But if there's a lot of people having lots of sex, then where is the problem?
I mean, the really attractive people in general are already going to be mingling, even if
it was a monogamous culture.
And there's there's some fuzziness and overlap between levels.
But I guess their argument boiled down to that, OK, well, the people at the very bottom
of the level ladder before when there was monogamy, everyone was assured a partner, someone they
could sleep with.
I'm pretty sure that's not the case.
Yeah, I know.
But it was the people that are all the way at the bottom now, yet no one at all.
And it's going to be terrible and anarchy.
And, you know, to me it was like, first of all, I even hate to like rank people in terms
of attractiveness to me.
Because there's so many different aspects to that.
That feels both and and just unfair.
Yeah, anyways, first of all, every the people who are on the lower end are going to mingle
with each other.
They're not going to be mingling with the people all the way at the very top.
And second of all, if you are so low on the scale that you can get no one to sleep with
you unless you are literally the last dick on earth that they can get because you're
violent, you don't shower, you don't have a job, you're rude and abrasive.
If you are the worst person ever, maybe you should step up your fucking game.
So let me let me let me still man the position a little bit.
So like I'm picturing, say, like the bottom 25% of people, like just on like attractiveness
and otherwise desirability.
Yeah.
Overall, let's go with overalls, that's our ability because like, let's look at Stephen
Hawking, the man is not physically attractive and yet still managed to screw around on
his wife.
Okay.
So he's an incredibly attractive person.
Yes, there's lots of other ways to attract someone than just physical.
Right.
So that's what I'm saying.
There's some, there's some demographic people that happen to hit the center of all of them
diagrams of desirability and just score low points and all of them, right?
And so those people might be able to find mates of similar people in the section, in
the demographic that they're interested in male or female, right?
Unless those people can date somebody a level above them.
And then that's just going to be, that's going to leave some, so I can kind of see where
that might be a bit of a problem for some people.
I guess I'm not, I'm not certainly into that anecdotally.
Yeah.
Please.
So this is going to sound weird.
Anybody who I'm dating just don't take this personally.
I feel like being able to have multiple partners and first of all, the four partners I have,
it's just like way too much of a time commitment and there's difficulty there.
So you're limited by the amount of time and energy that you have to dedicate to people
who you really, really, really want to spend lots of time with, all of them.
Yeah.
We need to spend more time doing group activities, like going on hikes.
Anyway, it frees you up to date people that you wouldn't normally date, I think.
And so people who might be a little bit more of a gamble.
Oh, because you're not, you're not investing like say three months of your entire relationship
life with somebody.
You're not, you're not shutting yourself off from other, there's not the loss of shutting
yourself off from other things and completely pursuing, sorry.
No, that's a really good point.
And other relationships, completely pursuing that one relationship, I mean, there's certainly,
there's certainly costs associated, but it's a little bit lower cost to give somebody a chance.
It's a lot lower cost.
It's a lot.
Yeah, it's a, well, but.
Well, because, because for a monogamous person to take a chance on somebody is going to say,
okay, for as long as we're together, I'm not looking at other people and people, other
people aren't looking at me and we're going to just try each other.
And if this goes a year and it doesn't work out and it sucks, then I basically wasted that
year, romantically, right?
You know, trying things out, yeah.
Sure.
But, but to be able to run that parallel with other successful relationships sounds like
a much smaller risk.
I feel that way and I've definitely been with people and that turned out to be really fantastic
relationships that I, I'm really happy that I went into where if, if it was just that
person and I was going to be dedicating my time to that, I one wouldn't have stuck around
for as long as it took to, to realize that it was a really fantastic relationship and
that I really loved having it long term and wouldn't have even started it to begin with
because I would be looking for somebody who was higher in the initial attractiveness scale
to me.
Right.
That's, that's a, I think that's an interesting point to something to consider as a very strong
counter-argument to what the, what the person, what the argument came across like.
Anecdotal, still anecdotal.
I don't know if that's how other people feel, but it's how I feel and even when I wasn't
Polly, I was, you know, kind of like, this person's interesting and weird and I don't
know if I'm going to like them, but I really want to get to know them and I'm, I'm much
less that way now, but it's lower cost definitely to do that.
Well and, I mean anecdotally, sure.
Just that quote that anecdotes aren't data, but they do just prove universals.
I mean, so, you know, to the extent that you can take the anecdote for what it's at-phase
value.
Yeah.
But assuming all that he said is true, that just proves the universal supposition that
this, that Inyosh's claim got made.
And there are definitely people who, people who I would have left.
I would have felt like I had to leave them, but I wasn't limited.
I, I don't, this wording is awful.
Your wording is perfect.
I wasn't limited to being just with them through the tough times.
So I, I had the, the Polly luxury of weathering that and changing our relationship and either
having a different relationship or going back to the way it was before, you know, something
like that, but some disturbances that would have shook me to the point that I would have
ended it otherwise.
Is this a bad analogy for a monoperson considering this from the outside, that it would be like
saying you can only have one great friend?
You know what I mean?
That's what I feel about it.
That is absolutely how I feel about people who are monogamous and are just like, what,
how could you possibly be emotionally invested in more than one person at a time?
Like really, you don't have multiple, no, I don't have multiple friends.
Well, I only have one best friend and we're best friends forever and there's only room
in my heart for my one best friend.
And I, and I also meant it like, you know, some, some really good friends that you may
have aren't worth keeping around, you know, during their worst time or something.
I guess not necessarily like, because you're going to ditch them and shit's going bad for
them, but because of stressing you out too much to be the only person that they can go
to for their stuff.
Cause you know, they only have one friend too.
Or you had a fight or, you know, and you can kind of circle around and be like, Hey,
years later, I'm really sorry I said that to you, you know, we never talked about it,
and then be friends again.
I know that's happened to me.
All right.
So I have a couple of other counter arguments.
Okay.
Do you want them in order, in any particular order from like shittiest to best possible
counter arguments or shortest or whatever.
How are you supposed to do it in traditional essay form?
I have no idea.
Give us one.
Lead with an almost strongest, do a couple shittiest in between and then end with the
absolute strongest.
Okay.
Um, sorting that for my own preferences.
I've got it.
Okay.
So one counter argument.
So this goes kind of go, this might touch back on what we talked about with rules.
Uh, you know, whether it makes sense or whether it's appropriate at all to establish rules
for poly relationships.
One rule that I should have thought of instead of the financial obligation of having a house
should be the assurance that you will use protection with your other partners because
I don't know where they've been.
I know that I'm currently STD free.
I know that you're currently STD free.
Let's try and keep it that way.
So I don't get STDs, but if you're going to go out and have sex with people then who
knows what I could catch.
And, and reciprocally who knows what you could catch if I'm not having sex with people.
So first of all, is that a common rule?
Is that an okay rule?
That is both very common and okay.
It is very common and it's one that I've had in the past.
And now we do things a little bit differently and I think it works really well.
What do you think, or do you not want to mention, talk about it?
I can absolutely talk about it.
I'm really curious.
So the way that we do it now is I discuss things before they happen and the other thing
that we do is all get tested often and when somebody has a new partner, they get STI information
like they get tested and they get STI information and share it with everybody.
So it's not uncommon for people to politely request, hey, when did you get your last STI?
It's very common.
It's not only not uncommon, it's something I expect.
And that's fantastic.
That's exactly the level of discourse I would require, frankly, if I were to get involved in this.
Yeah, like a lot of mono people think, you know, they're scared of the whole STI situation,
but in addition to, we can get into STIs not being as big a deal as they're often made out to be,
but that's a whole other episode.
That is a whole other episode.
But the incidence of STIs in the polyamorous communities is at the same level as the incidence of STIs
in monogamous communities.
And that's partly because monogamous, as always, is in quotes.
But because...
Socially monogamous.
Yes, polyamorous people are generally very much aware of this exact thing you brought up.
They use protection much more frequently than monogamous people do.
They get tested very frequently compared to monogamous people.
They talk about it.
They talk about it.
Yes, it's not so stigmatized.
And they generally tend to expect protection and have it on hand.
Whereas if you're monogamous, sometimes you're drinking, you're upset at your partner or something,
stuff just happens to happen.
You guys don't have a condom on hand.
Oops, oh well, whatever.
Well, I mean, ultimately, it doesn't need to be a cheating situation.
It could just be you're not in a relationship right now, but you're a monogamous person.
There we go.
Or serial monogamy.
Yeah.
That said, referring to cheating, there actually happened.
There is at least one study that I can think of that I'm happy to link,
because I do it every once in a while because people bring this up.
Cheat, she says.
There's a study.
Cheaters, monogamous cheaters have higher rates of STIs and also use less protection than polyamorous people.
That's really interesting.
And yeah, I mean, link it just for so we can back it up.
But I take it, work for it.
It is interesting to me though.
I guess, so it strikes me that a polyamorous person would be at higher risk for any STDs
or STIs, however people like to use it.
But they're more careful, so they get them less.
It is high risk.
So I looked at my health records at my clinic and under problems, they had listed high risk sexual behavior.
I was like, you know, okay.
And then they get really aggressive about it too.
When I'm like, yes, I'm with multiple sexual partners, which is true.
They'll be like, you need to do, you know, this and this and this and you need to consider being.
I was in one situation where a woman told a nurse told me that my partners were probably lying to me.
About them being about STI status, about who they were sleeping with.
And I'm like, we are in a consensual non-monogamous relationship.
We talk about this.
I have a file on my computer where I keep STI records.
Oh.
And I, whenever I get information from a partner, I share it with everybody else.
And I have that so that I can back up what I'm saying if somebody chooses to.
If they're like, oh, I'd really like to see that.
That nurse must not have a very good relationship.
That's sort of what I'm picturing is that she's imagining.
That everyone is like her.
Or like that everyone is like everyone she's imagining, right?
So like, I mean, it's, it could be that she's just predicting from herself when she's picturing.
Well, if I was like a bunch of people or if my husband was, there's no way, you know, or something like that.
But it could just be more general.
I guess I'm trying to charitably think it could be from a position of medical concern, but it sounds like it totally wasn't.
She also told me to put yogurt in my vagina.
Okay, so she had a good nurse period.
So that's okay.
You never went back to her, right?
No.
So another example is like somebody who drives a lot is probably at more risk of dying in a car accident.
Yes.
But you can take substance to mitigate that by being a super careful driver.
And you'll probably be in less car accidents than other people.
I think that people who are in open relationships are aware that there's a risk.
And there is.
There absolutely is.
There always is if you're sleeping with other people.
But I guess that that part of it's talking about your talking to your partners, figuring out what level of sexual intimacy you are comfortable with,
given the knowledge that you have from other people.
You can choose to use barriers.
You can choose abstinence with a partner, maybe for a certain amount of time.
And part of the trick to that is not feeling like you're being punished or acting like you're punishing someone else by choosing a different level of sexual involvement with them,
because we're all responsible for ourselves and our own health.
And as long as we're informed and we can make choices and we can have these discussions, it's okay to make those choices.
I think that those are fairly sound rebuttals.
It makes sense to me that as long as everyone's playing the game appropriately, which is open discussion, honesty,
and what I'm assuming is, like we talked about earlier, the small social circle of that person's gut history.
Well, if you ask that person, hey, what's your STI status?
They're like, oh, I'm clean.
But the word around the water cooler is that they're riddled with STIs.
Well, that's going to diminish their...
The term clean is kind of...
Yeah, I hate that.
Did I say clean?
You did, yeah.
It's okay. It's a common term. It's not like you were doing it maliciously, but it's a...
I don't have the same way that I meant healthy.
Like, you know, if I didn't have...
Yeah, but you can still be healthy and asymptomatic and have an STI.
Right, but like...
That you could potentially spread to somebody who would not be healthy if they had it.
Fair enough. I guess I just appreciate you not reading what Malice and two...
Right.
But I was saying that I didn't know you used the word clean.
I guess I need to examine...
I don't think there's Malice. A lot of people use it.
And I try to point that out, like any I just did right there.
So you mentioned...
This is another issue...
What's the appropriate term?
Really quick.
Non-STI.
Positive?
Positive.
Or negative?
Perfect.
All right. That works.
I am negative for XYZ.
I am positive for T.
I don't know.
Just...
Let's throw some letters in there.
Just in general, the, you know, the clean versus dirty dichotomy.
It treats people like objects again.
Well, I only considered it like I was picturing, you know, somebody with a communicable...
Like someone with a cold.
I would have used the same word there if someone had work.
Yeah, but if someone had work comes in with a cold, you don't call them dirty.
What you don't say...
I wouldn't have said dirty if I finished that sentence either.
They don't call themselves clean.
That's a thing that is specifically an STI thing that people say.
That's so weird.
It's a common slang term.
But it passed through mind and speech without even registering it.
I've done a lot too.
Good catch. That's awesome.
Yeah. It's okay. It's very common.
So this is actually a place to come back to one of the problems with rules.
So whereas I listen to my partners or their partners, or if you want to go really crazy,
their partners, their partners, STI status, I want to do that in a non-judging way.
And I want to make decisions without it feeling like I'm punishing anybody for my own safety
or for the safety of my other partners or just general concern about public health.
But when there's a rule that you have to use protection with partners and you break it,
there's an incentive not to tell.
Whereas if there isn't a rule, but somebody's like,
I really prefer that you let me know if you're going to move to not using protection with somebody
or if you have.
This is a concern that I have because of STI transmission or whatever.
I'm with somebody who's immunocompromised, I don't know.
Or you don't have to be, of course, to be concerned about that.
Anyone can say no for any reason.
Yeah. Anyone can say no for any reason.
And they accidentally maybe don't use a condom.
They get really caught up in the moment.
Every now and then condoms break?
Well, condoms break, that's easy to tell your partner if it's a rule.
All the condom broke, which is probably the lie that people go to.
If they do have a rule, is the condom broke or it slipped or something.
Something like that happened.
I just didn't use one right then.
Free communication and honesty are so much more important
than being afraid to tell somebody because you've broken a rule,
because the stigma around rule breaking,
that's another reason why I choose not to go with quotes and quote rules.
I honestly, the emphasis on open communication,
non-judgmental discourse and just polite approach to touchy issues
is super attractive to me, that's awesome.
I think that's a good aspect of any great relationship
and if the poly community does that better than average,
then kudos to them, that's awesome.
They've put some articles like in Psychology Today
and various other popular publications
and I don't want to say that it's true,
but they're selling it as polyamory has something to teach everybody.
It has something to teach monogamous people about how to have relationships
and I think it becomes really more obvious
when you're in polyamorous, when you're in multiple relationships,
the need, the absolute need for things like open communication and honesty.
That makes sense, especially when it stops being a sort of,
not necessarily option, but when it becomes necessary for things to work.
It's like, well we need to be honest or this just simply can't happen.
Not like it'll happen but worse, it's just like it can't.
Does that make sense?
Okay, so let's see.
Counterargument two was, it's almost a walking straw man,
except in this case it's a straw woman
and the straw woman is her argument.
This came to light, I was listening to Star Talk Radio with Neil deGrasse Tyson.
It's a lot of fun, check it out.
This was an older one and it was a Valentine's Day special
and they were talking about love.
And the guest was Dr. Helen Fisher,
well she's a biological anthropologist
specializing in love, reproduction and relationships and stuff.
And it was all about all kinds of things
but the one thing that I wrote down, and this was three months ago
that I wrote this down because I knew we were going to have this conversation
at some point so I remembered it,
was that he asked her at some point, one small sign on the bike,
from Twitter or something,
but he asked her opinion on polyrelationships.
She's the expert and she came right out and said,
basically humans aren't programmed to do that.
We get too jealous, we're not designed for polyrelationships.
See I think the exact opposite,
humans are not designed for monogamous relationships
and trying to force people into them is damaging.
It sounds like she's not designed for that.
It's really easy for people to fall into the typical mind fallacy
but she is provably wrong.
So for a long time when I said I don't think people can be monogamous,
that's not true.
For a long time I thought that,
I've come to grips with the fact that there are people who are just naturally monogamous
and that is the way life works for them.
But there are people who are entirely naturally polyamorous
and she's just actually wrong.
It's like if someone were to claim a hippo had six legs.
I will caveat this by saying I agree with you
that I think that she is actually wrong.
But to go on with quotes from her,
she would say they're just lying to themselves or to each other or to us.
We could say that about her too.
Exactly, so if you're going to start questioning the honesty of your respondents,
then there's no point in doing the survey.
If you're just going to argue away any result you don't like.
So when I went to go Google and find this source,
all I could find was a Dan Savage article
rashing her being quoted in a source saying something similar to this.
But it was something along the lines of
Dr. Fisher said that couples in open marriages
establish all kinds of rules for what isn't, isn't allowed.
So A, she's talking about open marriages,
not necessarily polyamorous relationships.
I'm in an open marriage.
I'm in a specific kind.
Exactly, and she's also assuming that they all establish all kinds of rules
for what isn't, isn't allowed, which we've already kind of covered.
So sorry Dr. Fisher.
You're probably smart in lots of stuff but you got this wrong.
She never met a monogamous marriage where they had any rules?
Right.
They may say that you can't have dates on Friday nights
or you can't have someone call at the dinner hour
or when the children are around or something like that.
She also said there are people who want it all
to preserve their deep attachment to one partner
and have romance with others.
I mean, yes, there are people like that.
But I...
Yeah, and they...
But they can't have their cake and also eat that cake.
And that's what she's saying is that we're not programmed
to be able to have our cake and eat it too.
So I wanted to bring that up because that was the one thing
that I thought about.
That was the first expert source at her to talk about this
and I was like, well, that can't necessarily be the case
just based off of what I've seen.
The most recent book that I know of is Sex at Dawn,
but it's by no means the only book.
Some of our anthropologists are arguing that the exact opposite is the case.
That humans were actually designed, not designed.
The ancestral environment was one of polyamorous relationships
and therefore a lot of human psychology and even our physical traits
like the way the penis is shaped is to adapt to a polyamorous culture.
I heard that there are really good criticisms to that.
I have also.
And that one of them is called Sex at Dusk.
I'll find that.
I actually haven't read either, but I know that the penis shape is weak.
Damn.
Yeah.
She's just dissed all her penises, dude.
No.
No, I know.
I know what you were actually saying.
Good.
First of all, what an awesome name for a counter book.
And second, I think...
Just playing off of the original one.
Right.
But I think it seems kind of like, unless it's your job,
I guess, to just talk about these things,
then Dr. Fisher needs to develop an opinion on this
and that's what she came to,
but she should update whatever with better evidence.
It seems like an opinion that she...
It seems like what my mom said.
Right.
Which was, after I made my dad promise not to lecture me,
my mom did it instead.
And she sat me down and said,
it is impossible for humans to do this.
There will always be jealousy.
Anybody who you date, if they truly care about you,
they'll try to take you away from your other partners.
Wow.
Wow.
That's simply how humans work.
And full stop.
There are no...
You can't do this successfully.
But that sounds exactly like something you could say to a monogamous person.
Right?
Yes.
There's always going to be jealousy.
They're going to try and take you away from your female friends
or your male friends or whatever, right?
And...
So it's kind of like they're just rehashing arguments
they already believe without worrying about where they're applying them.
These people also...
When they say monogamy is natural,
I have to question why the hell they have all these rules about monogamy then.
Because we don't have to pass any laws
or discourage people from sticking their hands in fires, you know?
It's just something you don't want to do.
When you have to put this much social pressure on a society
to get people to stay monogamous,
it's kind of an indication that maybe it's not something that comes natural to a lot of people.
If you have to enforce it with this kind of punishment.
In some cases, or I guess in antiquated cases, legal punishment, right?
Yes.
Like if it was just the way things were,
you wouldn't have to have God tell you in the Bible
or have the judges tell you in the courtroom
that you can't have sex with other people.
Right.
And it still is. It depends on where you live.
Yeah.
I don't know, necessarily,
executed for every year for stepping outside of marriage.
It's known as adultery?
Yeah.
But it's not something that you're jailed for.
Not here?
Right.
Oh yeah, that's what I meant.
Oh, okay, okay.
Yeah, I was working in my pretty little bubble of the first world.
We were talking specifically about honor killings and such.
Oh yeah, that's a problem.
Honor killings are generally done extra judicially,
but there are...
Not always done that.
Extra judicially.
That is a hard word to say.
Oh, sure it is.
Extra judicially.
Yeah, very good.
There's also, a lot of times,
they look the other way,
which kind of, even though it is not technically legal,
kind of makes it de facto legal if it is not enforced.
Oh yeah.
I do want to mention something else.
So for when arguments come up like that,
like, it can't work, it can't work long time,
it can't work with children.
Isn't that what all the gay people were told for decades?
Yeah, I'm gonna actually also share a link
to some academic articles by Elizabeth Sheff,
who has nicely spent time studying all sorts of
non-traditional relationships,
including polyamory,
and has a couple books out on the subject.
And I liked that noticing that that's the exact same thing
that people were told about gay people for decades,
or presumably centuries, I don't know.
And what do they do about all the relationships
that are polyamorous and do work?
They pretend that they don't.
Oh, okay.
That they secretly unhappy?
That's exactly how you would, I think, justify it, right?
People are currently taking parental custody away from people
based on the fact that they're polyamorous
or have other alternative lifestyles.
There's a fucking neighborhood of assholes
in, God, I don't remember what state it is now,
but it was going around about a year ago.
There's this family, bought a house together.
I think they were...
Yeah, you remember this, the eight adults.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, they weren't even poly.
They were just...
Well, some of them were.
Oh, okay.
Okay.
But the truth was that they were cohabiting,
and there were multiple, more than two adults,
and there were...
And their kids.
Yeah.
And there was a rule in that neighborhood
that these houses are single family houses,
and only one family can live in a house.
And their assertion that they are a family
was not good enough.
Yeah.
So...
There's no fighting the HOA.
So that sounds more like just being...
drawing a short stick on the HOA than necessarily...
I know it went to court.
I don't know how it ended.
Last I heard of it, it was still in process.
I don't know if...
I don't know.
I remember the neighbors were saying,
they're lovely.
We have nothing against them specifically,
but what about the president?
If dogs and cats will be lying together
if we let this go on.
Slippery slope.
Yeah.
All sorts of multi...
like, all sorts of people who are more than two adults
and children will be moving into houses in this neighborhood.
Disgusting.
Do you have further objections?
These aren't really my objections.
Yes, I understand.
I'm just trying to think of stuff.
So, the last one and on the strongest one.
Okay.
So I went strong, weak, stronger.
That's how I'm doing this.
Yeah.
Strongest one.
That's the way to do it.
This is a knockdown argument.
This sounds like a lot of fucking work.
Okay, well that one's actually not a bad argument at all.
I know.
This is something that you do if you have extra time.
It's one of the reasons I don't have
very many other relationships,
because I got a lot of shit I try to do anyway,
and that's not entirely fair.
I do like having other relationships,
and it is worth the time.
Well, I think it depends on the dynamic for it, too.
Like, I know somebody, the person I'm thinking of
that made me think of this one,
she was describing how much she put into this.
Yeah.
Was like, no, Monday is guy A, day.
Tuesday's guy B. Wednesday's guy C.
No, Thursday.
Every Thursday's guy D.
I've known at least one person who,
okay, so everyone has that friend in college.
Okay, God, I'm gonna date myself here.
Everyone had that friend in college
who discovered EverQuest while they were in college,
and then basically flunked their next semester.
Mm-hmm.
And, you know, substituted World of Warcraft
for EverQuest or whatever,
MMO is going to be popular
when people listen to this podcast.
But I've known at least one person who,
when they became Polly,
basically their school just kind of stopped
for a bit in all their grades tank,
and it's like, yeah, it can be like anything else
that's new and exciting, take over your life.
And that's true of any relationship that takes you away,
even if you're in a monogamous relationship
or you can have a new relationship
that you're like, I don't have friends,
I don't have work,
I'm just going to quit my job
and follow my boyfriend all around the world.
I wasn't necessarily talking about the person
who's just predisposed to turn it up to 11, right?
Right.
So that could happen with a monogamous relationship.
But if you're putting in the effort
that you're putting into a monogamous relationship
into three relationships,
then it's going to have three times the impact on your life.
Yeah.
And so my thinking is that I don't even like,
I couldn't imagine coordinating just with friends
to meet with four people a week.
Which is exhausting as hell.
That's actually a fairly common saying
in the poly community that love is infinite,
but time is not.
Yeah.
It's true.
And it also depends on when the type of person you are
to the type of person, people you're dating.
Yeah.
Some people don't need as much time as others.
Yeah.
Some people, you can see them once a year
because they're long distance
and maybe chat with them on Skype
for an hour, once a month,
and the spark's still alive.
I happen to be the type of person who,
if I'm in a relationship with someone,
I want to see them a lot.
And if I don't get to see them for a week,
it's hard for me.
But is there a rule that you see them every week?
It's not a rule, of course not.
Is it an implied situation where you see them once a week?
I actually often don't see some of my partners once a week,
especially now that I have four.
Gotcha.
So you're not like the person I'm thinking of,
where it literally is unless I think
heavy, extenuating circumstance.
Thursday's this guy day.
I used to be that person.
As I mentioned, I am updating
how I feel about relationships
and letting them be more flexible
and have different pieces and parts to them.
But yeah, I used to be that person
where I was like, I can have no more than two relationships.
I'm going to dedicate this much time to one
and this much time to the other.
And this was actually really appropriate
because I always wanted more time
from any one person that they wanted.
Ah, okay, yes.
So I was willing to give tons and tons of times
for relationships, whereas some other person
might be like, I can only handle you
because this is a lot.
Well, yeah.
See, I'd never actually thought of it that way.
But oftentimes, if you're in a relationship
with a sexual disparity, like one person
only wants sex very rarely and the other person
wants sex a lot more, one of the common things
that some people suggest is open up the relationship.
The person who wants more sex can get more sex
and you can still have a relationship together.
And this never occurred to me, but yes,
there are people who want much more time spent
on relationships.
And if they're with partners who don't have
that much time to give or don't want to spend
that much time, then yeah, that's perfect.
Open it up and get someone else to fulfill that.
So some people can do that.
I used to be in a place where I was like, no,
each relationship I'm in, I have to have
this much time with them.
Okay.
Or it's, again, I-
It's not a real relationship.
Or it's not a real, it's not, you know,
it's not really what I want in a relationship.
And each relationship I'm in has to have
these characteristics at a basic level,
and then these other things could be different,
but you know, I have to have this.
So there's a lot of different ways to go into it
and you can balance and be flexible
and you like talk to each other.
But yeah, I used to be really put out
if I didn't see somebody like three days,
at least during a week.
Yeah.
And that makes sense.
I think for some, I just have some people
are predisposed, right?
But I guess it was only two that sounds flexible,
but like if it's three or four more,
that sounds like, like I said to me,
that is the noxious argument just like where I,
I don't have the energy to meet with my friends
four days a week.
I just, you know, I want to sit at home and just be alone.
I feel lonely when I'm alone.
You know, even when I was, had no relationships,
I just wanted to have a roommate in the house
like where I was miserable.
Oh yeah.
And I'm not alone.
I'm, you know, so I cohabitate with my partner.
Yeah, exactly.
I sometimes need to be alone.
It was like, and bye.
I'll see you, you know, when Monday comes around,
like on Friday, I'm like,
I'm leaving for the weekend because, yeah.
Or, you know, if you are lucky enough to have
co-share a home where there is enough space,
you can be in different rooms, do your own thing,
which I often do.
It's just really important to me to have somebody
who also lives in the same house.
I have lived alone before and it is kind of just quiet and weird.
It's really hard.
But I do like, that's one of the things that my partner
and I do as well.
I don't know why I'm not naming her, but whatever.
That, you know, if there's never been this sort of issue,
like you described how you kind of used to be more,
the shorthand for that is clingy.
You know, like, used to be, like you said,
like in 2007 or something, right?
So, where it was more about...
That was before I started being poly
or even discovered less wrong.
Exactly.
No, I'm not hating on it, but I'm saying that that's just,
you know, like how you said, I deserve this,
because, you know, whatever...
I've been, I've been a...
It's only clingy if the other person doesn't want
to spend as much time with you as you want to spend with them.
Exactly.
And I've been in that situation as a poly person, for sure.
And I'm not shitting on it, if that's what works for people.
But I guess what I'm getting at is that there's never been an issue
where it's like, hey, so I'm going to spend all night
over here playing video games.
So you can spend all night in the other room watching TV
or playing, you know, working on a computer or something.
And neither of us are going to feel bad about that.
Is that cool?
Totally.
So that's always been a cool thing.
And I've had relationships in the past where it's like...
No, you have to be paying attention to me.
Or...
Or like, why do you...
Why is your alone time so important?
It's like, because that's just who I am.
And like, if that's not what you get, then whatever.
So, yeah, I guess that was our main thing.
And I feel like that's knocked down for some people
that if it's too time-consuming or too energy-consuming,
then it's just not for you.
I happen to be a very relationship-driven person.
That's just me.
What does that mean?
It means that that's what I want to be spending my time on
is having deep intimate relationships with people
and just connecting on that level.
And I want to be spending time doing that.
I'm kind of in this weird position where like,
I enjoy having those connections,
making friends and forging deep connections.
And yet, I wish it didn't take that much time.
So, like, it's kind of...
It's hard for me to put my finger on,
but I've made a lot of friends over the last couple of years
and I enjoy being friends with all of them.
And I wish that, like, it would be possible to be more...
be closer friends that didn't like take a lot of effort and time.
But I guess that's just part of how it is.
Yeah, so I guess the good news for people
who are concerned about time is,
yeah, you can get in over your head.
I often feel like that these days.
I didn't feel like that as much when it was three partners.
But, you know, then they had a bunch,
then all of a sudden they have a bunch of partners
who also need scheduling.
And then it's the rush to sharing our Google calendars
so that we can figure out things two or three weeks ahead.
That sounds just awful.
That's like my worst nightmare.
Coordinating my schedule with a bunch of other people
who are quitting their schedules with a bunch of other people?
Right.
It's hard enough for me to set up...
It was a nightmare for me to set up to go see Batman vs Superman
a few weeks ago, to coordinate it with five other people
and we're going to do it one day at Sunday at two or something.
That was annoying.
I'm never doing this again.
I'm going to go see it with me and one other person next time.
You can do what I do and just not see very many other people.
Yeah, and it was a lot easier before
my partners got several other partners.
It was super easy because they had only maybe one other person that...
I think that's Melissa's biggest fear actually.
Three other things that they would be doing.
That all my time is going to be taken up by other people.
I think that's a somewhat fair concern if she's contributing the primary person.
You know how I approach that one?
Again, I feel overwhelmed now
and I do feel like I'm a little bit in over my head.
So this is time management is something you need to think about.
It doesn't mean that you can't be poly,
but it means that maybe select your partners,
stop before you're overwhelmed, things change
and you have to be kind of flexible with that.
What was I saying again?
Oh, how I address the time thing.
How I used to address it is the amount of time
that my partner spends with somebody else should not be my concern.
What should be my concern is am I getting what I want out of our relationship?
So this actually...
I guess I can think of a few more things to inquire about
that maybe it's just me or maybe some of our mono audiences thinking about too, right?
So we mentioned very early on,
and I'm glad I remembered before it completely slipped out of mind,
was I implied earlier that I got everything I needed out of my one monogamous relationship.
Yeah.
And we took issue with that.
And then there were some fighting words in this audience.
I'm happy to talk about that quickly.
Yeah, so I guess that's where I'm at.
I don't mean like as a challenge, but in what way,
if any one person satisfied everything you needed,
why didn't you need three people or four?
So I have a partner who says that if one person,
he has often said that if he could fill all of his relationship needs with one person,
then he wouldn't date multiple people.
And he has in the past talked about looking for people based on certain characteristics,
saying, oh, I'm fulfilled by a combination you and my other partner right now,
but there's this one thing that I don't get from either of you.
And if I find that person,
then that's the person I'm going to be dating next and additionally.
So that doesn't sound outlandish, right?
So if I got everything I needed from...
It's offensive for one.
Say if I got everything I needed out of my relationship.
With your one best friend.
Right, or my one partner.
But I was really into martial arts and they weren't.
And then I met someone who was, well, hey, new friend, right?
Right.
You can have your martial arts friends.
You can have your, in this partner's case, BDSM friends
and partners who aren't into the same kind of thing in that
or partners who you can go dancing with
versus partners who aren't into going dancing.
I think that there's a huge danger in looking for people to date by characteristics.
I think that what you should probably be looking for
are people who are compatible with you,
who you have fun with,
and who you have great communication with.
There's so many things that are more important in a relationship
than do they do karate?
You look for friends for characteristics,
but not for romantic partners for characteristics.
Is that a fair way to put it?
The funny thing is...
I became friends with one of my partners,
a person who later became my partner
because I was looking for somebody with a characteristic of
would go to metal concerts with me.
So I was like, hey, a friend who would go to metal concerts with me,
so I'm not alone when I'm at metal concerts.
This guy's really into metal concerts,
and he seems nice.
And then I got to know him
and decided that not only is he into metal concerts,
he's actually an incredibly considerate,
kind, sweet, sensitive person
who just goes out of his way for other people
and is just a fantastic human being,
and that's why I dated him.
That's awesome.
And we're still in a relationship,
and I'm still so grateful that he's in my life.
I think that's how many good relationships start.
They don't just start at a vacuum, right?
You share proximity or an interest.
But I feel like you don't look to date somebody
to fill a specific hole.
And I've made that mistake before I told you guys
that I was looking for somebody specific,
and then I was like, that was stupid.
I should never have done that.
But also pigeonhole that partner
into that one facet of your life,
and that would be okay.
What happens if they don't fulfill that for me anymore?
Sorry, you don't fit into my pigeonhole anymore.
You no longer get to be a partner.
Yeah, so that kind of works.
If you have a friend that you go
to sporting events with or something,
and all you guys do is just we go see
the sports games in there in town or something,
but you don't see each other outside of that.
And they're both okay with that.
Also, I mean, you said that
what if you can get everything you need from one person?
People are infinitely diverse
and infinitely interesting.
Or at least very diverse and very interesting.
Okay, yeah, I guess infinite is an overstatement.
Let's not go crazy here.
Because of that,
being able to have a relationship
with more than one person
is part of what I need in a relationship.
And people aren't
like plug and play.
They're complex beings.
And when you have
even a friendship, but definitely
an intimate, emotional
relationship and connection with somebody,
you're with that whole person.
I agree. One way to...
And yes, I love
to explore
connections with multiple people.
That's a thing that I really like.
When I was a young person,
I found out early
that I could be deeply in love
with more than one person at a time
when I was not open.
But in a process of breaking up with someone
and starting a relationship with someone else.
And back then it was tragic
and you had to write love triangle stories and things.
Back then I was like,
I love this person, I don't want to leave them,
but I want to have the freedom
to have this new experience
and get to know this person on this level.
It's so much harder to consume romantic fiction,
or fiction with romantic elements
once you're poly, because
at least half of them are about the love triangle.
Like, I like this person and this person,
now I have to choose, and whoa, it's me.
I'm like, you idiot! There's such a simple solution!
You can have both Edward and Jacob!
But maybe that doesn't work for them
because they really do need to be monogamous.
Good thing the only...
Yes, but when every single story is that way,
it gets fucking annoying.
Good thing the only major piece of fiction I'm currently consuming
has the main protagonist with
three partners, so...
Which one's that? The Wheel of Time.
It's not really about that,
but it works out to where
he loves three women
and those three women love him.
So, that said, it's a much bigger
series than their romantic thing. It plays a very small part.
There's a much bigger...
Hey, I really like when there's representation
of non-monogamous people
in any kind of media.
There is. I wanted to be to
not do a disservice to the
enormous world building and character building
that this story does across 14 books
by saying that it's primarily
about a
poly couple, or poly
relationship.
Oh, I want to give a shout out also.
One of my exes
wrote a lovely book in which
there are lots of
poly queer characters
and it's called
Ascension.
I'll put a link to it
in the show notes.
So,
what if I got everything
I felt like I needed romantically from one person
but all the other stuff I need I can get from friends?
Or, like, so I guess...
It couldn't be mono.
Yeah, but I guess what I'm curious about is...
But it's not like a...
I mean, I have been
in my
long polyamorous relationship with Tim.
There have been years where
I have not dated anybody else, but him.
And when I do have
dated other people, it's not because he's not fulfilling
for me, it's that
I start to feel like
I want to get out there
and experience people
and, you know, have
new connections and I'm ready
to do that now.
What differentiates that from friend hunting?
It doesn't have to.
Yes, but
a friend relationship and a romantic relationship
are just different. I know.
And I'm only blabbering this because...
There's blends. Yeah.
They're definitely blends.
And often one leads to the other.
But,
I guess that's another great thing about being poly
is that you don't have the same kinds
of hard limitations with your friends.
Thank you.
And you can be friends
and, like, not worry that maybe
that hug was too long.
And, oh god, am I cheating
on my partner by spending too much time with my friend?
It relieves so much stress being able to be poly.
You are not constantly policing your emotions
and your actions.
That sounds like
one avenue. So the only reason
I'm kind of beating this point is because
this was a long conversation I had
our last, last wrong meet up.
This guy's position was more or less that
if you subtract the elements
of romance, which he felt was a troubling word
because it was hard to pin down exactly
what it meant from a relationship,
then it encompassed all relationships.
I'm curious just to see how I'm basically
trying to find a way to actually resolve
that confusion we were having.
I think there is
some confusion and that's why
we're saying that
there's a little bit of confusion around
how you can act with your friends
sometimes.
And you're like, where is this
what somebody else might see as a romantic
connection? Where is this?
And you
if you are giving yourself
freedom
to feel the way you feel
and act the way you act
you don't have to worry about
that distinction.
Because it is
difficult. I was talking to somebody
who's definitely monogamous and also much older
than I am. I talked to him about this
and he's like, yeah, I guess
I have some relationships with
a few women that are
romantic but not sexual.
And I call those women my friends
but we do have
very romantic relationships.
What's exactly what that means?
My relationship
maybe my relationship with one of my
partners is
we cuddle and kiss
and
we do not have sex.
Some people would put that in a sexual
relationship category though. Especially like a monogamous couple
you know who
but what if you're kissing your friends
on the cheek or the head
if they say something particularly charming?
I think
what if your friend is hurt and you go over
and hold them for a while?
Even like certain conversations you have
are really rather intimate conversations
which some people would not
consider appropriate for
they would consider it edging on romantic.
I guess I can see that.
Maybe you travel with your friend
and
maybe even is some sexual attention
that you don't act on
but is that too
romantic?
There's a lot of grey area
that it's nice to not have to worry about.
I think I'm finally
coming to a resolution as to why I was confused
talking to this person because I didn't imagine
lines were drawn where he thought they were drawn.
That's common.
I certainly wouldn't
see any issue with any of that stuff
maybe other than like if my partner kissed somebody
and we didn't talk about beforehand
I would see that sort of as a transgression
of the relationship.
Of your monogamy expectations.
Yeah.
But it's not the kind of thing that I'm axiomatically opposed to
but it would be weird if
the transition happened without a conversation
that included me.
That's where I'm at.
I totally understand as a poly person
I don't really like surprises
although I can get over it
if I am faced with a surprise
because those happen
but I like it when someone's like
I'm interested in this person
I might want to kiss them at some point
you know like I'm like
thank you for telling me
now I will be prepared if that happens.
But there's not always time for that right?
No there's not always time.
So sometimes you can get a pinch
I mentioned that I do get jealous
luckily again I have got
such awesome partners right now
that jealousy does not last long
but it's more of a quick pinch
and then I'm like
why do I feel that way?
Let's talk about it and now that we've talked about it
I'm not jealous anymore.
Some people who are in poly relationships
a very close friend of mine
who I've always thought
thought of as a very very successful
poly person
he confided to me that he had debilitating
jealousy.
Part of what really helped him
was figuring out
why, what are the triggers
and trying to follow that back
to what is he really
feeling afraid of
is it
is it losing his partner
is it
not having the kind of connection
that he thought he did
what is he really afraid of
and once he was able to address that
and then talk about that with his partner
things got exponentially better.
So some people really do get jealous?
Yes.
Because
my next question is going to be
if poly is so awesome why do some people have to
poly hack
conditioning yourself
so that you get over
the want, need for monogamy
and over things like jealousy
and making it so you can be poly
successfully and more naturally.
There is some practice involved.
There is some changing your mental structures.
I always assumed that it was because
I mean I had to do a little bit
but it was getting over the shit that society
has drilled into you.
Because for me that's all it was.
It was
as a man in society
you get massive privileges
I guess that's not
something that needs to be said.
But it also comes with you have to hold on to your man cred.
And if someone else is sleeping
with your women then all of a sudden
you lose all your man cred
and...
People were judging Tim
about that people
which had nothing
to do with our
feelings about the relationship but they were
convinced that I was
taking advantage of him when he didn't have another
partner
and that it took until
he had another partner
for them to even be slightly okay
with it because otherwise it was
me abusing
him in some way.
I was resistant at first
for a few months I guess
but for me all it was was getting over
the societal instilled
this is the way you must act
when you ingrain things into yourself.
What about getting over the need to be the most important person
to someone?
This is the thing, I've never had that
I've never felt any sort of jealousy and I wasn't sure
they were actual things.
I thought it was all just societal conditioning.
It's a real thing.
Like when I see
someone I love with someone else
enjoying themselves
that makes me happy.
That is known as compersion
definition alert, compersion
feeling happiness at somebody else's happiness.
Why would I be upset about that?
I think
Dr. Fisher might say something along the lines of
well
men are more inclined to be that level of
jealous because they don't want to be caught
raising someone else's kid
or something right so the
mental image of
their primary partner having sex with another male
means that they might be wasting their
life raising someone else's genetic
offspring. Such a waste of your life
to raise a kid that you love.
Well hold on
that's not what she would say either
or excuse me she wouldn't be endorsing
that conclusion.
It would be a natural selection.
My mental model
of her making it that quote
was speaking on behalf of our ancestor's
genetic fitness.
It would be like saying there's no point in adopting
right and there certainly is
I just don't want children in general.
Yeah luckily
that's one easy answer to
and especially if it's impossible for both of you
to have children then hey there's no
then if you have that inner ape saying
dude she's going to get knocked up and be raising someone else's kid
you know just your apeshine brain
not like a real thought you can just tell it
no dude we're both infertile.
Anyway I actually think
that's a great thing about Polly is that
my relationship with Tim
was able to change
and is
still flexible and able to change
and we still
love each other, adore each other
and are able to
be together.
I think that that's a healthy part of any good relationship
whether you're having more than one
relationship like that or not I think that
being able to grow together
whether in different directions or whatever is super important
I think that's awesome.
I guess what I'm saying
with that statement is that I don't want to
give ground and say that Polly people are the only people that can do that.
No
but as I mentioned
I feel like I'm building
flexibility into relationships
by being Polly.
I know you said you dislike a lot of things Dan Savage says
but one of his big things is opening up relationships
saves relationships.
He does believe that? Yes.
Man do I ever not agree
with him that is like the worst way to
come to being in an open relationship
is
if you feel like you need to save a relationship
usually they end
if you try and usually
it's not only painful to you
and the partner that you're having trouble with
which is why you opened it
it is causes heartbreak
for everyone else
that either of you
dates or is in any
kind of relationship with.
I'm not sure if he was saying
it to save the relationship
he was saying that having an open relationship
saves relationships.
I guess that's my warning
to anybody is if you're having
problems in your relationship
adding other people
is a really
not good
idea.
I was going to say it's as bad as having a kid to save the relationship
but that's not true. It's much better
than introducing a new life.
But it's a similar sort of mistake
you don't do something like that
to try to save relationships.
I mentioned that podcast in a few episodes
it wasn't just for me and it was a few years ago
but that sex nerd Sandra
from the Nerdist Industries podcast
I'm not sure if it's a thing or not it was a few years ago
but that's what that swinger guru said
was that people talk about
opening a relationship to save it
and he says that's not the case
if your relationship is on the rocks
opening it like this is going to just shatter it
if you're already secure, if you're already jealous
it's just going to break.
Build that in before you even start
build it in
build in that flexibility
build in trust with each other
or if you already have like trust
and you are at a position
where you can open it up
that's a good time to open it up.
Sure, yeah exactly.
You come, I think that
that kind of naturally makes it so
that people tend to come from a place of couple privilege
if you're already in a relationship
and then you decide to open it
I prefer to
enter relationships already non-monogamous
and single people
can be non-monogamous too
even if they're not dating anybody else
and when I wasn't dating anybody to Tim
we were still poly
so, yeah
and I think that there's something certainly to be unpacked there
it sort of ties into
well, I've got a few more things
but I guess one thing that I wanted to do
was
first of all, do you guys ready to get into
it's almost three hours, I'm ready to read
we'll have to figure out how to parse this in a minute
but I do have one last thing I wanted to do
so one thing
I wanted to ask, so you guys have different stances
so you're both poly
under the umbrella term of consensual non-monogamy
yes
yet your different flavors of it, which one's better?
Ha! Ho!
You know, I've been talking about
why I think that
my way is better the entire time
I don't feel like I have to get into this
at the end, I think it's really
common for people who are involved
in poly relationships
to
think that their way is better
and
be really ready to say why that is
but all I can say, actually
in reality, is
my way is better for me
and I have lived
my life and I have learned
hard truths and I have made a lot of mistakes
and
I know I have a lot more learning
and growing and changing to do
so I can only speak from my experience
about what's good for me
Alright, that's a pretty soft point
Inayashi, here you go
I could never answer that question if it was asked of me
because it's a bullshit question
it's like asking what way is thinking
is better, is it better to be
conservative or liberal, is it better to be
you know, more Asperger's
or more extremely extroverted
or is it better to be close-minded theist
or rationalist? Well, that's an easy answer
Right, so that's what I'm gonna get
is that parsing it that way doesn't necessarily
I think there's different ways of thinking
and the whole, what is the
is it Myers-Briggs, the one that
is kind of ehh iffy but it's a way
that people often sort themselves
there's no
one way that's better than another
when you do, IntJ I guess
is a really popular one among
our sort of crowd
not to say that it's better or worse than any other
way of thinking, it's just a different way of doing it
Well, that's sort of the problem with Myers-Briggs and one of the major criticisms
is that it's a lot like a horoscope
where they all say great things about you
But, alright, so
maybe to put it a different way that's less like
alright, fight
I've given my reasons why
I ended up giving up rules
I've given my reasons
I actually haven't given
my reasons about hierarchy
but it's actually very similar
to rules in which it's
doesn't necessarily
allow the
the non-couple
person to
have a say in their own relationships
the way that the others do
and gosh that works
really well for a lot of people and
there are people who they want
to have a
satellite relationship or
all satellite relationships or
all secondary I guess
is another way that people refer to
that all secondary relationships
I'm my own primary partner
people have different ways of looking at different things
that they want and if
you can find people who want
the same thing that you want
more power to you
it's all about being consenting well-informed
people, I guess the way
reason I would caution that approach is
be ready for change
because people's feelings change
and
we didn't mention this but
when I asked Tim
why does Zeleizer
why is that a rationality thing
why is this a polyamory
rationality thing, his answer was
if you think that you're going to be living
for a very long time
or if you think there's a good possibility
that you will be
then maybe you want to be
with one person for your entire
current life span
but how do you feel about
being with one person if your life span
is many times more
than that
that's actually
part of my argument against marriage in general
the way it's traditionally envisioned
but we can save that for the marriage episode
that people grow
and people change and people don't always
grow in exactly the same way and given enough time
they're going to be different enough people
that others will fit them
better
that's what it was when I was 22
and I was starting out poly
I had a philosophy professor say the exact same thing
you just said in Yash
therefore it's right
it was interesting because he was
engaged to get married at the time
so I asked him but you're going to get married
so what does that say about your
professed belief that you guys might change to different people
it means that we're going to get married and we'll see what happens
I think if I'm paraphrasing correctly
maybe he didn't have a satisfactory answer
but that's what it is
and as far as the
functional immortality aspect of it
I think that's another thing to consider too
that it's one thing to commit to somebody for 60 years
another thing to commit to somebody for 6 billion years
and say
that is a really long time
but you could be
a standard human and do
sequential
monogamy and be married
for X number of years
until you don't want to be married anymore
and then marry another person for X number of years
and that's also okay
well that would be more like
what was the word you used for
non-enforced monogamy
de facto monogamy?
it's also
there's a cartoon kimchi cuddles
about polyamory which I will also link
where they refer to that as ethical monogamy
nice
but I'm thinking like
my great grandparents I think they've been married
for
60 or 70 years before they died
I think they were happy in their marriage
my in-laws
Tim's parents are
monogamous and a model couple
and so so happy
and old
sorry if you guys ever hear this
I'm sorry I called you old
but I'm never gonna hear this
so if someone
comes to the comments and says okay so this poly stuff sounds really interesting
I've never taken it seriously before
I don't know where to start
well I am happy to link more than two
I'll link kimchi cuddles
I'll link Elizabeth Chef's
articles
more than two especially is a practical
guide to ethical non-monogamy
so that'll actually help you
figure out how to
maneuver a relationship
but I also said that it spoke more to your flavor than it did to Enya's
it talked against rules and it talked
against hierarchies
it tells you what to do
if you are going to be involved
in an ethical hierarchical situation
more than two is kind of a go-to text right now
they used to be the ethical slot
but more than two has taken over
recently
for example there's something that is
honestly the relationship bill of rights
and it's changed to reflect that
but I think they originally had it set up as
the secondaries bill of rights
if you're going to be in an ethical relationship
what to look out for
red flags
who you should be dating
I think I might also link something called date your species
that's great
advice for somebody starting out
because Katrina has been talking so much
some of the
advantages of having the
more traditional couple that is open
as opposed to the relationship
anarchie she does
it does tend to be a bit more predictable
and doesn't necessarily take as much
time out of your life
when you are mainly interacting with other couples
who are also open
afterwards you go back
to your own houses
and so it doesn't
there isn't the constant
drain of having to see someone every single week
and maintain the relationship
so it takes less time
it makes it much easier
to plan your life
because generally it's assumed that if you
have to get up and move somewhere
for work reasons or whatever
that your partner, your primary partner
is going to come with you
it looks very much like a traditional
business
and that is a level of security
that some people really need
because when you more have the
four open relationships with people
then you're not quite as much guaranteed
that and I personally
think that sort of freedom is awesome
but then there's other people
who are more than willing to trade in that
freedom for some stability and some security
that this person will still always be with them
and it gives you someone that is just
the default person
that you always go to, you do everything with
it's all the standard
arguments for having
a person that you pair up with
a significant other
so it was my default to assume that people
would date until they decide they want
to be exclusive and then be monogamous
relationship escalator
so that was
and I just want to throw in a note that
getting off the relationship escalator is
I think fantastic and freeing
other people don't find it freeing
and that's okay, that's fair
but then when I was
in a polyamorous relationship
I was told that
hierarchical is how people do it
and I was like
oh, in that case I have two primary
partners
oh, that's cool
yeah, that was more primary
that was my
and that was my response to that
as I spent like I
don't play favorites
they're very different people
and I have these two relationships
that are necessarily different because they're
with different people who I love
I love them both
I actually had to learn
that hierarchical isn't the only
way to do things before
and before I was like oh I just have two primaries
okay
so it sounds like there's a lot to look into
a lot of homework
anyway, actually
the truth is if you have some questions
feel free to ask us
also, I'm not sure
we really did that good a job of steelmanning
because it's just so hard for me to
figure out
I don't know if you should be inviting steelmanning
we invite very polite steelmanning
yeah, if you have a great argument
in favor of monogamy bring it to the table
as long as it isn't you know
you're actually doing polygamy and this is why polygamy is awful
yeah, we know why polygamy is awful
if you have a good argument to bring to the table
please do
you know
things tend to
things tend to get pretty
not good when you're talking about this kind of stuff
unfortunately
in the comments section, heck yeah
this is pretty heavy
topic for most people
okay
I would hope that as rationalists
as rationalists but to somebody who's maybe
being exposed to this through the podcast
for the first time
if you're coming to them and saying man the way that you look at
your primary relationship, you're married to 10 years
I'm telling you that it's probably not the best way to set up a marriage
or set up a lifestyle
that's gonna sound like an attack
if anyone says there's no difference between what you're doing
and fucking animals then they're banned
but I don't think anyone would do that
you guys know the rules
talk nice, bring us questions, it'll be fun
come to our subreddit
the Bayesian conspiracy
write us a Bayesian conspiracy
podcast at genehill.com
we gotta get a short array
or leave a comment on our website
thebayesianconspiracy.com
and if you have a couple minutes
put a rating or review at iTunes
I think that that gets us more able to notice
that would make a big difference
it takes three seconds
you don't even have to write a review so if you want to though go for it
thanks for listening
know this was a lot of relationship talk
and signing off, bye
you
