And then I've got this weird light coming out of my head, and then I've got this weird
fourth-dimensional LSD-fueled way of looking at it that it's not articulate yet. I'll eventually
get this figured out, but I can just word vomit it at you. You've got all these expectations
of what your life is supposed to be, and you sort of develop them in childhood or maybe through
your life. This is what I wanted to happen. And at some point, they either do or they don't,
the things that you want. But at the end of the day, you have, assuming things don't go great,
like eight decades to be alive on earth and walk around and see the universe. And if that didn't
go according to the plan that your apish evolved brain came up with, it's like, dude, so what?
This was the life you had. And that's, I'm sure there's a philosophy that covers that
sort. Maybe it's stoicism or something, but it's like, this is just how your life was. And what
is that a big deal to? Maybe it's what this is getting at, right? Like to yourself, but then
just have your goals be what you have. Maybe that's a lot easier said than done.
I kind of see what you're saying, but there's also, if your goals are just do whatever happens,
then you don't end up striving for the really big things that you wanted, right?
I don't know if that follows. I could see how it's a super tempting way to walk into it.
I think having an ambition is actually really kind of cool and very frustrating too. Obviously,
I'm not going to be getting this novel I just wrote published the traditional way. So
I've come to my peace with that. And maybe that's part of what's been fueling all this too,
that I got to start all over with another one now. But if you're just like, hey, you know,
I'm just going to do whatever and live my lady in my eight decades here, I feel like there's,
it's cool to have like something big to grow for, you know, to really drive you. I like people
with that fire. And I do too. I think maybe I'm not expressing it well. Like I said, this wasn't
articulate because I'm not anti-ambition. I'm very pro-ambition. I think it's great to have
big projects, you know, like I want people like Elon Musk be like, you know what,
fucking Mars is going to happen. I don't want it to be like, you know, it's not meant to be or
whatever, right? What I want is like, first of all, I don't know what the process is exactly like,
but maybe, you know, I'm not sure when it's time to give up and self-publish or sell it yourself
or whatever. But, you know, that doesn't mean that like, that can't happen for you, right?
But say something that, you know, you wanted to happen, but just something that didn't work out,
like a, like something that, you know, could have happened, but didn't, you know. And so like,
how long, I don't think this is turning her up, but just now going with hypothetical.
Imagine she, you know, this is like two or three years, she's still upset. So like at that point,
how long are you going to let that eat away at you? It's like, dude, don't. Like this, this,
this just happens not to happen. Right. And there's something that you can do to change that.
If you could, if you could do hard work and good plans, make it happen, then by all means, go nuts.
It's a sucky thing that happened and you can use it to fuel you, but don't let it like destroy you.
Yeah. Or maybe just take a different spin on it. Like a very minor example, a few weeks ago,
I learned that they're hiring another entry level developer for the core services team at work,
which is like the cool platform team that's building the foundation of this three quarter
billion dollar company that I was on for like six months before I was moved off to like the mobile
app team, which is like, fuck you. Well, so I was kind of buttered about it for a little while,
and then I learned to hire another SE one for that team. And I'm like, what the hell? You know,
I know more than they do. I've been doing this for a while and I know what they, what they've
been doing over there. It would take a lot less time to catch me up. What makes this new, but
better than me. And I was kind of better about that for like two hours, maybe most of a day.
And then I was walking across the bridge back to my car and I was like, you know,
why am I bummed about this? You know, in a few, in a couple of years, I'll look back and be like,
oh yeah, I was on, I was not selected to go back to the cool team at the first development job
that I had. Like how big of a deal is this really? Now I didn't take that to be like, you know what,
things are just going to happen. I don't need to try and going to take a backseat. I still want to
get awesome. I still want to be really good at my job and be a, you know, for the goal of like a,
making a fortune and be, you know, excelling. I'd love to be, you know, like there's a 25 year,
or I think he just turned 26. And he's a senior. And his dad's an architect. So like he's been
around this as a kid, but like, yeah. And he, I mean, he's been like, since he started here,
that just this Titan of like knowledge that the, you know, 15 year veteran seniors are going to
be like, be think about this. I would love to be. I think it's super fucking cool. That's that
they guys got some personality things with the work that he takes it, I think way too seriously.
Granted, there's a lot on his shoulders. This company wouldn't be where it's at without specifically
him. But like, I think he doesn't let himself enjoy it. And I think that's the hard part about
work. If you really want to be good at it, you got to care. I just can't care about accounting.
Oh, that's fair. I mean, so I care, but not enough to like let it ruin my day, right? Or bring down
my like life. He seems to hate his life. And I'm, dude, you make, I'm assuming like $130,000 a year
and you're 26. You'll be able to retire at 32. Yeah, get a grip, bro. Yeah. You know, do whatever
you need to do to enjoy the fuck out of this. Right? Yeah. But I mean, I get it. He's a different
person. He's got his other life stresses. I don't know him that well, whatever. But the, so like
my, my nonchalant attitude doesn't mean that I don't want to kick ass and excel. It just means
that like, I don't, I'm trying not to let things get to me. And I think it's working. You know,
like when I'm sorry, we're still talking about not the podcast. That's okay. You know what,
I'll throw this into the main podcast at some point because this is interesting.
And that was more of a hypothetical. I don't, I think that she may, I think, I know she was hurt
by it, but I don't think that she still is. But if she is, she, you know, I think the
perspective to take is just this, you know, big step back, you know, what Neil DeGrasse, Tyson
and Carl Sagan would call the cosmic perspective and just like, you know, not to say like, you
don't matter. You're an ant on this floating speck of dust. I can't, I can't take the cosmic
perspective because I always get suicidal. Then that's not what I'm talking about. Okay. I'm like,
I see nothing matters. I will God. And that's one of those things that like you want,
you want to be remembered after you die, right? Sure. And that's why you're right. You're like,
maybe I'll be like Homer or Shakespeare or something, but both of those guys got really
fucking lucky. And for each one of them, there's been like 10,000 different writers and you know,
eventually you're just going to fade into obscurity. And it's only been 2000 years,
give it 100,000 years. No one's going to know anything that I've ever done. And it's just,
it's like, so why bother with anything at all? So. So you and I have two solutions to that. Well,
one, one is not die. Yes. Then you can continue to be productive and contribute to society.
That's right. And just enjoy stuff. But I guess that's another part of life. That's nice.
But the other part, I think it is like, not, not to worry about like, not to not care. And
by the cosmic present, maybe the cosmic perspective was the right way to think about it.
Because that's not, I think the constructive, like things still matter. I'm still, you know,
I still get, you know, annoyed in traffic or something, but I don't get, let it overtake me.
You know, so like, when we went to go visit my sister in the hospital, when the first night that
she was in there, we could go Wednesday, we could go last Wednesday, we got there. I didn't know
if we were supposed to go up or not. So we just hung out and talked outside for like an hour.
And we talked a lot about like, you know, the possibility of one of our family members dying
or something. And, you know, like I've historically expressed a very terrified and kind of kryptonite
attitude regarding death. And, you know, when I was talking about this, Rachel said, oh, yeah,
you know, I thought, you know, I've thought about this before about how, you know, this might impact
you, you know, like a couple years ago, my grandma had some very minor surgery. And, you know, it was
just one more thing, you know, she's in her 80s and other things are going wrong and they fixed it.
And I kind of came home and I was pretty upset that, you know, one of these days they're
not going to be able to fix it. And it's going to be a, you know, eventually she's going to die.
And that's hard for me to say. But I can actually say that sentence now, you know,
whenever this was, I just told her, you know, like, eventually, it's not going to be a surgery
that we're going to go to, right? So like, well, I mean, it sucks. And it's, you know,
it's terrible. I don't, I'm not, I'm not resigned to death. I think it's still the worst thing ever
and no one should ever have it. But in their lives or to themselves. But dude, I'm still terrified
of getting old. I know that at least, at least two or three times a year, something happens.
Like just a few days ago, I slipped on that third step right there. And, you know,
still young enough that I managed to just jump down on the ground and catch myself. But I'm like,
dude, if I was old and 80 and didn't have this ability, I would have landed on my ass and broken
a hip and possibly died. And just even if I wasn't died, I would have been crippled for the rest of
my life. And like, fuck, I'm going to have to be so much more careful when I'm old like that.
And it just not looking forward to that whole process.
I'm sort of, I'm not really coping with that at all. I think I rather by not coping, I mean,
I'm not even considering it. I think, I mean, I'm old enough to where like, I've had lasting
damages from injuries, which is stupid because we're, you know, we're young and virile, that
shouldn't be the case. But you know, when you're 80, you'll put a banister on your stairs or what
do you call it, a guard. So like, and I mean that in a literal and metaphorical sense, right,
you can set life things up to be more careful. But I'm also strongly suspective, suspecting
that and we'll talk about this, I think with David in a couple of weeks,
the future is not going to be like now, probably. I don't, and I don't envision a
future where I get old and decrepit. One way or another, I don't see that happening.
I see us either all not being in meat suits. I see meat suits lasting forever or being super
safe or regenerating, or I see the world on fire. Like those are, I think the three most
likely outcomes in fire in various different outcomes. So like the idea that we're still
going to be working 40 hour days and you know, doing all the things like we do now in 50 years
blows my mind. I don't think, I think that's extremely unlikely. I don't know. I mean,
I also think, I don't know, I can't put a likelihood on it because while I agree with all
the things I see about basically how the tech singularity is coming and we're going to be replaced
if we are augmented or augmented. Right. I still, I remember my childhood as a Jehovah's Witness,
as I guess I mentioned every now and then because it was such a major impact on me. But
one of my things that was that, that happened to me as I was leaving the faith is the Jehovah's
Witnesses first predicted the end of the world in 1914 and then again in 1975. And the entire
theology is one of the entire world is going to change drastically within our lifetime.
And so you've heard this spiel before. Yeah. And so, I mean, I knew people who in 1975 thought
the world was going to end. And I saw as I was leaving the faith, a little business card that
was being passed around by like atheists, you know, as, as a, I don't know, a gotcha or whatever.
But it had a little checkmark. I've had a little checkbox. And next to it says, I am 10 years
old. I believe that the world will end in my lifetime. Then it has another checkbox below
that I am 20 years old. I believe the end will world will end in my lifetime. It says,
as you reach the birthday, check it off. And it went all the way down to 100 years. And it was
like, now just imagine all the people that if they had this and filled it out would have, you
know, fully fold filled out cards and died. And I kind of feel like this is the same. I have emotional
echoes of that same sort of thing. Like, yeah, I can definitely see the world changing drastically.
And I donate money to Miri every month. And I am worried about it. But on the other hand,
I'm also remind remembering that there is a chance nothing will change.
Once bitten twice shy kind of thing, right? Right. I don't really know. I mean, you know,
people debate about how much has changed and how much we can expect to change. And all I can say
is that whatever reasons that the Utkowskis and Bostroms have of, you know, of the world have
are better reasons that the world will change than the Joe's witnesses have.
Oh, yeah. Joe's witnesses have fairy tales.
Right. So at the end of the day, these could be deluded, wishful thinking,
you know, optimists or something, right? But there's also a real possibility.
There's, there's, there's for the first time in history, an actual real possibility, right?
Yeah.
I think Utkowsky mentioned somewhere in the sequences that like,
try as they might, or no, it was on the cryonics pitch, you know, 200 years ago,
humanity could have, or, you know, someone could have spent their entire life trying to,
you know, strive for mortality and it wouldn't have done nothing because there's just no hope.
You know, now there's a thin hope to kind of a cryonics.
So like things are changing. And I'm, you know, I don't really have the background
knowledge or large repertoire of like history, either life history or known reading history to
like draw from, but I get the very strong impression that we're at a new kind of age.
We're on the cusp, you know, well, you know, Sagan talked about this in the 80s, you know,
like we, we are at this turning point in history. And things could be, he said it differently than
than the point I'm making. He was talking about how the very same technology that we have,
I think his phrasing was like, it says, if there was a God who gave us these tools,
he's talking about nuclear weapons and nuclear power, who gave us these things and gave us the
choice, we could go to the stars and colonize the universe, or we could blow ourselves up and die
on our stupid little rock. I'm paraphrasing, but we were at that point now with like, you know,
scientific advancement in history, we can actually do stuff. And the world is in a place
where it's never been before. It puts me in this vaguely optimistic hope. But I mean,
regarding aging and stuff too, it doesn't have to be a full, you know, intelligence explosion
singularity to stop that, right? It could be Aubrey de Grey's, you know, life extension
style thing, right? So just continually riding the wave of life extension improvements.
And, you know, if that means that I live in a 55 year old body for 120 years till we get
cool, cool new ones, then that's fine. Or, you know, backup worst case scenario or second to
worst case scenario, I end up being declared legally dead and hope that at some point I get
woken up, right? So I don't know. We'll talk, I think it'll be more fun to speculate about the
future. We'll get David. He's eloquent and smart. He'll have something fun to say here, but I don't
have, maybe if I actually sat and thought about it, I'd be filled with dread and anxiety. But
right now I'm just like, you know, pretty sure things are gonna be okay. I'll try and take care
of myself. I've been trying to go to the gym. I've been slacking the last couple of weeks. It's
been stressful. But, you know, for the first time, like really, since like, junior high, I've been
working out regularly, which is nice. Do you listen to podcasts or something when you work out?
I used to always watch the Daily Show and the Colbert Report. That would have been perfect.
Oh, that was wonderful. Those were good times. That was ideal for conditions. Yeah. And then,
you know, Stuart left the Daily Show and Colbert Report folded and now I sometimes watch the Daily
Show with Trevor Noah. It's not quite as good. And I still haven't found something else to take
the Colbert Report's place. I mean, he does his own, he does that new show, the Late Show,
but it's not the same. No, it's not. Sometimes I watch Steven Universe, sometimes my Little Pony.
I got into Atlanta recently, but Atlanta is so visually gorgeous. I don't want to take my eyes
off the screen for too long, you know? Sure. So I don't know. It's, I need some sort of entertainment
and that is what I do. But I mean, you could rewatch Rick and Morty or something, you know,
fill that time. That's not a bad idea. Because that's not a very like, you need to pay full,
pay full attention show. Well, I mean, it is, but once you've seen it once,
I'll say this, I've seen every episode probably at least five times of Rick and Morty.
Holy shit. That's kind of high. That's kind of how I watch TV. Okay. It's, it's dumb. I real,
I was, we were talking before we got on the show that like, I mean, I, I don't use my free time well
at all. I don't engage in new projects. I don't better myself at my job. I want to, you know,
I want to get better at the things that I need to do to excel at my career. And I'm not doing that.
Instead, I'll rewatch, you know, Brooklyn Nine-Nine or, you know, other, you know, not even like
meaningful shows. They're just funny and relaxing and relaxing is the thing that's important to do
too. Yeah. But for like two hours a day, I don't know, maybe more sometimes doesn't sound like that
of watching reruns. Okay. Yeah. I mean, it could, it could be worse. And I mean, that's probably
about an average. But it's still like, come on, I could be, like I said earlier, I could at the
very least be watching new television. Right. But I hate memorizing new characters and new names
and new storylines. I still find that process daunting. That's why it's so hard for me to
start new books. But I need to, I need to get over that. And I think I will. I'll just actually
start doing it. I'll watch Atlanta. I need to catch up on Westworld. Oh, Atlanta's so good.
No, I'm sure it's great. I've heard all the good things. That reminds me, I stopped Deadpool
today. I didn't say that on the air yet. It was very fun. Everyone go see it. Speaking of Brooklyn
Nine-Nine, Terry Cruz plays a main character in that show. Oh, in Brooklyn Nine-Nine. Yeah.
Okay, okay. And it's great. The whole show is outstanding. They do, I mean, they're all great
actors. They're all great. A lot of them are very funny, like people and other stuff. Andy
Sandberg plays the main role. But it's just like the level of like writing, like, you know,
the straight man of the group, you know, the stern Professor McGonagall style character,
just as a kind of a comedic twist, the straight man in the show is gay. And, you know, that's,
it's that level of like kind of like subtle quirky, like jivey humor that runs the whole thing.
Okay. So it's like, it's vaguely a cop show, but they're just, it's, it's really funny,
a lot of running jokes and that sort of thing. In fact, it's a cop show also kind of threw me.
I mean, it might as well not. It could be a, it could be anything. It just happens to be a cop
show. It could, it's, you know, I suppose I can think of it as in an ideal world. This is what
actual cops would be like. Maybe we'll talk about this at some point. I am of the unpopular opinion
that police are not as bad as everyone as it is now popular to sit on them for. Many things,
many cops are, many, there are many issues with the police force. I'm not, I don't want to be,
the guy is like, you know, blue lives matter. Our boys in blue never do anything wrong.
They do and that sucks. And, but I mean, you know, this is somebody who had a vague ambition
in their teenage years of wanting to be a police officer, because I love the idea of like the
protector class of people. You know, it's, it's, it's their ambition to be, you know, the first
line of defense, protecting people. And that's not really what it is. I mean, I love that idea too.
And that's what it aspired to be, I think. I think that's one of the reasons that the police
force is as bad as it is, because the people who are just sadistic monsters get in there
and the protector class leave because they don't want to be around those people. And so it degenerates.
Yeah, it could be kind of, it could have gotten to the bottom. And I don't, I'm not that in on it.
I do, I was really slowed down a couple of years ago. When I came across a number that
could dig up again, I've got it saved somewhere in my Reddit history. Was it the roughly 30%
of cops score on the psycho? No, no, no, this was the opposite kind of finding that it was like
85% of the time there was, it was like a list of like all the fatal shootings that year, maybe
2015 or 16 or something. And there were a few hundred in the US, which is a lot, but like 85%
of the time they were under the apparent threat of a gun. And I was under the impression before
that that it was like almost never that they're shooting poor innocent people screaming not to
be killed all the time. And that's at most like 15% of these deaths, which don't go wrong. That's
way too many. I was about to say I'm not defending a lot. But my perception was, and I think many
people's perception is, is that it's like all of them. And it's like, no, a lot of these people
are brandishing a weapon or something. And like, or an apparent firearm, which I think that's what
this number was, wasn't just like they came at them with a bat. In that case, you don't need to
shoot them 16 times. But the same time too, they're not going to throw down their gun and grab their
baton and get into a sword fight, right? And I mean, the reason is that like, if they lost the
sword fight, which they probably would because they're not trained swords fighters or knife fighters,
whatever it is, I don't want to make it too facetious. But the idea that like, hey, if I get
knocked out, now this bad guy has a gun, because now he's got my gun. And now I think of all the
damage he could do. And also you kind of do got to shoot him a lot because I mean, the thing that
stops people is blood loss, right? And you need to shoot people a number of times to get the
blood loss low enough that they're high enough that they'll pass out. Right. And don't get
wrong, I'm horrified by every instance, you know, there was that one just a couple months ago where
because like bullets don't do enough meat damage to incapacitate you by taking out a muscle, you
just got to. Yeah, but they fucking think that stops a lot of people too. Yeah. But yeah, if
somebody's charging you, you're not going to shoot, stop and see if they stopped, and then shoot
again. It's kind of just like, no, we got to put this guy down. And, you know, is there a trigger
happy subsection of the population of police officers? Absolutely. And that's fucked up. And
that shouldn't be the case. I'm not coming off as like I said, cops do nothing wrong. But I think
I'm less anti cop than the average person in my community. I think it's the fact that there are
so many awful cops that really puts me off to the system as a whole, because it's the same thing
with like the Catholic priests, it's sure only a small percentage of the molested children. But
what is wrong with the institution that those people stay there and are protected, it makes me
think that everyone there must be pretty awful if these, you know, psychotic sadistic cops keep
just staying in the forest and are protected by their friends, you're not that much better than
the other guy. And I don't think like someone who did have that protector ideal would be able to
stay in a system like that that does protect the sadistic awful people. Yeah, there's probably
the occasional martyr who manages to stick around and try and make things better or something. But
yeah. And that's that's a really good point. And I think that I mean, you know, the system that
allows bad police officers, you know, why isn't the motivation of every of every district or precinct,
I'm not sure how this work on what level these distance are made at. But why isn't it like,
no, absolutely body cams, we should the second those become available, we want them all, we want
these bad cops off the street, even more than you do. Combine that with the fact that like your
average persons only encounter the police is them rolling you for, you know, going through a stop
sign, you know, or rather, like, not a California stop is what it's called, where you come to a
slow stop or slow roll and then go through, you get $150 ticket. So like you only encounter the
police and then being complete dicks and being unfair. So like, there's that. But I mean, I think
you've got, you know, your sadistic dickbag cop, who's like, I'm going to go out there and make
lives hard on people or like, you know, the ones who are like, no, I think this is great,
I want to help people and it'll be nice. I went to like the Youth Police Academy when I was in
junior high. And all those cops are just like, you know, the warm and fuzzy, you know, like,
yeah, this is great, you know, we're here to help. And this is cool. You can drive this police car,
we'll let you, you know, do these little drills. And it was fun. Awesome. And then you get people
like Kyle Kanane, comedian mentioned, you know, like, pays $10 more than an hour in the post office
and I get a gun, like, oh, yeah, I get you, man, you're just, you're just having a job, you know.
But then at the day too, you know, it's pretty cool that if, you know, somebody breaks into your
house or you're feeling threatened, you can call the police, many people can call the police and
somebody will show up at your house, put their life at risk to help come help, you know. Granted,
I know that many people don't have that privilege. A lot of people, you know,
they're on cool cops or cops aren't cool to some people. Yeah, I just, I don't know.
I've been convinced that cops generally always make things worse when they show up.
They can never make things better unless like there's literally someone in your house trying
to shoot you or something. And they can just bring a gun into a situation and make things worse.
I mean, at some point, you want, you know, you might want somebody to bring a gun.
Right, right. I guess if there was literally someone in my house,
yeah, then, then they couldn't make it any worse at that point, right?
Yeah, probably. Like I said, I don't, I'm not going to, I'm not going to say that there aren't
problems. There definitely are and they're, they're huge and they're, they're terribly discouraging and,
you know, societally depressing. But the idea that like all cops are terrible, I hate that.
I hate all anything is anything sentences for the most part. Yeah. I feel like that's painting
with too broad a brush, which we've had a conversation like that before. It's like,
and it could be too many. It is too many. Right. It's okay. It's certainly not all,
but it's enough that I am very hesitant to ever involve the police or anything.
I can't remember last time I called the cops. I called them a few times in my teens when things
went, you know, scary, but nothing ever useful happened. So that's a good point.
I went to the police station once to file a report when the neighbor at my old place threatened
to kill everyone. And they're like, okay, we're writing it down. Thanks. I'm like,
that's, that's all you can do. They're like, yeah, that's literally all we can do.
We wrote down that you made a complaint. I mean, at some point that's not,
I do this annoying thing where like I try to steal man things that they're just
made of jello and it's not going to work. But one thing is like,
what would you want them to do? Take your word for it and go arrest them?
Arrest them, but go talk to them and maybe go talk to them. Maybe they should have done that.
Right. I mean, at the very least, if two people came in in a few months with those things,
like, all right, now we've got enough that our red tape says we can go do something.
But you don't want your neighbor, you know, who just doesn't like you because of whatever
reason to be able to call the cops and be like, he's being a dick and have cops come kick your
door in, right? So like there needs to be some barrier there. But at the same time, it's still
like, Hey, we should do something before this person snaps and starts actually killing his
neighbors, right? Yeah. I don't know. That's a tough line to cross or tough line to toe. I don't
really know how to solve that. I was just, I was kind of surprised at how useless going to them was.
Yeah. And I mean, I guess obviously it's better to have a paper trail because if it keeps happening,
you know, they build up a record. And especially, you know, if other people complain as well,
but it was like, huh, okay. I almost feel like that was a waste of time.
Yeah, I can totally see that. Sam Harris had a cop on his podcast. I think it was,
I can't remember what the episode was. It was right during those like four episodes in a few
couple months where he did like a Navy SEAL, a police officer slash like now private, you know,
advanced weapons tactics trainer and stuff. And it was like a few episodes on like how to
deal with like violence in the real world. Oh, yeah, I remember that one. That was a really good
episode. It was really good. So strong recommend on that. It was a fun perspective. But one thing
that Harris, I can't every point this out to his cop friend or his another episode, but
he was like, I have a friend who lives in LA like in a million dollar house neighborhood,
and she was robbed. And, you know, one of the things they stole was like her iPad,
and they could point to the house where this person was at. So she goes to the police station,
because on her phone, you know, as long as you've got it connected to your network of devices on
your iCloud stuff, you can say, yep, from my iPhone, I can see my iPad. And this is the house that
it's at. They were like, okay, thanks. And it's like, well, what, you guys are gonna go get it?
It's like, we literally can't. Our resources are stretched too thin. So like, at that point,
if they don't have the resources to go after, you know, some millionaire stuff in a nice neighborhood,
you know, it makes sense that they don't have the time to go after your neighbor, right?
But that's sort of like a bigger scale problem than, you know, it's not even maybe they just
don't want to. They just can't. They should be spending all this time harassing people and
writing stupid tickets. Yeah. I mean, traffic cops and, you know, drug war and all that crazy
bullshit sucks up a lot of their time where they could be actually doing useful stuff.
And destroys lives for no reason. And the systemic problem that the culture of police officers
defends bad cops rather than says, fuck that monster, we want him out of our ranks too.
I guess I kind of get there's probably this, this us against them kind of thing. And just
for the same reason that, you know, any small, any minority community is reluctant to eject
members who are getting a little fringe is, you know, even sometimes very fringe, right? I mean,
how bad do some people, you know, we talked with Vivian a few weeks ago about TERFs, you know,
that the trans exclusionary radical feminists, they're probably in some feminist circles still,
right? They don't get kicked out for being total dicks because it's like, well,
we need all the help we can get kind of thing. I'm not sure what causes people to keep like
people like that around. And it is a dark mark on, you know, the feminist groups that keep those
people in their ranks. But it, I don't know how to, how to solve that either, right? But it seems
to me a similar tone of issue. So don't get me wrong. I think I'm pro the ideal of cops,
which I think most people are. But I think there's too much of eagerness to like, this is my only
point, I'm not making very much of a strong point. If it sounds like I am, I'm not. My whole point is,
is that I think that saying all cops are evil or all, you know, it's, I think anything with
word all is too broad. And there's no, I don't know, I think it's too harsh. Like I, you know,
I've met some really cool cops. I guess the best you can say is on net, this institution is either
useful or detrimental to society. I don't know how we do that without the institution completely,
right? Right. We just divulge into the purge. I saw the trailer for the first purge, whatever,
like the prequel movie, which I only saw the first purge movie. It was a fun premise. Then I saw
the Rick and Morty episode and I was like, all right, I've seen them all. Yeah. But it, although
apparently the premise of the first purge is that it was used by the government as an excuse to send
out cops to murder people. That's true. But the idea that, you know, we need to, yes, I think that,
you know, people need to, all the purge movies are jokes. But I do think that at some point,
you need the threat of like, yes, we will kidnap you and throw you an Azkaban if you do too much
bad stuff that needs to loom over society because some people need those bumpers to keep them in
check. Right. Or at least enough people need that, that decided to collapse without that threat.
I don't know why this is such a long thing that I got on. I don't know how this started. Sorry.
It's all good. All right. Well, that was our weird digression on police and stuff. I can't remember
how that came around. So we, we started like resting with something. Yeah. Okay. All right.
Welcome to the Beijing conspiracy. You've been listening for a half hour. I'm Hini Ashbrotsky.
And I'm Steven Zuber. Thanks for your patience. Indeed. We do not have a guest this week because
we figured it was a good week just to catch up with, I don't know, chatting about other things,
doing some, some rat pics, which we haven't done or rat chat. And yeah, things like that.
Yeah. This is what happens when we have a guest to like, talk to and we just keep us on track. Yeah.
Like, so what about that local sports team? Right. Okay. Did you want to start us off?
I figured, I guess I don't really want to start off material.
Did we want to like start with listener feedback this time? Do it all backwards?
Sure. Why not? As long as we're going way out of order.
Yeah.
Well, skimming through some stuff here on the subreddit. Last week I rate, I want, I like to,
you know, once in a while tow some gentle controversy. So I was curious what the Storten
Peterson business was. And I've spent some time reading a bit more about him. I still can't
bring myself to watch any of his videos. I did read Scott Alexander's review of his book,
The 12, The 12 Rules for Life. And Peter or Scott seems to really enjoy the book. I think
Scott's kind of long-winded and hard to summarize, which holy shit, might be the whole point of
like Peterson being hard to summarize and long-winded. All right, that gave me pause.
I think Scott has a very, I hate to use the term mystical, but almost sort of a mystical,
spiritual connection to certain intellectual things. And this just seemed to hit all the
right buttons for him.
He's the guy who wrote the book on, you know, the world running on cobalistic law and, you
know, everything, you know, he gets that level of mystical is the word I can think of too,
thinking I think pretty intuitively. Right.
So someone's making a hundred parables about hell and heaven and, you know,
metaphor and then drawing all these lessons from it or something. Well, that might hit Scott
perfectly. Exactly.
For me, I'm like, all right, you don't need to do this long-winded 10-minute explanation just to
make your point. Anyway, you had feedback.
Yeah, I'll paraphrase real quick. I didn't go through all of these yet, but
Mordinnomail, who is Matt Freeman from the Awesome Daily Planet podcast, he co-hosts on there once
in a while and he co-hosts full-time We've Got Ward, which I strongly recommend for everybody.
He said that he's read 12 rules of 12 rules for life and he'll give the Steel Man of Peterson,
which sounds actually a lot like Scott Alexander's summary. I'm going to ask him if he read that,
but basically, I'll skip like the points from the 12 rules for life and just make the general
Peterson point that, you know, he'll give some example, usually from like a story from the
Bible or something, which again, just pause, sorry, Matt, but it's like, I still have a hard time
taking it that seriously because he has this whole bastardized version of truth so that you
can say, oh yeah, you know, the Cain and Abel thing happened. It's true because it's useful to have
that life metaphor. And I don't know if he said those two sentences in a row, but that is exactly
the kind of thing that I think he's trying to get at. And somewhere in there, he's weaseling in the
truth of his particular religion, which is stomach shit, but anyway, he'll make some, you know,
the point of Cain and Abel, which isn't just some psychopath killing his brother, you know, it's
the whole idea of a man who resents his brother so much that he murders him, but it resonates
metaphorically with a timeless message about how it's easy to come to resent someone that you
should love when you feel that the universe has unjustly rewarded them and withheld your
justice arts from you. So like, that's a really good reading of that. And you wrote a really
impacting story from the Cain and Abel thing that I really liked. Oh, you wrote that? Oh, yeah.
Oh, cool. Years ago. All right. Yeah, I never got it published, so I didn't think you'd read it.
You put it somewhere? I once asked for feedback from me. Possibly it was on Facebook before I
had the full writers group. Oh, yeah. Hey, anyone want to read this? Maybe help me make it better.
Did that ever make it online? No, no. Oh, well, if it did, people should read it. But since you're
hiding it, then they can't. So I thought it was fun. Okay. And it was a different kind of take,
but it made the which one killed the other person Cain killed his brother. It made Cain's perspective
really fun. So anyway, not what Peterson was getting at. And that's a bit of a digression.
But I think about maybe maybe putting it online at some point then. Why not? I think it was good.
You thought it was good? Yeah. All right. I thought it was really cool. Okay. Well,
I mean, it was a different take, but it humanized it and it made it fun. Yeah. So I mean, my since
writers never know if what they actually wrote is any good or not. My way of judging it is,
will someone give me money for it? And if no one gives me money for it, I'm like, obviously,
this isn't very good. And I should hide it from the rest of the world. You could publish it in
your next series of short stories. I could. And then only sell those or something. I don't know.
Yeah. But then, you know, it's not that way. No one else read the story and said,
this is good enough. I'll give you a few hundred dollars for the rights to publish it, you know?
So, hmm. Well, I enjoyed it. Oh, that's worth. I know that's free and doesn't,
doesn't, you can't, you can't pay your pay your pay your mortgage on on complements, but you can't
fucking pay your mortgage with writing either. Are you shitting me? You can buy a few dinners. It's
just, it's just the stamp of approval, you know? Fair enough. Since money B is the unit of caring,
that is how I know that it was good enough that if someone was willing to part with their hard-earned
money to publish it. And, and so it's not that the money is needed. I have this nice accounting
gig. It's just that that's how I know it's actually worth something. I don't know. We talked about
reading that. I know this is another aside, but that's what happens when it's just the two of us.
Utopia Law. That was published for free. That was amazing. Well, no, no, no, no. That was put
online for free. Strange Horizons pays professional rates for their stories. Oh, yeah. Okay. Well,
I didn't pay for it and I enjoyed it. Right. But yeah, the author, I guess, made money on it. So,
that's good because it was fun. Yeah. All right. So anyway, last side note before I get back to
Matt's comment, he points out that, you know, old stories have a lot of wisdom.
Sorry. Last aside, then I'll get back to it. I challenge that assumption or that assertion.
Some old stories have some wisdom and some have a lot. Many of them are completely pointless and
nothing to do with anything. What is the, what is the wisdom in lot fucking his daughters or
in, you know, Jesus killing that fig tree? I'm sure somebody's made some stuff. Like,
there's a lot of weird pointless shit in the Bible too, right? Yeah. The whole obsession
with foreskins and, you know, all those poor dead animals. Like the advantage that old stories have
is that everyone knows them and so you can refer to them and then make whatever point you want.
That's fair. Yeah. So, it's not that they have a lot of wisdom, it's that they have a lot of
shared inferential knowledge. Everyone knows them. Right. And I think that's something that
Peterson makes as a platform of his thing. Me having not read any of his stuff properly,
just from what I've heard, that his whole thing is like all these stories came about from humanity
trying to make sense of chaos and that's where all the stuff comes from. Okay. And in his weird
bullshit sense, they're true because of that, but it's mainly just, you know, this is the distillation
of our wisdom and it came together in these myths. Also, the sense you got to make out of chaos when
you're a sheep herding society is vastly different from the chaos that you got to make sense out of
when you're a, you know, a modern interconnected world living in a city kind of. We have these
weird economies where we go and do what seems like pointless nothingness for our entire lives and
get paid good money for it. And I'm like, I juggled numbers. Most of my life, I've been juggling
numbers. I do the same goddamn thing every month. And yet somehow this is valuable enough that people
are like, yeah, we need you to do this. Here's a bucket of money. I'm like, okay, I can keep doing
it, but you don't feel like I just, I got done renovating my basically done. I still got a little
bit left, but I got done renovating my house just very recently. Right. And that was fucking
fulfilling because you come in here every day and there's a little bit more done and you see the
fruits of your labor every time you come home. Yeah, there's paint on the walls now where there
were shit on the walls earlier. There's hardwood floor down where before it was carpet that had
been peed on, you know, and just like you make the world around you better and you can see it.
Whereas when you're just toiling away at the office job, it doesn't feel like you're doing
anything. Maybe we're the target demographic for Peterson's 12 rules for life because I think,
I mean, from what I got from Scott Alexander's review is that it helps you do that more in your
life if you're the kind of person that you can get wisdom from that. So anyway, Matt says that
Peterson does this a lot. He pulls some psychologically resonant moral out of a biblical
story or fairy tale and then shows how that explains some bizarre facet of human behavior.
And generally he's right or at least the explanation feels sufficiently plausible.
Perhaps this is because every time he uses a story to highlight a new flavor of human evil,
you automatically reflect on yourself and see that you've absolutely been there
and you've absolutely seen that evil. And the conscious recognition of that rejection of evil
is a step toward like Scott Alexander recognized being a better person. So like then in parentheses
here he's got, there's a level that this book is therapy forcing you to go beyond the abstract.
Yes, people sure do have a lot of evil in them that tends to create their own suffering to
hear us six times in my life. I've created a hell for myself through lack of moral conviction.
The 12 rules are practically banal and almost all translate into literal platitudes. Take care
of yourself, pursue meaning, not happiness. Take responsibility for yourself, hold others
responsible for their actions or they won't respect you. Don't lie, fix your own life before
you presume to fix others or before you try to get political or like Scott pointed out, you know,
suffering is bad. So fairly standard, almost stereotypical advice to expect from a stern
father figure. But Peterson makes you understand or at least feel that you fail to live up to these
seemingly simple basic guidelines of moral behavior, then you're complicit in the construction of
your own personal hell. Because life is suffering in chaos, it's only through diligence and effort
that you can steer your soul through it and find meaning in order. And there's something deep within
people that simultaneously doesn't want to hear that and deeply needs to. I mean, maybe his book
does that. But from what I saw of his, you know, interviews and other videos that I saw, he does
not do that in person. So one thing that I can say from still having not read any of his stuff,
and I've talked earlier with Enoch that I'm a pretty slow reader and the 12 rules have
been pretty low on my bucket on my list. But honestly, I'm getting enough good reviews from it
for people like Scott Alexander and David and Matt that like, maybe I need to read this book.
So maybe I'll check it out. Generally self-help books read pretty fast too.
Yeah, maybe. I'm not sure how big it is, or if it's even classically a self-help book. And I
imagine I'll find all the, if he's half as long-winded of a writer as he is a talker,
then it's going to drive me nuts. But maybe he's more, I think Scott Alexander said,
maybe he just has a good editor. So yeah, it's, at the very least, I've been given more pause.
Now I've got two data points that people that I know personally, who's intellect side trust,
who think that there's a lot to be gleaned here. I'll notice Matt that you dodge the question of
is Peterson a cool dude? You just talked about his book. So thanks for that. If you want to weigh
in on that. Wait, why do we care if he's a cool dude or not? Because like, he, I think he first
came into public prominence through like, challenging Canada's law that, through a
fairly understandable interpretation, you could be held as hate speech by not calling somebody
by their preferred pronouns. And he's against that. So he's like, no, I'm not going to let
someone, you know, basically control my thoughts and actions through being a bully. I don't think,
and to be charitable, I don't think that he thinks that is the intention of most people wanting
non gendered pronouns for themselves. But it is the kind of language weapon that is employed
in totalitarian things. And like Alexander points out in his thing, you know, there's a
big kind of running joke that he's afraid of this, you know, neo postmodernist Marxist conspiracy
taking over the world kind of thing. So this is the kind of weapon they would employ.
Well, I also really dislike, I mean, I know this comes up a lot, but these laws that are
basically never enforced, except for when the government wants to fuck someone for whatever
reason. And then there's the fact that everyone is committing all these felonies all the time,
and you can't help it because fucking everything is illegal now. It's just we had another one of
those. Yeah, but I mean, this was this was expanding the definition of hate speech. Yeah,
which I mean, it wasn't like a whole new cloth law. It was just like, no, hate speech is, you know,
calling someone a faggot and not calling them their preferred pronouns or something, right?
I'm assuming that wasn't exactly how it was written in the law, but something like that,
right? Well, it's kind of hard to accidentally call someone a faggot, too.
Were you using that? No, no, but we're using the wrong pronouns. It's quite easy to do
accidentally. I think insistently refusing. Okay, right. So like, you know, there's a person at
my work who prefers they them pronouns. And, you know, if my if their boss was like insistent
on calling them a gendered one, and they were like, can you not? And they insisted something
that that boss is being a huge dick, right? I think we could all agree. But I think that
the whole point of this, like adding this, and I don't have a position on this Canada law,
it's probably a bad idea. I don't like restricting free speech either. But I can't
relate with this person who doesn't like gender pronouns, because I don't have, I think I've
talked about a sense of gender at all. I think it's like not being able to see a color that
other people can see. I just I don't have a I don't have on my radar, which I've been talking more
and more to people. And this seems to be a very common thing in the rationalism sphere. I don't
know. Is there anyone in the rationalist society who has a gender that they feel strongly? I don't
know. Okay, I haven't talked about it with very many people. But for the few that I have, all of
them are like, Yeah, I guess I'm kind of cis, because that's just how I was born. But like,
I haven't I haven't met anyone who is who actually identifies with their gender yet.
I thought cis was your sexuality. Or no, that's, I don't know. Yeah, no, cis is your gender.
Yes. Straight is your sexuality. Another thing too, is I was at a coffee shop once and I overheard
like these, you know, excited college girls taking, you know, some humanities studies class,
it was like gender studies or something. And they're like, Oh, my God, we just learned about
like the 27 different genders that there are. And I'm like, I have no idea what you guys are
talking about. There are like 27. That sounds like, you know, I wonder how different they could
all be. She's like, I could get that there are two colors that I can't see or something.
Are there 27 different colors I can't see? Maybe. But that's a lot. So I'm guessing it's just,
you know, different expressions of this thing I don't have. Maybe it's like a sense of smell,
and they can smell all the things that can't smell any of them. So I can't even relate to the one
thing that they're talking about. But anyway, the other thing with my perception of Peterson,
so like, aside from the fact that he has, I couldn't find good citations, although I did
find a couple, they were in the comments of the Slate Star codex post of review on 12 rules for
life, that like, the university wrote him a letter saying, look, we've got a lot of kids
complaining that you wouldn't like address them by their proper, by their preferred pronouns.
And, you know, you're making them uncomfortable, you know, who cares if they feel like they're
being coddled or whatever. Or if you feel like they're being coddled, like, it's respect them,
that's what they want. And we're not asking you, you know, to, you know, do a lot, just,
it's kind of like, um, I don't know, if I constantly mispronounced your name,
in a way that, you know, what, if I called, I can't think of a good way to do it. But like,
or if you called me Steve, and I prefer Steven, and it bugged me a little, it's like, it doesn't
take that much for you to add that N. In fact, at some point, you're doing it to be a dick. So
like, knock it off, especially if you're a teacher. So like, you know, apparently he didn't want to
stand down to that. And I don't know the full context on all that. As far as I know, if someone
can point me to a source where someone is like, yeah, I'm one of those students, and he was a
complete should head to me, point that out to me, I'd be curious to see it. I didn't find anything
quite like that. But that and the fact that he seems to give, you know, people that a lot of us
don't like, you know, like, all right, Nazi style people, a lot of ammunition, and be like, here's
this intellectual who says a lot of the things that I agree with. And, you know, let me, let me
let me caveat that because you can, you can have that about, you know, people I do respect like
Sam Harris. So like, I don't think you can be held morally accountable for some of the people that
agree with some of the things you say. But if you're getting a large following of people, if I
suddenly got a lot of friends in the alt right, I'd wonder if I'm saying the right thing. Right.
If I found people holding up quotes, I don't, I'm making this up, but maybe there are, you know,
if someone's holding up a quote, something that I said at one of these rallies, they'd be like,
I should take a step back to self value weight. That's not how I want to be inspiring. Right.
Okay. And I, so far as I know, he's not stepping away from that. I think he's decried it, but he
also spends a lot of time decrying the left like it's also popular. So I mean, I'm kind of worried
because I am in favor of eugenics, not in the murdering people way, but in the making the babies
that we have in the future have better genes, you know, and there's a lot of people in the horrible
positions that are also fans of eugenics. And I would not want someone to judge me harshly,
just because I'm saying that this thing of having, of getting rid of, you know,
genes that fuck people's lives and bodies over is a good thing, which I do think it is a good
thing. I would hate to have people associate negative things with me because the Nazis also
say that. Yeah, that's true. And I don't really know what to say there. I guess, you know,
someone could take Harris's criticism of Islam and be like, there, here's, here's our, our well
respected intellectual who is also anti Muslim. And I'm going to run with that out of context. I
think the hard part is I'm trying to find things in context. And he's also notoriously hard to
quote, which I find super annoying. So yeah, yeah, it's because he doesn't ever say anything that
makes it like a sense. Yeah. So I think I'm trying to read through maths to comment as we're talking
this next one here, as we're talking, and I'm trying to see if he's defending Peterson or just the
book. Um, a little bit. Oh, I do have a question here, Matt. You said that
Peterson would never claim that religious people don't do horrible things. I could have sworn
that someone told me, or I read somewhere that religious people who do terrible things aren't
really religious. And atheists who do good things are, are really religious. That he,
he quates religiosity with doing the good thing, whether or not you profess a belief in religion.
I could be wrong there. So I want to learn more about that. I don't know why I'm spending so much
time on, on Jordan Peterson. I'm just, the whole phenomenon is kind of, kind of curious to me,
because like I said, my, my first impression was that this guy was a crank and I had no idea why
anyone would take him seriously. And then I met smart people I know in real life who, who I respect.
And they're like, Oh no, there's something to them. Check him out. And I'm like, okay, well,
given that I'm a slow reader, I really want to dedicate 30 hours to reading his book.
But I'm now talking to the idea that I might. So we'll see.
Could make for an interesting episode.
Yeah. Yeah. All right. Give me six months. I'm a slow reader.
Speaking about controversial laws and restricting freedoms and such.
Oh, hold on. I'm sorry. Really quick. I don't mean to interrupt. Operation question
gave us a link to a five minute video, which I haven't watched yet. I just found it. I should
read these before I come here. It's been a weird week. We asked for a short video. And apparently
there's a five minute one. I will check that out. Do you want to pause and just watch it right now?
Do you want to? Sure. All right. We're pausing. BRB.
All right. We're recording. We'll link that video. Steven, you have thoughts.
Yeah. A few. First and most shallow. He doesn't look what I thought he would sound like,
or he doesn't look like he, I thought he would look from his voice.
Oh, you haven't seen him before.
I think I have, but I haven't seen him and seen him talk. I've seen his picture before,
and I've heard him on the, I've heard him on Sam Harris's podcast.
Okay.
But he sounds older than he looks. And he looks like in his video, he's just like
in a suit and stuff. He looks like he would sound more like the most interesting man in
the world from those old commercials. Okay.
And instead he sounds like this kind of like, you know, old guy. It was interesting.
That was obviously not the content of the video.
Stay thirsty, my friend.
So the video is basically, it's titled, Clean Up Your Room. And his point is, is that,
you know, the first thing you could start doing to like, what was his word for it?
Stop doing what you know is wrong and do better for yourself.
The first thing you can do is literally clean up your room.
Yeah, literally clean your room. It's the expression of yourself.
It's your environment and that sort of thing.
That might be a simple instruction that, you know, might be more original.
But the idea that like, you know, you're struggling with becoming a better person
and self actualizing, it's not a lot to me like, you know, what Islam teaches about
like the internal jihad, you know, the struggle against yourself and, you know,
your base, your acracia versus self actualization or something, right?
Or maybe what, you know, Eastern traditions are more about like enlightenment
or self fulfilling or something. You know, why aren't we doing that?
I don't know if maybe this is someone's first exposure to that idea.
It sounds pretty profound. It's not, you know, I don't think he's claiming it for his own either.
But I also found that fairly intelligent sounding and worth five minutes watching.
I think everyone should check it out if they're at all interested in this dude.
I still don't get the love for him. Like, yes, that's good advice.
And I also strongly back it, but I don't, I don't see him as like a prophet.
I don't know if he managed to inspire some people to start cleaning up the room,
then I guess it was worth it. And it's a good video for them because I mean,
that that really is good life advice, literally and metaphorically to clean up the room and,
you know, yeah, well, start with the literally.
Yeah. And the other thing he advocates is like in this sort of video is to
stop saying things that you know, aren't true or that make you feel bad saying it.
But again, like, like Matt was saying, that's really been all common advice.
I guess like some people just like his presentation.
And if that's what works for you, then yeah, sure, go for it.
Go for it.
Maybe the long winded version of that thing is actually inspiring enough to get you to do it.
Okay.
Like, I mean, one thing that I've come to realize over the last few years that like,
that stopped me from being more successful early on and like quote successful,
because I just started like, I've just passed a year at my first real job and I'm 28 is like,
just stop me in the words of the great philosopher Shia LaBeouf, just do it.
I believe he got that from Nike.
We delivered into that flexing TED talk.
If you haven't seen that TED talk, don't bother, but watch two seconds of it.
He just says, just do it over and over. It's very funny.
Don't let your dreams be dreams.
But it's actually that there's a certain kind of audience.
You told me once that Atlas Shrugged was a very formative and important book to you at the time
that you needed it in your life, but you wouldn't recommend reading it.
Right.
So maybe this is like that.
I think some people would recommend reading it for Peterson.
Like, I don't know how much I could glean from this,
although if Alexander gleaned something from it, I probably could.
I'd like to think, unless it goes right over my head.
But I could think of people who could literally start in the place of like clean up your room
and you know, I have people I know who feel disorganized and like they're trying to figure
their stuff out. Hey, this might be the kind of book that this person needs.
I don't know. I'm not talking about you.
No, no.
I'm looking at you when I'm saying it.
Yeah, I understand.
I kind of, I don't know.
I get the feeling that this is one of those things everyone needs to find out for themselves.
And most people, when they find it out for themselves, get a push from some external
source like a Peterson or something.
And so, even though it sounds like banal to most people, the people who get it right then
when they need it, which is everyone at some point in their life, really latch onto that
person who helped deliver it at that point.
And I think this is another one of those frustrating fucking things about aging and dying.
Because this, this shit takes some time to learn.
Like, nobody knows at the beginning of their life how to get things done and that keeping
your room clean is actually important and that getting enough sleep is really important.
It's shit that you find out through the long suffering process of going through life and
being shitty at things and slowly getting less shitty.
And then once you start learning that stuff, you get old and you die.
And the next generation has to learn it all fucking over again.
And it's this continual treadmill.
And I don't know, but people say like, well, why don't you learn from your elders or something?
I think that is such bullshit.
No one in their lives has ever learned anything from their elders.
The elders just gave them that push, right?
When they were about to learn it themselves, like, like Peterson, you know, and I guess
that's good that if he, if he's fulfilling that role for a number of people who don't
have anyone else in their life to fulfill it for them.
And maybe he's one of those people that like says, you know, saying are mostly good things,
75% of the time and 25% of it is that kind of fringe.
And like, I wish he wouldn't say that so much, but this stuff, this stuff's cool.
Maybe that's this guy.
All right. I think I moved.
I will try.
I'll at least read more of his stuff and watch some of his stuff.
Maybe some essays I could read that'd be nice, but I might actually read this book.
I'll put it on my list.
Well, I can't put it on my list of a hundred books.
I'll make a point to try and read it soon.
Well, I mean, the list, the bottom of the list never gets read.
So it's all about where you're putting it on the list.
The top of my list takes eight months to get around to like cracking the cover.
And then I get tired.
All right. I have a list of TV shows I got to watch and
the Twin Peaks is slowly inching closer to the top of that list.
So I might actually watch that sometime.
Tell Rachel when you start it. She'll love it.
Oh yeah.
Yeah. She might even, if you, in fact, if you watch it, I'll give it a shot with you.
Okay.
Um, I'd watch the first episode once and I could not get into it because I,
this was years ago before I had any sense at all of like, I don't know, cinematography or like,
you know, diff non-traditional storytelling.
And that's very much what this is.
Yes.
The director, apparently like everything he does is like this.
He's amazing.
Yeah. So, you know,
You saw Fight Club, right?
Yeah.
Oh, you didn't like Fight Club?
I get, I get kicked back on this every time.
I, I liked parts of Fight Club.
I thought that it was fun.
It was this cool kind of like, you know, undertake, you know,
a lot of parts of it were cool.
Mainly I hated the end.
Okay.
So like at the end, if you haven't seen Fight Club skip 30 seconds.
He shoots himself on the face to kill Brad Pitt.
And then he's talking with his girlfriend and holding her hand
and watching the world burn or whatever.
And talking with like this raspy voice.
Like, so I'm thinking if you shot yourself in the face, you'd be dead.
Right?
He managed to miss all the important parts.
So he really did shoot himself is how that ended.
That's what I, that's how someone, so my, my issue was that I,
for years I hated this movie because I was like,
so he metaphorically shot himself in the head
or shot himself in the face to kill Brad Pitt.
But he's still talking with a rasp.
Like he actually did damage with the gun.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So I'm like, okay, so did he do it or not?
Like, did he, did he, did he, did he shoot Brad Pitt?
Did he shoot himself in the face to kill Brad Pitt?
Like he's gotten a fist fight with Brad Pitt.
And he just did it psychologically.
In that case, why is he bleeding and have a rasp?
Like what the fuck's going on here?
So the answer that the second person say this is like,
he actually did.
He just survived.
Yeah.
And he survived enough to talk and stand around and not be like,
I need to go to the hospital now.
He's dead.
Well, this is a guy that's like been fighting himself
and not realizing it.
You can't take a bullet from that.
No, but, but he could like easily think that he's blowing
his own brains out and actually have the gun pointing like
out his cheek or something, you know.
Oh, so the raspiness wasn't because he shot himself in the
mouth or like through the, I thought that he shot himself
in the back of the head, like through the mouth to the back.
I mean, that's, that's obviously what he thought he did too,
because you see him putting the gun in his mouth.
But since he survived and seems to be just kind of bleeding
with the raspy voice, he must have not shot himself that well.
So the raspiness might be him gurgling on blood, not on him
talking through broken vocal cords that he shot with a gun.
Right.
See, I was under the impression that he either survived
with a gunshot that would have, you know, blown the head off
of the rest of us and killed us through movie magic because
reasons, or he didn't actually shoot himself.
He just did it in his head, but then why is he rasping?
So that was, all right, that's how I took the end.
All right, the movie was fine.
Twin Peaks is weird.
That's my impression.
I'll be willing to check it out.
Well, I think, you know, moving past all this Peterson business,
I think that I'm sold enough to check it out.
Yeah.
So that was fun.
Thanks for engaging me so much on that.
And I will have David on in a while.
I'm sure Peterson will come up because he's one of the other
same people that I know who likes him.
Maybe by that time, I'll have read some of his stuff.
So yeah, I think he's a fan, but some of Peterson's popularity
among groups of people that we're not huge fans of has given him
pause not to like throw his character out, but I'm paraphrasing
to kind of do away with some of that like idol worship stuff.
I think, and I can't remember if David said this or not,
he kind of found Peterson's stuff kind of right
when he needed to hear it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And I totally get it.
You know, it'd be weird if people were running around
quoting Udkosky at alt-right rallies, and I don't know
how I'd process that information.
Right.
Like, all right, I got to step back and assess.
I don't see how you possibly could though.
Let's find a quote that we can put under a picture
of the Tiki tortures and not put that online, just laugh.
I mean, he's got such a, his writing just comes,
has such joy in it.
It's just this aura that you can't associate with alt-right.
Yeah.
That's fair.
And you can do sound bites of Harris that you totally
could put on a, on a poster.
So yeah.
All right.
You're good.
Yeah.
Well, that was interesting.
Thanks, everybody.
All right.
Sorry to have engaged us for so long on side notes.
I wanted to talk about, unless you've got other stuff,
but you, you talked about, you sent me that link for
that Google AI assistant.
Yeah.
But no, there is one listener feedback I want to do.
Okay.
This is from Zeek Aran, and this is on the Get in School
episode.
He says, at first I agreed with Enios, because they said
a few words that made me think we were thinking the same
thing.
But the more I listened, the less I agreed.
I thought he was going more in the direction of Paul
Graham's thoughts.
And then here he quotes Paul Graham.
Public school teachers are in much the same position
as prison wardens.
Wardens' main concern is to keep the prisoners on the
premises.
They also need to keep them fed, and as far as possible,
prevent them from killing one another.
Beyond that, they want to have as little to do with the
prisoners as possible, so they leave them to create
whatever social organization they want.
From what I've read, the society that the prisoners
create is warped, savage, and pervasive.
It is no fun to be at the bottom of it.
In Outline, it was the same at the schools I went to.
The most important thing was to stay on the premises.
While there, the authorities fed you, prevented
overt violence, and made some effort to teach you
something.
But beyond that, they didn't want to have too much to do
with the kids.
Like prison wardens, the teachers mostly left us to
ourselves.
And like prisoners, the culture we created was barbaric.
Paul even brings up how pre-industrial young adults
spend their time happily in apprenticeship, which
Inyash thinks is a solution.
That or letting kids drop out.
I'm not sure what great results he's expecting
from that, though.
Inyash, what do you think America will look like
if we allow students to drop out?
What good things will come of this?
Do you have any experience with alternative students
that are working to get a GED outside of the
general public education system?
Yeah, Inyash.
All right, so I read that because I very much
agree with that Paul Graham essay.
And I think part of the problem, I wasn't feeling
very good about that schooling episode when we
were done with it, because I think I was trying to
tackle too much in one episode.
One of the things that I was wanting to touch on was
that the schooling doesn't seem to provide us very
much in terms of what we want in educational outcomes.
But the other thing I wanted very much to say was
exactly what Paul Graham had said, because that was
very much on my mind as well.
And I think I actually sent that link to Zeke,
or maybe we stumbled across it independently.
But in either case.
Which link?
The one Paul Graham essay.
Oh, yeah.
That was Why Nerds Are Unpopular.
Yes.
And I read that this week.
It was pretty fun.
Yeah, all of his essays are pretty damn good.
But yeah, that was one of my favorites of his in
the top three.
And I think I kind of conflated two separate
things in that episode and therefore didn't hit
on either one as thoroughly as I would have
liked to.
And I think I did a disservice to both of them as
a result.
But yeah, very much of my and the fact that we had
a teacher on didn't help things because the teacher
kind of has a how are you going to tell someone
that you're friends with that I kind of think
your job is acting a lot like a prison warden and
not caring about how these kids conduct themselves
because I very much had the same experience
that I think this is true in prisons as well and
in in old what is it the court societies of the
kings and such where there is nothing you can do
to contribute to society in a meaningful way.
So all status is reduced to sniping at each other
and pecking and just, you know, who can you tear
down and how can you make yourself look cooler?
But there's literally nothing you can do of value
to make yourself more valuable to society.
So it degenerates into these awful social dynamics
that are just toxic for everyone.
And I think that is a lot of what school is and the
reason I I did want to the reason I promoted letting
kid not forcing kids to go to school anymore is
because partly that would help with the whole
prison warden thing if you aren't forced to be there
it's less prison like and the teachers don't have
this one of their main jobs to keep you on the
premises right they can concentrate on actually
doing things they want to do like teach people
and if someone is not willing to be taught
they can just get the fuck out right then and also
I think it would help prevent this social dynamic
from getting going where kids are bored they have
nothing to do there's nothing they can do to be
valuable and so they form these awful societies of
destroying each other and that that is mainly why I
was promoting that because I was one of the kids
that really liked school and liked the learning
aspect of school and I would have preferred it
if those people simply were not in school
so I admit it is kind of self-serving of me
to be like get those disruptive asshole people
out of here we don't need them anyway.
I mean a lot of my childhood I mean I don't know
if a lot is conveying the right amount a portion
of my childhood was spent you know dodging bullies
and being careful around you know mean kids
and that sort of thing and those kids probably
didn't want to be at school if they weren't there
I could have focused a lot more on other stuff.
Yeah I think the kids who don't want to be there
make it worse for everyone else by a large amount
yeah which is why I want them out of there.
My aunt who is a joyful and you know I think happy
and fulfilled person who likes her job I think
that she, Audrey was that her name?
Yes.
I called her autumn for like the first half of the podcast
I felt like a dick.
Audrey didn't, I don't think she saw a prison guard
as part of her job title.
No.
Whereas I think my aunt totally does
together those bastards need to be kept in checked
I think is what she might say but I say I preface
that she you know is a joyful person who likes her job
because that's also true but I think she's also like
well as long as they're here yeah we need this discipline
we need to keep these guys in line because you know
they're making hard on all the kids who want to be here
which the fact that I phrased it that way
and I think the fact that I can plausibly imagine her
or another teacher saying it that way
they're making it hard on the kids who want to be here
kind of illustrates your whole point that yeah they
they don't want to be here they're making things hard on
on everybody else as a result and that's bringing down the whole system
a lot.
And I would like for teachers to get more involved in their
kids lives and actually you know want to be involved with the kids
and can be a force for social good when there is a breakdown
in the society that kids are creating.
Yeah and anecdotally because they do try to keep themselves separate
you don't want to get mixed up in the kids shit you know
yeah but once you're part of that society and they can look to you as a
normal person you don't feel as bad getting involved in their lives it's
not like these are the wards that are in my charge
that the parents have you know entrusted me with ensuring their safety
it's like these are my friends my short dumb friends but
my friends nonetheless and so I will get involved and help.
Yeah and occasionally their teachers should do that sort of thing and it's
heroic and it's awesome but it shouldn't be
the odd heroic incident it should be all the time I see that
and you know part of the problem too is you know I'm not one of those like
small classrooms are better but yet when it's 30 to 1 and you as a teacher
know the names of 200 students because that's how many teach a day because
they're all running through your classes all the time
you know you don't have the time to know their
life story and help them with every little thing and get rid of their bullies
and that sort of thing but I can't say anecdotally
and this probably speaks to the point of volunteering to go to school
when I went to community college before I went to CSU and at both of those and
it's I think even more so at community college because
there is a much higher percentage of population there who didn't come right
out of high school I went there because it was
like a third the price for the same education and people you know you don't
get the same esteemed credentials but you get
the same textbooks and that's my pitch for community
college you know if your if your goal is to learn you get it for a third of the
price and you can use those credits at a
university and get your you know your bachelors or whatever
I am more and more under the opinion that college isn't there for what you
learn it's for the connections you make which is why you probably want to go
the more expensive ones and for the credentials
well I am for the credentials but I mean you can put your first two years in community
college and then transfer but I if you're there for the
connections you make you want to go with the where the most valuable
connections are going to be that could be because you learn the same stuff in
either way but the people that you're around and that you form bonds with
are different and that is that is one thing I didn't know about college that
I wish I would have known like I stayed in my room and I did
studying and stuff and what I should have been doing is
well for the one semester that I was actually doing college what I should
have been doing is being out there and making connections with people
well for what it's worth I didn't make any friends in college either I made like
two friends that I'm still in touch with and
I also don't do what I studied at CSU so I can I can support the idea that my
lack of networking didn't do anything for me but
you know if your goal is to get a job in Denver
you know going to Harvard you're not going to make a lot of friends there
who probably can get your job in Denver but maybe some well if you go to
Harvard you're not the kind of person who
needs to get a job you're the kind of person who needs to know people in
high political offices and in the high up in the business world because you are
part of the ruling class well I'll pull the brakes on that before
I make one other point and just point out that my significant other went to
Columbia okay and you know is the kind of person
who wants a job and you know isn't this you know high
salon of society person she went there because on an
on a lark she applied there she got turned down from CSU for her master's
degree probably because CSU wants to get out of state people because they pay
twice as much and they do it under the guise of like oh we
want to bring new ideas in or whatever but it's really probably about the money
and Columbia said yes so it became really cynical
no I think that's I think it's it'd be weirdly rosy eyed of me not to
acknowledge that yeah money probably has something to do with it
probably has almost everything to do with it it's not explicitly everything
other than the fact they can't say it right so they have to do just enough of
beyond you know to make paying lip service not seem like a complete
you know farce but anyway Rachel's not the person you're talking about sir
okay okay all right but when I went to uh especially at front range community
college in Fort Collins there weren't I don't remember any bullies
there are people there who came that's I love the feel of a school
of a of an academy style school play-doh ish where people are coming there
because they want to learn yeah there was none in college either when I went to
college yeah because that's what I mean there's probably you know jocks and
jerks whatever but I don't meet them at CSU either
but they're much more of like the you know I'm here and I'm 19 let's have fun
and much less of like I'm here to learn but I got a lot of that at front range
and and some of that at CSU but the the idea that they're they're there on
purpose that they're not there because they're forced to be
that really cut down on a lot of these problems and you know adults might try
and say I say adults like we're not old but uh the adults who run schools and
stuff might be like well that's because they're older and they're not going
through puberty or whatever but Paul Graham hits that in that essay pretty
well that you know hormones aren't this monster that turns you into you know
this this sad psychopath it's really the assholes that are surrounding you that
do that to you and I think he's absolutely right I mean no doubt I remember
having anger issues in my teens and stuff and that was probably something with
you know your body's changing and you know whatever but the voluntary aspects
did add a lot and I wonder what Zeke's thought would be to compare from his
primary education to his college education there and if that is really
just a maturity aspect or if they're more mature because they can afford to be
because there's less bullies than to guard against although there is something
to be said for the fact that maybe does train people to punch the clock and
keep a shitty job that's just as bad as high school oh yeah that part is still
definitely on the table yeah um you know and at work you have bullies off I mean
you know less overt I don't get beat up at my job I don't even really get bullied
but um but back to your jobs yeah that's true but I do work with somebody who
has been bullied at his job considerably to the point where uh no
network listens to this no one will put it together because I know the names of
like half my co-workers on my floor and there's like a hundred so no one knows
what I'm talking about they went to HR to report this person because it's been
going on for months and they're like you know I get anxious when I get up from
my desk enough to walk by their desk to get to the door and I'm like that is
exactly the time you should be going to HR and having them step in and do stuff
because you're describing you know workplace harassment you can't you
can't do you can't be at work without feeling uncomfortable that's fucking
insane so it happens and you know maybe the fact that maybe he was bullied in
school and that's why he's able to put off you know complaining to the teachers
for almost a year at this place and I put that in quotes uh guys a great guy he
did the right thing yeah the domestication aspect you know maybe also keeps you
from shutting down at the first sign of trouble you know you can just put up and
shut up and do your things so we can't we can't ignore the domestication aspect
of it but as far as making it suck a little less there's still ways to do
so yeah what did you if you did it I might have been skimming the um the other
feedback um the first part of Zeke's question you know what do you imagine
they would do the kids didn't want to go to school did you touch more on that
no I mean I think it would be better for the kids that are in school
for the ones that aren't then I there's just this whole issue where I don't know
what to do with because they don't want to go to school yeah and they probably
don't want to be productive members of society either but even if they did but
there's not enough low level jobs for them to all stay busy right at the same time
and they're not doing anyone any favors by being at school so if they're gonna you know
be at home and be I'm sorry to put words in your mouth you tell me if I'm putting the
wrong ones in there but I imagine it's like if they're not going to be productive and
helpful at school let them be unproductive and unhelpful at home away from everybody
at the very at the very worst right so like you know at the very at the end of the day
what what happens you stay unproductive and unhelpful and the rest of us get to flourish
you weren't going to go anywhere anyway you're a bully don't get me wrong bullies turn around
life with caveats etc but for the person going to school like I can't wait to be a dick today
let them not go to school that day and see how well everyone else turns out yeah and I yes I
think of there are quite a few countries where going to school is viewed as a privilege and
they're very poor countries and the schools they're generally suck and yet they don't have these
these behavioral problems the kids that do go to those schools are happy to be there
because they know it's their way out of being you know maybe it's it's it's what our parents
our parents people my age ish told me call you know school and college would be it's your way
to like actually get your life good you need to do well and you know why do you have to go to school
Stephen because it sucks so much well you have to go because it's your door ready college and
let's you have a better life than we had and so but for many people in the world that's actually
true and it feels I don't know it also feels shitty to say that because then what we're dooming
those people that drop out of school to life and poverty or something and I I don't know I don't
have an answer that I can't be responsible for everyone especially the people that are shitty
you know imagine if more Elon musks came around because they're bullied less in school and their
spirits weren't broken how much faster the world would be saved and then all the all the bully
problems would also be solved we can bring the singularity on faster if there were fewer bullies
I'm not sure how true that is it's getting late speaking of Elon musk and saving the world
do you want to touch on that AI assistant the google one yeah which was not Elon musk but no but
it's saving the world style stuff yeah okay maybe maybe is it I don't know I don't know where you
want to go with this you just sent me the video I did no we'll post this video as well but it's
basically of a google voice assistant type thing where you tell your you tell your computer hey
make me a haircut get me an appointment for a haircut Saturday between 10 and 12 and this this
assistant just calls up a haircutting place near you and with a completely natural sounding human
voice is like hi I'd like to book a a haircutting appointment for my client and it likes stutters
and says um and stuff and sounds just like a human you know and the person on the other line went and
took down the information and thought that there was a person they were talking to and the the person
doing the demo on stage got a haircutting appointment booked for them and it was really
awesome because it sounded just like a normal person yeah the you know there's the occasional
like small pause where they'd be like you know what time or you know I'm sorry we're booked at one
okay I'm good anytime between 10 and 2 yeah so uh what did you think about this google assistant
thing my thought was is that I wish I had prepped by watching prepped for this question by watching
like the announcement for Siri when Apple first announced that because I don't know if they went
way above and beyond to what Siri could do and 10 years later however long it's been it still
sucks right I still often can't get it to call the person I want to call which I mean don't be
wrong that's a really cool problem to have that my robot won't you know make my phone call immediately
for me so I can you know talk to somebody a thousand miles away in a second like you know that's
not not to bitch on like that level of problem but um I'm curious if they oversold it so like if
this thing works as advertised that's fucking insane yeah and though on google it's gonna roll
out for free and everybody who wants one can have one did you hear what happened almost immediately
afterwards nope so there was a bit of a backlash about people being like this is kind of creepy
and unethical and we we don't want this to go like almost the next day like walked it back I was like
oh no we would we would never use this to just trick people into thinking about talking to a human
we'd always say hi this is google assistant or something like that and I was like I don't know
what do you think about that because on the one hand I don't see why it matters as a user of
google assistant I'm like if you think you're talking to human that's great but on the other hand
if I was when I when I call and I um you know get those those robo answering
menus that you got to push your buttons through and like say this if you want this I don't have
any consideration at all for the computer because I know it's not a person and I can just be annoyed
at it and and be jerky to it basically it doesn't matter whereas if there's a human on the other
line then right away there's a level of compassion and empathy that I feel I guess I believe the word
Vivian used for it was emotional labor when I have another human on the line I put forward
emotional labor to help make them comfortable and to work with them in a level that I never would
with a computer and so I kind of feel like I have done that labor for nothing if it's a computer on
the other end at the very least you fostered the kind of person that you want to be to actual
people so it's not necessarily wasted effort it's just like exercise right rather than actually
lifting something yeah um but I mean my thought was sort of that but I took it the other direction
in that like you know if I'm making the hair appointment or making an appointment for a haircut
or rather um if I'm taking the appointment for the haircut the person who calls me
isn't really a person they're they're like as far as I'm concerned they're they're a potential
customer do you want this or not when do you know here's our availability when do you want to come
in it's not it's not like oh my god you're steven you're I want to talk to you what's your life
story it's like no fuck it you're here to get your haircut let's get your haircut and when you go
to you know you're making the appointment they're doing that's the same thing in reverse they're
not a person they're a person they're they're a tool for you to get a haircut or to get the first
steps to getting one set up yeah um don't get wrong service people are people I've been in service
but what I'm saying is that it's like you know you go to you go to the coffee shop the person at
the counter is a person that you should care about but right then there are means to coffee
and I don't really know how how useful it would be I don't I don't think it'd be bad to say this is
a google assistant I'm scheduling a appointment for Stephen Zuber and I mean what if it wasn't a
google assistant what if it was my assistant Stephen yeah he's basically being a tool anyway right
just a tool to get me a haircutting appointment and if I was a full-time assistant I might call
saying this is Stephen calling for I'm calling on behalf of Enya she's getting him a haircut
appointment maybe I want my robot to say the same thing right I mean it would be
an identical interaction from from their perspective because they don't they don't care
they're just like when are you coming in when are we booked on the other hand I would still feel
a little cheated if I was nice to a computer so maybe that is the way to say it is like
I'm calling for Stephen yeah or I'm a robot calling for Stephen is maybe the idea is that
you're not wasting emotional labor yeah but then at the same time too google assistant is not going
to call clearly having a bad day and needing someone to talk to right so like you don't have to
any emotional labor other than like not shouting at them and you're presumably not going to do that
at the real human anyway dude it's the weirdest thing my uh the contractor that put in my air
conditioning and my new furnace like I was really fucking annoyed with him because the dude as far
as I can tell is not entirely stable and so whenever I called he would be like yeah okay I can come
and I can do that for you let's see here all right here's my schedule man it's been a really just a
busy week I got so much going on and he would chat with me for like five or ten minutes about
nothing randomly going places he once was like yeah I think I think we do need to spend more money
on the military because we don't have enough submarines we need more submarines man and I was
like dude you're you literally have some sort of weird mental issues but and I was unhappy at the
time I was like I just want someone to get in here and fucking put an air conditioner in my house
why am I doing this but now I look back on that as like man remember that weird dude that put in my
air conditioner who thinks we need more submarines that's hilarious yeah he's gonna stick out in my
memory so that guy clearly had no filter that's weird I I mean I don't I'm I'm paused because I
really know what to say there like he's violating the expectation of the of the contract that you
guys have with that conversation it's like I'm not I'm not calling to talk to you forgive me I'm
not trying I'm not talking to you as a friend or even somebody that you know I if if at all possible
I'd avoid talking to you all together if I could do this online I would yeah but you take appointments
over the phone so here we are right I've speaking of haircuts in this example I've gotten haircuts
from people and they'll tell me about like problems with their kids at school and problems with you
know their neighborhood in their house and I'm just like man you know it's hot out right like
what am I supposed to say it's like and I do you know I make I make I think I do a good job I like
to talk and I like to I like to engage that kind of conversation and be friendly but at the same
time one or two times I got kind of like personal and I'm just like you know holy shit like do you
remember my name like are you just desperate to talk to this about somebody and in that case I'm
happy to listen but if I was having a rough day and I'm just like trying to get something done
it's like man I I'm not wanting to hear about this right now and the robot will never try and
you know badger you if this person ooh I imagine the next step for this if it's not rolling out
at the same time would be setting up google assistant for your like your own personal business
right yeah or me even for yourself it's only gonna be a few months until it's your google assistant
calling the haircutting places google assistant and the two assistants talk to each other and that
sounds ideal then no human ever has to interact with another human I am finding myself much more
enjoying like talking and hanging out with people and it's been like in the last 10 years and in
the coming but then I have for what I thought like in high school I was a very shy probably from
my lightly bullied upbringing but like I remember like the first person I didn't really like I'd
never been introduced to that like I talked to it was like my second it may be not the first but
I remember like this is a big moment for me I talked to somebody who sat next to me in class
my second semester of senior year of high school oh wow and like I didn't know who this person was
before I talked to them and that wasn't like the first time but I remember being a watershed moment
for me as a developing person yeah like that's where I'm at that's where I'm coming from yeah
and so from that I love talking to people I love going to meetups and meeting my all the people
that I know and I like doing this and I really enjoy my social time which isn't something I would
have predicted for myself all that said I would love to make it super voluntary to where I like
I don't call this because of my haircuts I don't know who does but if I was that kind of person
or other other services man letting my robot talk to the robot and let leaving both of us
time to you know browse right out on our phones instead that sounds great so I could I don't know
I don't think this will be the degradation of society because this is just for like simple
things this isn't for like you know replacing conversation or replacing friendships it's just
for weeding out the tedium and I think that's the whole point of computers and robots right
but I don't know maybe the tedium wouldn't be as tedious if we connected with people a little more
so I would not convinced no no I was just thinking of different examples so like
I was coming back from Fort Collins a couple weeks ago and I swung through uh McDonald's
because I'd used the restroom we went inside and because it's going down the interstate
and you can order I haven't been in one in years I don't know when these came up but I ordered
at a kiosk I pressed buttons on them on a big you know tablet that was as tall as I was to place
my order yeah and the only time I had to talk to somebody was when they handed me a thing I said
thank you very much I thought that was actually pretty nice yeah because I mean people hate running
cash registers people probably don't like trying to teach talk to the person at the cash register
like a person plus I don't know if you ever worked a dull mind-numbing service industry job but well
it I mean a little bit for about two weeks asking supers yeah it wears you out right away right
and like when you're on the clock there like four hours into your shift someone asks you like hey
Inyash what's the capital of Wyoming and you're like I what what what are you even talking about
like you can't draw basic facts you can't think you're you're just you're completely turned off
right so like for many in many in my personal experience from doing some of the stuff for
years was like you're not I'm not really a person when I'm doing that job I'm just monotonously
doing that job and trying to engage a person is exhausting that's the worst part of it so like
I don't know if you know there are a lot of people who enjoy that sort of thing a lot of people you
know love you know like my company where I work they have a large customer service department
because we have lots of customers and those people probably a lot of them don't like it
because customer service sucks but some of them do you're helping people figure their stuff out
and at the end of the day you get to brighten their day by helping them helping them have solved a
problem but that's also like the only thing that they're doing you're not distracting them from
like trying to do the other five things to being paid nine dollars an hour to do right so I don't
really know what point I'm making with this other than I do think that I don't see this being a bad
thing I'm actually really looking forward to it I was just I was slightly surprised by how negative
the reaction was and how quick I had not expected that because I also when I first saw was like
that's kind of cool what other negative reactions were there like other than the fact that that was
it that was like this is this is a lying to people or something you can't do that I I don't think
it would be nice to say I you know if the robot said I'm Stephen I'm calling for an appointment
because that is lying right I am a human I am totally a human I'm fully human check out all
my legs and stuff isn't there a subreddit I'm totally a human or something something like that
not robot yeah totally not robots but like I think we kind of talked about at the end of the day
you're when you're making an appointment or you're taking one you're not a person neither of you are
you're just you're economic you're doing a job of productivity yeah you know one downside could be
that this could replace some jobs and that's a downside you know there are some people whose
jobs it is probably to do things just like this I think anyone rich enough to afford a personal
assistant is going to want the the actual of having the esteem of a personal assistant yeah but
the actual a human would still be better than a machine to have as a personal assistant like this
is this this is technology that will only be used by people who do not currently have personal
assistants so no one would be put out of a job oh I meant like the hair the person taking the
appointment at the hair place oh granted they probably cut hair too but like bigger companies
you know if you're if you're writing a lot of calls or something you might that might be a full
time job you know we probably could have staffed one less person at the pizzeria worked at through
college if there wasn't somebody having to answer phones because that person would also do other
stuff but since there was a lot as we didn't take online orders because it was mom pop shop and they
liked to be you know in the 1990s they did it all over the phone so if that could also be done
with a robot there would probably be one less person on staff so whatever that means that's
an externality but that's just progress and that's we're gonna lose more and more jobs until
either we all starve death in the streets or our raiding the razor wire compounds of the
middle of the trillionaires or something else happens yeah so that's that's just gonna happen
in the meantime and I think my vote is enjoy your robot and enjoy not having to talk to people as
much as possible excellent I do have one other thing let's sort of a rat chat thingy okay oh
yes okay uh so the uh one of our friends recently posted on facebook the uh her problem with family
movies that every family movie starts out with a young person is in an abusive family that won't
let them listen to music or won't let them marry the person they want to marry or something
so young person leaves the abusive family and gets to go and be an individual and do their thing
and the abusive family eventually says look we'll let you come back into our family and
they can have this one thing and the young person goes okay that's great and so they've won that one
little battle and they come right back to the abusive family and everything is great forever
and that's just a horrible moral qualifier family movie they mean movies about families
or like family movies like movies a whole family can get behind and watch movie whole family can
get behind and watch I can't think of a single movie that follows that premise other than like
Cinderella and she doesn't go back to the family does she the the ones that were brought up were
Coco and Brave oh I don't see either of those okay okay so that's fine I'm sure it's I'll take that
point as given but I can't I didn't know this was a common trope I don't I don't know how it's
moderately common hold on a second I only see superhero movies so that is not the case in any
super well let me go through them all really quick nope none okay with a vague except oh wait
shit no that doesn't count Thor 1 doesn't count his family wasn't abusive he was being a dick
okay all right hold on can you give me just one second yeah do you think all right while
Enos browses Facebook and succumbs to his life in the computer um I will point out my two ratchats
which are super ripoff I'm gonna just I'll link to them in this uh Scott Alexander's review for
12 rules of life by Jordan Peterson and um Paul Graham's uh why nerds are unpopular
which already made notes to include in the uh description here but the Paul Graham one was
one that Zeke wrote in about and uh I read that this week and if you're a fast reader it'll probably
take 15 minutes uh Zeke which is the time that Zeke quoted me if you're me it'll take you almost
an hour so um I don't know what my problem is I read really slow so all right well did you find
it I did all right okay her summary is family movie young person my family is trying to violate my
autonomy forcing me into a marriage forbidding me from enjoying music etc I will rebel young
person's rebellion leads to exciting but stressful adventure young person I miss my family I was wrong
to rebel now that I realize I love my family more than anything I will sacrifice my autonomy and be
a good family member family now that you've accepted our dominance over you we've conveniently
learned our lesson about letting you be your own person you may play music or choose your own spouse
or whatever happy ending so I am thinking of something that vaguely follows the trope I saw
how to train your dragon when it was new so I have no idea how long ago that was a long time
and from what I remember the dad's name on that he was this big hulking figure played by Leonidas
what was the actor's name um Russell Crowe no uh it was uh Drard Butler oh you're right there yeah
yeah sorry I was nope it's very rare that I get to call somebody out on an actor because I'm really
bad at knowing non-aventures so anyway so Leonidas was you know big powerful voice his son's name
was hiccup and the whole thing was you know hiccup was a small puny kid they're all Vikings and he's
giving them a hard time then he goes off and finds and tames this super badass dragon and then he's
popular and then cool stuff happens in the movie it's actually kind of fun I should probably
rewatch it I also haven't seen the Incredibles speaking of kids movies I need to watch Incredibles
was really good that's the unanimous thing I've heard I haven't avoided it I just never got around
to it and now the sequel's coming out 11 years later and it's about time so yeah the Incredibles
definitely does not follow that trope because that one's not about a young person it's more about
the dad than anything so we'll have to ask our friend uh if how to train your dragon follows
this recipe so maybe the closest I have but if it sounds like what what they were describing
they go off and have their adventure and self actualize a little bit and then they come back
and the family's also grown and learns to accept them it's not like they're going back and putting
back on the shackles right yeah they're just saying hey you got you know I'm better now and I've
shown that I could do without you and they're like you know what you're right but would you
deign to be with us again and we'll treat you like a person so that sounds like a good outcome
so what was their what was their issue here well uh their issue was that the young person has to
start believing they're not entitled to autonomy and then come um before the before the family
uh before the family starts coming around to the fact that maybe they are like the young person
has to be like uh my autonomy wasn't that great because I miss you guys and only then does the
family start thinking well maybe we can give you a little bit maybe I should see one of these
other movies but I do like the heavy chest and autonomy because I know that this this was a
previous guest and I I think it was Shelly she said the message is that uh a good person lets
their family own them but a good family is a little nicer about how they own their people
and and I mean my thought on that was that yeah I mean that's true and that's a great way of putting
it but uh you know the thing is a lot of people don't think of because this person that we had on
as a guest is very much into the individualism and autonomy you know but a lot of people don't
think that way about humans they think more about as collections of people you know and so the family
unit is is more like a single organism and like one one person is really upset that's like an
organ is failing right and the person leaves the family and then the whole the whole organism is
hurting and it's a story about how the organism comes back and learns to to be healed to reincorporate
the organ and everyone is one again and together and happy because there was something out of
whack with the body before and now the body is fixed and that's why it's a happy ending and our
friend just very much disagrees with this sort of issue on very personal very personal grounds
but it reminded me of this fantastic rationalist article on ribbon farm that I read a while ago
so I went and reread it and that is my rat pick for this week or my rat chat topic the name of the
article is minimum viable superorganism and it talks a bit about superorganisms like the Catholic
church and the US military and like the amazing things that they can do when people all work together
we did we this this was shelly we had her on episode 34 and maybe another at some point I can't
remember that sounds right who knows yeah anyway so the we talked about I think I'm sure autonomy
came up at some point that episode because that's something that I that she talks about a lot and
I think it's she has a really powerful take on it I think it's interesting and I really admire it
yeah I like shelly and like her viewpoints totally but the the minimum viable superorganism
basically said we can do these amazing things when we work as a single organism and how how
does this happen let us investigate how this works and so they they thought do people coordinate
because of like a strong man forcing everyone to work together that doesn't really work in
fact one of the first um ways that super organisms you know got together was to overthrow tyrants
people who are trying to impose their will just by being strong uh what about uh everyone gets
together and says we must all do these things for our common good and the problem with that is
always the free rider problem the one person who doesn't do anything still gets all the benefit
and uh when it comes down to it everyone can do that and if nothing gets done at all
so why is it that selfish individuals motivated you know for their own self-interest
still get together and manage to work as single organisms that benefit everyone in the end and
what the propose and which I think is I've seen echoed elsewhere too and which I really
like as a take is that nature or evolution azathoth came up with an incredible hack
which works really well being that we don't consider it work to admire people and praise them
like when we see someone really fucking awesome like Thor or Captain America or someone we really
admire now you're speaking my language yeah we want to go up to them and we were like dude you
are badass I want to hang around with you can I like buy you a drink or something or just like
you know I do it doesn't feel like work to praise people right you want to like praise people that
you really admire and likewise uh being admired like that is an amazing payment it feels really
good and so people will do things for the common good because it feels good to get that praise
and people don't consider it work to praise people because it feels good to do that
and that is just the hack that nature invented that uh social in this article they call it social
prestige in other articles I've heard it called um crap something similar but just the or status
prestige just the fact that admiration is how we pay people is what helps people work together
and which is also I think a reason we should try to focus a little more on in-person communities
because it's really easy to admire people in person face to face it's much harder to do it
over the internet well it's easy to scream into it's easy to say it and no one hears it right so
like you know we're talking about Yudkowski earlier you know Harris or some people with Peterson
you know they don't know that you exist they're they're glad that you exist and they're happy
that you like their stuff but like they don't hear your praise personally sometimes maybe whatever
but right you know you tell your friends you appreciate them that you like the stuff they do
but I yeah it pays them off they like it and you know you get to feel good about being able to
express how you feel is that what you're getting at yeah there's certain artists that I absolutely
love and who will never know that and I mean that's that's one of the shitty things about writing
is that you basically get no feedback ever you know you're like did people love this did it touch
anyone's life I don't know and that's not entirely true I have gotten a few emails and god I treasure
those so much because they are the best but for the most part you just have no idea and that's why
I think it'd be better for people to see each other in real space much more often because then you
can you know show that appreciation for each other and and build those bonds which I think is how
super organisms manage to exist and why it's sort of society is coming apart a bit at the seams
because we don't see each other in person nearly as much anymore and we cannot pay that same
praise to each other and get the payment of praise that we used to get if we're just interacting
online like a like on facebook or an upvote in reddit is not the same thing as someone coming
up to you like with an admiring look in their eye and being like dude that was really awesome what
you did last week or man thanks for helping with building that wall it's a great thing the lions
aren't eating our children right now that's true and the people who slack off they don't get that
praise so they you know there isn't that much of a free rider problem yeah sure they still get the
wall around their house but everyone's like yeah that's the fucking slacker that didn't do anything
screw him we're not giving him a beer and and so that the payment problem takes care of itself
I like that that's that's something to think about yeah it's a great article no that's not
cool I look forward to reading it makes a point about you know the mice came up with this great
idea in an old story that they they could stop the cat from eating them if someone would just
hang a bell over the mouse's neck or someone just hang a bell over the cat's neck and they
could hear it whenever it came up you know and then all of my slipped each other like yeah but
who's gonna put the bell on the cat's neck and no one wants to do that but as more as the cat
eats more and more mice and this becomes more of an issue maybe some young mouse with not much to
lose but really wanting all the glory and potential hot mouse pussy that comes with being the guy who
hung the bell on the cat is going to take that risk because you know pull it off maybe be the hero
probably get eaten but maybe be the hero yeah all right I like it yeah so that was that was my
article we'll link it on the the show love it yeah for sure not my personal article my article that
I enjoyed your pick yes you got it your your rationality chat yeah chatter oh I should totally
also mention the author of that thing as we speak about praise that was posted on ribbon on ribbon
farm by Kevin Simler Kevin you wrote a great article why don't know that name
he had to beat up two burglars that were trying to rob his house while he was left
home alone on Christmas one year he was just a kid at the time so they oh yeah that rings a bell
I don't know that's that was Kevin McAllister damn it from home alone which reminds me Donald
Trump was in the second home alone movie very briefly I remember did you hear a story Daniels
described their sexual encounter I can't wait to hear it she so you know she's getting sick and
tired of people just constantly focusing on the sex part and someone asks her so like what did
what did you and Donald do she's like well oh she spanked him with a time magazine of this face or
the not a maximum time what with a magazine of this face on it right well I mean in this particular
interview she was like well I asked him you know do you want to act out one of my movies because
that's what most people want to do is like no you probably act out your movies all the time
let's act out one of my movies and so she went up to him and she said hey mister where can I find
the the room or whatever Kevin's line was you know and he leaned over me and he said you just go
down that hallway take your second door on the left then he turned around and walked away and I never
saw him again that's amazing yeah and that was his big sexual fantasy with Stormy Daniels wow
okay well I'm glad I know that um I I feel bad for not remembering Kevin similar was the co-author
of The Elephant in the Brain oh that's Kevin that's Kevin similar that's the one fucking A
that was the uh yeah that was him well he's he's a good writer of things cool well I'm glad to hear
that he's writing stuff and and doing I liked The Elephant in the Brain sorry hands are Robin
a lot more than like Robin's uh OG writing mm-hmm Robin is kind of inaccessible to me he it's dense
it's hard and it doesn't energetically bridge that inferential distance that Utkowski does
that said it's full of awesome content but you have to be like you know you have to have you
have the sense that you have to be as smart as Robin to enjoy it and I don't have that so like
I or you need someone who's really good at communicating like Kevin similar yeah
it was a good team yeah um so sweet all right cool shall we thank people yes cool first of all
as always thanks to Kyle Moore our sound engineer shout out to Kyle what what and would you like
to do the thinking of the person this week sorry I don't have it ready Inyosh keeps the list
on his computer so I do I get I know like I see the names on patreon but I remember sometimes the
last person we talked to and never remember the rest so yeah shout out to Pen Long
for supporting us on patreon makes a huge difference and it does we feel appreciated it's
it's almost like people like us and if you can't support that's cool you can always leave a review
on iTunes or just tell one of your friends that you think might be interested in it yeah and you
know like I said don't give a lot you know there's there's a lot of things that you can't give money
to it helps to keep the lights on helps to keep the show going but like don't be like oh where can
I budget this in if you have to think of how you're gonna budget it in don't yeah that said
speaking of patreon this conversation went on for almost three hours three and a half maybe
no not that long not all of it is going on the episode so almost three hours some yeah almost
three hours so some section of this will go to patreon's only so trying to give some exclusive
content nothing that's gonna be like really you know be a huge you know pay to access the good
stuff kind of thing yeah but if you like the stuff that you heard near the beginning yeah there's
more of that that's on this exactly thank you I wanted to say that all right I'm glad I came back
to me I circled off the air for like 30 seconds to remember that so all right cool thank you to
David Greer for composing our intro music and to the someriki project for composing our outro music
all right I'm all set okay um all right thanks everyone oh yeah if you want to interact send
us feedback you can email us the email is on our website or you can post directly on the website
the basinconspiracy.com and we have the
