Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky.
I'm Stephen Zuber, and today we have a special guest from, well, Inyash want to introduce
our guest.
Yes, our guest is Andres Gomez Emilsson.
And Andres is with us today from the Kualya Research Institute.
I apparently have a tradition of once a year I meet someone at Burning Man and then I have
to have them on as a guest because they're doing something really interesting.
And this year it is Andres.
So welcome to the show.
Excellent, thank you so much for having me.
Now before we start, when I heard that you were at the Kualya Research Institute, I was
very confused because in my, as far as I know, Kualya is the, an abstract concept, right?
It's like the quality of what an experience feels like.
Right.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, like one way I tend to define it is, yeah, basically like the raw way in which
experience presents itself, even, you know, like even before we give it a name or even
before we do something with the experience, just the way in which it feels like the blueness
of blue.
And I mean, I think like the first moment, yeah, yeah, it's kind of like when you were
a kid and maybe you're one bird, like, is the blue that I see the same blue that others
see?
So like that's, like that quality would be the quality of blue that you can't describe
to others.
Right.
That's, that's what I always heard.
And I mean, after a while I figured it wasn't worth thinking about too much.
They're probably more or less the same blue unless you're colorblind or something.
But like, it always seemed to me an abstract concept, like, like a Udill or something, like
not something that actually exists in the world.
There's, you know, neurons firing in the brain, which, which corresponds to wavelengths
sitting my retina, but there's not like, there's no actual blueness in the same way
that there's no actual platonic form of a chair, right?
Or, or am I thinking about things completely wrong?
What now?
I said, you're not denying that you're not denying the existence of quality.
Are you?
You don't, you have experiences, right?
I am kind of denying the existence as a, like, as I don't know, I, apparently I have a misunderstanding
of what qualia is because, or are you denying it as scientifically investigatable?
Yeah.
So that's why I was like, what am I misunderstanding here?
What is, are you using qualia in a different way or am I wrong about something?
I mean, that's a, that is a great question.
I mean, like the, the term qualia is definitely controversial in philosophy of mind.
And it's an incredibly confusing term.
However, I think it kind of like a qualia centric view of, of the world in a sense like
grounds meaning in a way that nothing else does.
So when you, you can try to, in a sense, like ground, like meaning, like kind of like, what
is it that we're actually talking about when we talk about things, you can try to ground
it in the outside world.
And in which case, yes, you might be concerned about, Hey, there's no, there's no actual,
you know, like platonic chair anywhere.
Chairs don't, don't really exist.
They, they are kind of like this aggregate, you know, they, they may be functionally distinct,
but they don't kind of like have a existence of their own.
And if you kind of like start with that kind of ontology, then yes, like qualia will sound
like an extraordinarily abstract and diffuse concept with no kind of like a ground truth.
But you can also kind of like start from the complete opposite end and say, well, my experience
is the one thing that I am certain exists and its properties present themselves.
And they are the, in a sense, like the one thing that I know what it feels like.
I don't know how you may experience the world and I don't know how like a pig or maybe an
AI might experience the world, but I certainly know what my visual field looks like and what
it feels like.
And in a sense, like you can reconstruct what meaning is in terms of qualia, such that in
a sense, whenever we talk about the external world is a roundabout way about to talk about
our inner experience.
So yeah, that's kind of like a different, different paradigm for how to, how to approach
meaning and is the one I tend to resonate with.
So it's a, it's a, you're using that as a way to measure meaning in life?
Right.
So like what do things actually mean?
So is there ever like any hope of referring to anything that isn't ultimately grounded
in experience?
I mean, like if you were to talk about like, you know, like an abstract entity, but whose
properties never, never are experienced in any way, shape or form.
What is it really that we're talking about?
On the other hand, if let's say you describe a play and you say that, hey, like I really
like the, the lighting, I really liked how, you know, the sounds emphasize the emotions
of the characters.
See, in a sense, you can make sense of what you're saying in terms of how the play affected
your experience.
So in a way, whenever we talk about something in as much as talking about it is meaningful,
that's because it influences the quality of our experiences.
I don't know if this, this makes sense or resonates in any way.
No, I think it does to me.
I think what you're, if I'm not reading too much into this, that meaning comes from the
experience of conscious things that there's, that it's not meaning, like rocks don't have
meaningful experiences because they don't have experiences at all.
Kind of the difference between like a Roomba and a House Elf, you know, one just does things
as a robot without any quality at all, whereas the House Elf from Harry Potter, and I use
that because it's like a Roomba, clean your house while having experience of doing so
and can have fun or not doing it, right?
Right.
Yeah.
And I mean, in a sense, like I am generally of the mindset that if anything matters in
the universe, it will come down to whether the states of consciousness in the universe
are something that we find valuable or not.
It seems kind of like hard, hard to define like what it would be for something to even
mean something if nobody experiences it or anybody has, nobody has like an actual representation
of it.
Right.
Hmm.
I have always felt basically the same way that without, without conscious life, nothing
has any value at all, not because it is, you know, bad or anything, it just conscious
beings are what give value to to the universe.
That's right.
Yes.
And I mean, that's a, yeah, that's kind of like a consciousness focused ethics.
And I mean, it's definitely controversial, but I would, I would pretty solidly.
Wait, wait, wait.
Yeah.
It's controversial.
It actually, it actually is to some extent, there is some people who question it.
I, I do have some friends and I know of some philosophers who, who would say things such
as that if you imagine a universe that, you know, there's nobody in there, there's no
sense in being in there, but there are like these incredible, beautiful crystals and worlds
with, you know, like magma fountains and like awesome incredible things that they are, they're
not sure that that, that that is valueless, even though nobody experiences it.
Whereas to me, it's, it's crazy to think that they could, that it could possibly have any
value at all.
If there's like nobody there.
I mean, the only, the only reason the thought experiment has any value is because we're
like thinking about how beautiful those crystals and magma flows are, right?
Right.
If we weren't thinking about them, they would have no value at all.
That's right.
Yes.
It's almost kind of like the value of that world comes from the fact that it makes us
imagine pretty pictures, but not from its intrinsic existence.
Yeah.
I had, I did not realize there were people that felt otherwise.
That seems like a very strange position to take.
Stephen, are you, how do you feel about this?
I don't think I've ever asked you.
I think it's clear that I agree with you guys that, I mean, there's nothing, you know, if
the universe is full of beautiful crystals and magma rivers and whatever, it's like,
that's only pretty imagery because it's pretty imagery for us to imagine.
It might as well be a universe of just rocks.
I think the only way that has any value whatsoever is if it's like our universe pre-life, right?
Where the universe churns enough to build some self-replicating molecules that eventually
start caring about the universe.
I think it's not the much people think that, at least in my understanding of this position,
I don't think that it's, that people think that this is super valuable or desirable,
just that it's better than nothing.
And I guess, to me, it's about tantamount to nothing, right?
Yeah.
The universe no lights on might as well not exist, but I guess if I had to pick between,
you know, creating universe with, you know, or I guess not creating universe and creating
universe with just cool rocks, then I'd choose the second one.
But that's probably just my taste and has nothing to do with what actually matters.
Yeah.
You're just choosing that one because it would give you something to do to create a universe
with rocks.
Yeah, exactly.
So, so what do you do at the Kuali Institute?
I'm curious about what, I don't want to take us off this derailment, but I want to, since
we do have a limited amount of time, I'm really curious about what the Kuali Institute, Kualia
Research Institute does and what your role is there and that sort of thing.
Yeah, for sure.
So, I mean, I think like the discussion we are having, it's a, it's a wonderful kind
of like way of kind of like warming us up to, to actually what the Kuali Research Institute
is.
And the reason is that, yes, I mean, if you have a kind of like a consciousness centric
theory of value and of meaning, and you take that to heart, you come to the conclusion
that in a sense, the most effective way of actually improving the world would be to improve
our experiences.
And I mean, it's definitely the case that a lot of, you know, like interventions in
the world, either via charities or, you know, even, even like in the profit sector, that
all of those work to improve the world because they improve people's experiences.
I mean, definitely not, not having malaria, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a big improvement
on, on having it in terms of, you know, your experiences, the fact that you're likely to,
to continue to leave and yeah, just like not, not suffering, suffering needlessly.
But then when, when it comes to, you know, like trying to solve the problem in, in a
big scale, you will, you will have to come to terms with the fact that there's a very
big part of suffering that it's fairly independent from the actual external environment and kind
of the, the configuration of the world.
And I think like there's maybe the best example for, for these has to do with people who are
genetically predisposed to, to be depressed or have a high levels of anxiety.
I mean, we, we know by now that there are specific genes that modulate things like pain
thresholds.
If you have a one of the variants of the NCN9A gene that basically reduces your pain
threshold, you end up having a very miserable existence where you are in pain all the time,
but also you're in psychological distress all the time.
On the other hand, there's also other variants of the gene where you, you have a higher pain
threshold and people who, who have that variant tend to be very happy and successful in, in
the, in the modern world at the very least.
And, and then there's like people who have another variant that basically eliminates
pain completely.
And, and that is a maladaptive variant because people who, who have it don't tend to have
a very high life expectancy because they, they, they, I mean, they bump into things
and they get hurt all the time without realizing it.
But it does seem to be the case that having a higher pain threshold, all else being equal
tends to drastically improve the quality of people's lives.
And it's, it's, it's things like that, that, that suggests in a sense that in a sense like
the bulk of suffering can be explained in, in terms of it being evolutionarily advantageous
in the ancestral environment and also being to a large extent genetically determined.
And, and with, with that kind of insight, really trying to do in a sense like surgery
into our experiences to, to improve them seem to be a much more effective way of improving
the world than just like changing our environment.
So, yes, that's kind of like,
So do you mean, do you mean things like giving people, I don't know, Soma or equivalent sort
of drugs just to make them feel happier or what, what does, what does this sort of surgery
entail?
Right.
One important thing is to remain economically useful and also to remain in a sense capable
of reproducing and continuing to, to pass on pro-social patterns into the world.
And that in a sense like rules out any kind of intervention that's, that just generates
a uniform happiness.
Gotcha.
Yeah.
So we're, we're not interested in, in Soma for, for that reason or, or in a sense like
a lot of kind of like recreational agents that, you know, can be used as proofs of concept
for what kind of states of consciousness we may have in the future.
A lot of them like are not very promising.
I mean, things such as hard opioids or hard stimulants, they don't have a very good psychological
effect on people.
I mean, it makes them very dysfunctional in one way or another.
But if you look at, for example, states of consciousness, like those induced by MDMA,
you will realize that, Hey, like this is a state of consciousness that is both more
pleasant and also more pro-social.
And in a sense, it doesn't drastically disrupt your preference architecture.
I mean, like there are some people, you know, who will take MDMA and just lay on the couch
and just do nothing.
But for most people, it makes them very sociable and, and one, two, in a sense interact with
the world and gives them this feeling that they love the world and the world loves them.
And, and it's a, yeah, it's a drastic improvement, at least relative to the quality of experiencing.
It doesn't come with kind of the, the functional cost of just, you know, kind of like wire
heading or just being a couch potato the rest of your life.
So that's, that's the sort of states of consciousness that we, we are very interested in figuring
out how to replicate in a healthy and sustainable way so that we can have them whenever we need
them.
I can attest from personal experience, of course, I'm saying this disclaimer that I've
never tried drugs.
That's, you know, but if the FDA ever asks, I've never tried drugs.
But if I had tried drugs, MDMA definitely works like you described.
And I think one thing that it doesn't do is make me want to go to, go to work and sit
at my desk.
Right.
So it's, it's disruptive to my preference order in that on a mild enough dose to actually
enjoy it.
But I, I'm not trying to say I should have organized this thought.
It just up some of my preferences in that the idea of going to work for eight hours and
earning enough money to keep the lights on doesn't sound super appealing.
You just want to hang out and talk and be social and be connected with people.
But it does violate some of your other preferences, like that, you know, to stay, you know, housed
and clothed.
Right.
But I guess what you're saying is that this isn't, this isn't the end state you're trying
to, to give people this is an example of a kind of thing that is closer to the bullseye
than something that makes you just, I think, orgasmium is the term that occasionally comes
up in, in the, in the literature on this side.
So you're not just laying around in total bliss, please start with that, that's a happy,
you know, blob, but you're, you're able to have goals and interaction and stuff.
Okay.
That's what you're saying.
I didn't mean to be real.
I'm just trying to keep up.
No, that's, that's, that's exactly right.
I mean, yes.
And I mean, MDMA is like states of consciousness or just proofs of concept.
Definitely you want to be able to modulate as well, things such as, you know, like the
level of motivation and also very crucially is your time horizons.
I mean, the, something that empirically MDMA does, does seem to do is that it makes people
feel that kind of like the, they're immediate kind of like bubble of reality, like everything
that's only within, you know, like 10 feet around them.
It's kind of like the, the thing that is actually real and they treat it as such.
So they may not be very concerned about, you know, when, when they get retired or, you
know, not being fired from, from, from, from one's job and, and so on.
But, but I think, yeah, all of those are tweakable parameters.
And yes, the, this is just a proof of concept for now.
Yeah.
I liked that a lot.
I think that, that's fine.
That's what I was looking for.
That's a good proof of concept of saying, look, there are states of consciousness that are
desirable and it's the sort of kind of thing.
Okay.
I do.
I perfect.
Hit that beat for a second.
Yes.
So is the first step trying to figure out what these states are?
Right.
Like what they look like?
Yes.
Okay.
Let me say kind of a two, two kind of like very broad introductory aspects to the Higualia
Research Institute.
So yeah, I mean, like the, the, the first aspect is basically what are kind of like the very
broad things that we do and objectives.
I mean, the, the very first one is foundational research on consciousness with a special
emphasis on the pleasure pain axis to figure out basically what makes an experience positive
or negative or mixed or, or neutral.
The second thing that we do is generate technology.
I mean, that would have, I mean, we definitely don't, don't use anything illegal, but we
are interested in interventions such as Michael Persinger's, the God helmet, basically these
sort of electromagnetic pulses that can target brain areas and produce interesting states
of consciousness in fairly, fairly reliable ways.
But, but yeah, we're very interested in consciousness technologies.
And finally, we're interested in community building.
We think the really, the really is a need for kind of like a broader community of people
who are thinking in terms of, you know, paradise engineering via transforming our consciousness
in a, in a reliable way and sustainable way with, with technology.
Now in the first, first aspect, kind of like what is like the foundational, you know, foundational
consciousness research there as well, I would say subdivided into three things.
So the first one is defined a state space of consciousness.
I mean, that is basically mapping out what is the set of all possible experiences that
exist.
I mean, obviously this is a insanely ambitious task and I don't think we will be done in
thousands of years, but somebody has to start it.
I mean, there's like some projects that have a related interests, but I think like having
like an ambitious goal, kind of like a wiki consciousness where we map out the entire
state space is a, is very good.
It kind of like pushes us in the right direction.
This wouldn't, wouldn't different, oh, sorry, wouldn't different people's experiences of
the same things be different, though, and so lead to different, different maps, right?
So the range of possible experiences that are accessible to a given human will definitely
be a subset of the, of the range of conscious experiences that are possible in the, in the
abstract.
So, and I mean, that kind of like gets, you can nest that in a sense by, by then like
looking at the range of experiences that a person sober can access versus the range of
experiences the same person on psychedelics can access and, and so on and so forth.
What we're interested in is kind of like the broader state space of consciousness.
And I mean, there's reason to, to believe that at least like some simple experiences
and I mean, we can, we could go into what I mean by, by a simple experience, but there's
like a lot of low information experiences that I suspect that basically many different
people can experience it and it will be very, very similar across, across people.
And if you have like different brains, as long as you can emulate that particular low
information experience is going to be basically the same.
I don't know if that
Is that something like seeing the color red?
Yeah, I mean, imagine like an experience could be one where your entire visual field
is covered with red and all of your attention or at least like 90% of your attention is
focused on the quality of your visual field.
So yeah, like that's, I mean, that, that is like sufficiently simple that you don't get
this combinatorial explosion where the unique features of your brain kind of like show up
and then, then okay, yes, unique experiences that others are never going to be able to
have, except you will appear, but, and yeah, I mean, that this definitely gets complicated
by the fact that people's brains are different, I mean, in all sorts of ways, I mean, as,
as I mentioned, like people's genes, whether they have the SCN9A gene will make their
experience of pain very different, let alone, I'm sure there's like very huge differences
in terms of like what kind of smells are accessible to you and what kind of the way in which emotions
feel, which is different from, from person to person and, and definitely how you react
to, to psychedelics. I mean, LSD is very unlikely to be the same drug from, from one person
to, to another, just in terms of, I mean, just considering that something like LSD affects
20 different neurotransmitters, receptor types, and then people's have different concentrations
for those receptor types. And yes, so the same drug is probably very different for, for
each individual. And, and so on. So yeah, it's a, it's a huge combinatorial explosion of
possible experiences.
Do you have like a quick, a quick reply to the, the philosophical skeptic who would say, Oh, you
can't know if my experience of red is like yours. I have one in mind, but I'm curious what your
kind of reply would be.
Yeah, yeah, go ahead.
Just to that, to that, to that, oh, I mean, yeah, to that general philosophical opposition, I would
just point out that, you know, if I'm looking at a red, you know, a picture of a red square, and
you're looking at a picture of a red square, we're both seeing so many of the same things, and
we're built on architecture that is so close to identical, that it's almost like the burden of
proof is on them to demonstrate that it would, that we should expect it to be radically different.
Right. Well, I think that, I mean, that, that is a very, very deep subject. And I think like, I
agree that, given our genetic makeup and the similarity of our genes and brain architecture, that
yes, in a sense, the burden proof would be there. But there's also like pretty strong reasons to
believe that some of our kind of like core sensory qualia do differ from one person to another.
Let's take like the simple example of how cilantro is perceived by different people. And we find
that, yeah. Oh, so maybe you're, you're one of the unlucky ones. So yeah, I believe it's
a, but there's an argument that you know, she's having a different experience than I am when we
have cilantro. So it's, in that, in that sense, we can pinpoint the difference in our architecture
that that explains why he likes it. Or I guess we can point to the cause of that difference, because
we know what gene he has, or he doesn't have that I have or vice versa. Yes. We don't know, maybe
yet, how that's manifested exactly in the level of the brain. But it's, I don't know, I feel like
that's a different kind of example than two people looking at a red square.
Right. Well, here's another, I agree. So it's somewhat different. But here's the thing, like, you
could have different qualia relative to a stimuli. For one of several reasons. I mean, one of them is
that the receptor types are different. I mean, definitely people who are colorblind, because
they like, they lack a particular color receptor, like that's, that's pretty clear, like why their
experience is different. And, and for, for a lot of people who are colorblind, arguably, simply
giving their eyes, this additional photo receptor would allow them to actually experience the rest
of the colors, because they, they have the the appropriate hardware in the visual cortex to do
so. But then there are also people who are colorblind, because the neuronal channels between
the retina and the visual cortex are damaged, or they're different. But then there's also people
who are colorblind, because the areas in the visual cortex that that represent color are damaged,
or, or might be different. And what I would say is that there's one kind of a kind of like one
possibility, which is like the case where it's called the inverted spectrum thought experiment,
which is that, in a sense, like for you, what, what maps to red, actually in me maps to the green.
And for you, what maps to blue for me maps to yellow and vice versa. And the problem here is
that basically the color wheel is simply rotated 180 degrees. And, and, and that's a very, very
subtle difference and very hard to actually describe, because the relationship between every
color in terms of like the geometry of the space of possible colors remains the same. I mean,
basically this right, this rotation prevents you from from saying like, hey, like I, maybe your
green is different than mine, because I know that, you know, like yellow, yellowish green is more
similar to yellow than it is to green. And you can make arguments like that. But if the color
wheel is essentially just rotated 180 degrees, all of those relationships, we will stay the same.
Yeah, but you could never prove that in any way or test it in any way, right?
You can. Here is a couple of a couple of possibilities. I mean, like one of them
is we figure out what precise gene expression in the neurons in the visual cortex that I mean,
it's basically called the other color region in the individual cortex. What is the precise gene
expression in there that creates the particular protein structures with a secondary tertiary and
protein structure that leads to, let's say, phenomenal red. In that case, you would be able,
at least by basing on your first person experience, to say, hey, like I know that this particular
protein structure is necessary for my experience of red, and you don't have it. More so, if I
inject it directly into your brain, or in a sense, like I make your neurons express it,
all of a sudden, you gain these new qualia, and you're able to talk about it and it's novel for
you. I think like a scenario like that would be one with, which would provide extraordinary
evidence to show that a person wasn't able to experience red before. I mean, that's one case
which has to do with basically finding the biochemical underpinnings of different qualia
varieties. There's also the case of mind melding, which is much more even further into kind of the
territory of science fiction. But I mean, just as we know, there's like some twins, the Hogan
sisters, that basically they share a thalamic bridge. They're conjoined twins and the thalamus
in their brains basically is bridged together such that they essentially share kind of like an
extended thalamus across two different brains, and they're able to experience each other's
qualia. I mean, they're still too young for us to really understand what their experience feels
like, but it seems like a thalamic bridge that basically unifies your experience and my experience
so that we are, in a sense, one entity with two brains. Then we would be able to actually compare,
like, hey, like, how is the the neurons in your brain that represent color? How do they map
to the neurons in my brain that represent color? And are we experiencing, you know, like a
inverted spectrum scenario or not? And I think, yeah, I honestly suspect that
if we do come to the point where we can do reversible thalamic bridges, mind melding,
that we will have a bunch of surprises that actually our experiences are probably more
different than that we suspect. I'm having a hard time imagining that though, because
we both see the same wavelength of light on a like on a flower. And even if they're like experience
of that color is different, the it would be, you know, stimulating the same neurons in my brain
that are stimulated by that color, right? By by that wavelength. Right. Well, okay. So like,
here's how how it would actually play out. So imagine that our brains are connected via
a thalamic bridge. And also kind of like, take too hard to the idea that what these does is
is not in the sense that it just provides kind of like a, you know, telepathy communication
channel between us. It's, it's a much stronger change. It would be something like, all of a
sudden, there is like one entity that has two visual fields, two sensory, two sensory fields
related to the body, and all faction and so on. But it's still the same unified consciousness is
like one one entity with two visual fields. So how you could do this is basically,
in a sense, you have my face looking at the flower and you have your face looking at the flower.
The way wavelengths of light are affecting four different eyes, in a sense, but those eyes are
connected to two different visual cortex. And then you would be able to basically look at these two
visual fields at once, and see how does the flower look in one of them, and how does the flower look
in the other one? And do they look the same? So that's, that's how it would happen. I mean,
it would be crazy because it would be, it wouldn't really be me or you, but it would be this unified
entity with both of our brains. They couldn't be all that different, though, because we both
interact with the same world, and we can, you know, talk about things and manipulate objects
and understand each other. So I mean, there's, there's an outside world that binds us all together.
That's right. But it could be, I mean, it could be a, one of those differences, like the inverted
spectrum scenario, where the blue for you is, is a yellow for me. So the flower looks blue in
one visual field and looks yellow in a different, in the other visual field. Does that make sense?
Sort of. Do you, do you remember that like blue or gold dress thing that went around a few years
ago? Yes, I believe that's, I mean, that's, that's related. That's related. But, but yes, I know the
phenomenon that has more to do with things such as like the, the, how the, the actual retina
processes the, the information. And, and presumably to some extent, how your, your brain decides
how it's inferring the environment. I believe that like, if, if the light, if your brain inferred
that the picture was taking a high light condition, then it, it saw it in a particular color.
If it inferred that it was in a low light condition, it saw it in a different color.
So I think like what was different from one person to another in that visual illusion had to do with
how the brain is making inferences about the context of that light, of that dress, where the dress
picture was taken. But I mean, it is related and like, but the thing is like, you could,
you could still have like an inverted spectrum scenario and that, and that illusion wouldn't
really give you much of an insight into it. There is a, I mean, like one, another kind of like
important fact about the world that kind of like ups my, my, my suspicion that our experiences are
like much more different than we believe is, is the fact that synesthesia exists. I mean, you,
you do have a whole bunch of people who represent auditory stimuli with a phenomenal color and,
and they can have complex visual experiences based on sound. I mean, usually it's kind of like,
they actually do experience sound qualia, like they, they do experience how sound feels like to
others. And then that's appended with additional, in a sense, like decoration is kind of like a
decorated, decorated sound experience. But, but you could imagine synesthesia that is basically
just a based on replacement that rather than having auditory experiences that then get
embellished with visual experience, that maybe they just experience the visual, visual experience
with no auditory experience. And that's how they represent sound. And I mean, like the,
the main question that comes from this is like, why are we not all synesthetic? And, and our take
on that is that in a sense, we all are, we are just a functional type of synesthetic. It's kind
of like the mapping between sensory input to different qualia varieties that most people have
happens to be a mapping that is really effective for information processing.
So, like the reason why colors are used to represent wavelengths of light is not that
it has to be that way. But it's more that the organisms that do that basically are better at
representing informational features of the visual landscape. So basically using that kind of
representation is selected for. But, but yeah, I mean, I suspect you could probably rerun the
evolutionary game from, from the start. And it could very well be that by, by the time you have
intelligent creatures like us, whenever they open their eyes, they have complex auditory
experiences to represent the visual landscape. And they have like absolutely no visual qualia
that I think that's a, that would be a possibility. And that might, might be the case as well in
other species. I really enjoyed the exploration there. That made me think of a, I guess I have a
lot of thoughts, I'll try and be brief, or I'll just top a couple of them off. And I'll point out
that the auditory experience of visual phenomena was explored in the Deadpool comics and cartoon
series. They're not Deadpool. Gee, everyone does that, including me. Daredevil. So Daredevil can't
see. He doesn't get auditory, or excuse me, visual stimuli, but he gets auditory experience
that's enough for him to kind of build a visual picture, kind of like an echolocation. And I like,
that kind of struck a chord when you, or a good chord that resonated with me when you said that
we are all kind of synesthesia patients, but we're having, you know, paraphrasing, we're having
auditory experiences of auditory phenomena. Whereas with some of the synesthesia is getting
wires crossed, but you know, it doesn't, I don't know, for some reason that, that hit me on a,
on a fun note, I liked that. Yeah, that was, that was a good explanation. Yeah. But I, and I didn't
mean to get us too far field, it sounds like they aren't losing a lot of sleep at the quality
research institute over like the fundamental question that, you know, would come up in a
philosophy 101 class. But I just, I anticipated that coming up at some point in the comments,
so I wanted to make sure that we had at least addressed the point.
I mean, kind of like as a rule of thumb, we tend to take all of these, yeah, I mean, philosophy
one of one, especially philosophy of mind one on one, and where most people would be skeptical
that you can do anything with it. We, we actually think it's mostly an engineering problem to get
anywhere for these questions. Good, I think the way that scientifically thinking people should be,
should be oriented, so. So how do you do this research? Yes, so there's a, there's a few components
to this. I mean, as I mentioned, the, there's definitely just like the foundational aspect of
it. So that involves like pure philosophy of mind. I mean, that's the sort of research that
you would do at a philosophy department that, you know, you don't, you don't need a lab for that.
And in that sense, like we, we do spend a lot of that in foundational, a lot of time in foundational
philosophy of mind. Specifically, we explore a lot what we call what we call qualia formalism.
And this is the idea that consciousness will turn out to be similar to electromagnetism
in the sense that, you know, before there used to be electricity and there used to be
lightning and then magnets and compass and all of these disparate phenomena. And nobody had
any suspicion that actually they were all intimately connected into a unified, unified,
unified set of equations. But then eventually, yeah, somebody Maxwell figured out that
all of these disparate phenomena really are explained as, as different regions of a state
space procured by a set of relatively simple equations interacting together. And the same
we think is going to happen with consciousness. And I mean, in that sense, we are kind of like
very close to other, other research labs and philosophy, philosophers like Giulio Tononi,
who really take consciousness seriously, but, but more so, they also try to attack the problems of
consciousness with a mathematical foundation, where they actually tried to figure out what are
the equations that underlie consciousness. But so, I mean, and all of that obviously involves,
you know, reading a lot of articles and books and synthesizing them and
seeing, seeing how they can be squared with a qualia formalism as a philosophy. But then
there's also the experimental side. So specifically, sorry, go ahead.
Real quick, before we get into the experimental side, because I definitely want to hear about
that too. But what, what do these equations describe? Do you have any, any ideas yet? Like,
do they describe neurotransmitters or functioning or what? What is the right mathematics pointing
at? That's right. Yes. So something like IIT integrated information theory developed by
Giulio Giulio Tononi, like they what those equations ultimately map to is basically ways
of quantifying the ways in which a systems behavior can or cannot be modularized. By that,
I mean that whether the next state of a given system requires you to take into account
the entire system, or whether you can basically break down the system into subcomponents and then
estimate what the next state of each of those components is going to be and then
just aggregate the results. So they have a, the math for what they call integrated information.
And then they have a metaphysical claim, which is that they associate integrated
information with consciousness. I mean, if you look at those equations, equations, they're like
methods for basically taking logical propositions and then transforming them into a number that
tells you basically how interconnected or how integrated the logic is. And then you also need
like a way of transforming an actual physical system into logical propositions in order to do
this analysis. In our case, we don't specifically associate integrated information with consciousness,
but we do admire their work because basically there are people who actually are taking the
formalism of consciousness very seriously and seeing where that leads to. And in that sense,
we resonate very strongly. But in our case, what we're trying to do is transforming a brain states
into a data structure in which then you can apply equations to infer how happy or unhappy
that particular brain is. And the thing that it refers to is not actually individual brain,
sorry, individual neuron activity. It's a higher level phenomena that is called brain
connect them harmonics, which was basically championed by Selen Atasoy in 2016 in a Nature
article, where they figured out a way of taking fMRI and diffusion tensor imaging of brains
and transformed that into basically a vector that tells you the amplitude of each of the brain
harmonics. I don't know, I mean, I could get more into kind of like the details here. I can also
just like send the link to those articles. But yeah, I mean, I guess to kind of like tie it in
with your question, it's what this refers to is the amplitude of different brain harmonics,
which is basically the main electromagnetic resonant modes of our brain. So it does come down
to a physical property in this in this case, that is pretty measurable. And it's currently
been explored clinically. Okay, interesting. Are there any, are there any easily just adjustable
experimental results or predictions that are made by this kind of specific harmonic wave
paradigm? Yes, yes, we do make the prediction that I mean, broadly speaking, you will find
things such as that if you take MDMA, the brain harmonics that you will experience will be mutually
consonant. And I mean, here's where it gets, it really starts to sound a little bit kind of like
new agey. And I guess I'm not super apologetic, because I mean, even though new age paradigms
are definitely not very scientific, to the extent that they follow the intuition about how things
feel, that it can be pretty, pretty insightful or accurate. But like, you know, like this hippie
notion of you just need to find inner harmony, or you need to harmonize yourself. And like how,
like, when you have like harmonic sounds in music, that tends to be, that tends to sound good, or at
least it tends to produce emotions, as opposed to random sounds or, or white noise, which is
less emotional in general. So likewise, we suspect that your brain normally, you could think of it
as kind of an orchestra that has all sorts of different instruments. And sometimes the instruments
are playing well together. And sometimes they're not. Where each of these instruments would be
basically a brain harmonic, and a brain connected harmonic. And if you take MDMA, it would be something
like, basically telling half of the orchestra to shut up. And then the remaining part of the
orchestra to play a very simple tune that is extremely harmonic. And that that's basically
what the what MDMA is doing, but in the space of brain harmonics. And the prediction then is that
MDMA does this to human brains, in general? Yes. Yes. And whether MDMA feels euphoric,
will, will be, will be possible to be inferred by applying this, yeah, basically this consonance
equation to the set of brain harmonics. And so like, because you could take MDMA and, and, you
know, have a, not have a response, there's non responders, for example. So, of course, in,
if you're an MDMA non responder, they, they might, you know, take a blood sample and, and, and see
like higher concentrations of things like serotonin, but like that might still not really
correlate with your actual mood. So like we think like whether the MDMA is actually causing this,
this rise in mood, will be much better predicted by something like whether your brain harmonics
are consonant with each other than serotonin concentrations. And so you could, you could
measure if someone's having a good or bad trip. Yes. Yes. And there are observing harmonics,
something that you can do. Do you have instruments do that? Or are these theorized things that you
can do or in principle? It's something that has been done. And there's a few labs that, that have
done it. And we, if we, if we get enough funding, we would love to actually fund a study to do it
in one of these labs. Or what's actually most likely is to append our study with an ongoing
study that also uses MDMA. The reason why, why we, we care so much about MDMA in this particular
context is that it basically will produce the largest effect sizes. So if the theory has anything
going for it, we expect to see it on MDMA, whereas we, we don't necessarily expect to see it with
other chemicals or, or other, you know, mental phenomena, like, you know, hypnotism and things
like that. Freshly baked bread won't induce a reliable, obvious jump in activity, the same way
as a, as an MDMA hit will. That's right. That's really interesting. I think that brings us right
back to the actual experimentation. Yes. Yes. Aspect of the question. So yeah, I mean, like,
right now, we are basically doing a lot of low hanging fruit research. A lot of it involves
mechanical Turk. And it involves presenting stimuli, basically, I mean, mostly audio and visual.
Although there's also some semantic as well. But with the purpose of basically generalizing
the theory, music theory that transforms particular discrete harmonic sounds, I mean,
like when you play several instruments at once, for example, there are well known equations for
how to transform though the amplitude of nodes from different instruments into
a number that tells you how, how dissonant that sounds feels like. But what doesn't exist currently
into literature is a way to transform arbitrary sounds into something that tells you basically
how pleasant or unpleasant those sounds are. And that's something that we are we're investigating.
The reason why, I mean, this is low hanging fruit, and it's in a sense, it's not the ideal
research subject, but it's pretty close when it comes to things that are cheap to experiment on.
Obviously, no legal problem in presenting auditory stimuli to people and ask them how they feel
about it. But the reason why we think this is actually useful for our core mission is that
the number of pre processing steps that exist between auditory stimuli and actual brain states
is relatively low. Whereas with things like vision, there are just like so many pre processing
steps between, you know, how your retina is being activated, and then how your visual cortex is
activated that modulating brain activity based on visual stimuli is not as promising as modulated
based on sound. I mean, that's why, you know, like music is the window into the soul, so to
speak, it really produces large effects when it comes to to emotion affect response. And
yeah, so like a lot of our current like experimental research is involves in basically
developing the math for quantifying how pleasant or unpleasant different stimuli are. And this
this kind of ties in with one of our core beliefs, which is valence realism. I mean, this idea that
whether an experience is good or bad is, it's actually an objective matter of fact, just as
much as the rest mass of an electron, or the acceleration of the earth, right, like how much
gravity there is, like there's a matter of fact about it. And likewise, we think there's a matter
of fact about how pleasant or unpleasant a given brain state is, and sound is a very direct way
of modulating brain states. So by analyzing how sounds impact mood, it's a it's a good proxy
for how brain state translates into mood. Interesting. Okay. Did you have anything, Stephen?
Yeah, some of the notes that you've had kind of echo a lot of what Sam Harris talked about in his
book The Moral Landscape, where, you know, they're, I guess, I guess I'm getting hung up on some of
the philosophical bedrock that you're you're resting this on, not because I disagree with it. I think
it's as self-evident as you seem to think it is. But only because the majority of like the
disagreements I have with people on philosophy things come from this kind of argument where,
you know, they could say, well, I don't even know if it's worth getting into me. I think we
did a philosophy episode a couple of years ago. And frankly, if you don't know, or if you disagree
with the statement that like being shot in the foot is worse than, you know, sniffing freshly
baked bread again, then we don't really have a lot to talk about. I think I'll go ahead and just
skip that one. Right. Yeah. I don't know. Anything else that you're working on recently or anything
coming up that you're excited to share or talk about? Yeah, I mean, for sure. So like one of the
things that I really care about is, I mean, outer states of consciousness, again, like for all
sorts of reasons, we are not planning on actually giving, you know, substances to anybody. Like
if we do an experimental paradigm with fMRI, we will just basically append our protocol to somebody
who has the permit to do so. But we do take trip reports very seriously. And like something
that I've been working on for a little while now is basically how to help people write much
better trip reports so that the weird experiences that they had, in a sense, can actually contribute
to science rather than, you know, being like a ranty, a ranty Reddit post about that wild,
you know, wild time you had on LSD and ketamine, but doesn't actually, you know, contribute to
science. And I think like currently trip reports tend to be so bad that helping people do something
that is useful is not that hard. And one of the things that I emphasize is to focus on what I
call the phenomenal character of the experience, what it feels like as opposed to the intentional
content that is what the experience was about. Because people get like very caught up in,
for example, they describe like, oh, they saw like a witch or they saw like, you know, like a crazy
skeleton or they saw a dragon on their LSD trip. But, you know, like, that could be produced in so
many ways, like maybe you were dreaming or maybe you, you were taking a delirant drug or a dissociative,
like there's so many things that can produce the experience of looking at a dragon. The thing that
is going to be very different from one substance to the next is going to be, hey, like what did the
fur of the dragon feel like? How was like the spatial frequency of the patterns? And specifically
things such as how what kind of like symmetry groups were tessellating the walls of the palace
that you went to? Or what is like the particular frequency of the flickering that you were experiencing
and, you know, like the crazy sky that the DMT heat took you to. So there's like a lot of like
actual geometric mathematical features of the experience that are pretty noticeable once you
know what to look for. But people usually completely miss. They get too caught up in the narrative
and they forget to take note of the actual character of the experience. So yeah, that's
something I'm pretty excited about. I mean, I think like, do you have a resource or a link that,
you know, we can send people to to be like, this is the stuff you should look for if you'd like to
do science with acid? Right. Yes, for sure. I'll send you a link to that. I just published an
article about psychedelic Turk. It basically is a, this is just an idea. It hasn't been implemented,
but, but in that article, I linked to a bunch of the other, the other core, core articles about
this. I mean, there's like some ongoing really good research efforts, kind of like in the wild.
I'm a very big fan of this Reddit sub community, the sub Reddit called replications is our
replications, because that basically is like a lot of people who are like super talented in
Photoshop, and who also take high doses of psychedelics, who try to make really good
depictions of what their experience was like. And yeah, I mean, I think like that's super helpful
for for science. Like really, you know, like the differences between DMT and LSD, I don't think
they're inconsequential. And I think they really will will matter a lot for for the future of
consciousness and and trying to really depict them carefully. It's very valuable. Speaking of, I
mean, this has nothing to do with what you were saying, really, but just the word replications
sparked this, this in my mind, you, you were talking or maybe I read this somewhere, you had
very interesting things to say on pure replicators versus like team consciousness or whatever that
is. Yes, that's right. So that's a I mean, if I have like a big picture moral framework for like
how to make sense of reality, I would say that it's not I mean, a lot of people think of reality
is kind of like the battle between good and evil. You know, there's like more sophisticated people
who especially people who take psychedelics and do meditation, who then think of it in terms of
like the balance between good and evil, and they they say things like, you know, being happy all
the time is impossible, because, you know, the light implies the dark and, you know, they get
caught up in these kind of like philosophy of accepting both sides. But when you look at it,
usually they do so as a mood regulation strategy, I mean, they're trying to come to terms with their
suffering. And, and to think that it's necessary, it's a way of dealing with it. But, you know,
it's it's not it's not reality. Like, you do have much better ways to leave than others as
Sam Harris, pointed out by Steven, indeed, has talks talked about, then there's people who are
like one level higher, I call them the gradients of wisdom. And this involves, yeah, people like
Sam Harris, or Shanson Young, or Ken Wilber, who basically agree that there are better states of
consciousness than others that there really is such a thing as pointless suffering, like needless
suffering. That's, I mean, that's part of reality. And we can work to eliminate it. We don't really
lose anything by reducing it. But then there's kind of like this, this, in a sense, like I would say
like very sober, high level framework for making sense of all of morality, which is the battle
between pure replicators and consciousness and pure replicators are basically entities that
are really good at making copies of themselves. But they don't care about anything else. So
when you compare, I mean, a human, for example, usually they do care about making copies of
themselves and sharing their genes in the gene pool with having kids and having affairs.
And even sexual assault can be explained in terms of just a very unethical urge to just
making copies of oneself. But nonetheless, I mean, people still care about being happy,
they care about others being happy, they care about not suffering too much. So in a sense,
humans are not pure replicators. I mean, it so happens that evolution recruited consciousness
for information processing. But then all of a sudden consciousness was implemented in such a
smart way that it's looking after itself rather than just looking after the genes that brought it
here. And I think that's the team I would be rooting for. It would be, hey, let's really take
consciousness as the source of value. And then all of a sudden you see that there's this battle
between patterns that are making copies of themselves in a very efficient way and the
interests of consciousness, which involve happiness and understanding and intelligence and knowledge
and agency. And those are the things that really matter. But if you're kind of like fast forward
the evolutionary process, it seems like we are probably at a pretty delicate moment in history
because there are so many ways in which pure replicators could take over. I mean, obviously,
the scenario of nanotechnology, basically, the gray goo scenario is kind of like a
straightforward case where molecular pure replicators basically transform matter and
energy into just copies of themselves. And as we talked about, that wouldn't be a very valuable
state of the world if there's like no actual subject of experience. And it's just all of these
great goo. But it could happen in many other ways. I mean, I think the age of EM of Robin Hansen
that he talks about it as almost a desirable case, he describes it as. I mean, I think it's a
horrible case where economic selection pressures pushes basically just people who are willing to
be slaves for their entire lives to be the the bulk of experience in reality. So that yeah, that's
a how do you fight against that? He said that I just wanted to say to be to be fair when we
pressed Robin on that he didn't say that he thought it was desirable, just that he thought it was
realistic. Right. Right. So he talked a lot about it, not because he wanted it, but because he thought
it was likely. I just figured out I'd plug that for him. That's right. Maybe he was. Yeah, maybe
he was feeling like the people that are like, yeah, the evil is necessary, as a part of trying to
deal with their suffering. He's like, yep, ms ms are necessary stage just to deal with the the
suffering beforehand. But but how do you fight against something like because they won't they
eventually outcompete you the people who are willing to make those sacrifices? They will if
there is no pushback. But I think I mean, there is some level of pushback. I mean, we and I think
we can increase that level of pushback. I think like a really core weapon. I mean, and actually
it's not so much weapon because it may be the truth. Although it sounds very weird. But I think
like a really important weapon here is personal identity. Basically, you know, like, especially
on psychedelic states, but also if you do a lot of meditation, or even if you do a lot of philosophy,
you can go into the state of consciousness where you you feel that we're all the same
consciousness or like we're all kind of like different facets of God. And this is definitely
very common in mystical traditions and in cults. But but also, you know, there's a lot of philosophy
that justifies the view that that it's likely that we are all one consciousness in, although it's,
it's a very complex way in in exactly why how that manifests. But yeah, I mean, if you identify
with consciousness and you identify with, in a sense, the the quality of experience, you will
recognize that who you will be in in 10 seconds matters just as much as who somebody is somebody
else is currently. And if you take that point of view, then there's a reason to in a sense try to
help consciousness as a whole. And if there is a method that basically makes people believe that
they are, you know, the universal consciousness, as opposed to their individual genes, then like
that that method is going to be very useful in the battle between consciousness and replicators.
And I think like, I mean, there's very promising leads for these, for example, five MEO DMT, which
is similar to DMT in the sense that is something that you usually vaporize and the experience
only lasts five minutes. But what's remarkable about five MEO DMT is that in about maybe 60%
of the cases, it makes people have this weird experience of quote unquote, realizing that
that they are God, and that everything is God. And they become a lot more altruistic and a lot
more interested in helping the environment and helping the world and the long term future of
Earth, once they've had that experience. And I think like, really, in a sense, standardizing it
and getting to the point that you have an extremely reliable way of making people feel that we are
all one consciousness is going to be perhaps the key weapon against replicators, because
that will allow us to yeah, basically not be afraid to modify ourselves. Yep. Go ahead.
Hasn't, hasn't religion been trying to do something like that for, you know, since the
beginning of religion, though? And I mean, I don't, I don't like the
I don't like the idea of having, having to, you know, convince people that they're actually
all the same person. I mean, isn't there a isn't there a more honest way of making people be good
and helping each other? I'm just picturing something kind of like the Batman begins plot where
Scarecrow puts that fear juice in the public water supply to do that with with this DMT.
Everybody, everybody becomes everybody else and then the world becomes a nice clean place.
Right. Everyone has any supervillain ambitions. That sounds like the way to go.
Yes. Well, I'm kidding. No one do that. Of course. It's a, it would be interesting, but
no, I'm definitely in favor of, you know, consensual experiences. And I think the problem here is that
I mean, you can argue philosophy all you want with a lot of people and they will come to the
point where they say like, okay, your philosophical case for oneness is pretty strong, but I don't
feel it. And because I don't feel it, I'm not, I can't really act on it. I will, in a sense,
kind of like secretly still just, just want the best for, for my genes. And they can use this
kind of experiences as a way of actually setting their own internal emotions in that direction.
Once they already agreed that this makes sense intellectually. And I think, I think, yeah,
that's a very promising way of approaching it. Likewise, I mean, I really, it's kind of like
a twin approach because just knowing that everything is one doesn't in itself solve the
problems because you could still have that state of consciousness, but being a state of suffering
or have that state of consciousness and, and feel despair because you experience depression,
or, or you know that the hedonic treadmill will make sure that even if everybody's reach, you
know, a fraction of people will always be miserable no matter what. So I think like it's,
it's the trick is on combining states of consciousness that makes you feel the truth
of oneness combined with or followed by things like MDMA like states of consciousness that
also show them, show you that there's hyper valuable states. So in a sense, there is,
like the value is to be shared because we're all one, but then there is value and there is,
there is something to protect. And that's something that you can only really know once you
actually experience it. And yeah, I mean, I think like the, the, the way in which these, these would
ultimately play out, it would be in a sense a battle between people who believe we're all one
consciousness and, and, and people who really just identify with their own ethnicity or with
their own race or their own, you know, gender or their own future selves. And yeah, I mean,
there's also going to be in a sense like dark magic or black magic on the other side when it comes to
making you be really afraid of death, for example, giving you the experience that like no,
you're alone in this universe and separate. And yeah, so I mean, I think, I think like
having, having tools that favor you identify with consciousness is going to be really,
really key, really keen here. Do you have any ideas of how to prevent the slide into becoming
peer replicators? Because it's not like, you know, we see the peer replicator robots and we can fight
them directly. It's more like the individual choices people make every day as to whether they,
like I personally, whether I choose to, to suppress my, some of my endeavors so that I
can like make money faster, better, so I can, in theory, be, be more comfortable in the future.
But every, every little thing that you sacrifice for that time away from the people that you love
pushes you closer to replicator and further away from consciousness. And
how, I mean, I remember reading that the Amish aren't technically anti-technology
on principle. They just have this ideal where whenever a new piece of technology is introduced
into the world, their, I don't know, most learned among them will go and analyze it for months at
a time sometimes and, you know, decide is this technology that will enrich our lives or that
will strip us of some of our humanity and compassion. And if they decide the latter,
then they banned that technology. And that's why they use some things, like cement blocks, but
not others, like, you know, gasoline motors. Yeah.
Yeah, I want to, I want to see their, I want to see their work here.
I think they've made the wrong call a few times.
I mean, I wonder what the work would look like, you know, vaccines or something too, you know,
but I could kind of see that's, that's painting your human experience or whatever.
But I want to see the case that allows cinder blocks if it doesn't allow but.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, but like, so how do we, how do we find that?
No, you're absolutely right. I mean, this is an open problem. I should be clear about that.
And I'm, I'm open for, for suggestions. It really interests me to, to hear, hear options.
But I mean, yeah, like, it gets super complicated when you consider game theory and the fact that
even if you don't act on a given technology out of ethical caution, somebody who has a,
you know, lower threshold for, for what they perceive to be dangerous will act on it. And
uh, yeah, like that, all of those dynamics don't, don't seem very hopeful.
There, there will probably be like a lot of like extremely powerful technologies in the future.
A lot of them may be consciousness technologies as well.
And not all of them will be pushing in the, you know, in the pro consciousness direction and,
and people will still be using them if they can for, for a variety of reasons.
But yeah, I mean, like, I don't, I mean, I think like individual choices obviously matter.
I think like the, the approach of moralizing people doesn't really work in practice.
So I don't, I don't, I'm not very particularly fond of it. I, I think like people changing people's
hedonic representations of the world is, is where it would, would be at. I mean, like the,
what happens, for example, on, on MDMA that allows you to reconnect with a, with a lover
or make peace with yourself has a lot to do with the fact that your inner representation of others.
I mean, this kind of like cartoon character that you use in order to
predict and make sense of the inner states of others becomes massively enriched.
And it also becomes massively enriched with positive emotions.
I guess I should say that most people don't necessarily realize that the world's world simulation
has a hedonic tone, not only in how they feel their bodies or how they feel about their emotions,
but also in the objects they represent around. So like when you look at somebody who's very
attractive is, is not so much that it's only, you know, like making you feel good by looking at
the person in your body, your own body, but it's also that the actual shape of the person is
completely embedded with positive hedonic tone, in a sense, kind of like materialized visual
pleasure. And, and the thing like, yeah, modulating that to basically motivate us to,
in a sense, whenever we think about our future selves, we think of them as close to us as who
we will be in the next second, or how we represent people in the other side of the world, that we
also think of them just as much as us as, as, as who we will be in the next, next second. So I think
like it comes to having to, in a sense, like reengineer how, how our world simulations, internal
experiences are, are created. And yeah, I mean, like a pro social future where we have one against
pure replicators, I think, will necessarily be implemented with very different experiences
that right now our experiences are these egocentric, self-centered
quasi God experience where we basically feel that we are the center of the universe. But,
yeah, I mean, the experiences of the future, once we transition, hopefully,
into a consciousness focused ethics, we will not actually feel like the center of the universe.
We will feel that, in a sense, everything around us is, is part of ourselves. It's,
yeah, very different experience. I think, I mean, I am, I don't want to sound like a jerk or anything,
but there are extremely few people in the world who I regard as, as important as me one second
from now, right? Like, I would do a lot in service of keeping me one second from now alive and healthy
and such. But I think if you were, if you were to modify me so that I feel that same way about
everyone who's alive, like, I'm not even sure I would still be me that much. I mean, I would
like to care about other people that much. But being, being concerned about my own welfare is also
kind of part of who I am. I mean, that's a, that's a good point. I would say that there's a way of
seeing this where basically that feeling is itself a pure replicator feeling.
Yeah, you can shed that, that core selfishness as part of your, your central personality,
Niyash. Right. No, I mean, I'm kidding. I'm not, I think, I think there's a lot of people in the
world that I like, but I just, I don't see, you know, everyone in the world being that.
No, no, no, I'm giving you a hard time. I think, I think what, what the case might be here is that
there are ways, whether aided through the assistance of drugs or not to view your relation to other
people in less of a eucentric way. You know, we're helping somebody is like helping yourself.
And it's really, I think it's probably easier to feel that way through the influence of
drugs like, you know, MDMA or DMT or drugs like Buddhism. But yeah, I feel what you're saying
that if you, and if you modified away from your current state where you really care about yourself
in the future, you might feel less like you. And I think that the reply might be that's kind of the
point. I'm not saying I agree with that. But I think that's what they might say. Yeah. Yeah. I mean,
it's all exactly. I, that's exactly right, Steven. And I mean, the same is when you were three years
old, I definitely know that when I was three years old, I did not care about what would happen the
next day, right? Like my entire world consisted of today. And of course, you do a lot of regrettable
decisions when you have that kind of representation for how the world works. But I think like
expanding your sense of self to include who you will be the next year. It's a different kind,
it's a similar kind of operation as it's going to happen with these other like consciousness focused
states of mind. But yeah, I mean, like, in a sense, like, we are chronically delusional.
And we are so because there are some delusions that are evolutionarily advantageous. So I mean,
I wouldn't blame anybody for, for identifying only with themselves or, or preferentially caring
about themselves precisely because that's how the world feels like from the inside from those
points of view. I mean, that's, it's not one's fault that that one is under the spell of an
evolutionarily adaptive delusion. Well, I mean, I also feel like that people who are themselves
have a much greater ability generally to, to improve their lives than I do, because I mean,
for starters, I can't physically move their body. But being less facetious, it's just,
it's much harder for me to, to do something that'll affect someone very far away. So it sort of makes
sense to be more concerned with your own local area, starting, I guess, sort of with your body,
because that is what you have the most ability to improve.
Yes. I mean, that's, that's very much the case when it comes to kind of like the
instrumental value of different moments of experience, different here's and now's.
We definitely can't affect the past, for example, even though we, if we take physics seriously,
the past, you know, is still there. It hasn't disappeared.
But yeah, I mean, the fact that we can't do anything about it, I mean, I would say, ideally,
we should care about it intellectually in the sense of like, hey, let's,
you know, if we could go back in time, we should probably try to help and do rescue missions, but
because we can't, we should probably not, you know, feel too bad about the things that
happened in the past. It's just not, not very instrumentally useful.
Okay, we are actually quite a bit over one hour, so I should, we should probably wrap this up.
Thank you for talking with us. Is there anything you wanted to, to say to add at the end here?
Or anything that we really should have gotten into that we didn't?
No, I think, I think, I think we covered a lot of ground. And yeah, I mean, I'll send you the,
yeah, the links for people who want to take a closer look at it. So yeah, that sounds great.
This is a really fun conversation. Thank you so much.
Thank you so much. Yeah, it was wonderful. Thank you so much for having me.
All right. Thank you. And maybe we can do it again sometime because it went by pretty fast.
Yeah, I feel like we have a lot of ground left to cover.
That's right. All right.
Great. Well, thanks again.
Cool. Take care.
Have a good evening.
And cut.
All right.
All right.
So we just wrapped up with Andres, which was really fun.
We did keep talking after, well, basically he had said and seen or stop or whatever,
and fight, stopped recording. He stopped recording.
Inyosh being the one with forethought didn't stop recording.
Inyosh never stopped recording.
And the one with software that wouldn't let him stop recording without hanging up.
So we got about another 15, 20 minutes worth of audio that all comes through in one,
like, Skype 10.3 recorder. So it's going to sound different.
And for that reason, we're not going to mash it into this episode,
but we'll put it up for the patron only content on the Patreon page.
Yeah. Yeah.
So if you'd like to hear some more, they talk about things about depression and the
God helmet and a few other things. It was also interesting stuff.
Yeah. And yeah, I think we're just going to dive into the,
how we can do some listening feedback if we have the time and energy, but we need to do our...
I don't think we do because we've spent like over an hour with Andres,
and then we're going to do the less wrong posts.
And I think we should just call it an episode after that.
Well, in that case, we do have lots of listening feedback that's getting up on our backlog.
I don't know if we've done any of the last couple of episodes.
So we'll chug through. Bear in mind, we do read absolutely everything,
but it's rare that we get a chance to respond to it.
So thanks for writing stuff in and being active on the subreddit and stuff.
But not everything has time for...
Or we don't have time for...
We don't have airtime for everything is what I'm trying to say.
Yeah. Exactly.
All right. Let's go on to our sequences then.
Sounds good to me. What are our two posts for today, Yash?
Our two posts are the proper use of humility and...
Whoops. I just scrolled past that other one.
The modesty argument.
Yes.
Let's begin with the proper use of humility,
since that was chronologically before the other one.
Sounds good.
Proper use of humility.
My take on it was that it was basically a way of saying...
Sometimes people try to tell you to shut up because they don't...
They think you're getting too big for your britches when you talk about
things that threaten their worldview.
It's basically a pre-counter to that, being like,
look, there's a difference between scientific humility and social humility.
And when you try to conflate the two to get people to shut up,
it's a real dick move and you shouldn't do that.
It was my take.
And I'll get into more specifics in just a sec.
What did you think about it?
I sort of took it in another direction, which was left about the...
I mean, LAI's are covered both, but I took more away from it on the personal side,
that the proper use of humility isn't to tell other people to be humble or to signal humility.
And this theme is carried forward in the next post too,
but it's to actually do what you would do if you were alone or if you just wanted to be right.
So I kind of think about the Martian and what Mark Watley does on Mars by himself.
You know, he's not signaling his humility to anybody.
He just wants to be sure.
So he'll double check his math.
He'll think through his problems.
And he's working towards an actual goal there that,
since he cares about the outcome, he's going to be properly humble.
Yeah, that's a damn good example.
You rock, dude.
Right, okay.
So I'm going to add a few quotes that I took from out of it.
One of them was,
consider the creationist who says,
but who can really know whether evolution is correct?
It's just a theory.
You should be more humble and open-minded.
And then it contrasts that with,
the engineer who humbly designs fail-safe mechanisms into machinery,
even though he's damn sure the machinery won't fail.
Which is kind of like what you just brought up with the whole Mark...
God, what was his last name?
Watley.
Mark Watley on Mars, yeah.
And Eliezer goes on says,
consider the student that says,
no, the studying wouldn't really work for me.
I'm not one of the smart kids like you.
One so lowly as myself cannot,
can hope for no better lot.
And Eliezer says that this is social modesty,
not humility.
It has to do with regulating status in the tribe,
rather than scientific process.
He then compares it to the actual scientific type of humility,
where he says that when physicists find a tiny flaw in their math,
they will...
Or in their model.
Or in their model.
Yes, thank you.
In their model, they pursue it to the ends of the earth,
because they aren't okay with it being mostly correct,
or almost entirely correct.
It has to be perfect all the time.
And that some people might call that arrogant,
but it's a source of strength.
He says, the end of era in physics
does not always announce itself with thunder and trumpets.
More often, it begins with what seems like a small, small flaw.
But because physicists have this arrogant idea
that their model should work all the time,
not just most of the time,
they follow up on flaws.
Usually, the small flaw goes away under closer inspection.
Rarely, the flaw widens to the point
where it blows up the whole theory.
But think of the social audacity of trying to be right all the time.
And I think, yeah, socially that is audacious, right?
But scientifically, it's more of a humility thing.
It's realizing that there's an error here,
and I have to go and look into it and correct it, if possible,
because I'm not perfect,
and I shouldn't just assume that my theory is perfect the way it is,
if I see something that might be a problem.
Yeah, I mean, if when you dropped things,
they fell at different rates one percent of the time,
our current theory of gravitation alone wouldn't suffice to explain it.
But if you're on air resistance or whatever,
then you can get something that makes a little more sense.
But yeah, I guess for me, this is kind of fun to read,
just because it brought back the easy days of arguing to people
that science was the right way to go and wasn't being, I don't know,
too aggressive or too high on its bridges,
like it really earns those high bridges by,
or that it really earns the seat on that high horse
by how hard it is on itself systematically.
But yeah, this isn't geared toward people
who already buy that science makes sense.
Right, I remember people saying that the four horsemen
were so such arrogant pricks because they wouldn't...
Well, okay, here's another quote.
When you argue a lot, people look upon you as confrontational.
If you repeatedly refuse to compromise, it's even worse.
Considered a question of tribal status.
Scientists have certainly earned some extra status
in exchange for such socially useful tools as medicine and cell phones.
But this social status does not justify their insistence
that only scientific ideas on evolution be taught in public schools.
Priests also have high status, after all.
Scientists are getting above themselves.
They won a little status,
and now they think they're chiefs of the whole tribe.
They ought to be more humble and compromise a little.
Which yeah, it's the wrong sort of humility.
And the line that really made this entire post for me,
which I, and oh, I see your note that you were about to copy it too,
is that he says the proper use of humility is humility that is useful.
The line is,
it may help to look at the actions recommended by a humble line of thinking and ask,
does acting this way make you stronger or weaker?
And like you said, when Mark Watley on Mars was humble about his,
maybe his math is wrong and double triple checking all his things,
it's because acting that way made him stronger.
It made even the smallest flaw get caught, so he wouldn't die.
This is one of the first real big insights in the sequences too,
which I guess we're only on post four.
But this is just one of my favorite little examples of,
you could sit and argue with your coworkers or your friends
about what the proper use of humility is and go back and forth,
but not content to just mentally masturbate,
and then barf that on a page and call it good.
And as he says, look, how about this,
what makes you, does acting this way make you stronger or weaker?
And I'm going to just go ahead and say, or rather, I think we can all agree,
that if it makes you weaker, that's not the proper way to do it.
If it is fine, call it its own thing,
well, without your own words, whatever, if you're hung up on that.
But the point is, is like, the goal of being a rationalist isn't to be weaker,
it's to be stronger in every way that you can be.
And so if, you know, the kid who's like,
well, no, studying only works for smart kids,
it's not going to work for me, you're made weaker by that thought.
Yeah, or if you're arguing something that might be important,
and then at the end of it, you just say, well, of course, I could be wrong.
And you don't actually change your position at all,
based on any of the arguments or evidence put on.
And it doesn't have any effect.
You're like that, that made you weaker.
You're just saying, well, I could be wrong.
And because you could be wrong, you don't take any of that into account.
That's, that's a shitty use of humility that it didn't improve you at all to,
to say that and to ignore everything that just happened.
Right. And he has that too, where, you know, you can meet every counter argument by saying,
well, I guess I could be wrong and not really take the work to analyze your belief.
And then having dutifully genuflected in the direction of modesty
and made the required obeisance, you can then go about your way without having changed a thing.
And then you stole my next quote, I was going to put down here too,
which was to be humble is to take specific actions in anticipation of your own errors
to confess your fallibility and then do nothing about it is not humble.
It is boasting of your modesty.
Yeah.
And, and exactly one of those things makes you stronger in the sense that,
you know, I, in, I guess the rationalist sense of more likely to be right or achieve your goals.
And one of them doesn't, right?
You know, this bullshit hand wavy thing to, you know, knuckle under somebody,
somebody's, somebody's challenging for being arrogant or something.
That's not going to, that's not useful to even your own goals, right?
So if you're doing that, it's a misstep in the dance.
It's, it's, even if you're making the step right, you're doing it,
even if you're putting your foot in the right places, you're doing it wrong, right?
Yeah.
You're getting there.
And likewise, just saying I could be wrong and not changing anything is also a big mistake.
Oh yeah, exactly.
That's, that's missing the point.
If you think you could actually be wrong, you'd make sure you know what that means.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That goes to the point of people being like, well, I guess all religions are true,
you know, because I could be wrong about this one and that doesn't help anything at all.
Actually consider that you might be wrong and how that should affect your actions
and your beliefs.
I'm liking Mark Wotley.
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
Yeah, go on.
I was going to say, I'm liking the Mark Wotley analogy more and more because it's nicely non-offensive.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, I could just imagine, you know, he's planning that, that, that mission or that,
that road trip to, I forget the name of the, the, the pros to go pick up.
Was it Curiosity?
I don't remember it was Curiosity.
I don't think so.
It was, it was something, but yeah, he takes that 20-day road trip out to go grab it.
I can imagine him saying, you know, well, fuck it.
I could be wrong and then nothing, right?
Like that, that's so out of character form that it's laughable.
And he kind of points his thing kind of northwest.
He's like, I could be wrong, but I'll just go in this direction.
But yeah, so what, what he would do is I could be wrong.
Let me, let me go back and look at a map and look at the stars and, you know,
draw a fucking line in the sand and, you know, whatever.
But the point is, is to, if you notice that you, if the thought occurs to you,
I might be wrong here.
You, you do something about it, whatever's appropriate.
And the appropriate thing is never to just ignore it.
Yeah.
Alrighty.
On to the modesty argument.
Yeah, that works for me.
All right.
Did you want to start with this with time or should I again?
Um, yeah, I guess the only thing that I'll point in is to keep in mind here at this one,
that this kind of strikes me as, as a good tie into the, I remember that when we were going
through the culture war 2.0, like the six proposals proposed, not solutions, but, you know,
positive paths forward, you and I kind of tore them to shreds.
Because I think we were, we were thinking about it in the wrong way.
We were talking, we were thinking about a, I think the point of those was to have them be
more personal commitments, not like public ones.
If somebody wasn't going to play ball, then there's not playing ball, whatever.
But the other thing was that we kept imagining, arguing with bad faith
arguers and people who would do, you know, who would make claims like the modesty argument
of the same kind of icky flavor that the modest argument is.
Where they'll, they'll, they'll challenge what you're saying and kind of demand
that you change your opinion, but not really give you a good reason.
That's sort of, the modesty argument's more in depth than that.
It's more, you know, you change your opinion, not because they don't give you a good reason,
but because their belief is a reason.
But to me, that's not a good enough reason, and neither it is to other users.
So I just, I wanted to bring it kind of back and tie it into, I think that this is
a good example of a generalized case of that kind of icky argument that we were imagining
encountering when taking those six positive steps to combat the culture wars.
So that's, that was my, my one tie into something else.
Okay. Yeah. Yeah.
What I got, I guess we should quickly summarize that the modesty argument is basically it states
that when two or more human beings have common knowledge that they disagree about a question
of simple fact, they should each adjust their probability estimates in the direction of the
others. This, when I was reading this, it seemed like this was kind of a continuation of an argument
that may have been already going on, because he mentions Ommons, is it pronounced Ommons?
Ommons, I think.
Say Ommon Ommon.
Okay. Ommons agreement theorem, which is a Bayesian thing where if two fully rational
Bayesian agents meet each other and they have different, they have different probabilities
assigned to a certain belief, or they, once they exchange all the information that they have
and their priors, then their likely probability hoods should match after that that
mathematically obligated to have the same probability as been after.
Yes, that they literally cannot agree to disagree, which I guess may work in in certain types of
machine learning, especially if you can be completely transparent and honest about all
your beliefs and where they originated. I don't think it really applies to humans that much.
And I'm not sure that this post really is all that relevant anymore, because
like, I don't know of anyone that accepts the modesty argument, not personally anyway, like no
one I know of thinks that like, yeah, every time I meet someone on the opposite end of the political
spectrum, I should adjust my beliefs slightly towards their point of view, and they should
adjust their beliefs towards my point of view, you know, it just, that doesn't work that way.
I think there's something naively Bayesian sounding about somebody comes up to you,
especially somebody that you might trust, whatever, and says, hey, I just saw werewolves.
That that makes that that it sounds intuitive that that ought to increase your probability
estimate that werewolves exist. And that's sort of the modesty argument, right?
Yeah. I don't know if that's, I mean, I don't, I don't know if you find that unimaginable or
anything. I don't know if I, if I know anybody who would articulate anything that way either.
But I think that that's the intuitive kind of thing that this is getting at that is,
and this is apparently an actual disagreement that people have had in the past, but B,
it does, it sounds somewhat intuitive to me that that could be a way to think about a disagreement.
And, you know, I guess I've actually heard cases that, you know, look,
well, rather I've heard confusions on how to handle those Asians, like, look, too many,
there are way more Christians than there are you. If you're not a Christian,
every one of them should count as evidence of the, of the, the truth of Christianity because
so many people believe it. You know, like, if you're the only person driving on the wrong side
of the road, you're probably driving, you're probably the wrong one, right? I think that's
sort of thing. But honestly, this post sort of struck me as the opposite of the property
use humility in that I didn't, I found it kind of long-winded and not applicable to me. Whereas
the property use humility was, was pretty brief and awesome. So we can get into, into it as much
as you want, but, you know, everyone, you know, can give it a shot. It's not bad. It's just, uh,
wasn't quite as useful. Yeah, at least not to me. It does quote the 12 virtues of rationality,
which we should probably cover at some point. Oh, does it? Oh, it, it, it quotes them a couple
times. Therefore it is written. Do not believe what you do to others as a favor. If you accept
their arguments, the favor is to you. Yeah, I wanted to pull that one out because that was,
I thought that was like the, the best part of this post that you pointed out that
a lot of people consider it like a favor to adopt someone else's belief that you're doing them a favor.
Uh, it's like an equal compromise, you know? Uh, and Eliezer points out that that, that's wrong.
If you adopt someone else's belief, you aren't doing them a favor, you are doing
yourself a favor because it means you have judged their belief to be closer to the truth
than what your previous belief was. And therefore you are making yourself stronger and your map
more accurate by adopting a belief that is more accurate. So you're doing yourself a favor when
you, uh, when you change your belief. And if you're only doing it for social signaling reasons,
then you're, you're not doing anyone a favor at all. You are making your map less accurate and you
are making yourself weaker by doing that. So don't do that. Yeah. That, I mean,
I don't have anything to add to that other than an agreement noise. I'm nodding from,
from my house. We're recording in different places since we got a guest and it's complicated to do it.
And so. Oh, also, um, Stephen is using a new microphone and, uh, let us know if, if, you know,
it's okay because, uh, it's, it's one he can walk around with, but we're not sure about the quality
of it. Yeah. I was going to plug that and see if anyone really, I was going to listen to it
myself and kind of just gauge, but if it's tolerable, this mic's pretty good and it's somewhat
affordable. So if it's nice, I'd like to keep using it, but I, I'm already getting the impression
I'm not going to, it, I think I sound like I'm on a phone call. Um, okay. It doesn't sound good
from my end, but I mean that might be just because of Skype. I don't know. Part of that Skype,
I played back to my own audio too. So what was the other sounds? Um, also of note, I think that
this is, uh, this post is the first time he hints at the map territory distinction before he
actually lays it out in, you know, all its glory later on, but he does mention that, uh, if I sit
in my living room with the curtains drawn and make up five maps that are consistent with each other,
but I don't actually walk around the city and make lines on paper that correspond to what I see,
then my maps will not be consistent, then my maps will be consistent, but not accurate. I was like,
oh look, first shades of the map territory thing that we'll talk about later. That's one of the
things that we as rationalists love talking about, which reminds me, did he, did he, uh,
coin that or is that just something that he popularized in his stuff? Uh, I believe he said
that he first read about it in an old science fiction novel called The World of Nell A. Um,
but I think he's the one that like made it popular. Well, give him like the kind of Richard
Dawkins with memes credit where it was a thing that existed, but now it means something more
popular and widespread. Yeah. All right, fair enough. Cool. Okay. So that's everything I had.
Did you have more on this? Yeah. Um, no. Oh wait, I guess you have this thing down here about the,
the true story of a customer. Yeah. Right. I remember this, I remember this went around. Um,
there was a guy who, uh, had, I had a, uh, wireless service plan that's, um, it said that it would
be 0.02 cents per, I don't remember kilobyte to theta was much more expensive back in the day.
And so he called up their customer service before he went to you. This was a Roman char,
roaming charge in Europe. And so he called up before he left for his vacation. He's like,
I just want to make sure it says here 0.02 cents. Are you sure that's 0.02 cents and not 0.02 dollars?
Because 0.02 dollars is two cents, which is what I think you mean. Uh, even though the paperwork
says 0.02 cents and they're like, Oh, no, no, no, we mean 0.02 cents. He's like, really? They're
like, yeah, I was like, okay. And, uh, then he gets the bill and it's literally 100 times greater
than it should be. And so they were obviously charging him two cents per kilobyte or 0.02 dollars.
And so he called them up. There's a wonderful transcript because he goes up through like
four levels of customer service where every single person cannot grasp the difference between
0.02 dollars and 0.02 cents. And, uh, there's, there's a quote here where he's talking to,
I think this is a one of the high level managers. He says, do you recognize that there's a difference
between 0.002 dollars and 0.002 cents? And the answer is no.
Which, you know, you, no matter, you're just not going to update your belief to,
once you've gone through four people to be like, well, four people say there's no difference
between those two. So maybe there isn't any difference. Like, you'd know there's a difference
between 0.02 dollars and 0.02 cents. Well, except this is the case. I'm thinking of this guy one.
I don't remember. Did he in the end? I mean, he must have. He had the paperwork, right?
I definitely heard about, yeah, I definitely heard about this before. This was only a few years ago
and this guy won his case. Okay, good. So this is different than, you know,
just talking with one person who refuses to budge. Because he's explaining to different people.
And at the end of the day, you can escalate to lawyers who can actually read. So, yeah.
Yeah, this was, but this is a meditation in patients, maybe?
I just, I can't imagine what that must be like, like how crazy you would go. Because how, how,
how else do you get through to someone that dollars are not the same as cents, you know?
It is bizarre that, I mean, there's, there's only one way to say it, right?
Yeah, I think it's because I think people don't see like, on a gut level, as cents, as like
fractions of dollars. I know that they, let me, I think that there's a way to like make that
not clear. Like I remember when I went to Japan, you know, it's sort of bizarre that you can spend
$250 on it, or 250 yen on a soda, right? Because to me, it was like $250. But all they have to
keep in mind is that they don't have hundreds of dollars in their currency. Yeah. Yeah. So, well,
it's like whatever 90 cents, or what, 90 cents to 100 yen or something. But whatever it is, it's,
it's, it's like if I was buying stuff for 250 cents, rather than $2 and 50 cents,
yeah, or $2.5. So maybe there's the unintuitive leap with the, you know, the overworked and under,
underfed and undernourished, you know, temps answering the phones at Verizon where they're
just like, fuck it, man, I don't know. I don't know. I've been on the phone for 10 hours. I don't
have anything left to me that can do math right now. They look at it, they see .002 and like,
they don't glance at the units. And I don't know, have you ever worked in mines and I'm in customer
service job? That's exactly what it feels like. So I kind of see why he had to find it at the top
to fix this. Depending, I guess, on what time he called. You know, I think maybe your best bet
would be calling it like nine in the morning. But I'm curious if there's, I wonder, I haven't
clicked the transcript. Does it say what time the call began? I'm all over it because if it says it's,
it does not say what time the call was. That's okay. Oh, nope. Good evening. Haha.
Hey. Yeah. At the end of the day, you don't have anything left in you for math. You do customer
service. Good luck if you walk in with it first thing in the morning. Right. Well, I don't have
anything else to add to this one unless I think we ought to thank the patron this episode and
Oh, before we do that, let's let people know what the next two will be. Oh, yeah. Next two posts.
Yeah. And two weeks time, we will be doing I don't know and a fable of science and politics.
And we'll have links to both of those on the Bayesian conspiracy.com. Yep. So give us a
shout if you want to continue with our read through of these, it'll only take us at this rate,
like five more years. Right. So cool. That's great. Oh, this week, we would like to think
thus to maybe gusto. I'm not sure exactly. But our patron gusto for helping to bring this episode
to all of you guys. Thanks. And when we do buy new mic equipment and stuff that'll become that'll
be because of people like you and we really appreciate it. And you know, like I said,
every time no pressure to donate, it's always nice. And it means a lot. And it is just
I don't know, something that, you know, keeps us excited about, you know, I don't know,
I ramble every time at this point, because it makes me feel comfortable that people care about
enough this to throw some money at it. But thank you, it does mean a lot. I mean,
someone flusters me. Yeah, one of these days, you know, I want to get some better equipment,
maybe even like, you know, some studio equipment to soundproof rooms a bit. Oh,
shit. Well, I mean, you know, we could just do like milk cartons on a stand or something,
whatever it is, but you know, little things that, you know, be 50 bucks or whatever. But
I'm also trying to think of more patron benefits. So, you know, like sort of releasing content
for this episode. Another thing I was thinking was that to release the audio for the episode,
as soon as it's available on patreon.com, which full disclosure is often Tuesday night.
Yes, it'll be only a few hours earlier.
And sometimes a few hours earlier, but sometimes it might be a few days.
That's true. There has been a few times where we were like four weeks ahead of schedule,
which was, I mean, it's rare, but it has happened.
One of the days we sit back down and get caught up and get a proper back lock again. But
yes, this one's going out in, what, nine days? So once I get the audio from Andres and all that,
then I can start editing. But anyway, of course, you guys won't hear all this one until Thursday
or until Wednesday anyway. So yes, anyway, we want to do some more pretty exclusive stuff.
So if you guys can think of anything that, if you guys have any suggestions,
roll one of those. You can reach us at the subreddit. There's an AMA thread.
There'll be a thread for this episode. There's the email address,
Asian conspiracy podcast at gmail.com. And there's the website, Asian conspiracy,
or the Asian conspiracy, right? Yep. Yep. Perfect. It's not podcast. Yeah.
Cool. All right. Well, in that case, I think we're all wrapped up.
Yeah. Yeah. All set. Then I am now at the rambling stage of my evening brain juice.
So we should just wrap up and call it a night.
Cool. I'll see you in a week. Thanks. Bye-bye. Bye.
