Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Eneash Brotsky. I'm Steven Zuber. I'm Jay Sticky.
I'm Chase. Hello, Chase. Chase is joining us once again. You were with us. What was
the last episode you were on? It was our last tech-savvy one on something with EFF, something.
It's been at least three years. Maybe maybe more. Have we been on the air more than three
years? I think we're coming up on four. Damn, okay. You were on actually twice. You came
on once with Matt, and then once solo. Anyway, welcome back, Chase, friend of the show. Thank
you. Glad to be here. We like Chase because he keeps up with, I don't know, electronic
news. God, I sound like... Digital rights? Who were saying that? Thank you, digital rights.
That was the name of the last episode that he was on. What was? Digital rights. Oh, there
you go. Yes, Chase keeps up with digital rights. Apparently, something happened much earlier
in the year, starting in March, which I did not even know about because of fucking coronavirus
and Trump and fire and everything else that's been happening. This just literally snuck
by me. I did not know about it. I was like, oh my God, we should tell people in case someone
else has fallen into this trap. That's convenient just because I don't think there's actually
anyone who supports it besides a few difficult congressmen. We're not going to tell anyone
what this thing is until after we talk about the sequences. Right. So, ha, eat that for
your little teaser thing. Good hook. Yes. Okay. The first sequence, the first sequence post
we're going to be talking about this week is called Double Think, then in parentheses,
choosing to be biased. It starts out with a clip excerpt. That clip is for movies, right?
Excerpt from 1984, George Orwell's classic book, which I actually still think is pretty good. I
mean, it reads like an old book because it was written in the 50s. But I think that adds to the
charm, though. It has like a stylistic thing going on. Yeah, it probably is partially just Orwell's
voice and then partially just the time period that it's in. And importantly, you can't truly
appreciate 1984 until you've read 1984. The most important part about this story.
Which for really long time listeners was a short pony fic that I read during the period when
HPMOR was, you know, and it's one long hi, hi. Yeah, I was going to say hi, hi. It wasn't really
hiatus. It was a period where he was writing it and not posting what he was writing still. Yeah.
Are there other rationalist ponyfics besides friendship is optimal and 1984? Is this just
a whole sub-genre? I don't know. Yeah, I'm sure it's out there. There's got to be more than that,
yeah. And the friendship is, or the friendship is optimal is actually like at least two parts,
right? There's two parts and I think from two different perspectives or something.
I just re-listened to that while I was just doing some housework. It's on YouTube. Somebody
like podcasted it. Oh, nice. It's in like 10 parts or something like that. Oh, nice. We're
going to have to link it then in this episode. Yeah, we should do that. Cool. All right, so double
think. It starts with that little excerpt and then the- And if you can hear labored breathing,
that's because, you know, it's just babysitting a corgi. Yes, this corgi is not used to being
petted, I guess, on the head or something because he just seems incredibly happy.
Yeah. Anyways, the post starts with Elias asking, what if self-deception helps us to be happy?
What if just running out and overcoming bias will make us unhappy? Gasp. Yes. Which first of all,
question, how do you guys feel about the whole- Like ignorance is bliss? Yeah, exactly. I don't know.
I mean, actually, honestly, the first thing that came to mind when I was trying to think of,
like, do I know any dumb people that are really happy? I was like, dogs are all really happy.
And dogs are kind of known for being kind of dumb. Yeah, but dogs are also like-
Not people. They are not people. They are pets to humans. If these dogs had to make their own way
in the world, they would not be as happy. Isn't there some really self-serving
anecdotal data that intelligence is correlated with depression? I think I have heard that.
So that seems to follow that ignorance is bliss if you follow that very self-serving data.
I may be overreaching here, but I think generally, you know, the better your starting position or
the more privileged you are, the more comfortable you're going to be, not having to worry about
anything just in general. And that certainly makes it easier. And dogs are pretty high on that tree.
Oh, yeah. Yeah, you were about to say.
Seemed to remember a SlateStrike codex article that was showing that actually
IQ correlates with, like, all kinds of positive outcomes. I feel like I'm missing part of the
nuance there. Does anyone remember, like, specifically what claim that was? I think it was-
Basically what you said, that generally IQ tends to correlate with better life outcomes
in every measurable respect. Yeah, well, I think one of them was like,
like fulfillment, too. It was like happiness, quality of life, etc. So that seems to fly in the
face of this. That said, there's definitely a window, I think, for a lot of people. If you're
coming down from a nice reassuring belief, like, unless you're able to transition immediately into
a nice, solace, medium ground there, like, a good example might be people coming down from,
like, if you believe in afterlife of some sort, and then that illusion is shattered,
for many people, probably this window, at least, if not the rest of your life, where you're just
petrified of death, right? Like, I think believing in an afterlife is probably very reassuring,
if you actually believe that, right? I guess, but every believer I've met is still, you know,
sad when other people die, and they're still, yeah, have the same avoidance of death,
instinct, actions that everyone else does. I think maybe a bit less than someone like us
might have, because, I mean, like, they don't sign up for cryotics, they're not, you know,
taking life extension technology news very seriously or very hard, so they're not taking
preventative aging pills, starting at age 30, like, they're, I mean, maybe some of them are,
I don't know, but I don't know, I think for the most part, like, you know, if I wasn't aware of
whatever half the terrible shit that's been going on in the world, you know, like you mentioned,
this, this, the whole topic of today's episode flew into our radar, because the rest of the world
is complete, you know, dog shit. If I was somehow unaware of that, I'd probably be in a happier
place right now. Well, okay, so I have explicitly advocated for people watching less news, because
most of the time you can do absolutely nothing about it. There's no impact on, on your life aside
to make you more unhappy. But that seems less like an ignorance of listening and more of a
focus on things that you can actually change and that will actually affect your life.
I think that's not even like the news is skewed negative anyway. So it's not even really an issue
of ignorance. It almost seems to me, yeah, you're right. Because basically, you're just exposing
yourself to the dog shit stuff of the world, since that's what all the news is. Like, you can look
at positive news. There was, it might still exist. I don't know. For a while, I would check this
tumbler that was just positive news compilations about like, you know, this country now has clean
drinking water. And I think that it is kind of a weird thing about our species that we tend to,
I guess, because we're still to avoid the bad stuff. Yeah, we're evolved. And so we need to,
yeah, like have a survival mindset. Back in the day, if you heard about bad stuff,
it was happening somewhere near you and could affect you. Yeah, I we we try to end every episode
of the mind killer with some sort of happy news. So to slightly offset the previous 59 minutes of
shit that you've heard. There's a subreddit called Uplifting News that I like for that reason.
Cool. Oh, yeah. I honestly think that like, happiness is not correlated with intelligence.
Like, there's people all over the happiness spectrums in all levels of intelligence,
I have found. And I think really, it just changes how you can express your various feelings,
like people who are unhappy, have a much more eloquent eloquent way of phrasing it and convincing
other peoples that this is what life is. Life is pain. And anyone tells you otherwise is trying
to sell you something is much easier to sell when you have a lot of intelligence behind it.
Yeah, I don't know. I'm sorry for the dog growling. He's just he's super excited.
Every time I stop petting him, he just like nips my fingers right now.
It's like, hey, you're falling down on the job. See, if dumb people could nip other people on
the fingers gently, whenever they weren't being given something nice, they'd be more happy too.
Babies got it really good. They just need to yell and someone will just be like,
what do you need? I'll bring you anything in the world.
As soon as they have any sort of decent parents. Yeah.
All right, so I don't know. I think the thing with intelligence is at least it sometimes helps
you overcome your situations. Like, sure, dumb people sometimes like.
And I think it's really related to that. The less you need to overcome your situation,
the better your situation is to start, then the more you can get away with not making
optimal choices and not. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. If you're in a rich family and you're,
you're not stressed about your grades at school because your life's going to turn out fine anyway,
right? Right. Like you're going to land a good job. You're going to make good enough money if you
even need to make money. So like your level of background concern is just totally flat.
And in cases like that, it might be less beneficial to someone's happiness to
really sit down and think about their life, right? Yeah.
Yeah, someone brought up decisions. I actually was just reading some articles about,
they're about generational stress about trauma and like chronic stress could be passed down in
the genes. They've like at least been able to study it three generations down. Jesus.
So there's epigenetic things that go on too and think, you know,
trigger the like during the genes on or off, but there's definitely a correlation between
someone's grandparents or in some terrible war. And that causes actually, what is it,
a larger amygdala, a smaller cerebellum and like impaired decision making. So sort of the thing
about what was it? I think Chase had said or one of you guys said having higher IQ like helps,
you know, or better life circumstances like kind of absorbs if you make bad decisions.
I think you're also just less likely to make impulsive decisions because of all of that.
I have, okay, so we're getting way off on a tangent now, but this is something I want to ask
you guys. I recently in our discord came across this exchange where it was pointed out that
nowadays we have like much more control over reproduction than we ever have in the past.
Well, in the past several decades anyway, nowadays not necessarily meaning like literally this year,
but a lot of people are choosing simply not to have kids. And a lot of those people tend to
be people who are already like kind of depressive and life hurts. And, you know, I don't want to
bring kids into this world. So I'm not going to. And honestly, that was a large part of my
motivation as well. And it was pointed out this is a good thing because that way people who are
genetically predisposed to be unhappy will not propagate those genes into the future. And those
who are disposed to be happy and have happy lives will have more children. So overall,
net utility of the existing people goes up as there's more happiness. And that kind of like
feels terrible. But on the other hand, like I cannot at all dispute this. It's going to be a
short term issue anyway, because we're going to be able to have CRISPR babies. I mean, they are
dear to me. At least for me. So you can actually like go in and pick and choose those genes.
I mean, I don't know how fast that's going to roll out. And whether or not, of course, it's
going to, I mean, even IVF, which is actually a pretty benign procedure, like GenX wise, but people
were freaking out for a long time when IVF came out. And that's been around for what 60 years
or something. Yeah, yeah. Even if you can pick the genes, though, that doesn't get rid of my
intuitive feeling that this world is bad and shouldn't have more humans in it. But I don't know.
I mean,
not shouldn't have more humans in it. Because objectively, it should. So the human race can
continue and do great things. But I don't know if I can be a part of it. Chase, you were going
to say something? No, not at all. I was just going to say, speculating on future outcomes
of genetic manipulation, so far outside of my reasonable realm of knowledgeable discussion.
And like the best thing about it is that there is no government eugenics program. This is all
self selection and people doing what they think is best for themselves and their own lives.
Yeah, I've heard lots of, you know, arguments about the idiocracy thing where people are like,
Oh, like the poorest, like really religious, etc. people are having the most kids. Well,
smart people who tend to be more depressed. I don't even know if any of this is true. Like,
I don't know if the numbers actually show that this is correct. I know a lot of people in the
rational sphere tend to be less likely to want to have kids. I think, I don't know,
it's still a fairly young demographic. But from what I have seen, it seems that the
replacement levels are less, you know, we are reproducing at less than replacement levels.
But on the plus side, there's a lot of people out there that are of the rationalist mindset
that haven't been exposed to rationality yet. So. Well, in part of the, you know,
it's like proselytizing, right? So as long as you're recruiting new members,
at a rate faster than you're losing them. But what if we recruit every member of humanity,
though, and then everyone stops reproducing? Because we reproduce it slower than our
replacement rates. I feel like if the entire world was making that rational of a judgment,
and I'm not saying it's actually rational not to have kids, but if that's the level that we hit,
then we might be equipped as a species to solve every problem we had in the 30 years before everyone
died, right? So maybe. Also, if we achieve immortality, we won't need to replace people.
That's a good point. But like, we're so far in the weeds. Yes. So that was all the first two
sentences. What he was really saying is that some people propose that true wisdom would be
second order rationality, choosing when to be rational. That way you can decide which cognitive
biases should govern you to maximize your happiness. We've really got far field, didn't we?
So yeah, choosing when to be rational and when to be not rational based on when it is most
advantageous to be rational or not rational. And the, I don't know, before we continue,
what do you guys feel about that? Without oblivion, that wouldn't work.
Yeah, it's the same sort of like Pascal's wager. I remember hearing about that. And before I could
even hear any of the like more nuanced arguments about why it was dumb, like immediately the
person who brought it up was like, but you can't choose to believe something if you don't believe
it. You can't just do that. So it doesn't matter. You bet me money on something. Oh,
you got to believe this or don't believe it. And it's like, I can't choose to believe something
like that. Or maybe you can maybe act like you believe the sky is green, but you can't
actually believe it if you don't believe it. And that's what Eleazar's talking about with
first order and second order beliefs where it's like, you really in your guts believe this thing
or like, um, I guess most of my life, like when I was a kid, I kind of, I was religious because
I was supposed to be religious and that never, I actually remember doing double think a lot as a
kid where I would start to think a thing and then be like, no, no, no, no, no distractions, ponies,
there's a dog, pretty rainbows or, you know. Yeah, wrong being scared of wrong think as a kid,
as an exposure to religion is kind of, I think one of the features which is terrifying.
Were you guys taught to be scared of wrong think?
Well, it's just like what, what Jayce was describing.
Okay. Yeah. Jayce certainly sounds like.
Yeah. I don't think I, I mean, I, my memory of all of my childhoods so vague. I don't think so.
There was some period around 10 years old, give or take three years where I was concerned for my
immortal soul, maybe younger. But it like, I don't know, it's been too long. My memory's too hazy.
But I imagine that's a thing, especially, you know, if you're whatever the Bible says you
shouldn't be, if you're gay or something, you'll hide from that. You're, you have an extra inclination
to hide from, from your identity and your, your orientation because you believe it's wrong, right?
Right. I remember having these thoughts like, man, Chelsea would be like really hard as a guy,
it's too bad. Just like kind of like, you know, crush it on my friend and like just doing all
the same things. Like when I had a crush on a guy, like, you know, staring at them out of the corner
of your eye and then like, but like just being like too bad. She's not a guy. What if I just imagine
she's a guy for a bit and then I'll imagine that we're dating and it's just like, I don't know.
But like, you're literally told that God can read your thoughts and that you not only have to like
act correctly, but you have to have the right belief. So like as a kid is, I was just, I remember
when I did believe in religion, I was mostly just mad at God a lot of the time too. I'm kind of
resentful. I was like, yeah, whatever. But it sort of also felt like, yeah, I mean, like, look
around the world kind of sucks and things aren't fair. And then like, so it makes sense that we
have this like totally like douchebag God. That rage at God was, I mean, it was huge for me too.
It's really a thing about when you're on the cusp of disbelieving because you still like feel like
God is real, right? And yet you see everything that's horrible in the world. And so there's this
anger. And you're like, what the hell, God? Yeah, it's not until you've been an atheist for a
number of years that you're like, oh, there was no one there in the first place. But God, I was
so mad for so long. And then like that anger transferred once I accepted God wasn't real from
God to religion instead, since they had convinced me that there was this God.
I think my thoughts kind of went back and forth. Like, it's really hard to regenerate what it was
like. It's hard to even remember. Like, I think when I was really little, I did believe in religion,
but only because I had no other models. And everybody else said that they believed it and
acted like it, like, you know, everybody that I knew, which was like my immediate family,
members, and friends. You were raised basically, you're religious, right? I was raised a non
denominational, some version of Christian God is real. Like, but we didn't go to church. I was never
told this is the way it is or something explicitly, but my parents were vaguely religious in a way
that imprinted a bit. The analogy I use is like, I believed God existed as a 10-year-old the same
way that, like, I believe Japan existed. Like, I've never been there. I'd seen pictures. People
told me it was real. Yeah, you have no reason to think it doesn't. Exactly. You just believe it
because you were told that as a child, which I think there's probably an evolutionary advantage
to believing in parents. The seven-year-old who wants to investigate whether or not the
lake really contains alligators doesn't go on to have children.
But also, what kind of crazy conspiracy thinking is it to believe that the entire world has
conspired to convince you of this all-powerful person that doesn't actually exist?
Well, but as a kid, you're not thinking the whole world's convincing you, right? It's just
your whole world is your parents. Yeah, but you would have to think like a conspiracy theorist
to doubt that as a kid. Oh, sure. Yeah, exactly. I remember an early, like,
deconversion moment being like realizing there are other religions and realizing that there are
people. They say that in some sects of Christianity, if you have a baby and the baby dies and the
baby hasn't been baptized yet, it's like, well, the baby is going to hell or purgatory. There's
all the weird wiggle things that people would do to you. I was like, well, they don't. Okay,
I know it says this, but there's a special purgatory just for unbaptized babies that's
actually really nice. It's not heaven. I remember the Rainbow Bridge, which is still a thing that
a lot of people talk about where like, it's animal heaven where your pets like live and then you get
to like cross the Rainbow Bridge and be reunited with all your pets. Oh my God, I'd never heard of
that. That is so adorable. There's like a whole book about it. I think I was in Sam's Club. I
remember being stuck in Sam's Club a lot of my childhood just reading the books out of boredom
and they were all like weird shit like that. Anyway, you should the the post ends up with
you should wonder I think whether the happiness of stupidity is optimal if it is a piece. Yeah,
there was a thing I wanted to say before. Yeah, grab it. Okay. Well, so he says that in order for
you to be able to choose which beliefs you want to, which biases you want to have or not to be
more happy, you would first need to a good model of reality so you can extrapolate the consequences
of both rationality and irrationality. And then you would have to forget that you had done that
afterwards. So you can't know the consequences of being biased until you've de-biased yourself.
And at that point, it's too late because there is no obliviate spell.
Oh, I do remember an instance of trying to make myself believe something as a kid. It was not
religion, but you guys remember the show Cat Dog from the 90s? Yeah. Yeah, people. Okay. It was
this like Nickelodeon show and their the main character was like a it was the like head and
torso of a cat fused to the head and torso of a dog. It's less horrifying than it sounds,
but the question of where's the poop come out is still an open question.
What kinds of weird cartoons, logic about like the physiology, I guess it was clever, but like
there's this sort of dichotomy that like, I guess it's in a lot of fiction, especially a lot of
cartoons, you think of like SpongeBob and Squidward, where you've got the happy idiot, like dog was
the happy idiot character, and then cat was the like the Squidward, like always like being gloomy,
but like intelligent. And I remember like a lot of cartoons hurt as a kid, because I always identified
with like the gloomy one that was always the butt of the joke. Like I identify so much with Squidward
now and I'm watching SpongeBob. And it's like, oh man. And for a bit, I was like, I'm gonna try to
be a dog person. It's like, I'm gonna like like dog. And I tried really hard and I was just like,
nope, can't identify with this guy. I think there is a way you could choose to do the second part
where you only keep the biases that are helpful to you. If you never actually did the first order
rationality, so you didn't find out which ones are helpful and which ones are harmful, but you
just trust the rest of society, everyone around you to have done that work instead and just adopt
their beliefs and their biases. Oh, so we should just hire a rationalist handler that'll only teach
us the things that'll better make us happier. That would work, but you have to trust your handler.
And then, you know, the Who Watches the Watchers thing comes along.
Isn't that kind of what religion is anyway? People be like, we have looked at everything
already. This is the correct way to do things. No reason to look any further. If you look any
further, it'll make you sad and ruin your life. It's an eight plot of 1984. It is eight plot of
1984. Totalitarianism being sort of like, yes, we the government know what's best for everyone,
shut up, do what we say, believe what we believe. But it is not portrayed as a good thing. Yeah,
I think it's like, whereas we're trying to get to like the haptopia where you do have a benevolent
AI God fixing all the things and telling you don't look into that hole over there, it'll make you
sad. It's still a little bit of 1984. And what did you say, Chase? Nothing, nothing. I was, I was
just talking about the AI God. Oh, I mean, like, what if you could live in a mellos without knowing
about the kid in the basement? Yeah, I mean, that sounds like the happy scenario, right? But don't
they make everyone see it? They do. Yeah. Yeah. Who knows if that's required for the ritual to
keep working or not, right? That's why it's called those who walk away. Yeah. And I always felt I
would have been one of the ones that walked away. Like, I... Me too. I think everyone thinks that
of themselves though. That's kind of the point, right? I know myself. I mean, like, I do radical
honesty because I know that I can't like, keep secrets. I just blur stuff out. And I also know
that I have to like, even if I know that like, finding out the truth about something is going
to hurt, I still like, can't just... I think that's like, probably the mindset that's like,
that causes people to be more inclined to seek out rationality and this kind of thing.
Yeah. Yeah. Wanting to know the truth and be the master of your own destiny kind of thing. Yeah.
Do you want to end up with the final part? Yeah. I guess there's one other thing before
that. You can't know the consequences of being, oh, you already read that part. Yeah.
You should wonder, I think, whether the happiness of stupidity is optimal,
if it is the most happiness that a human can aspire to, but it matters not. That way is
closed to you if it was ever open. All that is left to you now is to aspire to such happiness
as a rationalist can achieve. I think it may prove... I think it may prove greater in the end.
Yeah. And that's good writing. Yeah, it is good writing. And I think I also agree with the sentiment.
Like, when I was saying intelligent people can really expound on their depression much better
and make it more seem more reasonable and, in fact, more people, I think you can do the same
thing with happiness where you can just appreciate the happiness on a more in-depth level and share
it with others on an almost deeper level, I guess, than if you didn't have all the
background and the work and the thinking put into it. Yeah. I think so. I think it's like,
when you get into any art form, whether it be movies or music or whatever, at first you just
like it because it is enjoyable and cool and appealing. And the more you get into the geekery
of how this is made and how it can be appreciated and you watch all the videos about people
deconstructing stuff, the more you're like, wow, there is so many more levels of how to appreciate
this stuff. And you tend to start liking things in a more and different way. Yeah. Yeah. I think
there's something there. There's a deeper capacity for appreciation of something that way. Because
I mean, that's how I feel about religion too, where there's the idea of this very simple
universe. But then there's actually understanding how things work and it's so weird and cool.
Quantum mechanics, cellular mechanics, genetics, there's so much to learn. And if you're somebody
who's very curiosity-driven, that would be a very small world to live in if I was, I don't know,
European peasant. Yeah. And it's sort of like stop asking questions about everything. Well,
that would be a pretty unfulfilling life because it's just like, okay, I guess everything is exactly
what it looks like and everything that people tell me is exactly right. Just the peasant lifestyle
seems really bad in general. It's what peasants do, right? They hammer a thing. The King of
Monty Python, where the peasants were just sort of like- Just keep hammering the dirt until food
comes out of it. I think they were just like grabbing piles of mud and just sort of throwing the
mud around. There's some lovely filth over here. Still so funny. Yeah. We got to roll through these
if we're going to get to our topic of the day, right? Yes, we are. Jesus. Don't sweat it. It's fun.
The second one is why I'm looking. And all it says is that he's writing a book. Is there anything else
to add? Yeah. It's for those part-ventos. Yeah. Like vlogging. He basically says that he has a very
hard time like trying to write formal papers and like a big formal book, but he has no trouble at
all like writing emails and posting on forums and shit. And that just comes out as fast as he can
type. So he decided, yeah, let's go ahead and just post a blog post every day. And afterwards, I will
edit all up, curate it into a book. And that will be how I write this thing. And that is literally
exactly what he did, writing AI- Tozombies. Yeah. Rationality AI-tozombies is basically
the curation and reshuffling of all these posts that we are going through. We just like to see
the sausage made. So that's why we are going through this part rather than the official
final released version. It's fun to recognize that like, hey, I have this problem where I
can't do it this way, but I still want to do it. So I'm going to do it the way that
works for me and just make it work. He could not do it. There's a really common
writer's thing where he was saying, I just write very slowly and specifically because I'm thinking
a lot about every sentence. I'm going back and tweaking it and editing it. That's why like
when I was trying to do NaNoWriMo, it's like write a novel in a month, month. Oh man, that's
coming up, isn't it? It's next month. It's in November. Oh no. I've never done NaNoWriMo. I
just can't write fast enough. Well, actually like the only way I was able to do it was using
it's a free web tool called Write or Die. Oh, I know this one. Yeah. And that's where-
If you stop writing for a long enough time, it deletes everything you've written, right?
Or it'll start slowly deleting from like the back forward or there's a bunch of different modes.
I found the most value out of the one that would just- If you stop writing after a few
seconds, it'll slowly start to turn your screen red and make a terrible sound.
And you have to keep writing in order to make it stop. There's a positive one too, where it was
like if you keep writing for a long enough time, you'll hear like nice noises and see pictures
of kittens or stuff like that. That one didn't work for me though. The punishment was more
motivational. Yeah. So this one's short, not much to say. The one thing I wanted to point out
before we moved on was that I think I view this as a strength of rationality of like when you're
trying to do something and it's not working, but it's the traditional way of doing stuff.
Maybe like stopping and looking around and seeing what works for you that's kind of similar that
you can hack into using as a workaround, like just doing things weird. No respected academic
would just start posting blog posts every day as a kind of method of writing their next big
academic book. But you know, he did and it worked really, really well for him. So doing
things weird is a thing that we can harness. I think actually that was also the purpose of
writing Harry Potter and the methods of rationality where it was like trying to write this like
academic stuff wasn't really generating a lot of momentum. What if I make it in the form of a
Harry Potter fan fiction? Yeah. And that turned out to not only be like very motivational for
cranking out all the stuff, but then also, you know, attracted the fan base or I guess the community
as it exists now. Most people were introduced or most people that I know of. I think he did a poll
too. It was a very large percentage of people that actually found the community. It was around
like half of people. Yeah. Came to it through HPMOR or HPMore as everyone else says. The people
who don't have to, you know, spell out the name of the website for people to go to.
HPMore.
HPMore, yeah. See, if I were trying to go to hipmore.com, I'd be H-I-P-M-O-R-E and yeah,
just end up at someplace that sells hip clothing.
And then the last post was planning fallacy, which I don't know if we have to cover
all the stuff in it because I think most people are familiar with it.
Oh, we should absolutely cover it because, you know, there's no hipmore.com.
Oh, man, take it. It's too late. Now that I typed it into a browser,
someone else has already grabbed it to squat it. I just, I didn't think there wouldn't be a hipmore.com.
I should just redirect too much now.
Yeah, so planning fallacy.
Yeah, not everyone else says this has read the sequences, so we should cover it. That's fair.
Like planning fallacy, though, is my worst thing ever. Like, I suck at this. This is the
rationality skill that I'm the worst at, I think. And it's really hard to overcome this like,
it's a cognitive bias where you just sort of, it sounds so dumb when you say it too. It's like,
when people are trying to think of how long it'll take to do something, for example,
they'll think about like the optimal scenario. Like, oh yeah, there's this one time where I
wrote an essay in like three hours the night before. So that's clearly my norm. Oh yeah,
the traffic usually isn't that bad that time of day. I've made it in 15 minutes one time,
so probably I could do that in 15 minutes. And then like you just go with this completely
over optimistic estimate.
You always just think of like, how long does it take you to drive from A to B? And you don't
think how often is there an accident or construction or something along the way,
which actually is very frequently. So you want me to read the first several pieces?
Yeah. It starts out with this study that was made by researchers who are named,
but I won't read the names. Researchers asked for estimated times by which the students thought it
was 50%, 75% and 99% probable that their personal projects would be done. 13% of subjects finished
the project by the time that they had assigned a 50% probability. 19% finished by the time they
assigned a 75% probability and only 45% less than half of them finished by the time of their 99%
probability level. The researchers say the results for the 99% probability level are
especially striking. Even when asked to make a highly conservative forecast, a prediction that
they felt virtually certain that they would fulfill, students confidence in their time
estimates far exceeds their accomplishments. And it says that the reason for this is asking
subjects, oh, and another surprising finding, asking subjects for their prediction based on
the realistic best guess scenarios and asking subjects for their hoped for best case scenarios
produced indistinguishable results. So their best guess was the same guess as, you know,
what is the absolutely wildly most optimistic guess that you can make? And yeah, it's because
they said ultimately it came down to generally people didn't envision unexpected delays or
unforeseen catastrophes. They just looked through things like what would this look like normally?
And the lesson is that normal is never what normally happens. Chase, what have you been
screwed by the planning fallacy? Every time I've ever planned anything in my life.
Best answer. Well, I'm going to quickly say, well, do we want to cover how he said is the
best way to get around this? Yeah, that was actually what I wanted to highlight if nothing else.
Where was it at the end? Yeah, inside versus outside perspective. I want to kind of say these
backwards because it's the last two paragraphs. So there's a fairly reliable way to fix the
planning fallacy. If you have something broadly similar to a reference class of previous projects,
just ask how long similar projects have taken in the past, without considering any of the
special properties of this project. Better yet, ask an experienced outsider how long similar
projects have taken. You'll get back an answer that sounds hideously long and clearly reflects no
understanding of the special reasons why this particular task will take less time. This answer
is true, deal with it. Yeah, or like, I'm just dating Phoenix who has the kind of common autistic
thing of getting very upset about when things are planned a certain way and then they're not going
that way. So like, I'll be like, I'll be home in 15 minutes and they'll just like text back and
I'll catch planning fallacy and I'll be like, I'll be home in 30 minutes. Nice. I think the other
one other way is to run your plan by a group of experienced people. Like project managers.
Well, no, I was going to say explicitly not project managers or product owners at a tech
job, but your team. You want to leave the bureaucrats out of it. And when your team
sits down to plan stuff, you say, okay, well, this doesn't sound so bad. They're like, no,
no, I've been there takes for fucking ever double that your estimate on how long you think it will
take. Like that, that I find pretty valuable to like roughly predicting the, I don't know,
time complexity of accomplishing a task. And if you're uncertain, just pad your time guess a bunch.
If you don't know, you know, if you've never remodeled a kitchen, don't read online one thing
that says it should really take $1,000. Like, no, I'm going to just go ahead and assume that
this person has no idea what they're talking about. It's going to take me three months and $5,000.
You know, like, then at the very least, you're positively surprised when it only takes you
two months and $3,000, right? Yeah. So if you don't know and you can't ask experts, just
just pad your guess a bunch. Yeah, the outside view is what it is called when instead of looking
at the particular details of what you actually want to accomplish, you just look at how long
similar tasks took in the past, and then think it'll be roughly the same amount of time.
Yeah, don't assume the happy path. Yeah. And when I initially started, you know,
independently realizing how bad planning policy was, and initially came up with solutions,
like my initial reflex is, you know, the padding, just pad it to X, but it can get difficult when
you get into like recursive padding. Like, okay, well, walking to my car is only 30 seconds,
so I'll double that to a minute. But in the wider context of a project, it adds up in weird ways.
Yeah, I drive to a friend's house, you know, if your phone says it takes 32 minutes, maybe give
yourself 40, you know, pad it a little bit, because phones are pretty good at planning,
that sort of thing. They know about traffic and all this and that. But, you know, if it's a
month-long project, it's hard really to get a good number down, which is the other thing is just
to bake in some room for flexibility, you know, like, that's why I was mentioning leave your
product directors out of your decision process, because they'll say, hey, we need this by the end
of November. And it's like, well, then you're not going to get it, because we can't commit to
shipping this, you know, immediately without all the details and stuff planned in advance. And even
then it's, it's hazy. You could tell us what you want or when you want it, but not both.
I was thinking of the, there's a rat fic about on building the Death Star. Yes. You know, which
one that is. It's a great one. It's tools of destruction, I think. I have been looking for
that one. Is that the one about, yeah, the whole project management? And when I was thinking of
project managers, it was this person who I was thinking of where they're like, no, like the,
you know, in fact, I did a, I was going to say to new voice though, I did instruments of destruction,
isn't it? And it is by Alexander Wales, same guy who did Metropolitan Man. Yeah, that was really
fun. There, I've actually been looking for that for like, probably months to years. No, you're
welcome then.
The post ends, it doesn't actually end with this, but there's a great example of the outside view
says on a cross cultural study, they found that Japanese students expected to finish their essays
10 days before deadline. They actually finished one day before deadline, asked when they had
previously completed, completed similar tasks, they responded one day before deadline. This is
the power of the outside view over the inside view. And I got to say, I am, I am consistently
impressed by how accurate the phone GPS is are with estimating my arrival time. And I think it's,
you know, it's just entirely because the phone doesn't know how long something is supposed to
take. It just compares every other route, every other person that drove that route recently.
And it says, yeah, that's how long it took them. It'll take you the same amount of time.
Exactly. It gives you the outside view anyway. Yeah,
know about the inside view at all. All right, are we ready to dive in?
I believe we are. Oh, wait, before we got to say what we're doing next week. Oh,
yes. Did anyone else have anything to say about any of these posts and the last one specifically?
I don't think so. Okay. Every time I hear the word planning fallacy, I hear
Hermione Granger say, Oh, looks like you fell prey to the planning fallacy. Because I just,
that was not at all the way I heard that line being delivered in my head. And then she gave it
to me and I was like, Oh, that's perfect. Yeah. That is so good. This is our casting. Yeah. All
right. For next time, we are reading Canemans planning anecdote.
Kahneman. Thank you. Kahneman's planning anecdote,
which probably should have been in this week, but I mean, three is really our limit. Also,
conjunction fallacy and conjunction controversy in parentheses or how they nail it down. So those
three posts. And as always, the links are included in the show notes and at our website,
the basin conspiracy.com. All right. Going on to our actual subject. Have y'all heard of the
earn it act that was put forward in March by Lindsey Graham and a bunch of other people who
hate privacy and the internet and everything good? I had not. I hadn't really run it on my radar.
Chase, can you tell us what this abomination is? Okay. Yes. But to start, we'll kind of have to
start with how the internet works. Serious tubes, right? It always comes back to section 230.
Yes, exactly. And section 230 basically is what allows the internet to exist more or less,
as we know it today. Yeah. It simply makes it so that content hosts, content providers,
even just service providers, don't have to entirely vet every single piece of information
on their entire website from every single user all of the time, because that would be completely
unreasonable. I mean, it's doable. It would just drastically alter what the internet is.
It would be like if UPS or FedEx or even the US Postal Service, if anytime someone sent a mail
bomb or anything dangerous or even like maybe a legal harassing threat through the mail, if the
delivery service could be held liable for delivering that bomb or that threat and they would serve
jail time or pay for it, then there would be no such thing as something that's privately sent
anymore. The deliverer would inspect every single thing and vet it before they would deliver it,
because if you send something illegal through the mail and then they go to jail for it,
they're just not going to let you send anything ever and that would be the internet. No one could
post anything anywhere unless it had been completely vetted by some other third party.
Well, by the company themselves, because it would be in their own interest because they're the ones
being held liable. So it stops just shy of forcing every letter to be read to the government, but
it's... Yeah. It'd be like if you couldn't have a phone conversation unless the phone company that
owned the wires vetted everything that was being said to make sure there was nothing illegal being
there just is no privacy anymore and due to the huge amount of labor that it would take to vet
every single thing anyone wants to say on the phone, we wouldn't have the phone system as we
know it. Yeah, it would make everything inefficient and it would provide possible deniability for
censorship of other things that maybe the government just doesn't like you saying. Right, absolutely.
So section 230 basically, if I remember correctly, was passed in the early 90s and it's the law that
says the equivalent of the phone company or the mail carrier cannot be held liable for what is
being said by people on the internet. Yes, you're still liable for things you post. If you were
on the website and you post an article that's full of illegal slander, what have you, you're
still liable. But if someone, if you post a positive article and someone in the comments says,
ah, he's actually an alien from space, you are not liable for that slander's claim.
Right. And more specifically, if some sort of illegal pornography was posted,
then you can go to jail for posting that thing. But the ISP that routed your file and the website
that your comment was posted on would not be held liable for what you did.
That'd be like, imagine, like you said, the phone analogy is perfect. And if I called you
and we're planning some terrorist threat, that's illegal for me to plan it with you and you probably
do agree. It'd be insane for T-Mobile held accountable for allowing this to happen.
Right.
And it's like, how are they going to pause the conversation long enough to hear everything
we're saying and allow it to go through or give it a green light or a red light?
And there's a fine distinction here because Section 230 is as we were talking about carriers
and data purveyors of all sorts. But the ERNET Act is specifically removing,
revoking those protections for content hosts. ISPs aren't explicitly mentioned anyway.
But it's a similar problem because a lot of content hosts we like, your tumblers and your
Facebooks and I'm dating myself, but it's...
The tweeters of YouTube.
They're full of user-generated content, just like the stuff the ISP would host.
So a comment section on your website, the Discord for discussing after an episode,
all of these things are hosted externally. And those would be what are more affected by
ERNET than ISPs.
Now, Discord itself would be impossible to have anymore.
Basically.
Well, no.
I mean, they would just have to check everything, right?
Right.
They would just scan and morally approve every single message, which is in no way problematic.
Well, I mean, it certainly wouldn't be free anymore if you had to pay a censor to approve
every single thing.
Yeah, I think it's like...
So that's what Section 230 is. What did ERNET do?
Well, ERNET more or less revokes those protections for content hosts, content providers,
anyone with a user accessible or a user modifiable.
I don't want to say comment section, but...
And what pray tell...
Anywhere a user can post.
What pray tell is their excuse for how they can do...
Why the sort of thing is a thing that they can do or they want to do?
Oh, save the children.
Specifically, child porn, right?
Yes.
Yeah.
And we have to bring up that the ACLU, the...
What's the...
Oh, the Human Rights Foundation.
EFF, the Human Rights Foundation for Protection of Human Rights.
All of these think it's a terrible plan, which you would expect to be the people,
maybe encouraging laws that protect children, but that might be because it doesn't help protect
children very much.
Yeah.
And I mean, in every single article I read, there was at least two disclaimers in there,
often more than that, saying child pornography is absolutely disgusting and horrible,
and it's illegal, and it should be illegal, and that's good, and we should fight it.
And then they went on to say why this law is terrible.
But like, you know, it was basically a...
I was almost sad how that seemed to be required.
Like, if they didn't say that people would assume that they were child pornography fans or something.
Well, because when you couch it in the...
This is to end this child sex exploitation, then like, if you're saying,
well, this is a terrible idea, like, oh, so you're a pro child sex exploitation or whatever.
So it's a nice, weasel-y way to get it in there and to have the conversation framed around that.
I mean, child pornography is like a misnomer because pornography is not that bad,
but child pornography is universally the worst thing in the world.
I had a great miserable...
Oh, it's filmed child rape, right?
Right.
I had a great miserable two hours with Sam Harris's podcast,
and he's talking with Gabriel Dance, who is like the...
Let's see, deputy investigations editor at the New York Times,
and he works with a small team investigating all things,
technology from online sexual abuse...
Or online sexual...
Sexual, Jesus.
Online child sexual abuse imagery to the companies that trade and sell our data.
So, I mean, the problem of child sexual abuse is the worst, you know.
It's among the worst imaginable crimes, right?
And so, I think Facebook, if I remember from the conversation,
it was a few months ago, is one of the best reporters of it in the tens of millions a year.
Wow.
Because they scan the stuff that's posted.
So it's not that it's the most...
It might be the most popular platform for sharing it,
it might not be, but the point is they're reporting it at the highest level,
which is actually good.
You kind of want that.
So if that means I can't send you a private DM
without someone being able to sniff it, I mean, it's one of those...
This is where I'm dunking wrong.
This is the...
The Urna Act is terrible,
and I can see why it has all these terrible externalities.
And yet, for most things, for most people,
it's not going to impact anything, right?
Well, it means that now someone is looking at every single thing you send.
Right.
For most things, for most people, as Jayce mentioned, it opens up a lot of other...
Even best case, and we say it's implemented with the best intentions by entirely...
People entirely interested in preserving public rights,
even in that best case, everything's still going to be filtered algorithmically.
And AIs have...
Simple AIs and simple filters have a terrible habit of blocking false positive,
again, blocking all sorts of stuff that shouldn't be blocked just out of an abundance of caution,
because it's easier to have an overly strict filter that blocks all sorts of stuff
than it is to have...
Okay, go ahead.
Oh, yeah, than it is to have a filter that's not strict enough and opens you to liability.
You don't have a bunch of false positives than one false negative.
Right.
If you're AI filtering for child pornography.
Like, I remember when Tumblr got acquired,
they shut down a bunch of stuff and they flagged a bunch of stuff as inappropriate content.
And a lot of them didn't even have...
It would be like a statue or something.
And it's like, yep, that elbow looks kind of like a nipple and the AI caught it as a nipple.
And so it's funny, but that's just the overzealous problem there, right?
Right.
So best case scenario, that's what it looks like.
Best case.
And there are a lot of other less good ways this can affect ordinary people in ordinary lives.
And let's go into the Earned Act itself for a bit,
because it's not just saying this law makes child pornography illegal,
because child pornography has always been illegal and that never stopped.
What it actually did was make it so that if anyone posted something on any service
that counts as a child sexual material or whatever they used, then...
I wish they used that.
It's actually just anything illegal, not at all.
Really?
I thought it had to be specifically with a child abuse.
I don't think so.
And maybe that's in the amendment.
The actual act is called the Eliminating Abusive and Rampant Neglect
of Interactive Technologies Act.
These names don't mean shit anymore.
Rampant, rampant neglect of interactive technologies.
They just needed it to be words.
They're really one of the acronyms.
They earn it.
As far as I know, it doesn't specifically call out, let's see, any...
No, I think it's almost a blanket revocation of Section 230 protections,
which includes just about everything you can be sued for.
It was originally called Earn It because there was going to be a government committee
which made a list of best practices, and as long as you followed that list of best practices,
you could still be protected by Section 230.
This is the original bill, and it had basically nothing in details as to what the committee
would say, and they could revise what they wanted every five years.
This was viewed as a way to get rid of encryption on the internet basically entirely,
because it was assumed that one of the things that would be in the requirements was that
any law enforcement can see anything on the website or that went through the website without
exception.
The naive thing is... I remember this was nice and fun to watch Sam Harris just kind of
spout this as somebody who doesn't know tech stuff, but then immediately update when he got
backlash was like, it makes sense that Apple should have... This is me quoting him.
It makes sense that Apple should have a way to get into your iPhone because they literally
catch a terrorist or you're murdered and they're pretty sure you got a video of the person murdering
you, but if your phone is locked and there's no way to get it, then that person... Murderer walks
free or whatever. Wouldn't it be nice if we could just... There's some secret way that you have to
get a warrant and you take it to Apple and they can get into it. The problem with that is once a
door exists, somebody can break in. If there's no door, then there's no key that someone can
forge to get in, so that someone can leak or lose 10 years from now.
Right, exactly.
I think it's just a matter of understanding technologically that you can't have a backdoor
without also having it be exploitable. Yes, there's literally no way to make
encryption that is completely secure in every way except to this one agency. If there is a hole in
it, that hole is exploitable by anybody. My main contribution to this was when I was googling
around this, I saw that it was introduced by Lindsey Graham, who everybody is a big fan of.
This was the guy who... I said that my main contribution to this would be ad homonyms
against Lindsey Graham. His SuperPack got a quarter million donation from Oracle a few days
before the country through a fit at TikTok. Everyone knows who this guy is, but I think
he was the guy who just this week said something about the good old days of... How did he put it?
Segregation. Yeah, the good old days of segregation. I mean,
again, it doesn't have anything to do with his argument. I just hate the guy.
But what I like about the slithering meanness of it is couching it in terms of fighting the
worst crimes imaginable makes it impossible to argue against, right? Right. Oh, you're pro-child
porn. Is that where you're fighting this? Yeah. This is basically the same thing that
Faust Assista was, where they're like, oh, you're for the trafficking of sex trafficking of women
and children. I'm like, no, that's not what this bill fights at all. That's not what it does. It
makes their situation even worse. And earn it is a very similar thing where it doesn't address
child pornography because, like I said, child pornography already illegal. What it does is
make content providers basically become censors for anything that goes onto their system or
through their system. The Human Rights Watch says in the first paragraph of their article about it,
the United States Judiciary Committee should reject a proposed law that would jeopardize
privacy and free expression rights without effectively protecting children from online
sexual exploitation. Everyone who's actually... Dude does work in this realm says, first of all,
this is not effective. This is not going to protect children. And all it is going to do is
just wreck the internet for people. They've also pointed out that this runs into Fourth Amendment
problems. The Fourth Amendment is the one against unreasonable search and seizure,
where you have to have a warrant in order to search people's private shit. There have been
rulings in the past that when a company was compelled to search things and turn it over to
the government, they were acting as a government agent. And so the stuff they found was not admissible
because they hadn't gotten a warrant for it first. This would have to go through the courts to
really make a final decision, but based on prior rulings, this would effectively turn
every single content company into a state agent that is required to monitor all people's contributions
to it. And so basically, then it would all be covered under the Fourth Amendment,
since the companies haven't gotten a warrant to search every single thing everyone is posting
beforehand and might make anything that was posted illegal not admissible as evidence,
which would make pursuing these cases even harder if the actual stuff that was posted that is
child porn is not admissible as evidence anymore. Is this just for public platforms like YouTube
or Facebook? Or is this for any sort of encrypted over-the-net communication?
Funny you should ask. Go ahead.
No, please.
Okay. So there has been an amendment made to the Earn It Act where they actually carved out
encryption where they said, okay, end-to-end encryption will not be covered by this. So
if you have end-to-end encryption, that's okay. This won't be covered anymore.
So I could still text you links to child pornography via signal?
Yes, but I mean that would be illegal.
Right. Yeah, but it would go into the radar. But what are we going to say, Chase?
Yes. However, their best practices list still includes recommendations such as scan it before
it goes into the end-to-end system.
Yeah. That's like saying we won't read your letter while it's on the truck,
but we can read it when it arrives at the post office.
We'll open it in the period between when it's in your mailbox and when the guy picks it up.
Right. Yeah. So they kind of carved that out, not sure exactly how that'll work,
but they also took away the thing where you can earn, quote-unquote, your Section 230 protection
by following their practices because that was the thing that kind of made it look like every
company would now be an agent of the state. So now just simply everyone has lost all Section
230 protections if this passes. And whether you follow their best practices guidelines or not
basically would be more of a how hard the court is going to hit you afterwards for anything that
was posted on your system. And it's just looking for any illegal stuff, right?
So if I wanted to hurt Facebook after this passes, I could go to your page and post a link to
how to make a bomb or something. And I would get in trouble, presumably. And so would Facebook?
Yes. It is called the harassers veto. You could do that in theory. Yeah.
But that would make Facebook liable for what you did.
So I guess I just don't see how any of these platforms can possibly survive.
That's kind of the point, I think. I think they want complete censorship control.
The human rights to avoid criminal prosecution companies would have a strong incentive to adopt
practices for restricting content that would sweep more broadly than the illegal content.
So it wouldn't put them out of business. It would just make them ban encryption
or have such a strong filter that it's going to make it very unusable.
A filter against talking about anything that might conceivably be illegal now or in the future,
which end up to the individual company's interpretation of that, which would probably
be quite wide, right? Post a picture of the recipe I use to grow weed in my basement.
Oh, that's illegal in 30-some-odd states. That's illegal content.
It also does this purdish thing of cracking down on any sexual content. And Eric quotes
sexual content like a woman breastfeeding is going to go. All trans stuff is going to go
because that's sex. It includes all sexual education. Funnily enough, it also includes
any sexual education that says abstinence is the only way to go because that's still sex ed.
So that would probably also be swept up, although I doubt they would enforce that particular one.
Yeah, one of the interesting parts about the amendment is that it
says state laws also can revoke Section 230 protection. And there are two states,
specifically, I believe Illinois and Florida was the other one, have laws that say if you don't
monitor what your users are posting, that is illegal. And previously, those didn't particularly
matter because the federal law with Section 230 in it preempted that and said, no, carriers can't
be held liable for this. But with that being specifically removed by this amendment, now any
company that had any users that lived in Illinois or the other state, which I think is Florida,
would be required to scan everything that anyone said, a post that are transmitted through their
service, or they could be held liable for, quote, reckless or negligent allowing people to do shit.
Rampant.
Yes, rampant. Just rampant communication.
So, Chase, what do you see the dystopian outcome of this looking like? This past is, say, in December,
once they confirm that new Supreme Court judge. And five years from now, what does the Internet
look like? Well, it's basically an amplification of, it starts with an amplification of a huge
pile of problems we already have. Companies don't want to host anything or show anything that might
not be, right now, that might not be profitable. They only want to show what's going to get the
clicks and keep users on. They're not going to show, hey, my car died. Can anyone help me out?
They're going to show cute puppies or whatever. And now we're just going to expand that into
anything that might be criminal, maybe, sort of, depending on what we feel like and depending on
how accurate our filters are. And as a wide blanket, that is going to interfere with reasonable
conversations about a whole lot of things that aren't explicitly legal, but are a lot easier
to put in the illegal bucket, right? And a lot of, there are a lot of important things that
ride that line. A lot of journalists, a lot of other communication that rides that, yeah,
it's not illegal, but it might be, and it's not profitable, so let's just not.
And specifically, there's a lot of things that, since the guidelines are so vague,
they're just like whatever this committee thinks isn't great, what it comes down to is
stuff that the government doesn't like. Specifically, speech the government might not
like will become censored because these guys don't want to risk being taken to the government and
either locked up in jails or fined millions of dollars. And so if the government has a bug
up its butt about protesters in the streets, maybe that stuff will just get wiped out. If the
government instead gets taken over by the communists and Pro First Amendment rights stuff is not
liked by the government, then that can all be taken off the internet. Like whatever the government
feels is disadvantageous to them will start being taken off the internet.
And whistleblowers.
Imagine how deaf me whistleblowers.
Imagine if it was literally illegal to share like all those videos of police brutality over
the last six months. Like Twitter feeds were full of them and all that.
Or if you're on the other side, what if it was illegal to talk about the satanic conspiracy
that the Democrats have to rape children? What is it that QAnon says? It's something along those
lines, right? There's lots of other things. What if it was illegal to talk about your religion?
Because the government is now officially a atheist government.
Yeah. It's one of those weird annoying things that I don't know. I don't even have the energy to
be upset about it. So I guess the other thing is that this would be for...
It's not going to start out with that.
It's going to start out with...
That's why I said five years, not next month, right?
So this sounds like the kind of thing where if my internet didn't think I was operating in the
United States, it would be fine. I just VPN to England.
England and France are also bad choices, but for different reasons.
Also any company that has a significant user base in the US is just going to
have this in a blanket thing because it's hard to have a policy that doesn't include...
It's the same reason like textbooks that cover biology often just skip over some things that
Texas doesn't like because Texas buys so many fucking textbooks. It's easier just to make
textbooks that is okay with Texas than to make a separate textbook for Texas students.
The flip side of that is think about how many of those...
Are you sure you accept cookies? That's a result of the EU's GPDR, which technically
doesn't affect you here, but I bet you've clicked on a few of those pop-ups.
Oh my god. Privacy policy cookies. Every website you go on now, it's just like,
okay, we've updated our privacy policy. We've updated it again. Hey, you enable cookies.
Do you want to know what cookie? I'm like, oh my god.
Yeah, that's GDPR. That's not even American law.
Exactly. And then there was a separate one. I forget what the shorthand for it was,
but in California, I'd had a similar thing. If you do business in California,
you might remember the title of it, but basically, if your company does business in
California, your internet company, the user has a right to actually have their data deleted.
I think after 30 or 60 or 90 days of inactivity or something,
so you're like, you can actually delete your Facebook account now because Facebook has
customers in California. Am I remembering that right, Chase?
At least that one sounds not so bad, but this was fun because my company didn't have any of
these things implemented, so we had to set up a bunch of shit to handle how do we actually
delete people, which because our database was put together by, it seems like it was put together
by people working all across the globe in different time zones who spoke different
languages. When in fact, it was six guys who sat in the same room, but it was a nightmare to
implement a way to anonymize and pseudonymize and then delete their data. Yeah, I don't know, man.
Is there any happy news that we can, like, is there a chance that this will be, you know, not
passed? Is there any not somewhere way to look at this? There's a chance to be passed with an
additional amendment that outright bans private communication in the country. That's the opposite
of what Stephen has to do. Oh, shoot, sorry. I got that back. I mean, so I guess in that future,
though, then that's the point where the citizens will start noticing, like, hey, why can't I text
my girlfriend or something, right? Like, people are going to notice. I guess they'll still detect
them, but it won't be private. So will this fly under most of the populace's radar? Well,
maybe I'll keep it slowly, right? Yeah. The biggest place this change will start to show up
quickly is any public facing discussion, forums. I can't name the millions of dedicated specific
forums, right? You know, I've got 13 for motorcycles and the model of computer and the
model of phone and the, you know, every individual hobby has its own forum, its own site, and they're
going to be hit first and they're going to be hit the hardest because they don't have
the resources to spin up, you know, an entire investigative branch, right? So that'll be,
I think, be the first visible change is all of the small forums are probably just going to die.
So on the flip side, the public forum on, say, YouTube, Facebook, other big ones,
you won't notice it as much because it'll just silently not be visible or otherwise,
you know, not posted to the site. So you can write your tweet and no one will ever see it and
that's harder for you to detect. I wonder, there's a number of states where it's illegal for kids to
send naked selfies to each other. I think it's almost all of them. I think most states have
an exception that, like, if they're of the same age, it's not child porn. I think it depends on how
trigger happy your district attorney is or something. But yeah, for the argument, what
are we going to say, though? Well, I was going to say at this point, the phone services would
basically have to scan every single picture anyone is sending or either that or have some
age limitation and only scan the pictures that people under the age of 18 are sending to make
sure they aren't sending nude selfies. But, you know, I could be texting you a picture of my
weed garden setup, right? Well, if you lived in a state where that wasn't allowed, they need to
know that. Possibly, yeah. I'm still not sure if this covers non-child sex material.
I don't think it has any specific exception. As I read it, of course, I haven't read the
literal full text of the lots, Julian Pages. But as I understand it, it's more or less
threatening revocation of basically all section 230 protections, which includes...
Every summary that I read said that it is revoking all section 230 protections for anything that is
child sexual material. But again, since you don't know if a picture that someone is sending is a
picture of their car or a picture of, you know, themselves naked and they're not 18 yet, you
have to scan literally everything. So it basically affects everything everywhere, even though it's
only, in theory, in that child sexual material. That may be. I mean, so if they're just like,
you know, checking your motorcycle forums to see if there's child porn on there,
your motorcycle forums should survive, right? Well, they have to check every single post on
their entire website. Oh, right. It's not the government checking. The motorcycle forum host has
to buy or buy or write an AI that can check everything that's posted. Right. Okay. Yeah.
And since this does affect things that are sent between people's phones,
phone companies would have to start scanning every single pick that you send to anyone else.
Am I remembering incorrectly that Facebook actually...
Like people have the ability to flag content and then it gets evaluated with by AIs and they have
humans that are, like their job is to go through all this material.
Yeah. The pain farms offshore. And that was also talked about in that episode on child porn.
Okay. Yeah. I was trying to remember if we had talked about that already. I just remember reading
about how traumatized some of these people are having this job and having to look at all this
terrible shit. Well, so you go to Facebook and you watch a beheading video and because someone
posted some Taliban video or something, and then you click the report button, it's flagged,
and then some human has to review it, right? So then some human has to watch it and be like,
yep, that was gross. That's not going, that's not, we're going to go ahead and block that.
But yeah, those pain farms are offshore. They're cheap and it's just these misery factories.
There was an interesting point made. These are generally, like you said,
offshore to cheap foreign places. A lot of those places are more conservative
than American people in general. Yeah. They're going to see the breastfeeding
mother and be like, oh no, can't have that. They specifically interviewed someone.
She was like a lady in her 30s. She was a religiously conservative Hindu, I think.
And she was, there was lots of things were like, yep, these Americans, they should not be allowed.
This is not good. And she would just censor things that we would be like,
what the fuck? It's just a bathing swimsuit.
Ban Americans.
And yeah, she was like, no, this goes against my religious sensibilities. I will not allow this
to be seen. And I mean, it's a tiny amount of power. It's like one person that's banning flag
videos, which honestly, some troll flagged because they have something against you. So
they flagged your stupid picture. But you know, it goes to show there is weird secondary effects
that we don't think of oftentimes to these. Sure. And then there's the fun thing of like,
where when it's flagged, it's taken on automatically until it gets human reviewed.
I remember when Dobby, the giraffe was being born at the Denver Zoo, there was a live stream
and someone marked it as pornography. And so the stream was taken down for like an hour.
Whoa. It might have been longer or less. Give or take. It was some, you know, non negligible
chunk. You know, I don't know how I didn't actually watch the video. I don't know how
up close and personal it was. I don't know if you want to watch the giraffe come out. But if you
want to see a tiny little baby giraffe take his first stumbling steps, you might have missed it
when it was live. Yeah. I mean, having seen Jim Carrey been birthed from a rhino,
that stuff is legit gross. That's one of those scenes where I had to walk out of the theater,
not because it was gross, but because of the second hand embarrassment. There's so many Jim Carrey
movies. He's like, oh, no. Yeah. All right. We need some positive news here. Is there anything
happy happening anywhere in the world, tech world, maybe if it's relevant or anywhere else,
just because? Well, I don't think we got to the worst part. Okay, great. Hit me again.
The worst part is that the Urnit Act, they carved out the end to end encryption because,
that is just absolutely ludicrous to break all encryption in the world. A lot of our
fucking banking system runs on that. Well, that's the thing like for these dipshits who are
proposing these don't know how their phone works, right? I remember what was it? It seems like
last year, but probably four years ago because time is weird now. But they like dragged Mark
Zuckerberg and the CEO of Google to Congress and be like, why is it when you Google my name,
bad stuff comes up? Because you keep doing bad stuff. There's not someone on the other end
of Google returning stuff for this. It brings up what's most relevant. I remember they asked
Zuckerberg, why was Trump's tweets flagged? And he's like, I don't know. I don't work at Twitter.
So that's the level of people who are writing these laws, right? And there's no secret messages.
They have no idea what the fuck that means. I feel like this one is somewhat unique in that.
I feel like those are the only people supporting it. I actually googled earn it support and I
can't find anything. It's actually weird.
They said that this is, by the way, an unelected 19 member commission who are developing these
guidelines. So it's just like, who even are these people? Why are they put like another thing they
mentioned that? The Department of Truth. I mean, the one thing we know is that the head of that
commission would be the Attorney General, which right now is Barr, who loves censorship.
I just don't know. I found this really funny because at the end of the one article I was
reading, they were suggesting what Congress should do. And one of them was, to this end,
Congress should update and implement a comprehensive national framework to respond
to and prevent the spread of child sexual exploitation material and ask the government
accountability office to evaluate the effectiveness of these measures. And I was like,
okay, wait, there's a government accountability office that they're not bringing in here.
So the encryption stuff was carved out in an amendment and the amendment introduced other
issues, which we have talked about at length just now. But because of that, on June 23rd,
Senator Lindsey Graham, who we all know and hate, also Senator Cotton, which that name
struck me because we talked about him in the last Mindtula episode. He is the one who is
running without a Democratic opponent right now. Something happened with a Democrat dropped out.
And so his main opponent at this point is a Libertarian. And the guy's pulling only 11 points
less than Cotton. So like right now, there could potentially be the very first Libertarian ever
elected to the Senate on the Libertarian ticket, which would be interesting if that happened,
although still unlikely. And Blackburn, as the third Senator, introduced a bill
that basically says, let's make encryption completely illegal. It's called the Lawful Access
to Encrypted Data Act. He said legal or illegal? It would make all encryption illegal. Oh, illegal.
Oh, not legal anymore. Yeah. Which is laid for short, LAED. Looks like lead. It is. Yeah.
It makes me think of like a Scottish person saying, Lord. Well, I was just when
LAED of its papals. It's what I was thinking about. Like it's specifically trying to ban
child porn. They're like, yeah, the LAED Act. I was like, oh, no, this one is not trying to ban
child porn. Yeah, I know. This one is literally just encryption is illegal now. There can be no
more intended encryption. Sort of. It's blocking services from offering. It isn't China level if
you have a private chat set up literally between you and your friend on your own server. They
aren't going to raid your house yet. So that's a bright side. They won't raid your house if you're
using it. Yes. But it will now be illegal to provide it if it does not have a backdoor built
in that law enforcement can access. Yeah. Which means basically a backdoor built in that anyone
can access. Or eventually, certainly. Yeah. No, no, there's absolutely no way that you can make
a backdoor without someone getting to it eventually. It might take a few years, but a backdoor is
Yeah. I mean, yes and no. You think about it. You use your email and it has lots of backdoors.
Google can get into it. If you're at a company, your company can get into it.
That doesn't mean anyone can, but it means eventually anyone will be able to.
Well, that's partly because Google has a team of people staying ahead of the
the safe crackers, right? Right. Right. So if you don't have the Google resources to
keep fighting the ever-increasing power of the safe crackers, the hacking criminals in this case,
like you're just fucked. Well, and it's evolving constantly.
And that's also, Gmail is not end-to-end encryption. No, not at all.
No, it's like this specifically says even end-to-end encryption has to have a backdoor
built in. The reason that signal is no longer offered in Australia because there's a law in
Australia that says any end-to-end encryption has to have a backdoor in and signal is like,
we literally cannot do that. Sorry, by people in Australia.
It's like what signal is designed to not do.
Yeah. Which I'm sure has excellent long-term effects on Australia's journalism and
investigations and just everything. I mean, correct me if I'm wrong.
Isn't our current electronic banking system based on uncrackable encryption?
Well, yes. But also, I don't think that would really be affected by this.
Okay. You think they're just going after communications?
Yes. And there are other methods by which the government has access to banking information
that they can use and do.
All right. Let's see. It applies to operating systems, apps, messaging, chat, social media
platforms, email, cloud storage, and video conferencing, and all electronic devices with over
one gigabyte of memory.
So cloud storage is one of the ones that was brought up in that Sam Harris episode on
child pornography because S3 is the dropbox. It's what dropbox is built off of. It's just
a bucket where you can put whatever you wanted in on Amazon.
They explicitly don't scan the stuff on there. And so because you can buy as big of an S3 bucket
as you want, it's really easy to hoard whatever you want on there, including nefarious terrible
shit. Why did I bring that up? Oh, because online storage of anything over a gig?
Anything that has more than a gig of memory on it.
So they're talking about crack encryption fundamentally in endpoints, in customer devices,
in your devices, which is that is almost worse.
It is insane because once your device is compromised, it doesn't matter how good any
service is at all. As soon as your finger touches the screen, as soon as you say something in range
of your device, who knows what's going to happen because it's not secured in any way.
And with COVID-19, kids aren't in schools anymore. People aren't at their jobs. Everybody is using
these forms of communication. This is basically a device to install spyware in everything in our
lives. It certainly could be used for that. What was it? Was it Iran? There was a company
somewhere that was, well, a government that was not on good terms with America,
and they were buying technology from us. And I believe it was the CIA went in and had the
manufacturer, like on the actual hardware chip model, install a backdoor so that we could access
them. And eventually they found out about it. And now most countries for anything that is like
national security level will only use chips that are created in their own country by
their own companies, the ones that have that option. Obviously, some of the pork...
I mean, and a famous example of this already going wrong is there are a huge pile of known
Intel management engine vulnerabilities that have... And the Intel management engine is,
theoretically, it's a non-nefarious tool. It's for remote management of servers, and it lets
Intel help you diagnose problems. But there were holes in it, and it ended... The end result was
tons of servers were compromised through vulnerabilities baked into Intel hardware
on the servers. And that wasn't designed to be a backdoor, but it still was one. This is worse.
Yeah. This is like the US going to every manufacturer and saying, you all have to have
these chips, like we installed in the Iran computer systems that we shipped to them,
so that we can access this at any time and do whatever we want with it,
like mandating that all of us have that in all our electronics.
So what are the odds of this going through? Because this would...
I think they're low just because of how fucking nuclear insane this thing is.
Well, because Apple prides itself and is pretty good at actually being secure.
If they say, we're not gonna... I mean, the government would probably get by,
although it's not clear if Trump would survive, if there were no iPhones in the United States
anymore. But the... I don't know. I'm not sure... I mean, Google probably takes a pretty good
stance on their phones as well. If you start telling everyone, yep, build backdoors,
and they're like, no, fuck you, or we can't, are these gonna just stop being on the shelves?
Are they gonna be outlawed outright? Imagine if the government kicks into your...
It's easy math to run.
Take your iPhones.
Right. It's not in their interest to do that. It's easy math to run,
which is we can comply with this insane law and it'll have huge repercussions that'll
suck for everyone, or we can not make money. And the answer's easy for a company who's sole
purpose to make money.
Yeah. Are you guys familiar with Kory Doctorow?
No.
Indeed.
Yes.
Okay. He is... I mean, he used to... I know he was one of the high-level people at the EFF
chairperson. He's also a sci-fi writer, which is what I first knew him as. He wrote Down and
Out in the Magical Kingdom, which got either a Hugo nod or a Hugo win, I don't remember.
But he's written a lot of great sci-fi stuff. Anyway, he's written about this going back years.
I don't even know how long ago. It was at least five years ago that I read it,
which he calls the war on general computing, which is just that people, well, specifically
people in power, don't want you to have general computing devices that can just do calculations.
They want you to have only specific single-use items. And since you can't, that is not a
natural category. All you really have are computers that have been handicapped and
locked down and restricted. That is the purpose of these laws, to make all computing devices
handicapped, locked down and restricted by the government so that they can only be used for
approved purposes. Right. And that's one installment's big things too. And both Corey
Doctor and Stallman, personally, are pretty weird nowadays, but a lot of their older stuff is
extremely relevant. Yeah. I'm trying to see how long ago did he write about this? 2011. So nine
years ago, Doctor, he was already talking about the coming... He calls it the coming war on general
purpose computing. And here we are. Well, that was... I mean, they've been trying to create laws
like this for a pretty long time. I remember, actually, the fanfic community always freaks out
about it and does a lot of activism around trying to encourage people to vote against these or to
write their representatives. Yeah. How would this impact securely stored or hashed data?
It would no longer be securely stored. Exactly. So we can't salt and hash passwords anymore.
That's the thing where it might not be a big deal when I call my representative at the bank
to say, hey, what's wrong with my card? They have to validate my identity through my social
security number and all that. Whatever. The government knows my social security number.
It's easy enough to find if you're a nefarious person anyway. But now my password can't even
be encrypted, so they can just get on there and get on my Venmo account and start sending
themselves money. It has to be in some way that law enforcement can get to it. Yeah. I mean,
that's what I'm saying. I am really legit shocked that they actually had the balls to go and propose
this. And I don't think it'll pass. But the fact that they felt they had the political ability to
propose it and do it itself is kind of worrisome. That's why I've got to think that this before,
but technologically illiterate morons because they don't realize that this also impacts your
cell phone, dipshit. Yeah, but it still passed the law no matter how illiterate they are.
That's true. Yeah. I'm just thinking like there's no way that tech savvy people,
I mean, there might be a way. But maybe my worldview is too rosy. It could very well be
perfectly literate people doing this to themselves and the country intentionally.
Economically illiterate people made the laws in Soviet Russia and 10 million people starved to
death because thems were the laws. Yeah, but they hadn't done a wide scale test of that economic
system yet. Yeah, here I could say we have done a wide scale test because it's all of China.
I mean, depending on your political views, you can view that as having worked out really well
for the Chinese people or not. Depends on if by the Chinese people you mean the government
or the actual humans. Yeah, no, don't worry about those. Those are secondary.
Sort of want to just read the end of this paragraph, the one where they were talking
about the government accountability office. They should ask the government accountability office
to evaluate it where it's what should Congress do. Congress should also invest in enforcement
measures and protections for child victims that have been chronically underfunded.
Any new standards applicable to internet providers in combating online sexual,
child sexual exploitation material should be explicitly legislated based on evidence
and with special consideration given to their human rights implications.
Congress should also invite meaningful participation by an engagement with children.
His voices and opinions are central to these policies.
I just, I find it crazy that I hadn't heard about this at all.
Yeah, kind of makes me wonder what else is playing under in radar.
I mean, journalism is real important.
All right, I'm bummed. Someone fix it.
Sorry, I wish I would have prepared something in advance.
Oh, you're good. I mean, I think on a positive note, like you said, there's probably very little
chance that this, that this Idoi encryption will, or whatever blanket ban will fall through.
At some point, someone's gonna have to explain like, no, this is actually a really bad idea
for you people who are actually invested in trying to make this pass too.
They're, they're not, no, they're not going to care. They're like, I am a person in power.
I will never be that affected by it.
Will all of them be that stupid about it? Or like then thing too, if it's unless they're
going to carve out exceptions for like police precincts or something too, then like,
then the, then the hacker savvy citizens will, you know, start hacking police data.
I don't think they're necessarily wrong. Like Lindsey Graham personally will probably never
have a bad effect in his life from this. You will be insulated by the power and the privilege
that he has. If there's a backdoor to his iPhone, someone's going to share his dick pics that he's
taking, right? I hope that's the first thing that happens. It's just, it's just instantly.
Should call this episode, everyone wants to see Lindsey Graham's dick.
We should not be that.
If we do that, it'll get demonetized now.
Fortunately, we don't require you to patronage. We have our own patrons.
I'm wondering too, then they'll have to have either like whatever host for podcasts you have,
just accept the legal liability of having your content on there.
Or they'll have to find some way to screen all of the audio as well.
Right. I mean, we're hosted online through our WordPress site. What is it?
Bluehost is, or Dreamhost.
God, Dreamhost.
Dreamhost, yeah. Dreamhost is our host, our website, and they would have to go through
every single one of our episodes and make sure we aren't saying, you know, I don't know,
what's the audio version of child porn? Whatever. The audio version of child porn.
Make sure that that's not in our podcasts. And eventually, yeah, make sure that the
things we're saying is okay with the government. Here's the weird thing. We've talked about sex
once or twice before. Would we have to find some way to limit our podcast to only listeners who
are over the age of 17? Because maybe, because we might be providing sexual content to minors.
I mean, like the Savage Lovecast, would that have to be behind a age verification check?
Isn't this marked as explicit on iTunes?
No, I don't think so. Is it?
I don't know.
You're looking at me. I don't know.
I guess we could just check.
I'm pretty sure it's not because explicit generally means things like,
are actually about like sex and stuff.
Or like we swear.
Yeah, but definitely swear.
I don't think swearing counts as explicit. There's tons of podcasts that swear that don't have the
explicit tag.
Fair enough. Well, in any case, I think, yeah, I don't see an explicit tag on our stuff.
It's like when Amazon, when you publish something on Amazon and they ask you,
does this contain adult content? They don't mean, is this like people wrestling with death?
And is there people kissing and making love? The question is, are you putting out porn?
But they can't say that. So they say adult content and it's just understood that you only click yes
if you're putting out porn.
Yeah. I mean, like right now, you just click, yes, I'm 17 or older on the website, right?
So like, is that our fault if someone lies about that?
I don't see how it's your my fault.
There's actually been a negligently and recklessly not verifying their age.
How could you and I possibly be verifying?
We would have to employ some sort of age of verification service.
Would we have to or would Dreamcast Dreamhost have to?
I don't know.
It can't be us.
Why do you say that?
Because it would be impossible.
Literally impossible.
That doesn't stop anything.
That's kind of the point. We might be off the air if it was literally impossible for us to do it.
I think literally everybody would be off the air.
I don't think that, you know, the largest podcast in the world, the Joe Rogan Experience,
has the power to check who's listening to it.
I mean, they might, but also part of this is why we're saying this would,
this would change the internet as we know it.
Yeah.
It would stop being a public forum.
Well, is there any law against making another internet?
Yeah. If you ban encryption, they're banning math.
There's not much you can do to get around it.
Yeah. Great.
I mean, this is not a specific set of wires that this applies to.
This is to any communication done within the US.
That's illegal math you're doing over there, sir.
Stop that.
You could make another internet and the laws would apply to it just the same.
Even if you were just to build the servers like in some rapture like underground server farm,
you would still have to find a way to get the data from here to there and then back.
Right.
So that the getting there and back part would still apply to this law.
At that point, you're effectively breaking the law intentionally.
Yeah.
I'm just thinking about like internet speakeasies.
I mean, you go on modern crypto check clients and that's some of them that,
you know, there's discussion about simple things that shouldn't be hard to discuss
and are in no way illegal, but they're easier to have there.
Yeah. Hmm.
It on the plus side would make for a great cyberpunk setting
with internet speakeasies and then like raid them.
And that's where the story starts out.
It's just imagining sort of a cyberpunk like 1920s
mashup aesthetic.
It's good aesthetic, not a fantastic legal precedent.
No, it's a terrible world to live in.
Just a fun world to read about.
Yeah.
All right.
So yeah, I think that's what we got on this.
Great.
This would be terrible and we should try to stop it.
I mean, is there literally any actionable thing that we can do,
given that this isn't even going to vote?
Well, no, it's going to go to vote at some point.
Not to us.
Well, no, to our senators.
Right.
So like your representatives and yeah, let's write them.
They'll read everything and take it to heart like they did with the,
you know, the FCC bullshit in 2016 or 17.
Right.
And the net neutrality.
Yeah.
They really paid attention to us when we yelled at them about foster sesta
because, you know, the children, don't you know, honestly, any single time in the past,
my lifetime that I have a law that is about protecting the children,
it's always been bullshit to use as an excuse to, to fuck people over.
Like I just have this, you know, you know how there's the Dan Savage has this rule of thumb
that whenever you see a politician speaking out against gay sex,
there's a pretty good chance he's having a lot of gay sex.
I now have the same heuristic where any time a law is about protecting children or
sex workers or something, it's actually about something completely different
that's just trying to fuck people over and probably will make things worse
for the children or sex workers.
You're going to say that they're probably looking at child porn.
Oh, God, no.
Oh, I wouldn't go that far.
But it would be funny if we just made that a meme, though,
make people stop doing this.
Well, I mean, that'll be really easy too.
Again, if we can get on Lindsey Graham's phone,
then someone just put child porn on it.
Like, I mean, it's not clear to me how they don't realize that adding backdoors
to things is self-destructive, not merely destructive to those,
you know, dirt-grubbing plebs out there like you and me, right?
I mean, if you build an entire huge governmental system around it, like China, it can work.
They don't have significant backdoor problems.
They have, they just have backdoors and everything.
And in time, you know, the massive censorship that is inherently connected to that.
Yeah.
It can work if, yeah, you live in 1984, China.
Right.
Right, exactly.
Didn't somebody get arrested for that?
Which is not where we want to be, but it's kind of like,
that's kind of one of the only stable outcomes of laws like this.
Right.
It is, it certainly seems to be where Lindsey Graham and others of his elk want to be.
Yeah.
What were you going to say, Chase?
No, that was, that was, that's what I was going to say.
Sorry, I meant Jayce.
Yeah, that's Jayce.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Confusing.
I don't know.
I was just going to talk about like people getting arrested for political cartoons.
Does that happen that often?
But then there was a cute dog on my lap.
I was just like, I don't feel like I'm finding anyone.
I don't think people get arrested for political cartoons in China very much,
just because people don't do political cartoons in China anymore,
unless they're pro-the-communist party.
The whole Winnie the Pooh thing, though.
Right, right.
Which was like pretty benign.
But yeah.
Yeah, you get, you get a few people arrested for that,
send them to jail for a decade or two,
and all of a sudden there's no more political cartoons in China with Winnie the Pooh.
Right, once you have enough, just stating the obvious,
once you have enough monitoring, obviously you need less enforcement,
because everyone knows you have the monitoring.
Exactly.
Not good, but kind of the stable type outcomes that come from removing all encryption.
Well, this is a bummer.
Yeah, I'm sorry we had a bummer episode.
Yeah, we had such a positive episode last time.
Maybe we needed to even it out.
Yeah, we'll find a balance next time.
Yeah.
I don't know anything.
Sorry to be a downer, just to...
No, no, I mean, this is the...
Actually, we opened up with a very appropriate,
less wrong post for this, right?
Yeah.
We rather, I mean, it wasn't just about ignorance is bliss kind of thing,
it was about which cognitive biases would you like to have,
but it's always better to know than not know, right?
Like, you know, if this passes and everything starts going weird,
I'd rather be in the loop, right?
Right, so I can start building the digital version of my crazy bunker full of guns and food.
Exactly.
A big pile of illegal encryption tools and secure communication tools.
Are you actually...
Point-to-point radios.
No.
Ah, are you...
If he was, he wouldn't say so.
Oh, damn it, okay.
We gotta go back to messenger pigeons.
Do you have some sort of resource to point people who want to make a digital bunker?
Let me see if I can pull it up.
There's a laptop that was originally set up by Stallman
where they have stripped out all of the closed source code on it,
just literally all of it, which sounds easy,
but it was a Herculean task.
It's something thousands of men are.
Let me see if I can find the name of it.
Dude, Stallman is a fan.
And that's a place to start, but it doesn't really help in this case.
It's only useful as applicable as a crazy person's bunker,
as a crazy prepper's bunker, right?
It's in day-to-day life, it will not help you.
Would getting dark web connections and VPNs help at all?
It helps put you on a list.
Yeah, that's the thing is, if you have a VPN,
the VPN can no longer be secure, right?
Right.
So maybe if you were to fly to another country, buy a laptop there
that didn't have this backdoor stuff on it,
install this software there and then come back.
I think it's illegal to possess.
Well, for now, it's not illegal to possess.
It's only illegal for a service provider.
As it stands, it still remains legal to host
your own encrypted chat and services and what have you.
Even if these both were to pass.
Okay.
Really, you could host your own encrypted chat services?
Yeah, we do.
We've got a bunch of friends and I in the area.
It's a small service called Matrix called...
Yeah, but if the late act passes?
I think so.
It's providing a service.
I'm not sure.
I'm providing a service to anyone.
This is exclusively for my use.
Oh.
Yeah.
To provide a service, do you have to charge for the service?
And I wonder if there's like backdoor ways of funding things like Patreon.
I don't think you have to charge for a service.
Facebook and YouTube and Discord are all free.
The app.
They're using your data for like advertising stuff.
But they don't charge you for it.
Yeah, it's...
Right.
Yeah.
The build does specifically apply to operating systems though.
So if you have an operating system on your machine that's running that,
they'd still have a backdoor into it.
Right.
Right.
I'll have to see into that.
As I was reading it, it was specific to service providers.
I don't think it's a ban on personal use.
But I mean, inherently, if you are operating in a compromise device, it effectively is.
Yeah.
Well, fine on the bun.
Yeah, sorry.
No, no, it's all good.
If any of our listeners are internet doomsday preppers
and know ways that we can still communicate securely
after this sort of shit were to come down, send us some links.
Yeah.
Information.
I mean, for me, I'm a fan of privacy for the same...
Like the argument of like, if you have nothing to hide,
then you wouldn't mind if we take a look in your house.
I understand resisting that.
It's not so much that there's a possible way to view my signal messages
that I have a problem with.
It's that it's impossible for anything to be secure again.
Well, and you never know.
I mean, you can look at everyone in Hong Kong and all of a sudden,
they suddenly needed some decent secure communications.
They weren't directly intercepted by the government.
And you never know when you might need it.
I know that puts me in the crazy bunker building territory, but...
No, I'm right there with you.
That's a really good point.
Well, and also, once governments, totalitarian governments,
don't give a fuck around, they will search through stuff in your back history.
Like anyone in Hong Kong who posted things five years ago,
critical of the Chinese government suddenly probably has to watch their ass.
If you ever said anything bad about the government on signal
and then signal is forced to compromise,
then, you know, if a more tyrannical government takes charge in the US,
then they know everything you said years ago,
even if now you're like totally lemming and complying.
Insert give of the professor from Futurama.
I don't want to live on this planet anymore.
I mean, that's literally the point of tyrannical governments.
Have dirt on everyone at all times so you can compel anything from everyone.
It's a good gig if you can be at the top.
You know, short ten years usually for those positions, but...
I think even if you're at the top, unless you're the actual guy at the top,
it's terrible. Did you see death of Stalin?
Yes.
Oh, my God, so good.
Well, actually, I don't know.
Even the people that were literally one level below,
direct advisor to Stalin, still fucking terrified for their lives.
Right. That's a good thing to be Stalin,
but again, short tenure for that job.
Right.
Was it in that movie or was it another anecdote where, like, he...
I don't think he was even there,
but there were some clapping to celebrate Stalin,
and they clapped for, like, 10 or 30 minutes
because the first person to stop clapping, you know,
would be terrified that they would be thrown in the gulags.
Yeah. There were, like, people whose hands were going numb
because they just...
I think it definitely went on for more than 30 minutes.
I don't know if it went down for an hour or something,
but yeah, terrified to be the first person to stop clapping
because you obviously did not love Stalin as much as everyone else.
And what does that say about you?
Terrified to be the guy with one, you know,
this arm and a sling, right?
Because it's already broken from something,
and it's like, well, why weren't you so in support?
Well, I literally couldn't, you know, I snapped my fingers.
Well, that seems human.
Yeah. Anyway, high, high recommend for Death of Stalin.
It is a very dark comedy, black comedy.
All the events portrayed in it actually happened,
although, you know, the actual words spoken by the people
are probably not exactly what they said because it is funny.
And I don't think things would have been quite that funny at the time,
but as long as you can, like, have murder and sexual abuse
in your comedies and just blatant human right violations and terror,
it's surprising how good it is as a comedy considering how dark it is.
There's a show, it was by the same people.
And all this should actually happen.
It was by the same people who made the show Veep.
Okay.
Starring Julia Louis-Dreyfus, that's all fictional,
but it's apparently just about how the government actually operates
from, you know, like they ask people on the inside,
is this, you know, which show is the closest?
It's not West Wing, it's Veep.
Now that I know that the Death of Stalin people made Veep,
I have to watch Veep because, God, that movie was good.
And it's funny, but it's also like depressing.
It's less depressing because it's a fictional setting,
but well, it's whatever, historical fiction, right?
Modern historical fiction, whatever you call that.
For which Veep?
Yeah.
Okay, okay.
I mean, it's supposed to be the modern government,
right, in the US, but whatever.
Yeah.
Anyway, Veep is funny.
You can watch that while you're-
See, we found a broadside.
Recoiling from all this news.
All right.
I don't have anything else to add on this one.
No.
Yes, we should probably leave off there
before we get into more depressing things.
Chase, do you have anything?
Definitely not.
This is more in-depth than even I.
Well, I want to thank you for coming on
and helping us and talking about this with us.
Yeah, man, you totally nailed it.
We would have been flandering like morons without you, so.
And also for bringing this attention to the first place.
Sure, thank you for having me.
Yeah.
All right.
Before we go, we would like to thank our patron, yes?
Yes.
Cool.
Our patron this week is Nick.
Nick, thanks so much.
We really appreciate it.
You are a total badass, and I can't think of a joke
that ties into today's episode.
Sorry.
I want to say that thanks to Nick, as well as all our patrons,
but this week specifically, Nick, we are not beholden
to content companies like YouTube to monetize us
or not monetize us.
You guys directly are funding us,
so we can tell you about these things.
And I mean, I guess YouTube wouldn't stop us right now either,
but maybe someday.
Right.
If we mentioned the word child porn or something,
this episode couldn't go out.
You just mentioned it.
Oh, no.
Oh, damn it.
We were critical of YouTube taking down that video
of Dobby being born.
Oh, like the house elf.
Right.
They named the guy after the house elf,
the giraffe after the house elf.
That's so cute.
We got to feed Dobby when he was still
like shorter than the average giraffe.
They do like, I think they let four people on at a time.
It's a polite little thing where it's not,
you know, freaks him out, but it's really cute.
Was there a fence between you and him?
Yeah, you're up on like on the actual feeding stand.
That's at head height for the adult giraffes
and Dobby's down here.
So you got to lean down and feed him.
How long ago was this?
At least two or three years ago, maybe four or five.
So, okay, he's adolescent now, if not adult.
He's probably adult sized.
Yeah.
But you can feed the adults too.
So.
Cool.
But they won't be as cute.
Yeah, they're plenty cute.
They do have like really long black tongues, the bizarre.
Yeah, that's how they get the stuff.
They reach it out and like wrap it around the whatever
you're feeding them.
It was like lettuce leaves or something.
Giraffes are all bizarre.
They're bizarre top to bottom.
But unicorns are the fictional creature.
Well, yeah.
Truth is stranger than fiction.
Alrighty, thank you everyone for listening to us.
Thank you, Nick, specifically for helping us out this week.
And thanks, Chase, for joining us.
Yeah, thanks, Chase.
You're on.
Cool.
Bye, everybody.
