Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Eneash Brotsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, and I'm Jess Dickey.
And we are doing our wonderful feedback episode, but before we get into that, we are going
to do the less wrong sequences, posts.
We're doing the posts first because, I don't know, we'll have all the time we need after
that to go as long as we want in questions, and we're doing three because they're kind
of shorter than usual, so.
Yeah, sorry about that, we probably should have, I don't know, I guess if you want to
read along, pause real quick and go read, what was the third one?
Go read, you are not hiring the top 1% because they were all pretty short, and we figured
we can do three this time.
Yeah, it'll go fast.
And honestly, you can pause and go read it in like two minutes, it's a pretty quick
post.
And we're doing a whole feedback episode because we've been not having time for feedback for
like the last two months, so let's get caught up on some of that.
Excellent.
On what I'm sure will be a surprisingly small amount of feedback, so.
But we will manage to talk for an hour and a half anyway because we're just blow hard
windbags.
We're dedicated like that.
And then maybe people will leave more feedback.
It's guaranteed that we'll just talk about their comment forever.
Lather, rinse, repeat.
Cool.
All right, let's get started.
I was about to say, damn, that sounds depressing.
The treadmill of podcast.
Except it's fun.
Yeah, OK.
We love it.
This is having fun pushing the rock and that's all that matters.
Right.
So the first post that we're going to discuss is politics is the mind killer.
One of the famous ones.
One of the famous ones and at least definitely my top five.
Oh, I did figure this out and I'll link to it in this episode.
Wait, no, it'll be linked to in last episode.
So listen to it.
Last episode.
If you want, I discussed last week that there was or last two weeks ago that there was definitely
an audio version of the Darwin, like what is truth really parable and I was like, are
you sure you didn't do it?
And you were like, I'm pretty sure I remember that.
Turns out you were right.
It was on the rationality from AI to zombies podcast.
Ha, I knew it.
Yeah.
So it wasn't you.
OK.
But there is a great audio version out there that'll be linked to in the episode.
Fantastic.
Let's go check it out from last week's and this week's.
Why not?
Yeah.
We should probably also include just a standing link in our posts to the podcast version of
the sequences.
Oh, yeah.
That sounds great.
Yeah.
And we'll start doing that too.
There are audio versions of the podcasts of the sequences.
They're actually two podcasts.
They cover it.
Yeah.
There's two guys with awesome accents who do it and they were doing it for fun and free.
And then I'm not, I bet the people who did it professionally or professionally did it
for free or some volunteers or something.
Maybe I'm not sure.
No, I believe they paid for it.
And it was originally a thing you can buy and then Mary went ahead and released it for
everyone for free.
Oh, the like overcast or no, wait, because I had those.
OK.
I had a couple of those sequences.
I thought these sounded different, but I wasn't sure.
I'll double check.
I didn't actually check.
OK.
Yeah.
One is AI rationality to zombies, which is curated differently.
Yes, they both are.
Yeah.
So they're both being rationally from AI to zombies.
The old ones.
Oh, right.
So they won't.
And they may won't have all of the ones in any case, there are two that you can listen
to.
So right.
They're both free.
Yeah.
All right.
So why don't you lead us in with politics as the mind killer?
OK.
Politics is the mind killer is basically what it says on the tin.
We did talk about this briefly earlier where someone pointed out that in the original politics
is the mind killer post.
Everyone remembers it nowadays.
At least I certainly did as well as being a sort of an injunction not to speak about
politics and the rationality circles.
Sager rationality for other more important things.
I'm going to go ahead and just volunteer that that's not how I took it on any reading.
Oh, no.
Just that that's not a good introductory subject for non-rationalists.
Yeah.
And that's the point, right?
That is the point.
Yeah.
I was kind of surprised when I reread this because what I remember from God, it's been
more than 10 years now.
But what I remember taking away from it at least after a month or two of time had passed
was just like, we don't talk about politics here.
And I mean, at the time, since we, he was still writing the sequences and we were going
through this, it was an actual injunction because we were trying to do the whole learning
of rationality thing, right?
Yeah.
And that would make sense.
And he even says in this post that, like, you know, this was when he was on an overcoming
bias and he wasn't going to say overcoming bias isn't political or isn't apolitical.
But I'm going to try not to be just because this isn't, we're not, we're not going to
get bogged down on reds versus greens or blues versus greens or whatever on every little
point we're making here.
We'll just talk about other, like, non-infinitory stuff.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So I was, that was an interesting perspective and obviously, you know, the community has
moved away from that over the years and done more and more with politics.
But for a while, there was, you know, whenever someone brought up politics, people just like,
politics is the mind killer, don't go there.
And you know, it's true.
So in the post, it says that in the ancestral environment, politics was a matter of life
and death.
It could get you kicked out of the tribe, which would lead to you dying of, you know,
starvation and exposure and whatever.
And also, it could just give people license to kill you if you were on the wrong side
of a debate.
And if you're on the right side, you could kill your hated enemies.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Because he's talking about evolutionary psychology, he says politics were life and death in the
ancestral environment.
In a way, I would argue that it still is.
While in most parts of the world nowadays, you probably won't literally be killed for
your political opinions.
And the wrong ones can still definitely cost you your career and make you a social outcast.
Yeah.
I think that's, I think it depends on how severe your opinion is, or your positions on some
of these and like how severe your workplace, like for the most part, part of the reason
is like, why that's the case.
Why people are so insane about it is because of the ancestral architecture reasons, right?
And I think, I don't know.
I want to know.
Okay.
So I was going to say, I think it's not that bad because in workplaces all across the country,
there's Trumpers working side by side with, I don't know, SJWs, right?
They just don't talk about it at work because they're there to get a job done.
Most work, it depends on the workplace, but yeah.
Yeah.
Like a lot of places it just doesn't come up or it doesn't matter, you know, or you're
encouraged, you know, not encouraged, but you're perfectly within your rights to have
a fun, heated debate at lunch.
But you know, if you're talking about it on the clock, you're going to get told to shut
the fuck up and that doesn't matter what you're talking about.
Yeah.
But then, you know, I think about back to the fifties when people were being barred from
doing anything in their industry because someone said that they were a communist.
Yeah.
And today's in the fifties and there are people still, you know, losing their jobs and stuff
over their political positions.
And some of those are like white supremacists, you know, who are outed for, I don't know,
doing crazy white supremacist shit and then they get fired.
So they could say I was fired for my political opinion and I don't want to be disuncharitable
and say that they weren't, but they were, they were fired for having really, really bad
ones.
So I don't know.
Like there's, there's a way to spin it that isn't, it's not even a spin, but like there's
a difference between if everyone at my office was pro gun control and or like say pro gun
taking them all away, whatever you call it, whatever that version of control.
And I was for like stringent gun control, but still private ownership.
If I got fired over that, that'd be insane.
They'd be more insane than me being fired for on my personal time publishing blog posts
about how Jews are destroying the environment and like sending money to the Magabomber or
something.
Right.
So does that make sense?
Am I, am I on a tangent or am I just, am I on a tangent that's so obvious that's not
even worth talking about?
No, it makes sense.
I don't know.
It's weird.
It's weird the way politics can still shape life because like just was saying the wrong
politics in the wrong office will hurt you.
You're having the wrong opinion like among your friends can lose you a lot of friends.
Like there's still consequences.
It's just, I like thought that saying that in the ancestral environment kind of like
downplay the fact that this is still a thing that we do need to worry about.
It's not like as a society, we've all gotten over politics or like they don't, you know,
they don't matter anymore.
They still do.
But I think one of the reasons, he's pointing out one of the reasons that we are this crazy
about politics is because back in the day, it used to be a thing where you could literally
die or have your reproductive success greatly hindered.
And the madness that we still have surrounding politics is from, from, from that environment.
I think most people nowadays, if they were to check out of politics entirely and not have
a political opinion, it wouldn't really impact their life, their day to day life for the
most part.
Yeah.
That might be a part of it too.
You know, depending on, unless you're like at a rally with a mob, like saying, I don't
have an opinion on this, it's probably not going to get you stoned, right?
Yeah.
And even saying, I do have an opinion on this and it's different for most peoples isn't
going to be that big a deal.
Yeah.
But I just, I just see what you're saying that there, the people are still crazy about
it.
And I guess I just didn't read it to be saying that we're not still crazy.
I think you were saying, we, this is why we're crazy.
Not, it's not politics was the mind killers that it still is.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I still think the argument for tabooing politics in certain discussions is solid because despite
how much our political opinions shape our views of the world and then like how we end
up self selecting the news we see and the groups we associate with our own personal
political biases can be really difficult to notice.
So I really appreciate what the sequence is trying to do, even though we kind of moved
away from it.
Yeah.
Oh, somewhat.
Yeah.
No, I think that that I, I see the, the goal there, but I do think that it's important
to be able to have discussions about whatever, including politics stuff, but you need to
make sure that everyone on board with the conversation is able to have it sanely, right?
So I mean, there are things that, you know, depending on the subject, probably any one
of us wouldn't be able to like have a good conversation about whatever this is, right?
So it's like, all right, I'm going to recognize that I am not equipped to have a conversation
about that.
I think the fact that we do get so, uh, testy and hesitant to talk about things is sort
of a proof that it is still a mind killer.
Yeah.
And it's at least now we're aware of it.
There's also one of my favorite passages and all the sequences in this is why it makes
my top five favorites.
It's that politics is an extension of war by other means.
Arguments are soldiers.
Once you know which side you're on, you must support all arguments of that side and attack
all arguments that appear to favor the enemy side.
Otherwise it's like stabbing your soldiers in the back.
Yeah.
I see that shit a lot.
Totally.
I've done that shit.
Yeah.
Me too.
And it's hard not to.
And so like, that's why I happened to get off Facebook right about the, when, right
around before Trump won the primary for the, uh, presidency.
Just in time.
Just in time.
Yeah.
But even like in the months leading up to that, I'd see people posting something about
how I can't think of what it is.
And it would be something that was like, like not true and egregious and, you know, like,
hey, this, you know, whatever it is, I can't remember what it is.
The point is people are publishing lies about Donald Trump.
And I'm like, you guys, there are so many bad truths about Donald Trump.
Let's share those instead.
Because if we, if we're out there lying to each other, lying, lying to, you know, pat
ourselves in the back, people are going to be able to point to the lies and say, look,
they're lying over there.
We don't have to worry about the truth things that they're saying because they lied on this
one occasion.
Yeah.
And so it turns out how polar, it turns out that it was surprising how polarizing that
is to say, hold on guys, that part's not true.
Right.
Um, how dare you?
You're a Trump, you're a supporter.
No, no, that's not what I'm saying.
I told you about the feng shui thing, right?
Yes.
Yeah.
Oh my God.
Wait, tell me.
Oh, there was a whole thing where, uh, I was just friends with, you know, a bunch of,
I mean, I still am friends with a bunch of left-leaning people, but this was like someone
very SJWish and she posted on Facebook about how she could not believe that her coworker
got a white person to do feng shui for them.
And I was like, because it's less bullshit when they come from the area.
And I got like ripped apart by her and one of her friends as in like, how dare you be
racist and shit.
I'm like, look, it's still bullshit.
I don't care about the race thing.
And it was, it was a big, big thing about, uh, I was, I was attacking the wrong person,
I guess I was one of those stab in the back people now.
I do like flipping it on.
I'm like, you guys are being racist ones, assuming that Chinese people have this magic
that they can do.
Right.
That sounds like super trophy to me.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Anyway, yeah.
So we got to fight the Chinese magic with the America magic and what's American magic?
The ability to turn human pain into money or like that.
A lot of people can do that.
So we're better at killing dragons because wasn't there in that Matt Damon movie a few
years ago?
Or wait, no.
Oh.
Not Matt Damon.
Who was it?
It was Matt Damon.
Yes.
Yeah.
I don't think he was better at killing dragons than the stars.
Wait.
Then what was he, what was he in the movie for?
Cause he was just around.
Yeah.
Yeah.
He was like one of the, the co-stars, the first of all Chinese people love Matt Damon.
Right.
Oh, I knew all about why he was in it.
Right.
I was joking about that's what we have to bring to the table is dragon killing skills.
I mean, he, he apparently was contributing in some way to the war effort, right?
He was in the movie.
I didn't see the movie.
Me neither.
What was the great wall?
That's the one.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There was.
I heard it's good though.
I heard it was.
It looked fun.
People that did watch it say it was actually surprisingly good.
So I should probably watch it.
You're shooting into a racist though.
What if you steal it?
Yeah.
There you go.
Okay.
Yeah.
All right.
Well, I'm glad we solved that problem.
Yes.
But so I think what I like about this is that we, and we chose some inflammatory examples,
but the, the idea that when having a discussion, I think everybody can think of an example
from their lives where they're talking about, um, it, well, it's, you know, this is kind
of the absurdity of like, if I know your position on legalization of drugs, I can guess what
art, maybe that's probably more centrist now, but, uh, if I know your position on abortion,
I can guess your position on immigration and gun control and I don't know your support
of the, your, your, uh, what do you call it, comfort with, uh, Russia or something, right?
Which has gone way up in three public and party in the last five years.
So fucking weird, man, from around 10% to about 35% now, the fact that those all are
on your side of the, of the war and why would they be correlated?
Those beliefs have nothing to do with each other.
So that's, that's the sort of thing that you, you might be called out for saying,
oh no, I'm, I'm a liberal, but I think that I should be able to own guns and somebody
might call you, call you out for that, or no, look, I'm a conservative, but you know,
abortion issue, that's, that's obviously settled.
People should be allowed to have them.
They'll be called out for that too.
Um, and that's not even like a policy debate, but that's just a, a, I guess in the metaphor,
guess different battalions, um, but they're all on the same side of the, on the same army.
Anyway, it's madness.
So he said that the reason we want to taboo, or he wants to taboo talking about
politics is that though politics is an important domain to which we should
individually apply our rationality, see, actually should apply rationality.
So weird, but it's a terrible domain in which to learn rationality.
And he used the example that in AI, in artificial intelligence, and particularly
in the domain of non-monotonic reasoning, which I don't even know if I've
pronounced that right because I don't know what that is.
You pronounced it right.
Okay, great.
There's a standard problem.
Quote, all Quakers are pacifists.
All Republicans are not pacifists.
Nixon is a Quaker and a Republican is Nixon, a pacifist that is Nixon, a pacifist.
And he goes on to say, what on earth was the point of choosing that as an example?
Cause you've just alienated whatever portion of your audience is, you know, Republican.
Or at least made them feel like, what the hell?
Yeah.
Yeah.
So you're, you're trying to talk about an actual problem in programming and you
have just put a certain amount of people on edge and in defensive fight mode.
Especially when in this, when the circumstance, you know, all A, R, B, all
C are not A, D is B and A, or D is B and C is D, A.
Like that, I guess what I'm getting at, it could have been more abstract.
And instead you make it politically aggressive.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think it is actually as a word problem, more comprehensible to someone who's
like a newbie programmer, but like, yeah, you could have picked something
that was non-political.
Yeah.
And then that's what he said, that it feels really good to get that jab in, but don't do it.
Yeah.
A lot of my college professors, I remember doing that too.
And it's, it was interesting because I had college professors that had different
political opinions.
I mean, academia, you know, like you tend to think of it as leaning really liberal
and a lot of them were, but I definitely had this one right wing professor.
And I noticed it a lot more because I tend to be more left leaning.
And he would just, he was like very biased and he would use like his, you know,
personal anecdotes and like his like little jokes that were like kind of jabbing
at the left all the time.
And it was so irritating.
And then I realized that all my like left leaning professors were actually doing
the same thing and I didn't notice it.
I was kind of sitting there chuckling along like, ah, good joke,
professor so-and-so and I was like, wait a minute.
Yeah.
And I know we do that on the podcast sometimes too.
But we don't make an effort about being non, I mean, we, we, we make an effort
to not be political podcasts, but we don't make an effort to be non-partisan.
Right.
Um, and I had a curiosity.
Did you go to a state school or a non-state school?
It was a state school because I, I don't remember any of my professors being,
like, I guess, I mean, I, I was at community college as a liberal arts major.
And then basically psychology is a liberal art.
Although I always like to plug this at CSU.
It's a science class or it's a science major.
So, uh, because most places it's a liberal arts major, but, uh, I don't remember anybody.
I guess I don't remember much of college, but not cause I had a good time
because I was tired, not cause I was partying too much.
Yeah.
No, I was, I was cripplingly depressed.
So it was like five years, kind of like mostly gone.
That's creepy.
Yeah.
Most of my life.
But yeah, I had one, uh, that is weird.
Wait, not, not the crippling depression.
My, you know, tepid, tepid depression.
But my, I think I've been on this tangent before, but, um, my, like confidence
in my autobiographical memory went really down when I learned about Elizabeth
loftists, loftists research on how easy it is to fake memories.
And then I realized that maybe I had some realization where I discovered
that one of my memories was fake and ever since then I stopped trusting them.
So I guess I've been in the background of recycling them all into the bullshit
bucket and they've all been thrown out.
But it's amazing how much I've forgotten of stuff, but it's not like nothing
that's ever happened to you actually happened, man.
But it's not like I forgot like addresses or like, you know, people or something.
It's just like, if you asked me to name a memory from all 11th grade,
I would struggle to find one.
Like if you showed me a picture, I'd like, oh, I remember that, but I don't
have anything sorted that way in my head.
Well, I don't think normally people don't just randomly recall things anyway.
Memories are sparked by something else that's happening.
When you're meditating, well, I release me, but I've heard that this is a
common experience.
I just get random memories that I had completely forgotten.
I get random thoughts, but they're almost never memories.
No, I'd like distinctly get memories from my childhood that I hadn't
remembered up until that point, but they just suddenly come back.
It's really weird.
And it's interesting because it shows that meditation is kind of doing
something, but, uh, we're really derailing this.
Okay.
Uh, I just wanted to point out at the very end, it says, uh, he has a note
that now that he's been named as a co-moderator of overcoming bias, uh, he's,
he's adding the disclaimer that it's just his opinion and not in a statement
of official overcoming bias policy, which I don't know.
I just thought that was kind of neat because it brings it back to the whole,
oh yeah, this was originally posted on someone else's blog as part of a
conversation.
And I would assume they took that line out of overcoming bias AI to zombies.
I don't remember that line being in there.
The what?
I don't remember that line being in there.
Although again, I could have just forgotten it.
Well, it wouldn't make any sense in what is basically a textbook, right?
Yeah.
Um, it might not be in there.
I'm not sure.
I know that in the comments section, Hanson and Yudkowsky went back and
forth a little bit on whether or not it was, you know, appropriate to use
political examples and they, they came back and like, can we at least
agree to like not make points just to get in that nice solid dig about how
dumb your opponents are.
And I was like, oh yeah, totally.
Don't do that.
Um, so I think they, they kind of just hesitated a little bit on the, like how
appropriate is, is political discussion and rationality.
They kind of went back and forth on that, but they were able to agree that like,
let's not be dicks, but I feel like it's a really solid baseline.
There's, there's one core value that my team has at work that we put together.
Cause we, no dicks.
No, it was, it was be excellent to each other.
Oh, yeah, that's fantastic.
Which, which we settled on because don't be a dick.
We had to write these down and put them on a board.
So we didn't want to do that, but.
So that's what it actually secretly means though.
Well, they, they think those mean the same thing, right?
Yeah, I like the, uh, it's more positive and it's more like proactive.
Don't be a dick is a don't thing.
Whereas be excellent is a do thing.
Fair enough.
I feel like they mount to like many of the same behaviors, but you're
right.
One is like more helpful.
I actually don't think they amount to the same behaviors, stopping, doing
things, uh, kind of puts you at a baseline, but like, be excellent means
kind of go above and beyond.
Oh, then we should have, we should have stuck with, don't be a dick.
We're not, we're not, we're not an above and beyond team.
Well, it's aspirational.
Yeah.
That's, well, speaking of aspirations, my daily aspiration at work is to
suck a little less every day, which is I've been told I should have it be, be
a little better every day, but I feel like this is an easier way to motivate
it myself.
So whatever works for you, man.
That's what works.
Our next less strong sequence post is just lose hope already.
How appropriate.
Uh, it gives two examples basically of people who were all in on something and
just kept going all in long past the point of reason.
The more astounding example, which I'll quote here is that LTCM was a, uh, hedge
fund and, uh, LTCM raked in giant profits over its first three years.
And then in 1998, the inefficiencies that they were exploiting started to
vanish.
Other people knew about the trick.
So it stopped working.
LTCM refused to lose hope addicted to 40% annual returns.
They borrowed more and more leverage to exploit tinier and tinier margins.
When everything started to go wrong for LTCM, they had an equity of 2.47
billion leverage of 124.5 billion and derivative positions of 1.25 trillion.
So these are guys that you really should have stopped a long, long time ago
and just refused to give up hope.
So for us non-accounting people, I know what equity is, but I don't know
the difference between leverage and derivative positions.
Uh, leverage would be basically debt that they had took on, uh, in order
to borrow more.
Sure.
Yeah.
Um, derivative positions, I don't know, man.
Well, I was curious because it was like another order of magnitude higher.
Yeah.
And I don't know what the fuck you could do for 1.25 trillion dollars.
I mean, all right.
Well, anyone who wants to know that can know that, I guess.
Yeah.
Anyone who wants to tell us what a derivative position is in this case, please
do.
There's one guy who's like, yes.
Now my expertise comes out.
Uh, I'm glad that we're doing this reread because the sequence is so short
that I, and I read it so long ago that I'd actually forgotten it.
Yeah, I had to, but, um, I remember Professor Queryle going to pains to try
to teach Harry how to lose in methods of rationality.
So for whatever reason, that stuck in my mind more, but, uh, I actually think
that the lessons better explained in the sequence, which is probably because
it's in the form of a real world consequence of losing money and
continual failing business ventures, then a lesson being taught by an evil
wizard who obviously hails here, your motives.
I actually didn't buy it at all in the story when he was like, lose Harry.
I was like, no.
Yeah.
Like, I don't know.
I think what, I think what Queryle's trying to do was teach him that you
need to know how, when to not escalate.
And like, so you keep, keep, how, keep the stakes in mind and then see how
high you want to keep going for that.
Because yeah, you could just burn yourself out.
You know, if his stupid ploy to what was, what did he just win?
Oh, we got Snape to apologize in front of everybody by threatening to walk out
on Dumbledore and damn the whole future of the magical Britain.
So he was saying, like, look, if your thing hadn't worked, you would have
just lost.
And so he'd have been expelled over what Snape being a dick snake or getting
detention is what it was or something.
Right.
So like, come on, you need to know when to pull your punches.
So I think it's a good lesson for any aspiring dark lord, but it does
hearken back to this too.
So I, well, the thing is though, even though this is like more, it's a better
example, I guess, in the fact that it actually applies to real life.
And you can see like, yeah, they should have stopped long before that.
Uh, I, the, the, I didn't remember this post, but I did remember sixth grade
people beaten up on first grade Harry Potter, you know, that, that stuck in
my mind for, I don't know, ever.
I haven't forgotten it anyway.
It's true.
And they are, there are, they are slightly different lessons, maybe as
part of the point too.
Yeah.
You know, one is like, no, when to not escalate and no, what not, when to not
go all out, because if you go all out and lose, you could end up totally fucked.
But this is more just like, don't keep writing on wishful thinking, you know,
have, have real realistic ambitions and keep them in check.
It seems like it's the same lesson actually.
Learn to realize when you should give up because you're losing.
Yeah.
I guess I had a difference and then I spoke to you on myself and forgot the
people who, whatever these else TCM hedge fund people, they didn't, they
didn't lose because they weren't trying hard enough and they didn't, they
refused to put all their cards on the table and they took the kid gloves off
and really just said, we're going to do this.
They lost because the system changed and there was no winning.
So it wasn't like, I feel like Harry in that situation, if there was no chance
of winning, he wouldn't have gone that way.
He had to chill or something else.
Right.
Well, I, so I'm, it was like, no, that this is, this is where I can keep raising
the stakes, but there, he actually had stakes to raise, whereas these people
were just writing on wishes.
Well, knowing Harry, he probably could have done something to win against those
bullies, right?
But then that would have resulted in something even worse, like blowing up
half of Hogwarts.
Sure.
Yeah.
He had his plans on how to win too.
There was, there was that part where he, you know, he turned on his real
enemy, the defense professor.
But the thing is, these guys had a plan as well, right?
They were, they were making profits the next quarter.
They just kept borrowing and leveraging more and it ended up with blowing up
half of Hogwarts in financial terms for them.
I think the difference though is that they weren't actually, they didn't,
they didn't have a plan or adapt or pivot when things got weird.
They just kept doubling down.
You know, it's like, it'd be like the person who goes to Vegas and they bring
$500, they lose it all immediately.
So they go withdraw more money.
They start maxing out credit cards.
They start whatever black marketing organs and their watch and their wedding ring.
Like at that point, and they're still just playing blackjack, right?
They're, they're, they're not, they're not trying harder.
They're just keeping trying.
So there's a difference.
I, I'm belaboring probably way too much, but I guess I wanted to, they felt
different to me and I wanted to articulate that these people are just playing
blackjack over and over and refuse to acknowledge that blackjack is a losing
game.
Um, actually, blackjack is a great game.
If you want to sit and play, your odds are pretty good for as far as poker,
but, um,
they're only slightly less than one and two.
Yeah.
Which is not bad.
Well, I like games where you're just playing against one person.
Okay.
Uh, like, oh, don't get wrong.
I actually like holding more because it's a longer game and it's more fun.
But the, so you actually like these card games.
I mean, a little bit.
It's actually like the one thing if I could, I've found, I've watched all
the videos I can find online, but it's like the sport that's on in a restaurant
or something.
It's the one I'll sit and like not pay attention to conversation watching
like high stakes poker.
Huh.
I think that's a lot of fun.
I've never seen high stakes poker on a TV in a restaurant.
It's cause it's not that common, but it's out there once in a while.
Yeah.
We must go to different restaurants.
Yeah.
You gotta go to enough, like, I don't know, shitty sports bars or something
on the off seasons.
Yeah.
I try to avoid those.
There you go.
Um, I'm going to get back to your point, Steven.
But, uh, and maybe this is just me, but I, while I agree with what the sequence
is saying, I don't like the negative tone of just lose hope already.
Right.
Uh, even though the focus is on knowing when to stop trying, I think the point
might be at the expense of the value of failure.
Well, they had like, there was the, um, hedge fund and then there's this
fictional character Casey in the sequence who keeps failing.
And the writing actually kind of made fun of Casey and saying like, he hasn't
failed, you see, he just had a learning experience.
And yeah, so he had failed at trying the same thing eight times and he's about
to try again the ninth time.
So he's clearly not actually learning from the failure, which is like what
you were saying, Steven.
I don't think that was a fictional character.
Was it?
Oh, was it?
That was a real guy.
That was a real person.
I think what he was saying when he is like, Oh, you see, he, he just had a
learning lesson, he had a learning moment, which I think he put that in like
the kind of sarcastic italics because that's probably what he's saying to
people and why he's trying for the ninth time, doing the same thing.
No, no, no, I'm just, I, those were the, you know, that, that wasn't failure.
That was experience.
And it's like, yeah, but you're not, you're doing the same thing.
Yeah.
We have a lot of societal kind of, you know, fall down, fall off the horse nine
times, get up 10 and, uh, I'll say like, if you just believe really hard,
but, uh, no, failure, I think can actually be really important, although
it's mostly like important because it tells you that you need to alter your
strategy or try to do something else instead.
So yeah, I don't actually disagree with the sequence.
I'm just not a fan of the tone.
Yeah, it is pretty negative sounding.
Who hurt you?
I think I'd have liked it more if it focused more on the how to be smarter
and how to calculate your odds of success.
Part of the, they just kind of like mentioned that this is what you should
do and then moved away from it.
It just like reinforces to me that failure is shameful and should be avoided at
all costs.
And meanwhile, I think most people don't fail enough because they're so
risk averse and afraid of looking bad that they never try anything.
I definitely see how that's an interpretation.
That's not how I took it, but I totally see how he, he opened himself up to
that reading.
I think what he would say is like, if you fall off a horse five times, like
check the stirrups or like adjust your grip the sixth time, don't just get back
on it, fall right back off.
Like there's, so it's about actually adapting and actually learning from your
mistakes, but he doesn't stop time on that in this post.
Stop just having hope that it'll be different this time and actually do
something.
Yeah.
And, uh, you know, like you said, as far as like things you can actually do,
you know, he's, there's a, one of our notes here was every profession has a,
has a different way to be smart, uh, different skills to learn and rules to
follow, which, uh, I put known here, that's kind of the thing we talked about,
uh, in the last episode with the person who said civilization is basically
systematized winning already.
They, a lot of, a lot of our organizations in life have these rules and systems
that are guide you into winning as long as you follow them.
Yeah.
And that's, at least there's basically saying the same thing here.
Each profession has ways to, to succeed at it.
Yeah.
And the next point too is one that I made when someone asked like, well, how
do I apply rationality in my real life, which is like, I try not to suck.
Yeah.
But how not to be stupid has a great deal in common across professions.
And there was a, one of my philosophy professors to find wisdom as like the
skill of not sucking at life.
And I liked that.
And it could be, you know, the skill of excelling at life, but I like, I like
that they're not sucking because it's more, it's more generic.
There are, there are pitfalls that you can fall into basically wherever you are.
And identifying and blocking against those is good, but there are different,
too many directions to reach in to have like generic advice on how to win.
I think, right?
I think a lot of advice on how to win is really advice on how not to lose.
Yeah.
He says, yeah, in continuation of that quote, if you'd set out to teach someone
how to not turn little mistakes into big mistakes, it's nearly always the same art,
whether it's a hedge funds or romance.
And one of the keys is this, be ready to admit you lost.
Yeah.
Maybe, maybe he didn't think of the line, learn how to lose until later.
Cause that'd been a better name for this post rather than just lose hope.
Yeah.
It's still pretty negative though.
It is, I think, I think I had a hard time with that too.
Even when I was reading methods of rationality, that was kind of why I had
the knee jerk reaction of like, no, don't, you know, learn how to lose, learn
how to win better, but that's less than Harry takes.
And he's ready to destroy the universe to do it.
Right.
So, so the whole story is kind of that lesson.
Yeah.
It's a lot, it's a lot of stuff.
All right.
As long as we're in tangent land, how are you liking Horizon Zero Dawn?
It's really good.
Yeah, vindication, validation.
I'm playing it very slowly because my temptation is to just like burn through
story mode really quickly.
And I'm trying to draw the experience.
So I'm doing all the lakeside quests and kind of just wandering around and trying
to explore the world.
That's what I did.
I went through and played, I took off all of last week for Thanksgiving and I
played God of War all the way through the new one.
Nice.
And when I started the game, I always look at the settings to see like what I can
change about it.
So I turned off a bunch of stuff that I think made it way more immersive and fun.
So there's like a compass like a lot of games have like that tell you where to go
at the top.
Yeah.
I made that only show up if I touched the middle part of the controller.
Cool.
So it's not like I'm not just staring at the compass and keeping myself aligned
the whole time.
I'm looking at the world.
Yeah.
I turned off enemy health bars unless I do the same thing, touch the thing.
And a couple of other things that just like, and I also put it in hard mode,
which I try, I always try a game in hard mode first and then get frustrated
because I die immediately and send it back to regular, but never play in easy
mode because that just, it too easy.
Well, and it takes, it's all that does is just make the enemies like have less
health, they give you more damage.
And it, it seems like it artificially deliberately makes the experience easier.
And part of the experience is like supposed to be challenging.
You know, like parts of horizon zero done are supposed to be scary and
frustrating because there's no way you can beat this thing.
And many times you're like, holy shit, I need to get out of here.
But if you know, you can just cheese it from a distance by throwing rocks at it
or something, then it takes away some of the fun.
That's one of the reasons I'm looking forward to the World of Warcraft
classic is because it was actually really fucking hard.
I like hard games.
It's kind of a problem.
Okay.
Anyway, God of War was fun.
Yeah.
I had a great time with it.
You know, I never really liked the open world games because of all the
side quests and shit.
I feel like if I don't do them, I'm missing out on a lot.
But what I really care about is the main story.
And so I spent hours and hours on these stupid side quests, which distract me
from the main story and I lose focus and it just, ah, it's really frustrating.
So bad games make side quests feel like busy work and good games make side
quests feel like this other awesome thing you're lucky you found.
And I think Horizon Zero Dawn does that really well.
Like there's this whole expansion that I didn't realize was the expansion until
I played most of the game.
Then I googled like, what does this expansion actually cover?
And it's like, oh, that whole northern part of the continent.
And you get up there and there's this whole self contained kind of story, but
you're really interested in it and that sort of thing.
So I think it did a good job there.
Yeah, the rating in the game is good enough and like it ties into the world building.
And, you know, there's actually cool characters.
Yeah, the last two games like that I played were Dragon Age 3 and The Witcher 3,
both of which are like apparently the best games ever, right?
But both of them, I just didn't get all that into them.
I couldn't get into those either.
And I think it's just the camera.
I couldn't get in.
I tried Witcher 2 and 3 couldn't get past the controls.
Like I know that's like a weedy, that's a weak complaint, but it was clunky to play.
And I was like, eh, I just didn't get sucked in.
No, wait, I take that back.
I tried one and two.
I never tried three.
God of War is a good hybrid of like it's open world, but not in that sense
that you can scale any mountain you want.
It's like, hey, here's where you're supposed to go, but you don't have to.
You can go to wherever else you feel like you can get to or that you can, you know,
you get things to unlock parts of the game through the stuff.
So you can't get past that.
You can't get past it or whatever.
But when you go through down these little side rails, it's kind of it's fairly linear maps.
It's not like, like I said, we're in like Horizon Zero Dawn or Skyrim.
You can just run up any mountain and see what's up there.
This is much more of a contained experience, but not in a way that feels constricting.
Anyway, I like video games a lot.
I feel like I feel like it's an underappreciated medium for like telling
great stories and having a great time.
I think it's much more appreciated nowadays.
It is.
But I mean, even just 10 years ago, people would give me shit about
like being excited about the next video game.
Most people sucked.
They did suck.
And I'm like, it's like being excited for the next book, except this book takes me 600
hours to read, like it's going to be great.
So and you're controlling the protagonist.
Yeah.
And you're controlling the protagonist and you get to help
write the story in some of these games, right?
Like Horizon Zero Dawn and God of War, you don't.
The story is going to be what it is.
And you can just uncover as much of it as you can playing through.
And that's a great way to deliver the great stories that those games have.
But like, I don't know, Skyrim, you can kind of you don't get to like
side with the dragons at the end or whatever, but you can be a total
monster and an assassin old time if you want, or you can be a, you know,
a paragon of virtues.
So anyway, that's my video game rant.
Excellent.
We'll be doing something.
I forget.
Oh, we have one more sequence post.
Yeah.
Thanks for bearing with me.
No, that was cool.
We were going to do the video game thing chat at some point.
And it just got squeezed in between post two and three now.
Lucky you guys.
Hell yeah.
Okay.
Our last one is you are not hiring the top 1%.
I got another negative post.
I feel like, yeah, you know, but what's what was going on this week?
Uh, where he makes the point that when you get 200 resumes and hire the best
person, does that mean you're hiring the top 0.5% because a lot of places
do advertise that we only hire the top 1% and I know a lot of, um, uh, a lot
of tech companies.
Well, I was going to say, maybe, I don't know.
I was going to say that, uh, um, short story markets will publish, you know,
what percentage of, uh, stories that they accept that they receive, they
actually accept and publish.
And, you know, for some of them, it's like 1% or less.
Uh, but he goes on to say what happens to the other 199 candidates that you
didn't hire, they go look for another job.
So, uh, it may only be a few good people that are getting hired.
And the other 199 people are just the same terrible people rotating, going
from employer to employer, making everyone think they're hiring the top
1% when they're, they're just hiring average people who aren't the
shitty bottom 199.
Yeah.
So part of this is just failure to understand like how distributions
work and how samples work.
And so like, it's like math problems.
Like you just, you, when you say this, you don't actually, you can't
write on, on, on paper and like numbers, what you're mean without, without
contradicting yourself or without showing that you don't really understand
what you're saying.
But the other, I think the other point there is, um, slept my mind.
I guess, I don't know, this, this is something that you're right.
A lot of companies or publicists or things will tout like we only do the best.
And it's like, no, you, you don't, you do, do you do what everyone else is doing?
It sounds like it does sound good at first, right?
At first blush.
And, you know, my, my little question here at the bottom is what
does this have to do with rationality?
Yeah.
Is that a real question?
Yeah.
Oh, I thought you had like a, I thought that was like your prompt
document answer.
Well, part of it is just noticing that they don't understand probability
distributions, but maybe they don't not understand, but it's a marketing
employee, like trying to get investment money or make their company look good.
I think a lot of people really believe in it.
I had a teacher once who wanted us all to do the best in the class.
And I pointed out in front of the class, because I was an obstinate student
that like, that doesn't make any sense.
We can't all do the best.
Cause I had this joke that went back, I think it was Jerry Seinfeld, who was
like, you know, doctors, there are some doctors graduating at the bottom of the
class and whatever a passing grade is, there are doctors who are squeaking by.
And somebody's gotten a point with him on Monday is the joke.
Um, but, you know, so whether a passing grade is a doctor is a 90% or 70% they
are, there's somebody graduating at the bottom of the class, cause they can't
all be the top of the class.
You know, if they're all getting a pluses, somebody, somebody's doing better
than the other people or you're measuring metrics sucks.
Cause if they're all getting a hundred or they're all getting a pluses, 104% then
you're not measuring anything.
Right.
Um, well, apparently that's a lot of how school works.
Well, it is, but like, so the example I gave my teacher, cause she was annoyed
at that and so that was negative thinking.
I was like, we can't all be the tallest person in the class either.
Mm hmm.
What, you get a, how old were you at this point?
Uh, I was disannoying as a child too, but I was, uh, 19 probably when this happened.
Your teacher told you that shit, said that shit to 19 year olds.
She, this was a community college English teacher.
The only reason that, yeah, it was a nightmare.
Like I can see trying to tell that to fourth graders and thinking it'll fly,
but I cannot see anyone trying to tell teenagers.
I want every one of you to be the best in the class and not get like, she, she
wanted it to be like a, a positive thinking thing.
And I'm like, that's fine.
You should say you want us all to kick ass or us all to do great, but we can't
all be the best in the class.
That's just not how the best works.
And I don't remember what she said to my tallest example, but she might have said
that as negative thinking or something.
I don't know.
It sounds kind of naked.
If she especially was just trying to use it as a positive thinking experiment,
just let her have it.
She totally said.
Oh, well then.
No, she was a bully.
She, she, yeah, she, she was, she sucked.
But, and it wasn't just me who thought that she gave me so much shit that no
less than three other students came up to me at some point and was like, what
is her problem with you?
That's a good question.
And then somebody's trying to inspire you to be the best man.
Oh no, like all the time throughout, like the rest of the semester should call
me out and try to get me to drop out and stuff.
Yeah, it sucked.
Um, but no, the whole, I don't think it's negative.
There are three of us in the room.
One of us is the tallest, right?
That's not negative.
That's just true.
Wait, she said that the tallest example was negative.
I don't remember what she said about that.
But I, I, I maintain that those are simple.
Those are analogous enough to make sense.
I do see how one is being not positive.
I don't think one is being not realistic.
Yeah, I don't have much to say about, um, you're not hiring the top 1%.
I did want to highlight that there was a comment from someone called kickstand
that said, consider this, 99% of the human population knows nothing about
programming, thus any programmer you hire is in the top 1%, which is a little bit
more positive or a little bit more, uh, kind of puts it again, like in, in a
different context.
I think what it has to do with rationality, why it's included in the
sequences is because it does point out the fact that people aren't thinking, I
guess, to fall back to this term, they have a bad map of the world where they
assume that since they have these 100 candidates and they picked the one best
one, they're hiring the top 1% without looking at the, the greater territory
and seeing what, what the representative set representative sample actually is,
right?
And rationality is a way to, you know, reevaluate what you're seeing and try
to really see it in the greater context so that you're not fooling yourself.
Yeah.
At the very least, just understanding, I think there's also a kind of a
precondition that's never made explicit because it's almost never necessary in
the sequences, but a pre-occurator for being a better rationalist than me is
like some math skills.
Like if you don't know enough about probability theory to follow exactly why
that's the case, then, then Eleazar might say, look, grab a math book and get
caught up.
Well, it's, it's, it's not even math.
It's pretty simple.
Once someone points out to you that, look, it's just the same terrible 199
people all the time.
So the top one isn't really the best.
It's just better than those people.
It's, um, it's just a way of stepping back and looking harder as opposed to
taking things at face value, I guess.
Is there any example that we can use in our real lives since we're not
hiring people for this?
Kind of thinking that like it, it's a fun thought experiment.
How would you actually munchkin the job market?
Is it like, okay, we need to just snipe people from other companies because
like, you know, if, if they're already being hired, so they're taken out of
the job pool well.
Well, I mean, good luck.
Cause I mean, y'all, all the best people are going to be working at Google and
Facebook and all the big four, right?
So go try to find undiscovered people who aren't in the job market, give them
an offer.
Most people do try to hire away from other companies.
Yeah, but you're never going to hire away from Google because they're going
to pay $60,000 more a year than you are.
So there's the thing that like, once you're in a relationship, that's
when people actually want to start dating you or something, right?
Yeah.
Same with the same with having a job.
Yeah.
So I'd easily find a job when you have one.
Maybe it's, maybe it's for the exact same reason.
Maybe people know this.
Well, no, I think it's that.
Maybe you're confident because you don't need a job now, you know, whatever.
But the other thing is that somebody else has already taken a risk on you and
said, oh, okay, they're, they're safe enough that, you know, if someone
else is already, you know, either paying them to work there or dating them, then
they can't be all that bad.
So that's already weeded out a lot of the bad people for me.
Yeah, social proof.
Yeah.
I guess I just realized the social proof for dating and for a job market is the
exact same thing in that context.
Okay.
So that was our sequences for this week.
For next time, we will be talking about policy debates should not appear one
sided and Birch's law.
And there will be links to both of those on our website, which is the
basin conspiracy.com.
That sounds right.
Okay.
I'm having a brain fart right now.
I'm sorry.
I'm going to edit that.
So I do not sound nearly so stupid.
Not again.
I thought it was funny.
And my response was knowing that you're having a brain fart and playing along.
Son of a bitch.
Want to listen to feedback?
Yeah, why not?
Unless we want to do this video game talking thing.
Nah, I guess there was one small thing.
Actually, I've got a little section in the notes for video games because it's
literally one bullet point.
Steven's video game, Connor.
That's right.
Yeah, Stanley died a couple of weeks ago, which is a huge bummer.
And I had played through the Spider-Man PS4 game a couple of months ago.
And it was fun.
That's probably, I don't know, three out of five.
It was fun to play, fun to look at, good story, but like kind of repetitive.
A lot of weird like bizarre, like these were the side quests where they felt
like just, you know, ridiculous sidetracking work.
And it's like, why are you literally spending time catching pigeons when
there's a side quest to catch pigeons for a crazy
homeless person?
So, yeah, is it just to be nice to the homeless guy?
Yeah.
And for whatever reason, the Spider-Man's personal phone number.
I'm not really, maybe he's relevant in the comics or something.
But anyway, does he eat these pigeons?
No, he names them and stuff.
I don't know if he eats them and it's pretty fucked up.
You're helping feed the homeless guy, man.
Anyway, Stanley had a cameo in that game, which I didn't see coming.
Peter and MJ had this little diner and then they're like kind of like
they're apparently in the point in the game.
It's eight years after he got his spider bites.
None of this like, you know, preamble stuff.
This is also after Infinity War, because there's Avengers Tower and stuff.
And they're anyway, they he has to run out to go chase the police cars.
And then the line cook that you only like kind of saw like his shirt from
the camera angle before he was like, I'm so glad the two of you are back together again.
You always were my favorite.
And it looks at him and it's exactly looks like him.
And it was him doing the voice.
Cool.
So it's fun that he had a cameo in there.
And I like to think that that was like a line that he actually believed.
Like they, you know, that was always his favorite couple, maybe in his in his stories.
Anyway, Stanley seemed like a genuinely great dude and it's a bummer that he's dead.
So, yeah, yeah.
There were so many great stories about him that came out after that, like that
I just didn't even know about, like how, you know, connected he was to his fans.
Yeah, I don't think he's ever the kind of guy that got like too big for his
britches or hated being bothered.
You know, he was a guy with a schedule and probably couldn't like stop
and talk to everybody for half an hour.
But I think he went to conventions and stuff because he knew that it was important
to people, you know, to say hi.
So anyway, seemed like a down-to-earth dude.
And I like that he genuinely loved the things that he made, too.
And like, yeah, that makes no difference.
Not in the way that strangled them to death either.
Totally.
Rachel and my my fiance and I are talking about the people who were in
Twilight apparently hated those movies.
Robert Pattinson, the guy who played Cedric Diggory, actually.
Well, they were all directed to behave like weird robot people.
Yeah, no, I mean, it doesn't make them look good as actors.
Oh, no, I'm sure it was garbage and like to work for.
And like, I saw one of the movies that was terrible, like all that aside,
though, I know that they've been at least Robert Pattinson has been pretty
vocal about how much he hated working on these movies and how bad they are.
But I feel like and maybe it's a bad example.
I was just thinking of somebody who talks negatively of what they did.
You know, he could have said it was great working with people I worked with or
something, but maybe they all sucked.
Maybe that's not a relevant point at all.
Other than some people don't love what they do and it comes out, right?
If I do love what you do, people are excited about that.
Man, I don't unless you jump on a very popular hate train like Twilight.
Right.
Like, why is he hating on Twilight?
It gave him a hell of a paycheck.
It made his name really big.
And there's, you know, fans of the movies that enjoy them because they just
like the movies.
Yeah, I wonder what his hate on the movies does to the fans who like the movies.
Right.
Yeah, don't don't be a jerk, man.
I saw the guy who I recently watched a short YouTube video about the making
of the Super Mario Brothers movie, which yeah, fucking train wreck turns out.
I mean, the movie itself was off.
Really? Well, it's good and scary quotes.
Right. It's a good, bad movie.
But the guy who played Mario, a great, bad movie.
Yes. Yes. So entertaining.
But the guy who played Mario, yeah, but apparently the whole set was a wreck.
People hated each other.
They people started drinking on the job because they're like, this is awful.
How are we going to get through this day? Wow.
But the guy who played Mario years later, he was like a pretty like
classically trained British actor, you know, got a bunch of good roles.
Someone was interviewing him in your life and they asked him like,
what is one thing you regret about your life?
And he was like, Super Mario Brothers movie.
OK, what is what was the least great thing that you ever worked on?
Super Mario's movie. OK, all right.
If you could go back and change one thing in your life, what would it be?
He's like, I wouldn't have done a Super Mario movie.
He really, really hated that.
And I mean, that I think is a legit complaint as opposed to Twilight,
which has some artistic merit and fans and, you know,
a lot of good came of that movie for the people involved in it.
Yeah, I think it's it's got to be a bizarre situation of working on a movie
with people who like you're not getting along with.
I do this thing now when I'm watching TV and especially if I'm seeing like a rerun,
you know, that feeling like when you're at the movie theater and you're like
immersed and you're not you're not you in the movie theater,
you're you're just having the experience of the movie.
And then whatever it is, you somebody in the audience laughs or whatever.
And you kind of pulled out and you're like, oh, I'm in the movie theater
and I'm watching the movies and like I'm seeing light on a screen
and kind of just like that distance to it.
I've been for fun kind of amping that up when watching things.
And I love watching like people act and this is totally not relevant to anything.
But it's just I was doing this last night because it was somebody like kicking
stuff around on a on a set like as part of the joke.
But things were happening, you know, if you're kicking props,
they're not going to always do the same thing.
So like the jokes that you're making about that are all like, you know,
in the moment and that chemistry has to be like real appropriate and like aware.
And like everyone I got, I've been appreciating the skill of acting.
I think is what I've been doing.
Cool. But I can't imagine trying to do that with people that you fucking hate it.
That's bizarre. Anyway, I kind of want to watch the Super Mario Bros.
movie again. Speaking of wastes of time.
Yeah. OK, we're we're doing a podcast, right?
We are doing a podcast.
Let's move on to listener feedback.
Bum, bum, bum. OK.
Well, there is a longer quote by Sun Derive, which was I don't even remember
what episode this was from.
I'm not going to read the whole quote because it's long.
There was a lot of it.
I think this would have been from the culture war 2.0.
OK, they did want to say first, I'd like to caution against what I perceive
as an increase in bashing of non-rationalists for having biases.
Everyone has biases.
The vast majority are unaware of the majority of the biases
and haven't put any effort into learning about it.
That's not surprising.
That is why we care about raising the sanity water line.
It's like bashing people for not getting the God question right.
It feels like bashing on children.
So first of all, I want to say yes, that is true.
Point well received.
That also gets a good solid dig and those stupid religious people.
OK, but it is.
I think, in fact, I talked with Jess about this a couple of weeks ago,
we went out and I was pretty like, I don't know, ardent atheist for the first
few years that I discovered it and read the God delusion.
And, you know, I think everybody goes through the asshole atheist phase
when they first did Convert.
I had like 10 years of that.
Yeah, you know, it was and it was bonding, man.
Yeah, you bond with people and the part of why it was fun is the debates
were so easy because there was three arguments people would make,
you know, so you would just get really good.
And it was kind of like, yeah, like fighting kids.
Do the best.
But that sounds mean.
It's not sitting on religious people.
I do. I do think that religions aren't true, but I don't give anyone shit about it anymore.
I still remember the what was it?
The forums that I was on.
Yeah, what was it called?
Fuck, I don't remember.
Reggie was the name of the the the the there wasn't even podcasting back then,
just guy who did things online.
But he had a forum and there was a guy named Todd Todes angst,
who I loved, who was just really a Serbic and would always be kind of
asshole-ish to people, right?
But and people would say, like, that's an ad hominem attack.
He's like, no, it's not.
If I were to say you're stupid and that's why your argument is wrong,
that's an ad hominem, because that doesn't mean your arguments wrong.
When I say you're stupid, that's just an insult.
You are the best.
That's a good quote, too.
But there was this one guy called Geek for Christ,
who whose avatar was the little cucumber from the Veggie Tales show.
And he came in there and he was all enthusiastic about Christ.
And we were just arguing with him.
And after several weeks, he started to have doubts.
And after like a couple of months, he was like,
think you guys may have a point about this whole God thing.
I was like, holy shit, it worked.
Oh, my God.
It was the coolest thing.
I was surprised that that kind of brow beating would work.
But I guess somebody who's open with those up to that.
It wasn't just brow beating.
It was like a lot of debate.
And some of it was a bit heated, you know, and every now and then
Tata Sengs would walk in and do his thing.
But he also made really good points, you know?
Yeah, kind of like Richard Dawkins style to doing that.
I suppose.
Yeah, he doesn't really worry about playing nice, but he's not an asshole.
Yeah, yeah, I like that, especially like if someone's coming in and just
it's like a good Reddit thread, which are rarer and rarer,
but it depends on the subreddit.
But some of the come in.
I like no stupid questions.
One of my favorites, because people will typically answer like, hey,
yeah, why can't you eat dirt?
That's a really good question.
And they'll explain why.
So like if someone came on to this forum that you're talking about, it's like,
hey, you know, what do you guys have to say about the resurrection?
I thought that was really compelling.
And you're like, well, here's all the reasons we don't find it compelling.
And they're like, oh, no one's ever mentioned that in Bible study.
So maybe that's the way that it kind of worked.
I've heard that it works.
It depends on the person.
Some people get converted with getting attacked or deconverted, rather.
Or and some people, it has to be like the, you know, the, what is it?
Carrier stick.
That's the wrong thing.
Love, honey, getting the flies.
What am I trying to say?
Yeah.
Yeah, I love bombing.
There's something to that.
I was at a, I brought this up on the podcast.
It's been like at least a year.
So I can do it again.
Um, I was at one of James Randi's annual conferences in like 2008 or nine.
And, uh, Phil plate, the astronomer actually lives in Boulder.
The infamous don't be a dick.
Yeah.
Which was somehow infamous.
He gave a 30 minute talk that ended up being titled, don't be a dick.
And one of the things that he did at the beginning was like, hey, who in here
used to believe something like Bigfoot or aliens or whatever.
And a lot of hands go up.
All right.
Now how many of you stopped, stopped believing because somebody got in your
face and called you an idiot and, you know, whatever shouted at you and only
one person left their hand up when it was Paul prevents or the comedian.
And the next day he explained to the person who shouted at him was
Penn Gillette, but so that aside, screaming at people and saying, you're
a fucking idiot, doesn't change their mind.
Yeah, but it's not necessarily screaming at someone and saying you're
a fucking idiot because most people don't do that, but it's being mocked for
being naive.
Like that's how everyone stopped believing in Santa, right?
All their friends were like, oh my God, you still believe in Santa?
Look at the baby.
And then you're like embarrassed.
And yeah, you go back to like, well, dad, what about the Santa thing?
And they're like, oh, shit, just, just don't tell your little brother.
It's weird.
Maybe it's only because I was thinking about it.
Don't be a dick thing, but there's got to be a nicer way to do that.
Oh yeah.
I mean, there's nice ways to do it too.
I'm just both work in different situations.
They do.
And both don't work in certain situations.
Yeah.
So I guess there's a lot of people who'll be like, fuck you.
You're going to come at me.
I'm going to come at you.
Yeah.
Places where it wouldn't work is where there's not enough shame for
believing whatever the thing is, right?
So like, if you're a climate change denialist, you're not going to shame them
in changing their mind because they've got a lot of people to go back and give
them support, right?
It's weird though, because religious people have a lot of people to go back
and give them support about the whole Christ thing too.
I think, I think it works more when there's already like a seed of doubt
somewhere inside them.
Yeah, that's the difference is that the people who are coming to forums
and asking questions are already having questions.
But yeah, the drive for curiosity is a big helper there.
Anyway, weren't we responding to a feedback?
Oh, yes.
Okay.
So the thing that I actually wanted to respond to was, Ines jokes that debates
is like rap battle for intellectuals.
By doing that, there's an implicit statement that people who do rap
battles are dumb when it in fact requires both a lot of training and quick
thinking to do well in those people who do rap battles are stereotypically
black and there's already an existing stereotype of black people being less
intelligent so the damage gets amplified by confirmation bias.
And oh, dear God, that is not at all what I meant.
And I was going to like reply with a whole big thing, but being in part
apologetic, because obviously I did not correctly communicate what I was thinking
when I said that, if that's what he took away from it, that is not his fault.
It's in part at least mine for not being clear.
But someone replied for me, here it is, before I could get to it.
Sol21,000 said, to defend Ines's comment, rap battles and sports debates are similar
and that they're both suboptimal at finding out what they purport to find out.
The sports debates tend not to revolve around to truth too closely,
and a strong case could be made that rap battles don't do a good job of providing
more intelligent lyricism.
They tend to favor traits like humor, novelty, should I read the, okay.
They tend to favor traits like humor compared dumbfounded against tantrum
during their classic grind time battle.
Novelty, Stolkon being Jewish and having a really low voice.
And spectacle, every single prop moment over long form traits like storytelling
or rhyme scheme flexibility, which come out more in written rhymes.
This isn't even getting into biasing effect charisma and reputation have on judging in both
arenas.
So a common thread is that they're the inferior form of a not dumb art rather than simply dumb
forms of art.
And basically, yes, that, that I was not trying to say that debating is like a rap
battle because it's dumb like rap battles are dumb, which dumb black people do.
What I was trying to say is when you're having a rap battle, you are performing for an
audience and you're trying to make people go, oh, shit, and like be entertained by how well
you're like slam this guy or being witty or it's, it's about the spectacle, right.
And it's not, it's not nearly the same thing as putting together something like I'm going
to date myself now, but something that Dre or Nicki Minaj would do or, or I hate to say M&M
because he's the white guy, but he wasn't a pretty damn good rapper in his day.
And they had, he had that movie, seeing the trailer for that is the closest I've ever
come to seeing a rap battle.
So, yeah, so yeah, I mean, that that's a different type of, of working on the musical
art that you can't do in a rap battle.
It requires sitting down and thinking and, and refining things a bit.
And that's what I was trying to say that in a debate, people aren't nearly as concerned
with the truth.
They're concerned with entertaining the audience and getting them go, oh, shit.
And you're like, yeah, poem that guy, you know, that, that sort of thing.
I wasn't trying to say that I wasn't trying to compare it to a rap battle because they're
dumb.
I was trying to compare it in that the point is to entertain the audience as opposed to
get to the truth or write a compelling, beautiful, lyrical song.
You could use another analogy.
What was the Dead Slate Star Codex endeavor where they had people who disagreed?
The adversarial collaboration.
Yes.
So like adversarial collaboration on the one hand versus like the Bill Nye versus Ken Ham
debate.
Right.
Yeah.
Those are not doing the same thing.
Right.
One is is bringing people who disagree together to try and find things that they can agree on
in a confluted subject.
And the other is people delivering canned lines in front of an audience to try and people,
try and expose the other side to hearing their canned lines or getting good digs or
laughs or whatever.
Yeah.
I don't even think they're doing that.
But like Bill Nye versus Ken Ham, it's kind of they're just both just drawing their own
audiences to watch them.
They don't even care about who wins.
They just want to like hear their, their side talk.
I couldn't sit through that.
No.
Um, maybe another example, maybe a less ridiculous debate, but I don't know, two different, like
a theologian in the flop.
Like, you know, the ones like people debating Dawkins and Harris back in the early 2000s,
those seem to be like somewhat good natured and you would draw people in from both sides
and support that or whatever.
But I think there are people who enjoyed watching those that weren't a lot of those.
I love those.
Yeah.
Same.
No, I totally agree.
But those.
But I, I watched them specifically to see that my side get good hits on the other side.
You know, that was why I was watching.
Yeah.
We get so annoyed during the parts with the theologian, like the sophisticated theologian
would talk about like that, you know, tiny technicalities of, you know, the language was
this, but this, and you know, this like cultural context at the time, just like, I don't care.
You're trying to explain to me like something about this book that I don't believe in, and
I don't care about this book, like go and get back to Richard Dawkins or whoever.
I always thought it'd be funny to be like, yeah, but it says here that the dark lord
Charmarquemez is equal and that he'll come back to fight him.
And then lo and behold, in the seventh book, he comes back.
Like, how does that improve the divinity of this?
That's the exact same kind of argument.
How hard is it to write a sequel that confirms that they continue the story of the first book?
Yeah.
Anyway, I know we're on a tangent.
This has been a fun episode.
So I having fun doing it.
I hope everyone's having a fun time listening to us go on tangents.
Yeah.
And just, you know, for the record, I still really love those kinds of sports debates.
They're fun to listen to, much like I also like rap battles, you know.
I actually don't like the sorts of debates anymore.
No, I don't, I don't consider them ways to get to the truth,
but I still find them fun to watch sometimes.
You find a good one, send it my way.
It's been a long time.
Sure.
Yeah, I feel like I've heard all the arguments on both sides,
at least with the atheism ones.
Maybe if I found a different topic.
Yeah, I don't bother with the atheisms anymore,
because like you said, I've seen them all.
Right.
Maybe like AI.
Is it going to doom us all?
That would be fun.
That would be a fun one.
There was a good one.
I think I plugged before.
It was Massimo Piclucci.
He was used to be the co-host on Rationally Speaking.
Did a talking or blogging heads debate with Eleazar Dikowski on
a number of things, but it was partly the AI fume and cryonics and all that stuff.
And that was, that was a lot of fun.
That was a kind of it.
And they were, they were clearly strongly disagreeing in a way
that I found baffling that Massimo was missing some of these points
because he's a smart dude.
Yeah.
But Dikowski gets in a lot, some of those really,
and depending on which side you're on,
maybe you feel Massimo does the same thing.
But Dikowski gets in some of those really good kicks of like,
oh, that felt great.
Don't you feel dumb now?
In moments, but they're still good natured
because I don't think they came out of this hating each other.
Right?
So it was fun.
Okay.
Alrighty.
Did you find yours?
Yeah, I've got it.
It's just sort of long.
So James has been a supporter on Patreon for a while
and he writes in on some of the episodes and on episode 37.
Thank you, James.
Yeah.
Thanks, James.
You rock.
We had a discussion about,
so we were talking about flow states and kind of like,
you know, so that was when he brought up like,
you know, kicking ass like a tar hero.
And so James brings up that the diminishing returns
from conquering something like the tar hero
is because it has an easily definable perfection
where at which point there's nowhere to go.
I'm assuming once you beat Dragon Force
through the fire and the flames,
one of my favorite songs that I liked from that genre,
by the way, I'd love listening to that in the car
back when I used to speed a lot.
But I'm assuming that was the hard mode song, right?
Because that song was super hard to imagine listening to.
That wasn't rock band that was Guitar Hero 3,
I think their final song, but fair enough.
Yeah, I correctly guessed that was one of the hardest
songs in the game because it's so awesome.
So part of, so James goes on to say,
part of what makes athletics so enthralling to me
is that the new heights are being defined
in real time in front of your eyes
and the space of ways in which to improve is so vast
that you can't just point to perfection
at the logical end point.
And I think that's a really good point that
if you master something, you know, again,
by beating the hardest mode of the game or something,
then say, all right, cool, I did it.
And then I guess you can kind of keep doing that
by seeing if you can get a better and better score
or something, but once you've won, you've kind of won.
I have a hard time, like once I finish a game,
going back and finishing side quests and stuff,
because like you're already like overpowered or whatever,
or you feel like you've already completed it.
So like, some instrument playing games were different though,
because even though you could, you know,
beat it on the hardest difficulty,
it was still fun to do.
Even if you could do a song perfect,
it was fun to do it again, perfect.
Totally. And it was like, there was still skill involved,
and just because you could do it perfectly once,
doesn't mean you could do it that way every time,
because it's really hard, that's the point.
But what's fun, I wanted to bring up about the sports thing,
is that you can look at videos of like 1960s Olympics
and just see how ridiculously weak and like,
bad at jumping, well, like they could all beat all of us,
but like, they couldn't jump as far,
they couldn't run as fast,
they couldn't throw things as far.
Compared to now, the athletes of today
would just destroy any Olympian from 60 years ago.
Yeah.
I think that's really fun to think about,
because like James said,
the perfection there isn't really as defined,
and we can watch it grow.
And I remember, I think I saw like a gift second comparison
of 1960s long jump and stuff like that,
compared to now, and I'm like, holy shit.
And of course, they're all wearing like,
they're super polite,
what's the word I'm thinking of,
like covering up clothes, with like, modest.
Yeah. So like, you know, it just looks like,
maybe that's limiting their movement and stuff,
but that's not just it.
They're just people are trying harder
and running way faster now.
So anyway.
Yeah, they're also ruining their lives
by training since childhood.
Well, maybe not ruining their lives.
They might be really enjoying it.
And that's like.
Dedicating their lives.
Yeah.
Doing push-ups since they were fetus.
It was much more of an amateur thing back then.
Well, I would, it probably wasn't even an amateur thing.
It's just that people go to really ridiculous lengths
in some Olympic competitions.
Now that is your life, and you have to be like,
of the highest percentile of genetic specimen
with the perfect body type for that thing.
And yeah, there's a lot more to it.
Yeah, maybe the difference was six years ago,
you still had to have a day job or something.
So like you ran like on your off hours,
but you still worked an eight to five.
Yeah, I wonder what a lot of the difference is actually,
and whether we're going to continue to see the trends.
I mean, there has to be like a ceiling at some point,
unless we start genetically engineering people,
or, you know, providing robotic augmentations.
Have you seen the latest Slates are Codex post?
Which one?
The one about diminishing returns
from exponential increase in inputs?
Oh, no.
Okay, the latest POTUS is about how we keep getting
less and less returns from more and more effort put into things.
Oh, was that about science though?
Yes.
Yeah, okay, I did read that one.
Okay, that had the chart of the like marathon times
and other things.
Like there are a lot of gains initially,
and now it's like leveling off,
where now new records are broken by 1,000th of a second increase
over previous records, right?
It's harder to eke out any more advantage,
because everything is being exploited more or less to the max,
in at least ways that we found so far.
That's kind of trailing off.
That's pretty interesting.
Yeah, it would be kind of fun though,
to see what else we could find,
like some kind of weird like ketogenic diet too, or,
I don't know, I don't even know.
I'll resubmit my in favor position
of a separate league of Olympians or sports,
the people who are allowed to take all the drugs and-
Get all the surgeries.
All the surgeries and all of the genetic modifications
that parents can give them,
and just have this race of super mutants
playing baseball and football.
And then if we want, we can still have human football,
but I think it'd be just amazing to see somebody who could make-
They'd have to make bigger football fields,
they'd have to make bigger diamonds,
they'd have to have robots throwing these balls,
or whatever, harder bats.
They'd have to be like 17774,
where they're playing football across the entire United States.
Yes.
Baseball, the giant mechs.
But there's also been some increase in technology.
Like the running surfaces take less energy away now.
Yeah, there's better sneakers.
Better shoes, yeah.
Like sportswear.
There's better diets again, like-
They've had to, oh, they had to outlaw, not outlaw,
make against the rules the certain,
what do you call, the game where they shuffle boarded on ice.
Oh, I know you're talking about curling.
Yeah, you struggle with the name,
because curling doesn't make any fucking sense
for the name of what they're doing.
Right.
Okay, so that, yeah.
In curling, there's-
I think there's a great reason it's called that,
but if you told me something that's called curling,
I'd be like, oh, that's like lifting weights.
I always thought of somebody entering themselves.
It's not running in front of like a little ball on,
or a little puck on ice and brushing ice in front of it.
Or maybe like throwing something in a curve or something.
Yeah.
But no, curling, they had to make the new brooms
take them out of competition because they were so good.
Anyone could stop, or anyone, you know,
with enough training and professionalism
could stop the thing exactly where they wanted every single time.
And the athletes were actually complaining,
this isn't any fun anymore.
We can always do exactly what we want.
There's no sport to it.
They had to make rules about what you can make your swimsuit out of
for the swimming competitions,
because the newer ones were just giving too much of an advantage.
So, yeah.
There's a number of things that change, have changed.
Something that's kind of arbitrary too.
I find that funny.
Like I was just talking about diets,
but it's like you can like, you know,
do some kind of weird crazy diet,
but you can't take drugs.
But what's the difference?
And you can train in a low oxygen environment,
like up here in Colorado, we're a mile high,
or in the tents that they have that have really low oxygen.
So your body slowly builds up more red blood cells.
And then when you go out into the actual arena
where they're competing,
there's a lot more oxygen than what your body is
already adapted for.
So you have an advantage, right?
But you can't blood dope.
But you can't blood dope.
That's exactly the example I was going to bring up.
It's like you can artificially blood dope with hard work,
but you can't just like have some blood boy give you,
you know, a bag of a pint the week before the competition.
Yeah.
Yeah.
A kind of sadder and more controversial example
is trans athletes.
Yeah.
I think there's a bit to unpack there.
Part of it is that to the extent that there are
or might be physical differences between
between genetically male and genetically female bodies,
that if you have a genetically male body who,
and I think part of it too is the only context I've heard
about this really talks about in is fighting
because Joe Rogan's talked about it a couple of times,
who I don't listen to that much,
but it's come up a couple of times.
If you have a person who was assigned at birth male
and transition or is like depending
where they're at in the transition
or if they're if they're taking supplements
or whether they're not or something,
they can apparently according to people who
measure how hard people can hit,
can hit harder than than many women on average,
including many women who fight.
So like that's, you know, a larger body.
Yeah.
Different muscles and different skeletal.
Yeah.
Longer arms and like that's going to give
all the difference.
So it's kind of just like, do you want to let,
I think you get kind of annoyed people from at least
three or four sides because it's like, look,
this one person's going to crush everybody
by a margin that makes us like not really fun to watch.
And yeah, I don't know.
There's not a really good analog for that.
And I don't watch a lot of sports.
I can't think of anything.
So.
Well, there's weight classes.
It's kind of like, you know,
putting someone in a lower weight class
and making them fight someone of a higher weight class.
That's it.
And I feel like that could actually resolve the conflict,
do away with men's and women's sports,
but then people will be like, oh no,
what if, you know, sexual things happen accidentally?
There's also, there's people that are intersex.
Why is there never a problem
where guys are accidentally raping each other
when they're boxing or wrestling, right?
They are, but it's part of the game.
Yeah.
I've watched the mixed martial arts.
It gets real.
It's real sausage.
If you pop a boner while wrestling a guy,
it's like, oh, that just happened.
But if it's to the girl, it's assault.
Oh, okay.
This is probably, that's an obviously off-color joke.
But I think.
They don't generally pop boners at MMA's.
I don't know what kind of fighting competitions
you're watching.
Yeah.
There's also people that are intersex,
which is kind of fun.
Cause then it's like, what, you know,
how do you classify them?
Because, and then like,
it just gets back to the fluidity of gender too.
I mean, people can transition at different ages too.
So it's like, it's a really like awkward question
because you have to be like, okay,
if you don't allow trans people to participate
in certain sports, like,
isn't that unfair to somebody who, you know,
took puberty blockers at age 10?
And then like, I don't think you take them at 10.
I don't know what age you start.
And then like, you've never actually had the chance
to have male hormones.
And gotten the bigger skeleton.
You could probably at some point measure that.
You can measure it.
But, but the question is, where do you draw the line?
Yeah.
Then see a super arbitrary about where you're drawing lines.
And I think I remember like in,
what have been like junior high or high school
when I was like, I was doing school sports.
I don't think it's all that arbitrary
if you have ways to measure.
Well, like measure what specifically?
I don't know the, what they can do,
skeletal structure, musculature, all those things.
Make a weight class.
Yeah.
Possibly make a weight class.
A more stringent weight class thing.
A man in the same weight class as a woman
is still not going to have a fair fight when they're boxing.
I think that's, so then you have to measure other things, right?
Right.
And we're kind of like nerfing.
That's what I'm saying.
The measurements would have to be more fine grain
than just what the weight is.
Yeah.
And I guess I don't know.
You could probably do something along those lines.
Yeah, probably.
You know, there's a lot of science people hitting each other
in the face over and over and seeing, you know, all that stuff.
I mean, dude, if we can fucking land that tiny,
that little thing on Mars and have it, you know,
sending us pictures a few minute hours later,
we can, we can totally get this.
Yeah, with enough time and effort, we can have,
we can have, we can have man on woman violence in MMA.
That sounds great.
So.
And finally, everything will be good.
Well, and this is, this is probably not the right way
to think about it, but this was the answer I was given
in like junior high and high school when I was getting into
school sports was like in track, there was,
there was no gender segregation, but in football there was.
And I didn't, maybe there wasn't in junior high,
but in high school, I think there was.
Yeah, that's how my school was set up.
Yeah, but there was a girls league and a boys league
in high school.
And I was like, why is there not just like one league
and let the best players join the league?
And the answer that I was given, that was like, you know,
it sucks, but like that's cause all the guys
would get it, none of the girls would.
Yeah.
And so the, you know, having this separate, having them.
Every now and then there might be like one really
exceptional girl that could make it in, but.
At which point they should let her join the boys team.
They absolutely should.
Yeah.
Maybe.
But everyone else who wants to play wouldn't,
all the other girls that want to play wouldn't be able to.
But yes, if one girl can make it in totally,
use the best person for the, for the job.
Yeah.
I got a, that a female kicker they had in,
God, I don't even remember where it was.
Sports.
Yeah.
And that's fine.
Yeah.
Somewhere, somewhere in sports.
Somewhere in sports.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I think the, but I brought that up for the example
that it would be, I don't know,
you still want to like let everyone who wants to play, play.
And then of course there's also the thing that like,
I think there are separate leagues for like women's chess,
which does strike me as weird.
That really?
I think the reason that I saw for that was that,
since it was historically and probably still is kind of a boys club,
that like having a girl's league, it was like,
look, you're not going to feel like ostracized by joining, playing here.
I'm not sure if it's weird.
I don't know what they do at like world championships,
if men play women, but if they don't, that'd be stupid as shit.
I think they do because there was that post about training a genius on Slate Star Codex,
they were talking about how the guy had trained his three daughters
to all the world-class chess players.
Yeah.
I sent that to my sister when she was pregnant.
It was like, you can have your daughter do whatever you want if you start early enough, right?
But of course chess is the kind of thing that you can optimize, you know,
but I, you know, I don't see why you couldn't try something harder.
Is she going to channel her kid into becoming a genius in some certain area?
I'm not sure. She's only six months old.
There's still time to pick a profession.
I gotta start early.
Yeah.
As long as she's picked something before 18 months.
Okay, we'll give this a more thought.
I mean, it works with John Stuart Mill.
He was kind of like a polymath at everything.
He had a mental breakdown and, you know, not a happy life, but,
Oh, I didn't know that.
But he did, he did crush it and he's super famous.
So, you know,
That's what really matters.
Yeah.
Okay.
So that was a long digression on that thoughtful thing that James wrote in.
So thanks for doing that.
Yeah.
Did you have anything, Jess?
No.
Yeah. Reddit is where a lot of the comments come from.
People can comment on the website and on Patreon directly too.
Yeah.
Or emailing us at the BayesianConspiracyPodcast.gmail.com.
Yeah.
Or wait, BayesianConspiracyPodcast.gmail.com.
Know the on the email.
Right.
I have one from Not Without Incident.
Yeah.
In our, I think two episodes ago,
we talked about the map is not the territory.
And you asked where that came from and I said,
Eliezer first got it from the world of NLA by Van Vogt,
I think is the name of the sci-fi author,
which is where he ran into it.
Not with that incident says,
the map is not the territory is an important idea in math and philosophy,
going back almost a century.
And linked us to a wiki which showed that Wikipedia page
showed that Polish American scientist and where?
Polish American scientist and philosopher Alfred Korsbinski.
I was going to trust you to pronounce this correctly on the first try.
I don't know, man.
I am so American.
It's ridiculous.
We'd have to ask my parents how to pronounce it.
They could like snap it off.
Was first, has the first citation of it in 1931.
And he says, or Not Without Incident says,
I think one of the biggest issues with the sequences in general
is that as part of his disdain for traditional academia,
Yadkowski isn't really into citation.
Because of this, a lot of people in the rationalist community
credit him with ideas from other fields,
sometimes under a different name.
And that's, that's fair.
I did not know that this king has been around since at least 1931.
That's good to know.
I actually have to wonder whether, I mean, like,
I imagine Eleazar knew that he probably researched it,
but maybe he didn't.
Maybe he did find it from the sci-fi book who was referencing.
You know, maybe there's just a chain of references.
Yeah.
I would bet the other way that he found it from the sci-fi book
and didn't even, wasn't even aware that there was some philosopher
in the 30s who coined the phrase.
But, but yeah, the point is true that Yadkowski, it's sort of apparent.
Well, it's not like he has this hobby horse
that he's hating on academia,
but he, especially philosophy, he sheds on a bit.
Yeah.
Because in his defense philosophy is kind of fucked up.
Well, it's the antithesis of what I think he wants rationality to be.
And that's why it's not rationalism,
because there's already a school of thought called that in philosophy.
It's rash, it's rationalist-ness rationality.
Yeah, rationality, but that's also kind of the reason
that he can get the good name of rationalism,
because there's already a name of that,
that's really not rationality.
We'll call it Bayesian rationality.
Yeah.
But the, I think the disdain for philosophy in particular,
and I am a big fan of philosophy, I've enjoyed it for ages.
But the field itself doesn't have the kind of cut and dry way
to weed out bad material that like good rationalists should.
It doesn't require evidence.
And you can still have debates now about like, is dualism true?
Here's this, read this cool new paper.
So, and this is something that they teach you in all the classes
and that you find in a lot of the books that unless you're ready,
just like to pick a side and basically say,
I'm just going to stop listening to the other side.
You have to kind of just take as a, and this is oversimplifying,
but hey, these are all open questions.
And that's not like, so I think Ychowsky's disdain is like,
fuck that, we've been talking about these for thousands of years.
We've got some settled answers on a lot of these questions.
Right.
And you know, these are not as open as they should be,
or as open as you guys pretend that they are.
So.
You know what finally settled the atomism versus four elements?
Debate, fucking science.
Right.
Yeah.
You wouldn't know it from the media.
They love those four elements.
I hate the elements.
Like, it makes me so mad.
And I love like, Avatar Last Airbender.
And I also like that they don't take the whole four elements thing that seriously.
Like, it's obviously, they're using it as a pot device.
That's why like, I actually, am I talking about this?
I didn't like Cora as much because they started taking the mysticism way more seriously.
It felt like.
I liked the beginning, like how Cora started in that it was,
I don't know, like 60 years later or something.
And they had started abusing the bending powers to like,
what was it?
Who were the benders that could do electricity?
Fire benders, right?
I probably.
They just had like cores upon cores of fire benders,
basically working as the generators for an electric city's electric grid.
I was like, that is fucking sweet.
You know, powering water wheels as a water bender.
You could be moving.
They industrialized their magic as any good society would.
That's kind of awesome.
Yeah.
That part was awesome.
Yeah.
But I didn't like Cora very much either.
I didn't see Cora yet.
I mean, maybe I should skip it.
There's, there's some people that swear by it.
I watched the first season and then I just gave up.
And a few years later, someone said, what?
That was the one shitty season.
Once you get past that one, they get better.
I'm like, God damn it.
I'm not going to go back.
I've given up on it already.
On the plus side with cartoon seasons, it's typically 2020 22 minute episodes.
Yeah.
But like avatar, the first avatar was good from like the get go.
It was a lot of fun.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And then it just kept getting better.
Yeah.
I really loved all of it.
Avatar was great.
And it even like had a surprising amount of like good emotional tugs for like, you know,
11 year olds throwing fireballs at each other.
Right.
So I thought it was a good show.
It was so well written.
But yeah, there's, I think it's the same team.
We're all at some of the same writers that worked on avatar.
They came out with a new show called The Dragon Prince.
I might be getting that wrong.
I've heard of this.
But actually, I watched the first season.
It's on Netflix.
It is good, but they started out with saying like,
the world is made of four elements again and they make up four different elements.
And it's just like, can we stop?
It's not compelling anymore.
Why would they make?
I find it annoying.
Why would they make four different elements?
Because everybody got sick of the classic one.
So they're like, we'll pick four more arbitrary things like ice.
But that's just, yeah.
I think one of them, I forget.
So it shows how like much disdain I had for this magic system
that I just don't even remember what the elements were.
It's like adding new Pokemon with new Pokemon types in later games.
Right.
Yeah.
Hey, it's the same idea, but different.
Yeah.
Although that had like a game behind it that they were trying to make more complex.
Yeah. And it worked for that.
I was kind of being tongue-in-cheek.
Okay, wait.
Can I just read?
In the magical land of Zadia, magic comes from six primal sources.
The sun, moon, stars, sky, earth, and ocean.
The earth and the ocean.
And then human mages create a seventh kind of magic called dark magic.
And they start capturing and harvesting the magic
and they drain all the other kinds of magic.
And it's just like, it made me so mad.
Like, I don't care about any of this.
I'm here for the characters and like the story.
What made me mad there is that sun, sky, and stars are three different elements.
And none of it comes into play.
I mean, maybe it will later, but like, it's basically just that like,
the like, all the other elements are fighting the dark humans.
And I think it's cool that the humans are the evil species and all the other
species are like the good ones.
Finally.
Yeah.
I think it's interesting about something that tells you about their world though.
Like their world might actually be flat with a celestial sphere above them.
And that's, you know, whatever.
And that's, that's all fine.
And you might be right, but I just like the idea that like, okay, cool.
You know, sun in the sky, sun also a star.
Stars.
Okay, whatever.
Fuck me, I guess.
No, I think like, you know, a system like that could have been cool.
I'll, you know, I love fantasy, but you have to actually think through
all the implications of your world.
Like if they're, you are with a flat, how would that affect gravity?
And like, do you fall off the edge?
And of course you fall off the edge.
That's the point of having a flat earth.
Yeah.
But like, you know, a lot of the times they just put stuff in there
because visually they're like, wow, that's cool.
And they don't really think through the implications.
And then there's just all these plot holes.
And you're like, why even put it in there?
If you're not going to use it.
There was the problem on Asgard and the Thor movies
that there was like the big waterfall at the edges.
It's like, where's that the water coming from?
If it's all just falling off the edges all the time.
They literally synthesize it.
Yeah, it's coming from magic.
No, what happens is it evaporates and it goes back up into the space.
Speak no, no, they could have like some kind of fusion furnace
where they actually take nuclear power
and just condense atoms out of it, right?
That or it's coming from literally magic or something
because there's a lot more magic in there
than Thor is willing to acknowledge.
That's basically magic.
Yeah.
Well, that's, yeah.
That said, speaking of Thor, the New God of War game
takes place in Midgard, which is the Norse mythology name for earth.
Which you might have remembered from the first Thor movie
when they're talking about the realms and this and that.
So you visit some of the other realms.
And then this rather than Thor and Odin and stuff
being the kind of happy, go lucky, nice guys.
They're like these total utter monsters.
And it owns this famous torch.
Yeah, it's much more lore, lore friendly as opposed to MCU friendly.
But it was a fun twist.
And I liked that.
So, yeah.
Did you have another one?
Yeah, we've got one here from Kale Silverhand.
Dope name, by the way, on the rest,
on the modesty posts that we talked about.
Yeah.
They had said that,
I feel like the hosts missed a crucial distinction
on updating probabilities based on input from other people.
The basic premise is that when two rational agents meet
and share their data and probabilities,
they should at the end of the interaction have identical probabilities.
One of the examples brought up by the hosts
was that billions of people assign a high probability
to Christianity being true,
so it shouldn't account as evidence for Christianity,
which was pointed out as the flaw in the modesty post.
However, the post specifies rational agents.
There's a lot of people, or excuse me,
there's a lot of evidence that people believe Christianity
is true for non-rational reasons.
Therefore, in my opinion,
it's just not justified to update your beliefs
based on those people.
As flawed rationalists, we can be relatively certain
that no other being we encounter is perfectly rational.
Therefore, we should never update our probabilities purely
on the probabilities given by anyone or anything.
We should require evidence and reasoning as well
and make our judgments based on that.
So I feel like that was kind of a good hybrid point,
and the Christianity puzzle,
maybe I didn't deliver it right in that post,
but that was sort of brought up as a way
to kind of just bring an intuition pump
that there isn't, it's not enough to hear a counter position,
enough times to update.
There needs to be more to it than that,
and Cale Silverhand hit it on the head.
So, yeah, go ahead.
Oh, no, you, yeah.
Okay, I think, so this brings up a really interesting aspect
of the whole overcoming bias slash less wrong original reason
for being.
It's, I don't want to use the French version of that
because it sounds too pretentious.
Go for it, because I don't know what it is.
Raisin d'etre, I believe, is how it would be pronounced.
I've definitely heard that.
I didn't know what to, yeah.
Yeah, but the-
I'm uncultured, we're not that uncultured.
Okay, the thing is the, this all originally spawned from the,
God, was it the SI4 forums?
A correction, that's the SL4 forums, not SI4.
It was a community of people talking about how to build AI,
and the coming, I don't want to say the coming robot overlords,
but you know, the post-singularity world,
where we will have programmed beings that can both think
and upgrade themselves and interact with the world
as actual beings, right, except in machines, in computers.
Artificial intelligence, and so a lot of the discussion
pertains to how to think about thinking
when you are trying to create that sort of intelligence
and how they would work on updating probabilities,
how we can relate to our lives.
A lot of this is about making programming God, right?
Like, how do you make a God so that it turns out friendly
and so that it knows what we want
and informs accurate beliefs in general?
Yes, exactly.
So a lot of the rationality project was butted from this original,
kind of almost platonic rationality discussion
about like the ultimate true rational agents
that can see each other's source code
and backtrack through how that other agent came to this belief.
And so now you have shared evidence
and it doesn't quite apply to humans, exactly.
The platonic form of the rationalist.
Yes, the platonic form of the rationalist is a machine God.
So it's interesting that it doesn't always translate directly
to humans because, yeah, we cannot explore,
cannot see each other's source code, right?
We can't even see our own source code.
You what?
Except we can't even see our own source code.
Right, exactly.
And so that is why the rationality arts
do not translate perfectly to us.
For humans, they're more of an art than a theorem.
An exact calculation, yeah.
And to be fair, Kale Silverhand does say
as flawed rationalists, we can, etc., etc.
So we're doing our best.
But yeah, in the game where you're playing with perfect players,
then the rules are different.
And actually, I guess you can actually just follow the real rules
rather than approximate them like we have to.
Right.
And so every now and then that does come up in these sequences
where it becomes clear that a lot of the discussion
comes from thinking about the Platonic Machine God rationalist
and pointing out how that doesn't quite fit
with how we try to implement rationality as humans.
Which is where I think Eliezer was coming from
with the modesty post.
He was responding to the Amman's Agreement theorem
that says that two rationalists cannot agree to disagree.
They will eventually come to the same answer
when they compare all their priors
and the evidence that they've accumulated.
But that doesn't really work for humans
because we can't do that the same way
that a perfect rationalist would.
Yeah, I mean, and also there's preferences
that you can't agree on.
I don't know if that's relevant or not,
but for example, if I like pizza and Steven likes soup,
then we can talk about it all day.
And if we're two perfect rationalist gods,
we can give our best arguments.
But in the end, we just have two different preferences.
Soup is clearly the superior food
because you can carry enough thermos.
And I have a strong value towards carrying my food in thermos.
Yeah, no, that's a good point that none...
And I'm sure there's a word for this that I'm blanking on.
I guess, I mean, subjective versus objective truths, right?
So objectively, there's not a fact to be found about
what's better unless we can define important parameters,
but nutrition, taste, or whatever, right?
Mouth feel.
But subjectively, I might just like one more than the other.
And so, yeah, that's an important distinction to draw too.
And that's why humans are cool.
Yeah, I mean, it's not cool
that we're not like perfect robots,
but we do have this kind of cool experience
that we get from being awkward and broken.
Speaking of having cool experiences,
Jay Michael wrote in on my joking suggestion
for the aspiring supervillain
to pump a bunch of DMT into the local water supply.
I like Scarecrow from the first Batman movie,
the first good Batman movie.
Regarding the suggestion of, quote, DMT in the water,
unquote, normally I'm all for consensual participation as well,
but philosophically, if enabling people to experience the perception of correctness,
of connectedness, can help them be less despicable person
and actually be more mindful and empathetic of others,
then that would be theoretically increased
to consideration, cooperation, save lives, reduce suffering,
improve humanity as a whole, so on.
So it seems like grownups knowing better
and making their kids eat vegetables,
or at least an ask for friggin' investigator situation.
That said, I don't really endorse this idea.
That said, if you're seriously considering being a crazy supervillain,
there are worse things that you can do,
like blow up the earth or something, right?
So I'm kidding.
I never drug anybody without asking.
Unless you can drug the whole planet at once,
then maybe you just see what happens.
I kind of see Jay Michael's point.
It's the same kind of thing where
Ozzy Mondias murders all of New York
in order to get the world to unite
and not destroy itself in nuclear fire, you know?
Right.
This is the antagonist of Watchmen, not the blogger.
Antagonist or protagonist of Watchmen,
depending on how you read it.
Even though they always make the utilitarian the bad guy.
Yeah.
When he clearly, he's saved the world.
Yeah.
I mean, sure, people died,
but a lot less people than others would have.
That's the reason people don't like effective altruism either.
Yeah, bunch of nerds.
Ozzy did nothing wrong.
Yeah, so, I mean,
on the one hand, I see his point.
On the other hand, I think there's very strict norms around
consensuality, consent.
Yeah, that are there for a very good reason.
And I would rather blow up half the United States
than blow up the planet.
Yes.
Even if it's half the United States that I'm on.
Yeah.
Like I'm right in the middle, so.
Yeah, but I mean, that's assuming that you're in a situation
where you have to choose, you know,
you're in a trolley problem situation,
push this button to blow up the planet versus not like.
But he kind of was.
But you don't know where the earth is going to go
if you don't give people DMT.
That's, I guess Ozzy has this whatever hand wave
that he was supposedly way smarter than everybody else.
I thought we were still talking about DMT, never mind.
Oh, no, yeah, you're right.
With the DMT thing, I'm totally kidding.
Don't, don't, that's.
I think the poster was kidding.
Don't drug people without their consent.
Right.
Well, I mean, the poster kind of has a,
so I take this, I think people have to have done
something wrong first in order for you to take their consent
away to make them better people.
Like the clockwork orange.
Like children.
Like children.
Like children.
Like children for your child.
Yeah.
Well, I take the clockwork orange example,
where I think they absolutely did the right thing
by making, what's his name?
I don't remember.
I didn't see the movie.
Oh, okay.
The protagonist.
The kind of.
The main character.
Yeah, okay.
They absolutely did the right thing
by making him unable to be violent anymore.
And I do not give a fuck if now he can't enjoy Beethoven
or now he doesn't have the ability to defend himself
when someone wants to beat him up.
If we have.
I kind of care about that letter thing.
You know, maybe he shouldn't have murdered people
and been randomly violent and raped people.
Once you've gotten to that point,
society has a vested interest in making sure
you can't do that anymore.
Yeah, but you put them in prison.
I mean, you can put them in prison
or you can subject them to this treatment,
which will actually let them be productive members
of society again.
And will ensure that they aren't able to be violent,
which they still could if they got out of prison.
They can be violent to other prison inmates.
I mean, there's, I think.
But idealistically, one of the four things
that prison is supposed to be able to do
is remove people, dangerous people from the population.
Yeah.
So it's like, we can't fix you because we don't have the tools.
Right.
Whether it's the psychology tools or the drugs or whatever.
We can't make you better.
Yeah.
But we can take you away so you minimize the harm you can do.
Yes.
And they actually could make him better.
And there's a lot of people like,
Oh, free will or whatever.
I'm in like the fuck free will, man.
The problem is they didn't make him better though.
They basically tortured him and he kind of continues
to be tortured the rest of his life, which I don't agree with.
If they had actually, you know, if the movie had been different
and they kind of, you know, changed his preferences.
So now he likes being a good citizen and that would be cool.
He's not tortured, tortured though.
He just can't engage in violence anymore
and can't listen to Beethoven.
The like conditioning process definitely was tortured.
They like pulled his eyes open and.
You're allowed to be tortured for a few days
if you've murdered and raped people.
Especially if it makes you be able to be in society again.
See, I would put another shelling fence around torture
where I don't think you should ever torture anyone.
And it's for the same reasons that you might, you know,
not want to give everyone DMT, I think.
I basically agree with you.
But if it, if it comes to the point where you have,
you have done certain things and this will fix you,
then it's more like a surgery than like torture.
Yeah, I think surgery is also very painful, you know,
but then you can, you can agree to surgery or something.
But yeah, maybe if you didn't want to, like maybe.
But he did actually agree to it in the movie.
Are you being held down while they gave you a shot
that like just gave you compassion again
because you never had that?
Like that might be an uncomfortable experience,
but that's different than being tortured for days.
Yeah, he wasn't given compassion.
He was just made to be in incredible discomfort
whenever he got an urge to do something.
Interesting.
And that's one way to keep somebody in check.
Right.
And it worked.
So, but you know, if you had, if you had the switch that,
if you had two syringes,
one which would make him super uncomfortable
whenever he had an urge to do something bad,
or one that would make him happy
whenever he had an urge to do something good,
you'd probably give him the second one.
Yes, absolutely.
So, if you have better tools, you use those.
But maybe they were using what they had.
Yeah.
No, I think they had prison in that world.
They could have just thrown him in prison.
I'm not sure prison's a better option.
Prison is pretty fucking torturous itself.
Actually, that's a good point.
And costs a lot of money.
Swedish prison.
My only thing on the only thing I'll touch on prison
there wise is that I always make an effort
to keep the economic arguments aside
from the moral arguments.
Like how much it costs doesn't matter on how good it is.
I get that there's a cost that we have pay for.
That was always my thing with the death penalty.
Even before I came...
I was undecided on the death penalty for a long time.
But even before I came down on it, I was like,
no, we're not looking at the dollar amount
on keeping these people alive versus killing them.
That's not the moral question.
That's just the dollar amount of how much it costs.
If it was cheaper, that would be the better thing to do.
Morally, no.
Morals are more high-falutin' than the economics of it.
Granted, if it was bankrupting the country
to do something or whatever,
and people were starving, fine, make it absurd.
But it's not that absurd yet.
Anyway.
So, yeah.
Anyways, people, in my opinion,
people who have fucked up the social contract
could be subject to DMT to make them better people.
But I wouldn't want to just arbitrarily do it
to everyone without their consent.
Because some people haven't ever taken DMT,
don't want to take DMT, and are still decent people.
Yeah, that said.
Okay, last thing on that.
Well, now fuck it.
I was gonna just name an evil person,
you know, like Uday Hussein or something.
If we could grab him and put him in a room for a week
with a bunch of MDMA, a bunch of DMT, and a bunch of LSD,
and then just see if he has a better person at the end of it,
would that be an okay experiment to do?
Yeah, sure.
He's tortured a lot of people in death.
But he wouldn't.
He's like a monster who would ride up to people's weddings
and rape the bride and then cut her off
and feed her to his dogs.
Like, his dad was Saddam Hussein.
He didn't have a chance.
So, like, his free will is not really coming into...
It's like...
Yes, in his case, I think that's totally a legit...
experiment to run.
Yeah, I don't think it would have the effect
that people think it would have.
I don't think DMT can change someone that much.
I think after a week he'd go right back to being Uday Hussein.
Yeah, I think people have to be open to change.
Yeah.
To, like, themselves changing in order to change.
There's a lot of people that do a lot of drugs
and they don't change as people.
And there's a lot of people who do,
but I think those are the people who are looking to change.
But that being said,
I don't think there's a moral prohibition
against forcefully changing people to stop being monsters.
We don't want monsters.
It's okay for us to use force to stop monstrosity.
I think where I'm having trouble
is the idea of punishing someone.
It's kind of...
It feels like the same kind of justification people would use
for torturing someone for doing something bad.
Right, but I'm not doing it...
Or I'm not advocating this in order to punish him.
I'm advocating this in order to reduce
the total amount of monstrosity in the world.
Like punching Nazis?
I don't think punching Nazis has that effect.
But if it did, if we'd been...
Oh, that was the conclusion who came to, wasn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah, right, yeah.
All right.
And I started coming from it.
I didn't bring this up as something I was being supportive of.
I was just kind of thinking of it.
And you brought up a good point that
I think people who want to change
might be more open after trying these things.
But if they don't, they don't, right?
And I recently got some evidence for this
by asking somebody who I knew had tried LSD
several times in their youth
and they're not youthful anymore.
And they're still, I don't know,
standard conservative bigot style.
Like, you know,
not a big fan of gay people,
not a big fan of minorities, whatever.
And I was curious, I basically wanted to check,
did you ever try LSD as a kid?
And they're like, oh yeah,
a bunch of times as a teenager in 20s and something.
And I was like, oh.
So it doesn't automatically make you
a more like inclusive understanding person.
Maybe made them more,
but not all the way or something.
I think they got to try mushrooms for that.
All right.
I think maybe it's not just a morality inducing drug.
Yeah.
It is an openness inducing drug though,
or at least mushrooms are.
I think LSD is too.
I think so.
That's kind of interesting,
because I do think that high levels of openness
correlate with lower rates of bigotry.
Couldn't high levels of openness
just make you more susceptible
to Nazi propaganda as well,
if that's what you are subjected to?
I think it's openness of experience and understandings.
So it's like.
So you could really understand
about how the subhuman races
are really fucking things up, right?
That's the danger of opening your openness.
That's why I kind of worry about it.
I think we're equivocating the use of the word open.
What we need to do is run some experiments
by taking a nice, peaceful person,
give them LSD,
and then subject them to Nazi propaganda
and see if they become worse.
Well, it does make you open to more ideas,
which you still have to have the kind of mental framework
there of maybe you just have more option generations,
and then you're able to pick the best option
where you wouldn't have generated seven options.
You would have generated three previously,
and that's cool.
But somebody who doesn't have that
can just become a crazy UFO person really easily.
I also meant that kind of as a joke.
Like, I don't think that would be more to do.
But on the other hand,
I would be interested in finding out
if this is actually a thing that would happen.
I feel like Dark Lord Enya,
she's like a force to actually be worried about.
No, I'm just curious.
I'm not dark.
It's a difference.
I just wanted to see what happened.
Yeah.
That was like that Saturday morning
breakfast cereal comic a couple weeks ago where
the wife comes home and she's telling her husband,
honey, it's twins.
And the husband's like, oh, my gosh, this is so great.
We can buy two sets of clothes, two sets of this.
And she's like, yeah, that's why I'm excited.
And then it's like earlier at the doctor
when he's telling her it's twins,
she's like, yes, I have a control group.
All those twin studies I can imagine.
We've got another feedback here from Mordina Mail,
who is our good friend, Matt Freeman,
at the Doof Media Slash.
We've got word podcast.
Hi, Matt.
And this one's on task or management systems
if you wanted to do this one.
Yeah, that's why I got pulled out.
Mordina Mail says, making a task management system
is itself work and takes time.
If you do it right, the work you invest in task management
saves you work slash time later
by optimizing how you spend the rest of your time.
There's a constant trade off.
It's entirely possible to spend too much time
on task management for tasks
that you could have just knocked out in any order.
I like that.
I think that's a good thing to keep in mind.
And there's a fun example for my work
where we use an agile management tool called rally,
which allows you to like visual,
have like virtual boards of like all your stories,
have you have the points available,
all the tasks down to hours, et cetera, et cetera.
And you can get pretty deep with how deep
all this business goes.
And basically the point where it can end up taking
like 30 minutes a day,
which is a not insignificant chunk
of your eight hour work day.
So it's kind of funny that like,
you know, in this sense,
there might be enough of a benefit from it
that management has transparency
into what you're doing and stuff.
But if you're doing that to manage your own personal products,
that seems like a complete waste of time.
Like for example, Rachel and I put together
a Kanban board for our wedding planning.
And it was great,
but we're not doing task hours
and, you know, managing things down to the minutia
because we're just communicating this to ourselves.
Is Bon a, not metaphor, a,
what's the word that means the same thing as?
You're asking if it's an acronym?
No, not acronym, not simile.
I don't know what you're talking about,
the thing that the sources have.
Yes, exactly.
What the fuck is this word?
I'm not sure what you guys are talking about.
There's words that,
there's two words that mean the same thing.
It starts with an S.
Synonyms.
Synonym, thank you.
Is Bon a synonym for pro?
I think Kanban is one word.
It's Japanese.
Yeah, it's Japanese.
Oh, it is.
Okay.
I was about to feel really stupid
having just realized that it's like a pro-Khan list
where the word pro has been replaced with Bon,
so it rhymes.
Oh, that'd be fun.
No.
No.
What's the Japanese word mean?
Oh, I'll find out really quick.
I used to know and I forget.
And I should know, but I don't because who cares?
Because I'm sorry.
I took this entirely off the rails
with this one word that I couldn't think of
because my brain doesn't work today.
No, you're great.
While I look up the definition,
there's a great reminder here that I have for myself
that there was that quote that probably Einstein didn't say,
but people attribute to him,
that never memorize anything that you can look up in a book.
And my version of that is never memorize anything
that you can Google, which is everything.
So why bother committing anything to memory
as long as you remember how to Google it?
Because it does take you less time
to remember a string of numbers than to look them up.
Sometimes.
Yeah, if you use it a lot, you probably do one thing.
It depends on the string.
Yeah, and also when you open your phone,
you can get distracted by lots of other things.
That's why I like to memorize my task list.
No, that's fair.
My thing is pretty tongue-in-cheek.
I still need to memorize some stuff.
It took me an embarrassingly long number of years
to memorize Rachel's phone number.
It took me an embarrassing long number of minutes
to recognize what I remember the word for synonym,
which if I had my phone on me,
I could have just went to thesources.com
and been like, what is it that you provide?
So anyways, you and Rachel have a con bond board for your wedding.
Yeah, but we're not doing it.
We're not tasking it down all the way
to sub tasks and hours and doing all this stuff.
We're doing it at the level that makes sense for us.
Cool.
And so really the point for me was this is sort of like,
this is a task management system thing,
so it's sort of relevant,
although I think it's a bit of a digression
because it's super personal
and not really applicable to anybody else,
but here we are.
Well, I think it is relevant
and I think weddings do tend to be these logistical nightmares.
So the fact that you guys are doing that,
and I think a lot of people probably
do use task management systems for weddings.
Yeah, my idea for the con bond board
was mainly because I knew what it looked like
and I liked the system of having it.
Like, so I think we've got four categories.
We've got like R defined.
Like this is stuff that we understand
like that needs to be worked on,
but we need to get some stuff together
before we can do it.
And there's the ready for work category.
And then there's the,
I don't even know if we have an improv,
oh, there's an in progress category.
And then there's the done category
for stuff we've done.
But part of the reason I wanted to do this
was I didn't really know a lot of what went into a wedding.
So like other than what I've seen from the movies
and the one or two weddings I've been to in my life,
I didn't have a lot to work with.
So I found it helpful to have an illustrated thing
to look at to do it all for.
So.
Things to research.
Yeah.
Anyway, fun stuff.
Yeah.
Merdynamel is right.
And I like don't mean to come off as
everybody should be using task management systems either.
I like to use productivity tools
and task management systems
because I personally find it fun.
And also because I have problems
with procrastination and time management.
And it helps.
The system that you were talking about
that you use at work, Stephen.
I can actually test whether taking this 30 minutes
of every eight hour day
is improving the group's productivity or not.
You can also kind of get an intuitive sense
of whether you're actually performing,
you know, better yourself doing more tasks
than you would have done otherwise.
And yeah, it can get to be distracting.
And I definitely have spent some time.
Like what I had to like quit using to do
is because it had too many widgets.
You could like, I think I was telling you guys last time
that you can like name your task, color code it,
and then add a custom icon to it.
And then you can drag it into like a subgroup
of like household tasks.
And then you can, it's just like it had too much stuff.
And I was spending so much time like doing all of that stuff
that it was taking time away from tasks.
And I found it fun.
So at least it's not like a total waste of time.
But if you're miserable
and you hate doing task management, maybe you don't.
Or, you know, if it is helping you,
then maybe suck it up and do it.
Like, I don't know.
And there are other metrics things to consider.
And that's part of what our management tool does
is that like, A, it is really nice to be able to like,
all right, I'm done with this.
What's next?
And you don't have to like remember,
you don't have to go find it.
It's just right there, the next thing on the board,
which is nice to be able to see.
But the other thing that it does
that it's hard to put a dollar,
like put a productivity value on
is like give transparency to your bosses.
Bosses is like they're,
they believe that you are doing enough work or something, right?
Or like maybe, oh yeah,
they don't have enough people to need more people on their team.
So it gives a level of visibility higher up
that just like me telling my boss to tell his boss
to tell their boss wouldn't really help with, right?
So yeah, productivity.
Sometimes the tools are for more than just getting stuff done.
Yeah, there's more to say about that too.
Like the whole, you know, productivity,
there's like a cult of productivity
where you can get way too obsessed with it
and kind of like use that as the one metric of your worth.
And I don't want anyone going down that path either.
I know I struggle with that too,
but like, you know, getting lots of tasks done
is in everything.
There's like, you know, working on your mental health
or like finding fulfillment in life.
So find fulfillment in life
by doing things and being productive.
Exactly, but there's other things too
that like it's hard to measure.
Is there other things?
Well, like consider like, as a writer,
like your measure of productivity
is probably correlated to the words per minute
or words per day, but it's not the same as
because you could really spend all day writing garbage.
You can crap art parts, yeah.
So like, I don't know how you measure the rest of it
because I'm not a writer, but there's some,
there's some difference where...
You don't.
You're just like, I think these are good ones
and every now and then you hear about the writer
that brings up three books a year and you're like,
don't, I don't think those are good ones.
You know what you could do?
You could do your draft
and then do a total word count
and then after all your edits,
see how long it is after that
and then put together a ratio
of how much stuff you end up cutting,
hits, like leaves, lives on the cutting room floor
after that, right?
And then you could see maybe how many words,
you can see what I'm saying, right?
How many words that you write every day
on average, make it to the end of product?
Yeah.
And then you see how productive that day really was.
Yeah, but...
And then there'd be another metric by Wish to Evaluate.
Obviously, I'm not a writer, we're just coming up
and this is probably bad for a number of reasons.
You don't want to do anything that would,
or at least I don't want to do anything
where the numbers matter more
than what's actually on the page, right?
Or I wouldn't want to be like,
oh man, I cut a thousand words from that week
so that was obviously a bad week when like,
no, cutting those thousand words
actually made the book significantly better, you know?
So that should be counted as thousand word win.
Yeah, sometimes cutting more words
makes your writing a lot better than it was previously.
Yeah, often.
And then sometimes you'll write something
that you barely need to cut anything from, it's great.
So that you can't really judge.
Maybe the takeaway here is that we're lucky
that people aren't paid by the word on what they write.
Oh, there you are.
Wait, really?
If you write short stories, yes,
all the markets pay you by the word.
So you have an incentive to make it...
That's like getting like a, you know,
whatever, three-page minimum on a paper at school.
And it's like, this is a great two pages.
I'd be happy to use longer words and filler sentences.
I mean, but there's also the thing
where the more filler you use, the worse it is.
So first of all, it'll be a worse experience
for your reader.
And second of all, you're unless until you're like
a really big name where they'll buy your shit
no matter what, there's the greater chance
that the editor will just be like,
no, this isn't good enough.
You've obviously got like something good in here,
but it's surrounded by so much turd word that I'm not gonna buy it.
So that's two short stories, but maybe not for like novels.
With novels, you get in advance
and then you get, you know, a portion of what you sell.
Oh, good.
Because it's very plausible to think
that Robert Jordan, the author of The Wheel of Time,
got paid by the word for the middle.
No, they haven't been doing that since Dickinson's time.
It was like the book series is 15 books long
and it could have easily been 10 or 11,
which sucks because a lot of it's so strong and good.
And then there's like a few books in the middle
where it's like, holy shit, come on, man.
Here's the thing, writers don't get paid by the word
when they write novels, technically.
But they kind of get paid by the book.
Yes.
And series sell better.
And once you have someone like in for a multi book series,
they tend to keep going with the series,
no matter what you do, which is why lots of series
get dragged out way longer than they ever should have been.
It's the same reason sitcoms and TV shows generally go
for many years past when they should have gone
because people will continue to watch
so they continue raking money.
Until they finally get canceled, yeah.
Exactly.
And then they get worse and worse.
Yeah.
Like the last three seasons of House.
Right.
And so yeah, there's a number of series out there
where I'm like, I don't think you need this many books
to tell this story, but I realize
that you like having your mortgage paid.
So.
Well, good on Christopher Palloni for stopping at four books
with his inheritance cycle.
Right.
And I think, you know, J.K. Rowling had the seven,
but it would have been kind of really annoying for her to keep,
like, they'd be like Harry Potter 2.0.
It's like, no, he's in the grown-up.
But like, that was never the point of the books, right?
So like having the seven years of school,
that kind of made sense.
So maybe it's easy to do when you have hard limits.
But like, there's like the cursed child.
We're going to pretend that didn't happen.
Right.
I read that it was so bad.
Oh, man, you're the only person I've ever
met who actually read it.
Oh my God, it was so bad.
No, yeah.
Or not.
I don't know if I want to.
No, I'll tell you.
I desperately want to.
One thing I just want to tell you one thing,
but I won't say it on the podcast because it's a spoiler.
We kind of know the podcast.
Although I don't know if anyone cares.
Oh, OK.
Spoiler for the cursed child coming up.
Stay tuned.
So there's, you know, the characters who are,
the main characters are the children of, you know,
Harry and Hermione, et cetera.
And then like, there's an antagonist.
And the reveal is that the antagonist
is Voldemort's daughter.
OK.
How did Voldemort have a daughter?
I don't get it.
How the haven expanded.
Wasn't there a large amount of time travel involved?
Yeah.
And like, that part of it was kind of cool on one hand,
but on the other hand, it just like, if you, you know,
are a rationalist, you're going to hate it
because they aren't much getting correctly.
Or at all.
Yeah.
Which is, I don't know.
I think I did hear about the time travel thing.
So wait, why is the fact that the protagonist
or the antagonist being Voldemort's daughter,
why is that a bad thing?
I don't think it landed for me.
Well, it's like they obfuscated like who the antagonist was
and then like it was like this big mystery.
And it's just like, I just, you know,
that's a really terrible decision.
Like.
And this takes place.
Oh, I guess I, this may be part of the setup.
This takes place when Harry's kids are at Hogwarts.
Yeah.
Oh, OK.
How did Voldemort have a kid that's their age?
I don't even, how do I not even remember that?
I hated this book so much that I think I like,
actually like forced myself to forget it.
That happens.
That's the way to do it.
That's not just creating it.
Because it was, it was also just really poorly written.
Like the, a lot of the dialogue felt really weird.
Did she write it or did she just endorse it?
I can't remember.
I think she did.
She didn't like write it all.
She, it was.
She was involved.
She was involved.
I don't know how much she was involved.
Yeah.
That's bummer.
Anyway, authorship sounds tough.
I'll stick around to not creating anything.
So.
You're creating a podcast.
I was going to say other than this.
OK.
Which, let's be honest, someone's going to say
Stephen's on a good author today too.
So.
Our final feedback is Captain QWERTY,
who in the subreddit posted a recipe for guilt-free chocolate
in response to just saying that there was no really good
sweets that we could eat yet.
So, I don't know.
I don't bake, but maybe you can give it a try.
I don't actually have the recipe here,
but I'll post a link to it on our website.
Thanks Captain QWERTY.
Yeah.
And finally.
Who said there were no good sweets?
Me.
For, I guess I missed.
No good sweets that don't have lots of calories.
I was getting annoyed about the fact that we haven't
like, you know, managed to come up with technology.
Oh, that's right.
You know, make healthy food, taste like unhealthy food.
Awesome.
Yeah.
I'd be down for some guilt-free cookies.
I mean, Alestra is something that I would probably love
because I love fats and salts, you know,
much more than I expect.
What is it?
Alestra, it's a substitute fat,
but apparently causes anal leakage.
So, there's a downside.
And I don't want to wear an adult diaper everywhere.
So, yeah.
Yeah, there was a Jeff Fox worthy joke from nearly 2000s
about like medications and that was one of the side effects.
And it's like, anal seepage.
It's not even fun to say.
Yeah, that's not a trade-off I'm prepared to make.
No.
It's kind of like, you know, yeah,
you can have lab-grown meat, but it's $3,000 a gram.
So, it's like, I'm not prepared to make that trade-off either.
Yeah.
There's some vegan meat that's actually pretty good.
Oh, totally.
But it's very overpriced.
It's compared to, you know, real meat.
Yeah.
Some real meat.
Yeah, some of the stuff.
Some of the stuff, you can get it safe way.
I don't, I have no idea how ethically sourced it is,
but it's vegan, like meat patties and stuff
from like, what, Morningstar or something?
Like, they come in a box that live in the freezer.
It's nothing fancy.
I'm not sure if it's even overpriced
and so much as real meat is underpriced
because of all the subsidies.
Could be, yeah.
And it tastes slightly worse than real meat.
So, like, I feel like you end up going back
to the real meat unless you have principles.
Or like, really strong willpower.
That's probably a fair point.
Or dietary restrictions.
Should we think of the Patreon?
Yeah, I think we should.
This week, we would like to think our Patreon.
Patreon?
Patreon.
I hate that freaking website is, yeah.
That reminds me, do you know what you get
if you give an Eevee cash to evolve?
If you give an Eevee?
Eevee the Pokemon?
You can't give them cash.
Well, you know, like, how you can give them, like,
the Firestone to turn them into a Flareon, whatever.
Oh, this is like a joke.
Yeah.
Okay, what do you get when you give an Eevee cash?
Patreon.
Okay, that was pretty good.
I knew it was coming and it's a little baby laugh.
That joke will either lose us Patreon supporters
or gain us a Patreon supporter.
If you would like to be one of our Patreons.
The Patreon we're thinking this week is Glenn Willen.
Thank you for supporting us, Glenn.
Thank you.
In general, people over the last several episodes
have been coming out and giving more support every week.
I see more names going up and it's fucking inspiring.
Thanks, guys.
Yeah, it means a lot.
And one of these days, we'll have the funds
to increase the quality of the podcast,
which I'm looking forward to.
So, me too.
Yeah, thanks, Glenn.
Thanks, everybody.
Woo!
All right.
All right, we're out.
