Today our topic is polyamory.
A quick interjection.
When this episode was first recorded, I accidentally outed someone.
This episode has been edited to remove their names and certain identifying details.
Again, I'm really sorry to the person affected.
This is a much requested topic from...
Is it?
I've had at least two people ask for more information about it, so...
Okay, well we did mention it in previous episodes with almost no explanation.
That's true.
So let's start with an explanation.
How about a definition?
The Oxford English Dictionary from 2006 defines it...
I hate dictionary definitions.
Me too.
What's that?
Well, we're starting with a dictionary definition because the truth is we probably all have
different definitions of polyamory, so why don't we just settle on one?
The dictionary definition is polyamory, the fact of having simultaneous close romantic
relationships with two or more other individuals, viewed as an alternative to monogamy, especially
in regard to matters of sexual fidelity.
So the custom or practice of engaging in multiple romantic relationships with the knowledge
and consent of all partners concerned.
That's actually really good.
I think that's a fair definition.
I really liked the line as, quote, viewed as an alternative to monogamy.
At the last lecture on me, I had a long conversation with somebody who insisted that if you drop,
you know, three main factors from what people consider a romantic relationship, then that
just applies to every relationship.
So everyone's poly.
And I was like, yeah, but then like really what's the difference?
You know, why would you even classify yourself and it got into this whole long thing that
we were basically just quibbling over our different definitions of how it should be looked at,
but by bringing in the fact, just looking at it, think of what you think of when you
think of monogamy, but plus or, you know, plus one or more.
And that's, that's really, I think what we're talking about.
Is that fair?
Yeah, I think that's generally what we're talking about.
Of course, relationships are on a multiple axis spectrum and there are people who are
a romantic and asexual and I think that we'll get into that a little bit more a little later
in this episode.
But yeah, just for right now, multiple romantic relationships concurrently with the consent
of everyone involved, with the informed consent of everyone involved.
And that's-
I think that's completely justifiable.
A really important part of it.
Okay.
To be distinguished from a, on the surface monogamous relationship where one party or
I guess both are having other romantic entanglements unbeknownst to their primary part.
Right.
So that's not what people talk about when they use the word polyamory.
No, that's cheating.
Or shouldn't be.
Yeah.
So the reason that we're talking about this particular topic, actually let me back up
for a moment, you should probably know where we're coming from and what our personal biases
are and what kind of relationships we are involved in.
I'll start.
I'm in a non-hierarchical polyamorous setup.
You're going to have to define non-hierarchical if we're going to introduce it now.
And sit here.
You're going to have to say it three times fast.
Non-hierarchical, non-hierarchical, non-hierarchical.
Oh, damn.
Almost.
It almost worked out.
I think I slipped a little bit on the last one.
But, so I'm in polyamorous relationships with four other people currently.
So where does the non-hierarchy come in?
We will talk, I think, a little bit about.
So hierarchical is the idea that there is a primary partner and almost necessarily secondary
partners and sometimes even tertiary partners and so on and so forth.
Yeah, quadrennary.
That sounds sad.
Actually, these are pretty flexible definitions, but part of it's the idea of having a primary
person who you are in a relationship with and other relationships are satellite to that
one.
So.
And you are not to that.
I know.
Okay.
No, that's.
That's what the non-hierarchical means.
Non-hierarchical.
So I'm not into that biz currently and, yeah, how about you, Steven?
How would you describe your relationship structure?
I thought it would be more fun to do the two polys first.
No.
So my relationship is I'm in a monogamous relationship with an individual.
But where this is going to be less of like the two polys versus the token monogamous
and more like, well, it will come out more later, I think, but really we're in a position
where we're satisfied with what we offer each other and where we're at with our romantic
fulfillments.
And neither of us are axiomatically opposed to the possibility of bragging that out later
in any way.
Defective monogamous, then.
Yeah, pretty much.
I take a little bit of issue with there.
There's a little bit of an implication there that I don't think you meant to make.
I think I know what you're thinking.
That by being polyamorous, it means that someone is in any way not satisfied with one of their
relationships.
I don't want to dive into more, I think, because I wouldn't stand behind that implication,
but I would be interested in exploring it.
So let's save that until after we hear Yasha's introduction.
I want to riff off your thing real quick, because the de facto monogamous relationships
are the only monogamous relationships I can respect.
Like when people are forced into monogamy, I kind of consider that this is compulsory
monogamy.
I consider bullshit.
But the de facto monogamy, there's quite a few people I think, God, I don't remember.
I think it was Bertrand Russell.
But someone who is monogamous his entire life, but said, yeah, you know, my wife and me are
okay with that.
We just have never had any desire for that.
And to me, that's, you know, that's fine.
There are people out there whose preferred relationship style is legitimately monogamy.
And for them, you know, all power to them takes all kinds of different types.
I think that's a good thing to bring up, because I think that there's probably some discussion
out there in some of the fringe poly forums where they insist that monogamy is completely
unnatural.
That no human is built that way.
And everyone, everyone, well, I say this, I say this, I say this having skimmed a little
bit this afternoon, mainly the angry rant, grantings of Dan Savage, who I don't think
would endorse that position entirely, but he really, he really came off.
Well, I heard him describe on one thing where he was describing monogamish, which I was
going to talk about that, which is his, which is his word, correct me if I'm wrong, for
a most monogamous couple who occasionally do stuff without people.
Yeah.
So that probably fits into the consensual non monogamy umbrella for sure.
But the reason I brought him up was because in the, I think it was on Joe Rogan podcast
that I was listening to him talk about it on, he equated being in a monogamous relationship
your whole life to standing on your one leg the entire life.
Is it physically impossible?
No.
But is it really comfortable?
No.
Well, I would also like to say that he was probably talking about people in general, as opposed
to everyone.
Because I mean, there are, I've been reading Dan Savage since I was in college in 99, when
his column was still titled, and I don't, I think it was called Savage Love Still, but
it always, all the letters to him started with, Hey, faggot, which, which when I first
read that, I was like, Oh, what the fuck is going on here?
Oh my God.
And then I read, I was like, Oh, this guy is gay and he's like totally okay with this.
And I guess that's okay.
He's embracing it, you know, but no, I've, I've been reading or listening to Dan Savage
for so many years now.
And he is not at all someone who, he very much embraces all the different types of sexuality
out there.
Okay.
And yeah, he, he believes in people who are nationally monogamous too.
Okay.
I don't think he was talking about everyone in that regard.
And other perspective, I don't respect a lot of Dan Savage's positions and I think they're
terribly wrong and offensive.
Oh wow.
So.
I guess you were right about us disagreeing on a lot of things.
We can link to his Wikipedia page, which I went to, because I'd heard of him before,
like I said, I'd heard him on that one interview, I think it was in the Joe Rogan podcast.
And I was looking for something that we'll bring up later.
I found an article that he'd written in response to another article that was written that quoted
Dr. Helen Fisher.
And he used like all caps, the fucking data and you know, a lot of like, it sounded very
junior high-ish the way, but I get it, he was mad.
Maybe that was, maybe that's part of his delivery and I didn't know what to expect.
I expected something more calm and I'm comparing it to what I read like on Scott Alexander's
blog.
I'm hoping that we can get away from Dan Savage and back to, I'm really interested in hearing
how Anyash is going to describe his relationship structure.
Yeah.
Let's do it.
Well, it's interesting that you brought up Dan Savage, because I was going to mention
that our relationship is what Katrina would refer to as a hierarchical polyrelationship,
which is a term I don't like because I do not like the term hierarchical.
I just, it's ugly term.
And Melissa doesn't like the term poly, because she's like, I'm not poly.
And so the phrase that we've often use is Dan Savage monogamish, because we're like
monogamists, we're a couple and we know do the standard normal couple of things, but
our relationship is open.
We can sleep with other people.
And so we both think that term is kind of cool.
She used to use the term swingers and swingers also applies, but it's just so fucking 70s,
you know?
Yeah.
It's not a nice term either.
So all of the things that you guys have been describing are again in the realm of ethical
non-monogamy and people might quibble on what polyamory specifically means, but I think
an important thing to think about for polyamory is it involves multiple intimate romantic
relationships.
Yeah.
Wait, does it have to be intimate and romantic, or can it just be swingers?
No, it really, if it's just sex, then I'm going to put my foot down and I am planting
my flag and I do not want people to take the word polyamory, which is a specific form of
non-monogamy away because then there's no term for it.
So the other place that we're all coming from is that Inyash and Katrina know way more
about this than I do, just because since I'm not in that community at all, other than
apparently everyone I know is, so like other than being distantly connected to it through
that, I've had no reason to do any research into what terms I want to tag onto myself
or where the trenches are drawn with definitions and that sort of stuff.
So that was something I was unaware of, that that was a contentious point for a lot of
people.
That's kind of interesting.
But I get it, it makes sense because you want to distinguish saying this is different
than us just fucking strangers.
This is going to be us agreeing, I like ethical non-monogamy, I think that's the great umbrella
term that I think can be used interchangeably.
And that does apply to signing also because people are hopefully aware of what's going
on and have agreed to it in good faith.
Now the reason that we're talking about this also is because to just take it back to the
rationality community is a survey that we mentioned before.
It seems that there is a much higher percentage of people who self-identify as polyamorous
in the less wrong community than in the community in the US, well in the population at large.
So to just bring it back to that, I did participate in the survey that we're quoting and I think
it was at a Scott Alexander generated survey.
When was, which was, how long ago did you take the survey?
It's the, I took it maybe even a couple years ago.
Then yes, that was when the Scott Alexander ones.
That was when the Scott Alexander ones and that's the one that you quoted on a previous
post of ours.
Yes.
But here are the stats, people who prefer being monogamous, that was 51.8%, prefer being
polyamorous, 15.1% and certain or no preference, 30.9% and other, 1.5%.
What are the other two options that the 1.5 might have meant?
Again, it didn't ask about ethical non-monogamy, it asked specifically about polyamory, so
swingers who are not monogamous or maybe don't consider themselves monogamous or they don't
like the word polyamory for any reason, might be people who either choose uncertain or preference
or other.
Gotcha.
So, not the most perfect questioning, if you really want to dive into that one, but it
was one of many, many different survey questions and let's compare that to the US population
at large.
There are estimates that up to 5% of people in the USA are involved in some type of consensual
non-monogamy.
So, they're saying that it estimates as high as 5%, could mean that it's like 3%.
Yeah, 3 to 5% actually is one that I saw in a bunch of different places.
Of course, this is really hard to measure, as always it's hard to get into what exactly
people are talking about, but that number seems to be any, for any kind of setup in
which other partners, sexual or romantic or both, are part of the situation.
So are we asking now what the link is between rationality and polyamory?
Yeah, so I thought maybe we could start by talking about what can explain or what theories
can we come up with to explain the higher percentage of self-identified polyamorous people
in the less wrong community.
Well, personally, I'm of the, okay, there's obviously founder effects and all that, but
more than anything, I am of the opinion that rationalists in general tend to be a bit of
a contrarian counterculture people and want to explore things for themselves rather than
taking the standard dogma of society.
Yeah, actually, I've definitely heard that a bunch and I think that you can potentially
apply it to other communities too.
For example, polyamory is higher in people of queer sexual orientation communities and
this is kind of a personal observation that other people have shared this personal observation.
At least when I started in about 2008, you know, really being polyamorous, the most other
people who I met who were like that would fit into the stereotype of being really nerdy
or geeky or otherwise kind of non-mainstream and happy with it.
I think it comes from a willingness to challenge what we've been taught and to re-examine things
yourself and when you look at the way compulsory monogamy is forced on people, it's really
not surprising that a large amount of the people who are willing to ask those questions
do come to the conclusion that this monogamy thing is kind of bullshitty and I think I
should consider my options.
There's also I think the I guess compounding factor that a lot of I'm not sure what the
age demographic breakdown is specifically, but I think I would guess that it's largely
a younger generation's game.
You don't get a lot of, I'm sure you get plenty, but I would bet that less than half
of the self-identified rationalists on the surveys are like say over the age of 50.
I actually don't know what the breakdown is for people who are ID is poly.
I know that there's definitely some differences between the, you know, the old people, the
old poly people and us younger 35 and younger people.
The rationalist community is definitely a youth community, so they're mostly of the
young kind, but it seems just in my experience that normally the people who are more open
in their sexuality do tend to be older.
I don't know.
I actually really don't feel like I can weigh in on this one.
I've been in different communities, but I've also seen a recent, what I feel like is an
explosion in people embracing various kinds of non-monogamy and those people I feel like
are running younger.
Yeah, they are nowadays.
And that's what I was getting at too, is I think that it's part of the general trend
that I'm seeing a lot of people online, because I don't see that many people in real life
as I do online, of people holding positions that their parents certainly didn't hold.
So we have less religious people in the younger demographics, and I think for similar reasons
you might get people challenging the assumption, you know, they look at their parent's relationship
and they're like, man, they certainly weren't happy.
Oh, I'm hearing about a lot of people are not doing what they're doing.
What's that like?
And also, the policing of sexuality is a thing that happens much more to younger people
than to older people.
The older you get, the less people tend to give a fuck about who you're fucking.
And the also, the more people tend to get more in touch with what they want.
Personally, I've found that a lot of young men have very unfulfilling sex lives, the
ones that have sex lives, because as a young man, you're told you want the thin little
blonde chick, and that's what's hot.
And if you get that, then we are going to judge you highly and that's a status symbol.
And so every guy thinks they want the thin young hot blonde chick.
And it takes a good 10 years or so for you to realize, if you're into something that
is not a thin young hot girl, oh no, I like the rounder girls more, you know, I enjoy
having a bit of meat on my woman.
And it takes a while to learn that and it takes a while to not care as much about what
society says you should like.
Or you know, even another shoe, I think that, especially girls that I knew growing up, if
he's not over six feet tall and not interested, a lot of people would be even way more superficial,
self-professed more superficial, not me just being like, they were superficial, like they
would want them to make a certain amount, all the stuff that like movies would list
off, right?
Well, especially if you're a guy, you lots of times chase women not for the women, but
for the respect of other guys.
So to bring this back to polyamory, why are we concerned in the evolving attitude as
people age over who they want to be dating by body type?
Like what does that have to do with poly?
Oh, I don't think it has anything to do with poly, it's just society being fucked up.
Oh, I think it did tie in because we were talking about other ways that...
I think we were talking about why it used to be that older people were more likely to
be poly.
And now it's been swinging more towards the young, but I was just saying it used to be
more older because it would take people a while to get more comfortable with their sexuality
and to throw off what society is trying to force on them.
Or be married for a long time and maybe have a spouse die or maybe they've been married
for a long time or with a partner for a long time and they're no longer interested in having
sex or there's a bunch of different reasons.
I do not want to make any claims about the age demographics of polyamorous people.
But there has definitely been an explosion of the young recently.
You said, oh, wow, when I was talking and like, I want to know why because it sounds
like you were strongly disagreeing with something.
No, I was just like slut shaming.
No, I was kidding.
What?
I think it was your use of the word meet on my woman.
Yeah, I believe.
I did not like that phrasing.
Oh, really?
Oh, I'm sorry.
I didn't mean it as an insulting way at all.
No, I...
We're not even...
I don't want to get into it.
Okay.
I'm sorry.
So...
I think...
I think I knew what you meant.
I apologize for my phrasing if that was problematic phrasing.
I think different body types maybe would have been the more kosher way to put it.
Oh, I was just thinking of the ownership part of my...
Oh, the my woman.
Oh, I meant the kind of woman I'm attracted to.
Never mind.
And not even me personally.
Just...
Okay.
Sorry.
At least we know you're not an ownership type person.
That's actually one of the reasons I hate monogamy because of the ownership aspect of it.
Oh.
So, with a little bit of backpedaling, I want to make a possible counterpoint to kind of
fringe communities being more comfortable with exploring non-monogamy and make a note
that racial minorities are really underrepresented as practitioners of polyamory.
It turns out racial minorities are underrepresented in just about everything and there was a fun
breakdown on an essay that we'll link to by Scott Alexander called...
That's the one.
I think he draws eight possible conclusions as to why this might be the case and probably
parts of most of them are part of the answer for the general underlying thing.
But everything from like NASCAR enthusiasts to furries, you get respondents in the single
digits in like the black community.
Which why would that be the case?
So it seems to be an interesting phenomenon that's...
Minorities are always underrepresented in any fringe movement.
Yeah.
And so that seems to be a larger...
Racial minorities specifically.
Yes.
Yeah, for sure.
And that seems to be a larger phenomenon than just for poly, although the Slate Star Codex
essay was written in response to an article that was written saying that the poly community
is just for white people or something.
So the...
Yeah, that completely conflated it with like swinger's parties, like as if minorities maybe
don't have enough money to go to expensive swinger's parties and that's why they're
not being involved in poly, which was just so faulty, it was terrible to read that article.
But that said, it is my impression as a non-poly person that there's not a, you must be this
white to join the club criteria, right?
There is not.
Okay, I didn't think so.
I know that's out there.
Not that I don't know.
We don't have a little color chart that we hold up to everyone.
Well, you should not have gone to Bermuda, look, you just, sorry.
I'm happy to have loved people of minority races and still do, so I don't think that
it's a complete exclusion, but for some reason, people of minority races are definitely
underrepresented.
Another thing that I wanted to mention as a possibility for why less wrong community
might have more poly members than expected is something that you mentioned, which was
obviously the founder effect, which is a concept in population genetics, kind of explaining
why a certain population might have a much more narrow, you know, narrow gene pool.
And it's because a few people show up, they happen randomly to have those characteristics.
And so those characteristics are expressed at a greater rate than they would be otherwise
if they were representative of the larger population.
So in other words, maybe there are more poly people because more poly people randomly
happened into being early adopters of rationality movements and less wrong, and they brought
other poly people with them.
It could be a non-random effect, right?
It could be that the founders were poly because that was the rational conclusion that they
came to when they started this whole movement thing.
That's different than the founder's effect though.
So let's get to that in a moment.
Okay, so I guess I wanted to sort of equate just as long as we're, well, I don't want
to deviate, but I want to see if this brings the point home.
So I was thinking that there's also a higher rate in the rationalist community of like
cryonics members as opposed to general population.
Is that explainable by any of the same factors that might say why there's more poly people
in the rationalist community?
I think there might be a combination of factors, but I mean, so the one that you're mentioning
is maybe it actually is a reasonable position to take, and people in the poly community
or in the rationality community are willing to question their presuppositions, think about
why they do what they do, and update.
So maybe it actually makes sense for more people to be polyamorous than there are in
the base population.
Right.
And if more of the base population was willing to question their assumptions, then more of
the base population would be poly as well.
Yeah.
And something else, another thought is actually people who are well respected and high up,
including Eleizer and Scott, are both polyamorous themselves and have written about it.
So maybe they have an undue influence on people who read their stuff and think that they got
a lot of good things to say, and people kind of follow suit.
Actually personally, my husband of eight years, and we started out in a polyamorous relationship,
although it's certainly gone through a lot of changes since we started out, I think that
part of the reason he was willing to do that with me was because he had been exposed to
the idea through overcoming bias and less wrong, and he was kind of more comfortable
with that idea and didn't think it was so totally crazy, but I would want to do something
like that.
So it seems to come from a lot of places, the inclination towards polyamory.
I wanted to say really quick, as a follow up to our Chronix episode, very short side note,
after our discussion with it, I felt more prepared to talk with people about it in my
personal life, and I had a conversation about it with my grandma there and my mom.
My mom agreed to sign up for Chronix.
These conversations can change people, and one thing that really slowed me down when
I was crack-crastinating was that I didn't know anyone else, and that it would be just
me and a bunch of strangers if it worked out right.
Anyway, so I thought it was extremely gratifying to get a mind changed and possibly life saved.
That's pretty huge, and I just want to put that out there so people know that you can
change people's minds with good arguments sometimes.
Congrats, dude.
Yeah, that's great, and that totally applies to this topic.
Yeah, absolutely.
It applies to every topic.
And regarding, Scott actually did a great post, Scott Alexander did a great post on Slate
Star Codex called Polyamory is Boring, which we will link to in the show notes, and you
can check that out.
It is about how normal and very much like being monogamous, Polyamory actually is.
Yeah, from the outside, I think I mentioned this before on the air, where I had a friend
call me out of the blue once, and he had just encountered his first poly person.
And to be fair, for him, it's not the kind of thing, we mentioned that I'm from Fort
Collins, and that you said the community is lively and active there, but it wasn't the
kind of thing that I was ever exposed to there, really, and that I guess he hadn't been either
until he met somebody, and he had the same sort of like, this is, have you heard of this?
This is so weird.
So the Scott Alexander thing was, you know, from the inside, it stopped being weird really
quickly, and he opens it up with a fun analogy about, well, forget it, you guys read the
essay, it's fun, it's not that long.
Yeah, it feels normal, it feels really natural, and it feels a lot like any other kind of
relationship, and how you would run any other kind of romantic relationship.
So I've been, I'm going to talk briefly about why I like polyamory and dyslexia.
I am one of those people, I don't know how, how much of, you know, how many there are
of us in the world, but who has just been poly by nature since, as soon as I discovered
girls, I guess, I never quite understood what this whole weird jealousy thing is about people
having to have just one other person, and I couldn't figure out why people weren't
just, you know, loving with everyone that they were in love with.
So you're saying you didn't, you didn't, or you still don't quite understand where that
jealousy comes from?
I, I, both.
I mean, I, I think we'll take a failure of imagination to literally have no idea where
people are from.
Do you experience jealousy, Anish?
Not sexual jealousy.
No.
I do, and we can talk more about that later.
Okay.
That sounds fun.
You know, society beat me into shape, and I was like, oh yes, now one true love, etc.
And I was in a monogamous marriage for six years, and the whole marriage had problems,
so we can't blame anything on just one thing.
But anyways, eventually I got out of that, and I was like, oh thank God, I can join my
people again.
Let's put this, let's put this on the table, I think, if I remember correctly from your
timeline history, that that was back when you were a fundamentalist, right?
No.
Are religious fundamentalists?
No, no, no, no.
I dropped religion when I was like 14, 13, or 14.
So when were you debating evolution and stuff on the forums?
Was that pre-13 and 14, too?
That was between the ages of 12 and 13.
Oh.
Yeah.
Alright, never mind.
I was precocious.
And, you know, it wasn't really forums because the internet didn't exist yet, and its current
form, it was just local BBSs you could dial into.
Gotcha.
Yeah.
But the thing that I dislike about monogamy, and we touched on it before, is the possession
aspect.
The treating the other person as if they are your property.
And this is, it's more the case that men do it to women, but women also do it to men.
We're both shaking our heads, bro.
Yeah.
You think it's equal?
I'm shaking my head.
Okay.
So I also don't think that it's something that has to be a part of a monogamous relationship.
No, no, no, no.
Like, you know, Steven's relationship, the fact of monogamy, I'm fine with.
But the fact that lots of monogamy, the way it's practiced, certainly the compulsory
monogamy of society today, is very much I own my partner's genitals, and I own their
affection and no one else can have it, and I think that is complete bullshit.
When I was first dating, and I was 17, I was very possessive, and I had this feeling like
I was entitled to, you know, this because I, because we were in love, and I was entitled
to, you know, this amount of time because we were in love, and this amount of consideration
because we were in love, and this type of behavior because we were in love, and that
is, I think, more of a lack of mature understanding of what it means to enter into a relationship
with someone than it is something that is specific to any kind of relationship structure.
I think so too, and I think that there is probably an even distribution between sexes
as to the propensity for the ownership quality, right?
Yeah.
Were you looking at her as you walked by?
You know, so it says the TV girl, and you're like, why yes, she has female characteristics,
those are the same things that attracted me to you.
And it wasn't a sexual, it wasn't even a sexual thing, it was a, it was just like, where are
you going?
We should be together at all times.
You know, there wasn't, it wasn't, say, a jealousy, you don't need, you need to not
spend time with other people or look at other people, it was, these are things that I absolutely
must have in a relationship.
And I feel like as I've gotten older and Polly actually really helps this, I've expanded
what a relationship looks like to me, what it can look like, and it's become less of
a matter of having expectations that people need to fulfill in order to, to have my love
or get to relationship status or, or even the need to have such a status, but it's
more of a dance where you're having all sorts of different interactions with people and
there's a lot more freedom and it, and it much more depends on what you both want to
be doing and when to be together.
I don't want anyone to be tied to me because then that's not a relationship in my opinion.
That's, that's someone that I have enslaved and captured somehow.
I want someone to want to be with me and if they don't want to be with me, then that's
fine, you know, go on and be with someone else, but this, this forcing people to be
with you is, I've always considered it just gross and that, that is what Polly frees you
from.
Like you are allowed to be with other people and if you want to stay with the person, you
stay with them.
I would say that's what Polly frees you from and more what like just being mature and thoughtful
frees you from.
That doesn't necessarily free you from that.
There are a lot of relationship expectations that I held long into being in a polyamorous
relationship.
Like if I don't get to see you two times a week at least, I'm going to cry because this
isn't fulfilling my expectations.
Oh, well, I mean, if it's not fulfilling what you need in a relationship, then you probably
need to drop the relationship and move on.
Needs and expectations are different, right?
Yeah.
So, or, or desires and expectations are different and, and the line between them can be a little
fuzzy, but I feel very happy that my desires are becoming more free.
And I think that Polly kind of lets you do that because you can have different kinds
of relationships and still fulfill some of your, some of your needs with different people.
And that's what I think is nice about de facto monogamy.
It's that you aren't tied to each other, but you just don't want to have anyone else
in your relationship and that's fine too.
That's sort of, so I'm trying to think of, and, you know, not to put my relationship
on a pedestal, but I'm contrasting my relationship with like archetypal relationships I have
that you're describing, right?
And it's like, it doesn't bother my, my partner, if I go out with a girl all night or if a
girl stays, stays at our place when we hang out until four in the morning, it doesn't bother
me if she's out with a guy until the wee hours in the morning, like that.
But it's very easy for me to imagine relationships where like, I can't believe you're out with
this guy till past midnight.
What are you doing?
You know, like that whole weird possessiveness.
That's a trust issue too.
It is.
But I think, so that might be a lot of what that possessiveness comes from, right?
Just the whole trust issue.
Well, no, I think, I think the trust is a, is a really good part of that because when
you have enforced monogamy to me, I don't feel like you can ever really trust your other
partner to be staying with you because they want to be with you.
And to me, I don't want anyone to be with me if they don't want to be, but once your
partner has gone out and slept with someone else and they come back to you anyway, they're
like, yeah, I mean, that was fun.
I enjoyed that person, but I live with you.
You are the person that I come back to.
Then you no longer have just like faith that they love you.
You now have knowledge that they love you, you know,
He's talking from a hierarchical perspective.
Oh, fuck.
I was going to bring that up, but that I noticed that that is not how you would describe it.
But I would say that I think there was, you were linked to the essay on your blog that
I read something about that that you wrote maybe last year.
Oh, okay.
It was a short post somewhere that I think you might have shared to Facebook or something.
Okay, okay.
But you wrote something on that.
We can dig it up.
Yeah, no.
You might have a better memory than I do of which one it was.
I didn't remember that I posted that, but yeah, it's very much to me once, once your,
once your partner is free to leave, but doesn't leave, then I feel much better about being
the relationship.
I no longer feel like I am imposing my will on someone.
If they're not there by unbreakable vow, but they're by choice.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yes.
And you know, I know that they're free to pursue sex somewhere else if they want to.
And you know, they will if they want to, but they're coming back to me.
For listeners, unbreakable vow isn't a rationalist term, it's from Harry Potter.
So the part that I was saying was coming from a hierarchical perspective is the, they live
with me, they come back to me, they might go out and do other stuff with these second
like satellite lovers, whatever, they come back to me and that's, that would be the difference.
Okay, see the way that you like, no one can see this, but you made this hand motion like
floofy, oh those satellite people don't matter.
But that's not the case at all because everyone that we've ever had sex with is someone who's
been a friend of ours, either a couple friend or someone that we know personally.
I mean, we don't just have random sex with strangers.
No, of course not.
Yeah.
So these are people that are important to us.
When I was a swinger, I was in a relationship with the same couple for the better part of
a year.
Nice.
Right?
And they were our friends and we would go out to movies and dinner and go to reptile,
we were all very interested in animals and go see reptiles and cool stuff like that.
And it was not a strictly sexual relationship, but that is what we did and I was, but there
were also rules.
They were the couple, I was the third person, there was no, I couldn't just go hang out with
one of them.
It always had to be them together.
Oh, that sucks.
It, there were, there were a lot of different, there were a lot of different things.
That sounds like they didn't have trust then.
Oh, they definitely didn't have trust.
So out of curiosity, out of curiosity.
I take back that high five, that sounds like a terrible relationship.
Oh, well, that's why I ended up leaving that situation is because it was, their relationship
was rocky enough and difficult enough for me to tiptoe around that it became very uncomfortable
and while I still claim them as friends, it, you know, and this was, this was like seven,
eight years ago.
I was no longer interested in having that kind of relationship with them.
Did we talk about the word primary yet or did we just use significant other or I think
we did.
Yes.
If we expanded on what that meant, I can't remember, but it was, it was exactly what
we're talking about.
It's the couple.
So I'm not, I, I don't have a situation where I'm involved in the couple and then there
are other people who I'm also in relationships with.
I am in multiple couples.
I wanted to say really quick that that relationship that you described from years ago sounded
a lot like you were in a relationship with an unstable person who happens to be two people.
Does that, does that sort of encapsulate it?
They were, yeah, it was unstable.
Would you, would you count that as a Polly relationship for them?
No, it was definitely not a Polly situation.
It was a, I mean, you could call it a friends with benefits situation or a swinging, swinging
coat on coat situation or something like that for them.
But even though there was like friendship and hanging out, it still wasn't Polly.
I'm just curious to see where some people, no, there is some blur, that is, that is
fair.
I would never call that Polly because there was no opportunity for a really close romantic
relationship for me.
It was, they were the romantic couple.
I was the friend that they could have sex with.
So yeah, I guess I've outed myself as having experimented with swinging for a little over
a year, a while back and the reason that I chose polyamory is because it turned out that
that was a really unsatisfying way to spend my time and that what I really wanted was
really close emotional connections with people and I wanted to be able to form those really
organically.
So the interesting thing that a lot of people would say, I think I really want to form a
close intimate relationship with somebody and I want to form that relationship organically,
but you used plural and I think that just different zone to start from is where that
difference draws, right?
So this is why I think people don't love, I guess in the rationalist community there
isn't a huge desire to work from a definition and then talk about stuff from there because
definitions suck, right?
It's hard to define anything in a satisfactory way.
Yeah, I know that starting from a definition is difficult and that we've kind of expanded
on and modified that definition as we have continued to talk, but I think it is helpful
to have something to start with and that particular thing that we started with I actually pulled
off of the website More Than Two which is, it's run by Franklin Vo and there's a book
of the same name by Franklin Vo and Eve Rikert called More Than Two that I absolutely recommend
especially if you're somebody who agrees with my particular form of poly which I arrived
at through a lot of mistakes and pain and trial and error and then this book came out
and I was like, why, why wasn't it there before?
Exactly, I could have read this five years ago.
Wow, other people came to the same conclusions I came to, this is fantastic and so helpful
and actually reading their book is what caused me to finally give up rules.
Not because it's bad to have boundaries to talk about what you want in a relationship
and what's important to you and have other people respect that but because there's a
bunch of unintended consequences that come along with rule making and one of those is
that people hold the rules as more important than even what they care about the rule actually
being about and I have made this mistake where I'm like, you broke a rule, that was our agreement
and I have zero tolerance for rule breaking around here, I can't even trust you anymore
whereas having an evolving conversation about it is a whole different situation
and then the other thing is that when you make rules as a couple, those are things that anybody
else who's dating your partner or dating you, they didn't have a say in that they are taking
those orders from on high and while they might agree or while many people do agree to enter
into a situation where rules are set down from on high about their relationship with someone
by a third party and that other person, things change and when love is concerned things are
often unpredictable and that's one of the ways that I guess I found out that it's really important
for me to have the potential to be in a changing morphing relationship because
because if you're with that couple that you're just friends with and then you fall in love
and they're not okay with that that hurts, it's heartbreaking and I've had my heart broken a lot
and when it is a third party who is not in the relationship that you are in who is making
the calls for your relationship that fucking sucks, it does I think unless you're agreeing to it
informed in advance right but like even then it might still suck right and then I guess I'm
trying to think of some rules that like are obviously stupid like I mean maybe not obviously
stupid but like there are things like you can engage in this kind of sexual activity but you
can't kiss or is that really a rule some people have oh god that's such a swinger rule right there
I was that you can't kiss yeah I've never heard that and I've hung around a lot of swingers
yeah that's the Julia Roberts yeah I mean that's the same thing as blumpies they don't actually exist
it actually exists blumpies don't exist don't worry about it I don't know about blumpies but
the Julia Roberts rule there's no way that's always one of the first things you do you with someone
so first of all that was going to be the fake rule that I was going to invent as an example
of a bad rule I had a couple solicit me uh-huh and they had a ton of rules oh no and one of them
was you do not kiss my male partner on the lips because you know what this is about me
and and I'm like well I don't want to be a bunch of fun finding somebody who's interested in
getting into a relationship with y'all because at that point they just need to hire a professional
this is an example yeah they do not want a person to have sex with they want a professional to
help them for an evening this is an example of uh this demonstrates the fact that you can meet
strong strong people in real life strong strong men so all right so hold on I wanted to just throw
this past you guys and you guys are the experts here uh it seems to me so like I think we can
all agree that a stupid rule is saying no kissing on the mouth because I just seem to have the kind
of even for me from the outside looking in as I'm hoping some of our audience isn't already in this
and they can sympathize with my ignorance a little bit why people do that trust issues and
stupid boundaries it's trust issues but also there is a as people are opening up and as people are
letting go of possession there is a a pretty serious desire to feel special and people will come up
with um artificial ways that they can feel special like he only does that sex act with me
I feel special because your partner loves you I I think so but but things like no he only watches
game of thrones with me or no this is our special thing we go to the theater or you know it can be
all sorts of this this might this might be a straw a straw man example or not you guys let me know
what if the rule was you only say I love you to me you can have really close friends that you
fuck and hang out with and hold hands and snuggle and watch the movies with but I'm the person
that you you say you love you too but then that draws the problem of like what if you fall in love
with them then you have to be dishonest yeah unfortunately that's an incredibly common rule
that people in non-monogamous relationships make you may only love me I must be the most
important person in your life period I don't believe we have that rule but I have my own issues with
the L word that are unrelated well we can get into that some other day maybe unless it's if it's not
that long it ties into polyamory well people use love in a lot of different ways and um when you're
communicating it it often helps to say I love you and by that I mean you've been an amazing friend
and I'm so happy that you're in my life sure I love the time that we spend together so the
reason I fear the L word is because of the the whole way I was raised again to you know with
the monogamy to me when you say I love you to someone that means and I want you to be mine
and be with me forever and I will take care of you forever and here's a ring and I can feel feelings
I love you to your brother or your mom right well I mean you can say it to family and it doesn't
count but if you say to someone the opposite sex especially if you're having sex with them
then all of a sudden all of that baggage is on you and I I I know not everyone is like that but
I still I fear saying that to someone because they're gonna think oh my god he loves me we're
a couple more together forever and I'm like wait no what I just I have strong feelings of love
towards you so I do not want you to pack your stuff and move in with me today this is and this
brings up as far as we're talking about the complication of just why I could avoid the word
that's a good point I've totally asked different people to move in with me um so far it hasn't
hasn't worked out no it hasn't happened oh it hasn't happened except for except for Tim who I did
end up marrying oh so I wanted to bring that up as an additional rule that kind of made sense but
it's not necessarily like a romantic relationship thing but first I wanted to say as far as they
I love you thing I exchanged and I love you with a friend of mine that we've been friends for for
many years and he's gay and I'm not but we both knew what it meant yeah and so it was more of the
you know the I love you kind of thing right yeah so um but but so like a rule that kind of makes
sense so say you're in a relationship where you're where you're splitting the bills uh for your uh
say your your home right and like an implicit rule might be that you you live there and you pay
the bills but say you fall in love with somebody and you move in with them but like that it needs
to be established somewhere in advance that you can't just up and leave those financial obligations
because then then you're leaving say your your hypothetical partner we can use Tim
in this example do you guys split your bills we do somewhat so like but let's try let's say them
let's say the mortgage is 50 50 right and then we definitely pay half and half rent and then
then say like well I'm gonna go live with this guy well and you know you can try and find a roommate
good luck but like that seems like a rule that seems distinct from well generally in a healthy
relationship one person isn't just gonna up and leave even if you have a roommate they just don't
up and leave if you're in a friendship they just don't up and leave you in a lurch um Tim and I
both spend a significant amount of time away from home but we share with other partners
sleeping over or you know doing stuff from multiple days going on trips whatever but we also share
responsibilities for our pets who we love and paying the bills and basic stuff like that
so my position I think would have been more coherent had I laid out my three
hypothetical rules okay in order which was the obviously stupid one of no kissing on the mouth
with your with your superfluous partners that's how they would model their satellite partners
and then the second rule that seemed less stupid but still probably common was no I love you so
that people and then the third rule which I which I was trying to think of one that was like really
made a lot of sense was was no leaving you know I want to jump in with a rule that makes a lot
of sense and this isn't the specific rule I have in mind but because Katrina was very much against
the rules and the third party imposing things on you and yes I agree with you that sucks sometimes
things suck but on the other hand if you're in a relationship with someone else or even two or three
other people you don't want to hurt them no and sometimes things will hurt other people and if
you were to do the thing that hurts them anyway that is that is just mean it's inconsiderate and
it makes it makes you have to reevaluate the relationship if you're willing to do things
that hurt them even though they hurt them and sometimes I want to be very clear I'm specifically
talking about rulemaking I'm not talking about so for example yeah but that can look like a rule
like if if a couple has important distinction if a couple has you mentioned Game of Thrones let's
say it's there on what season six now a couple has watched Game of Thrones for five years they've
bonded over it it's like a family ritual nowadays if that person were to go and like on a Sunday
evening let's say they always you know watch it together on Tuesday because they're busy on Sundays
and Mondays on a Sunday evening that person were to go to one of their lover's uh friends houses
and watch Game of Thrones with them and the next day the the the other person found out
they could be really hurt and to the third party that looks like a stupid rule that's like oh he
can't watch Game of Thrones with me what kind of stupid rule is that but to them that's something
that hurt them so things that sometimes look like rules aren't rules they're consideration for your
partner yeah so with the us having special things what I would strongly encourage for anybody who's
in a relationship is to think about simply doing being together being you know making that relationship
for you I don't know how to describe it with with this other person who is a unique human being
and you have you have something special with them is way more important than getting hurt
about who they watch a television show with I mean yes but emotions are funny that way
emotions are funny and if somebody if somebody is if that's something that somebody's going to be
if you about they should talk about it they should talk about their feelings and address why
like try to think about and and people should be considered I'm not saying people should just go
off watching Game of Thrones willy-nilly but um people should be considered of their partner's
feelings of course but I would also encourage them to figure out what it is about that that they're
really feeling pain over and trying to address it at its base it could just be that you did something
with someone else that is always our thing I can chime in from a mono perspective here that I can't
remember if this was Game of Thrones it may well have been I don't think it was because we're never
that invested in that show but um did you watch it with someone else well so here's the thing is
first of all I do see where coming from and that either you have to set up that as an explicit
thing which then sounds like a straight-up rule and then explaining it to the third party might
sound stupid or it sounds it's even very painful to the other person um like oh but you know you
also have a certain amount of understanding expecting that like okay you know even if you just
have multiple friends and you have one friend you watch Game of Thrones with all the time
and then you maybe like go off and watch it with somebody else because it happens to be
your friend might feel a little miffed and it's not a it's not a relationship a romantic relationship
thing it's a well I was expecting to watch it with you because that's our thing that we do together
we make brownies and we watch Game of Thrones and um I'm just a little bit a little bit hurt
I can think of a good platonic example that fits this fits the ball perfectly here and this will
help illustrate I think kind of where those expectations come from and how it doesn't
necessarily come from like possessiveness or like rulemaking but my brother and I used to watch
The Walking Dead together when I was still looking for colonists who watched it I think the 90 came
out on TV together and that was our thing and I can't remember if this ever happened what it
probably did but hypothetically I missed that Sunday we were gonna watch it that Monday well
he watches it anyway by himself and then it's like dude fuck you we're gonna watch this together
so like there's still that bit of thing and so I feel like the the one takeaway here might be that
hurt feelings are going to happen in any relationship whether it's a poly relationship
a platonic friend relationship or a monogamous relationship right and so part of it will just be
having healthy ways to deal with it and how you want to move forward with each other like
for example when Tim starts a video game and I'm watching him when he starts we will actually
talk about is this a video game that I want to be there for every time he plays it or
and watch to watch through the whole progression and yes I do that um or is it a game that I'm
totally comfortable with popping in every once in a while and he's played it by himself or he's
played it with another friend or another partner while I've been gone and if it's something that I
want to be there for then he respects that or you know he'll be like I don't think I can handle it
if I can only if I can only play this around you because I am so into this game and but you can
see how like a young Katrina would you know that's dating him and wants to play that game might be
like what's with this stupid rule that you can't play this game with me well I was an idiot okay
no I mean um let's use that real example though say like you're watching him play Fallout 4 and
you're out all week or something and he's got a girlfriend over hey you playing Fallout 4 I see
the disc there let's pop it in play oh sorry I play this with Katrina well that's stupid how come
right uh like that could theoretically happen right yeah I don't know when people when other people
watch shows or play games together and it's like the thing that they do um I'm usually cool with it
the other thing that happens is we just watch it twice and that's totally cool and um is it really
I don't I don't enjoy watching things twice but I happen to be in romantic relationships
with several people who are totally cool with watching things twice so Fernando has seen Game of
Thrones each episode multiple times partially because he also is dating somebody else who
really enjoys Game of Thrones and I totally respect that and you know knowing that he
has that outlet to watch Game of Thrones with someone else maybe I can if I have time I can
sneak in an episode on my own because I won't be putting him out but yeah it was our thing you
know and then it is more of a group thing and I feel like being a little open to change on
special things is actually really important in any friendship but the line in my head just
I had this line just pop into my head this is this conversation's got a bit metaphorical
and it makes me think of the thing is it's not it's literally what right but it but it also
like applies to larger things right and that's what kind of made me think of like everything
in polyamory it actually applies to every relationship and friendship that you've ever
had and since since I'm a nerd and this is rationale rationally adjacent it makes me think
of in uh Harry Potter and Methods of Rationality when Hermione learns that Harry and Draco have
been doing science together all year too yes she's like were you doing science with him and I
totally like I felt for both of them I know like I felt for Hermione like oh my god he was cheating
on her with science but but like on Harry's point of view he's like I was just doing science with
my other friend yeah no it was it was a brilliant chapter because you felt well I anyway felt so
much for both of them well but then again see their point we can look at the symbolism you know
look at look at where that got Hermione that position right oh dude too soon yeah have we gotten
through um have we gotten through all the rules that you had yeah it was just I was trying to like
I said I was just trying to think of three hypotheticals um are you asking me about like
real rules that I actually have or rules that I made up on the spot oh no those are the only three
okay I liked I liked the one that you thought of though I think that was a better illustration
of what I was trying to think of with the I love you thing only for one person right where you have
the one special thing that we do together and whether it's something you know as ridiculously
not tying as saying you can only love me or something that sounds more reasonable a bit
maybe to the couple but not maybe not necessarily to the to a third party that says I am so a
verse to the love word that I was in love with Melissa for a good four months before I allowed
myself to say it to her and when it did come out it came out on accident and I was like
fuck I can't take that back and I was like yeah okay I love you and yeah I totally been there when
I didn't really love the love love the person yet you know because before you love love the person
you love them sometimes like right after sex I'm thinking I'm thinking of a tv show called
better off Ted where he drops it on the first date it was very funny show check it out well or
you know they say something awesome and really intelligent and you're like I love you and you're
like oh can can we explain what that means to me right now yeah and I think that's an important
follow-up and then you know there's pressure to say it back and there's all sorts of of other
things going on there but yeah communication that's an important thing to have that's that sounds
like something that has to exist in a successful poly relationship well I think it has a relationship
but it's not something that exists in every mono relationship no it's not something that exists in
every poly relationship either what is it that you said that exists and what was the word that
used for the like non-optional compulsory monogamy yeah that those those couples I'm imagining
several right off the bat they don't communicate they're like bad friends right so uh alternatively
what if there's a situation where there's compulsory polyamory that would be just as bad as a compulsory
monogamy situation it would yes yeah but we don't we don't have that society but yes it would be
I can't like there are just people that that wouldn't work for right and so that's the whole
point yeah and I don't know if they're if the poly I'm sure they're again I'm picturing the the
fringe of every group there's probably somebody out there saying that that's what everybody should
be doing and you guys are anyone who's in a monogamous relationship is just drink the kool-aid
in there you can always find someone to say the most extreme fringe stuff but I don't think that
anyone takes that position seriously that's not my impression so did we want to get into
because I I personally consider polyamory so obviously um an okay thing to do yes that I find
that I need to try to steal man critiques of polyamory because I just cannot understand why
anyone would have anything against polyamory ever or or just the option of polyamory right
I mean de facto monogamy is fine but do we want to go into the steel manning of polyamory anti-polyamory
arguments or do we have other things first I do really want to go into it I'm just wondering if I
should be my normal defensive self and explain kind of what polyamory is not sure if you want to do
double time too when you're when we're like saying putting forward these critiques you can do it as
your normal like this is what I actually believe and then you can try and endorse it too I think
that that's that's a worthwhile endeavor for anybody to try and try and think of the best
arguments for position you don't like right or whatever so that's actually I've been a lot of
this is going to come up during steel manning so let's see what you got well steel manning was
hard for me because again it's so difficult for me to imagine why this wouldn't work I'm going to
start with what I don't think is a steel man but a lot of critiques that I did find when I was looking
for critiques weren't actually attacks on polyamory at all they were always attacks on polygamy
where they conflated polyamory with polygamy yes actually um I was thinking about that too I may
have mentioned to you that I unfriended somebody on Facebook because they were saying that if
polyamory is widely acceptable then only a few men will have all the females yes and then there
will be angry single men who can't get any females because of this imbalance and they're going to go
blow up things and um wow that's cool that that went from stupid to really stupid pretty quickly
actually I don't think that's stupid I think that is one of the reasons polygamous
societies are so evil because I meant jumping straight to blowing stuff up because you're
frustrated for lack of sex partners right no I mean I mean that's fairly common they're referring to
well they are referring to jihad and yes but a lot of early societies that were very violent
that was one of the ways they would encourage violence and get meant to go off to war the men
who were very successful and had a lot of riches had a whole harem the people at the bottom had
nothing left but they could go off to war and get riches or get killed either way the male
population is reduced it's polygamous societies are evil for particularly that reason because they
are made to exploit sexual frustration in order to create a violent warlike society I'd say that
the problem is specifically because um and because women are treated as property yes and because
women are always used as the incentive I've read a lot of blogs where they're like how are you supposed
to how are you supposed to get the correct social incentives if there's not an equitable
distribution of pussy that was literally the sentence which is burned in my head an equitable
distribution of pussy and I'm like dude pussy is not a resource you dole out these are people and
that's polygamy always treats women as as objects that are given to men as rewards for doing whatever
society wants so can I weigh in really quick and you mentioned that you mentioned jihadism and I'm
probably more vehemently against uh islam in general than both of you maybe that's a different
episode but that's but that's but that well islam and jihadism there I mean it's it's a different
episode it's going well I'm not complaining them but uh there's not another tradition that that
inspires jihad in the same way that we call it jihad is that there I don't want to get into
this conversation I was I was sort of flabbergasted because then you went on to say that poly army
or poly polygamy that's uh those words are too close to be they are it's unfortunate yeah
that they're they're necessarily evil and it's about controlling women it's not impossible for me to
imagine a society where that's just that that's the comfortable norm for people right that maybe
doesn't exist but like I don't necessarily I would I wouldn't even go so far as to say that
that's necessarily an evil thing no the the point of polygamy is that the men do not share their
women that the wind there's a bunch of women to one men but it's not a real it's not a society
where anyone can have sex with anyone how they feel the men have a harem that belongs to them
yeah and um actually that's a really important distinction that's often brought up in academic
discussions of polyamory is that the difference between polyamory and polygamy is that in polyamory
anybody can date multiple partners and people will bring up things like one penis policy and
you know different agreements that people have but polyamory is definitely an equitable system in
which you really can date multiple people like both men and women can got you and I guess so I'm
imagining hypothetical groups of people that could possibly exist but probably don't so maybe that's
that's what I'm getting hung up on and we're dealing with people that are actually out there
in existing right so the claim yeah so the claim that um that my former Facebook friend made
which you're echoing is this because we live in a paternalistic society that is naturally how
things will fall into place I'm not echoing that well that's you're suggesting that it's
something that could exist somewhere now my friend was saying not only could this exist
somewhere it does exist here if polyamory if people are given more freedom to choose
multiple mates if that's what they want to do then that is the um that is the equilibrium that
it'll tend towards man is that not the case no that is whenever you hear someone say that you're
like wow you have never met an actual poly community in your life have you because they
tend to be actually more much more women-centric than men-centric right that was the observation
that's going to bring to counter that what your guy I'm assuming was it you said it was a guy right
it happened to be a guy yeah um I guess I assume it was a guy because that sounds like something an
idiot guy would say well it could be a woman actually no it absolutely could be anyone who
doesn't know anything about call Paul this person who was in the peace corps and is a completely
admirable human being put that forward and decided to stick to his guns this is the hill he would die
on this is the hill he would die on and I just got annoyed to the point that because he wouldn't
listen to me and I feel like I have some pull on that particular topic and like the facts
and uh yeah so so I got frustrated to the point that I was like I don't need to hear your shit
and I should caveat I didn't mean that this person's idiot I meant that this person had an idiotic
position that that's that that's an important distinction and to clarify so for the people
who are not um familiar with the community they tend to be very much uh more women-centric because
women can leave in a free society and if they don't feel comfortable somewhere they will
and for that reason generally people make a lot of effort to make sure the women feel comfortable
there can you stand on that uh I I mean that there isn't generally creepers in poly communities
and if there are they get drummed out pretty quickly um there are but people are less afraid to
one it's a small community people tend to know each other like any ash for a while was actually
connected to me through polyamory yes uh not currently but you know distantly we tend to
kind of know each other know of each other and if somebody is rapey or abusive then that kind
of goes through the grapevine that that's a lot those are those are much stronger attributes
than creeper I guess I'm not sure what creeper is creeper I have a bad association with because
one person call you creepy and if all you're doing is whatever reason staring at the wrong place
for too long and you're just zoning out then all of a sudden you're branded as a creeper uh I mean
I don't think that actually happens so I'm not sure I guess I guess what is creeper I guess is
that is that is that the nice way to put rapey slash assaulting rapey slash assaulty slash abusive
yeah um like I have actually um I have received warnings from people about somebody I'm dating
oh really yeah I was I was with a guy and and did you tell them no he's actually a nice guy
I told him that maybe they misunderstood and then later I was like he's just too rapey I can't be
with him anymore and I did talk to other people about it because it's not okay no that's a pretty
intense uh relationship issue um to put it super multiple and it turned out that there were people
who didn't who I knew who actually had serious concerns about this person who out of politeness
and you know probably just not enough evidence had not talked to me about it until
after we had broken up at which point I was like this is why I received these reports
and um which was really upsetting and I suspected and but yeah I when I had a particularly bad
breakup one of my worries was that I would have difficulty dating yeah and not even not even
that date me but not even give me a chance at friendship or and that's what I was right about
with that relationship tarnishing in a small community right yeah well I mean that is also
one of the nice parts of having more than one partner that you do have other people as a
social safety net to fall back onto if something like that happens and to vouch for you and well
active vouch for you too yeah but there you're not alone you have these people you're still in
relationship with that can give you that emotional support I think you have a responsibility to have
a lot of evidence and um before you go to anyone in fact there's a metamore of mine who's dating
somebody and people hold on a term dropped there without explaining without explaining uh
oh I'm sorry um let me go back um a metamore is a term for a partner's other partner
so for example if I was dating someone who was dating Katrina then Katrina would be a
metamore of mine even if we're not dating that's right yeah so um I guess one thing about polyamory
is having good metamore relationships and um this particular metamore of mine
I definitely consider her a friend so when this other person said oh yeah I dated that
person and rapist I you know my and this this person's describing someone that you were currently
dating no let's just say I heard through a um like a third person not directly so I couldn't
follow up in questioning I had somebody come up to me and say I'm concerned about this other person
that because the person that they're dating has been called a rapist by somebody they used to date
gotcha so I said to this person who told me about it is that's pretty heavy accusation
you need to get more details like I'm yeah that's concerning I definitely don't want to judge somebody
without having any context for this but um how do you feel about going back
and getting more details or me talking directly to the person who made that accusation
so we can figure out if we need to go to to my good friend my my metamore about this other
person that she's dating I think that was an extremely responsible stance to take people
I think are inclined to overreact not so that's the thing is it's hard to say overreact but
they're inclined to react too intensely to charges like that right well like some people call
their friend like it depends on how mature your community is right or I guess how much you trust
the person that you got this word from or whatever like there's all kinds of factors that can jump in
but that's similar that's similar phoning going on here and there's no way I'm gonna act on a
situation like that yeah right no I just wanted to go into that that I've seen and I think that is
possibly one of the things that makes rationalism more amenable to to these uh to poly communities
because you I could see you know people who haven't been trained in this sort of thing to freak out
and start spreading all sorts of rumors and the fact that you require a higher standard of evidence
and you often build priors on other people and how much they can be trusted and how much a certain
amount a certain given piece of evidence alters your opinion makes that a little bit safer I think
so and you know I guess it's like if someone came up to me and said hey you know you're I heard
on the grapevine that your friend murdered somebody you're like okay can we back this up
before I call the police you know I have a partner who warned me that he that I might see accusations
about him murdering someone really and just kind of explaining the situation and just to warn you
this is something that you might see huh so don't freak out it's a misunderstanding he just fell on
my knife it happens um but okay so I think we got wildly after I do want to say the drama the drama
definitely can crop up in insular communities like polyamorous communities and it's not again
something that is specifically a poly thing but when there are only so many people who are willing
to date and experienced at dating multiple people successfully and healthily then you end up dating
some of the same people sometimes and yeah I mean you know you're gonna get drama like that I think
in any community whatsoever and it you might bump into more of it just because you know more people
you know second and third and fourth hand through a larger dating community or through a through a
larger uh you know so my dating I guess what am I just trying to say not dating community uh you
know my partner and all of her friends are like people that I know through my relationship right
but your partner partner partner partner and all of their friends and friends and friends
are so like that that neck gets way bigger right so there'll be more drama is a good way to make
friends oh yeah yeah but the more friends you have the more drama there might be I guess
so that's trying to get at right uh I guess so I guess um let me give you another example of
unfortunate uh poly drama okay so you're making all the listeners be like god I never want to be
poly I'm so much fucking drama okay all right go ahead from my own experience polydrama that's
a fun word it's like regular drama but pointy here so I mentioned that one of my exes and I
didn't part on great terms and her metamore was really really involved with that in that situation
so and one of my current partners this is years later um one of my current partners
was like I've been talking to this person and she is so cool and she does this and that I'm like
I is this her name yeah and like she is really cool but does she know that you're dating me because
she'll have a problem she might have a problem um because of of this past thing that happened
and if this is something that you want to pursue I would love to like go out to coffee with her
talk things through and and try to you know get to a better place but I just want to warn you
we parted on poor terms to the point that or I parted with my my ex girlfriend too if she
if this person knows that you are dating me she might not be willing to enter or even explore
entering a relationship with you so it ended up not working like not going forward between them
they just my partner decided it was too much trouble to even go forward with that when when
he could you know pursue other things so so I don't think we actually managed to steal man anything
no I you mentioned that people like like are just uh poly drama it's so horrible it's all
okay I guess there is that I would say that's probably the primary reason that I'm not a
poly relationship yeah because that sounds exhausting yeah and I mean well I've managed
to avoid most of the drama but and on the other hand I'm also not in very many relationships
and and your relationship and dynamic is different right you're not trying to maintain I guess like
so if one of your potential girlfriends had some drama that was going on you'd be like well all
right you know forget it yeah but no I wouldn't break it off with my girlfriend but it'd be like
that that's that's that sounds sucky for your drama you know I'd listen and commiserate but
I wouldn't get involved you it's uh I think that when you have an insular community people
learn how important it is to avoid massive trauma because there's a fear that it'll come
back to bite you in the ass you can't just burn all your bridges and be like fuck this I'm out of
here right you know you have fuck you and fuck you also so I think that that's actually really
a positive thing is that people have to have to learn you're forced to learn to communicate you're
forced to learn to do um on the other resolution I have seen much much worse drama in my monogamous
friends relationships than I ever have in a poly relationship well I've also had well I've been
in mostly poly relationships so actually I shouldn't ever I shouldn't comment on that yeah no I mean
my monogamous marriage had immense amounts of drama so you know I guess drama's just a thing that
happens with relationships it can be it really depends on who you're in relationship with yeah um
so of my relationships I'm in an eight plus year long relationship is one of them and then I'm in
two other relationships that have lasted about two years a piece at this point and then I met also
in a new one um that's only been a couple months but the relationships that I have that are the
longest lasting the eight years two years two years they are so easy and so low that's why they
last so long and I am so comfortable with those people and we are I gotta you know brag we're just
great at resolving issues and talking through things which we don't even have to do that often
as far as as relationships having drama you mentioned it sort of like as a prerequisite
you said relationships have drama to tag on yours and pat myself on the back for having a great
relationship I don't think we've had one piece of drama in our relationship I've been with my
partner for five years four or five and that's that stemmed from the relationship we just happened
to get along great on like everything it's it's it's like spooky don't try to have a wedding
right well yeah that I can actually see that being being a dramatic thing that was super easy for me
oh you're so lucky um I my you would think yours would be more complicated my drama is well my
drama is all with my parents um and that's the other steelman physician that I want to get to
is being polyamorous in the world okay that seems like a good stopping point for now this episode
got a lot longer than we'd anticipated so we're breaking it in half part two will be released
in one week from today and then we'll resume our normal schedule of two weeks between episodes
so join us again for poly part two and one week and if you have a moment consider leaving
a review or rating at itunes thanks
