Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Eni Ashbrotsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, and today
we have no Jace. Jace is feeling very sick and out of it, so we are going not solo. Duo?
Duo. Not COVID sick though. No, no, at least not as far as we know. I think it is said.
So I think we're okay. But yeah, you will have to be only having one-third the conspiracy
today, or one-third less, two-thirds the conspiracy. Math. We're already fucked. I mean,
Jace might be two-thirds of the conspiracy all by himself, so I hope you guys don't have a
terrible episode with just the two of us here. We're off to a great start. I know, right? Making
excuses about how terrible everything's going to be? Set expectations low, man. Life pro tip.
In Metropolitan, man, last episode or two ago, there was that Lowe was just complaining about how
Clark would set himself up to like, oh yeah, he acts like he can't do stuff but he can. And that's
as you compare him to Clever Hans, the horse. And it's like, the thing is, you're really good at
math. You don't need people to think you're a horse. So Brian and I are very familiar with the
phrase overpromise and overdeliver. Right, right, right. The same Scotty thing. I think
Brian even referenced the Scotty thing, didn't he, in the last episode? What's that? Scotty,
in one of the TNG episodes, they unfreeze Scotty from the original series. And when LaVar,
the card asks him how long this is going to take, LaVar gives him a decent estimate.
And after the comms are down, Scotty's like, what the hell did you tell him that for? Because
that's how long it's going to take. You never tell him how long it's going to take. You add on
two days. And then when you underdeliver or when you overdeliver, they think you're a miracle worker.
That's right. Scotty, not a very ethical person. I hear a rule of thumb for that. I got,
I know he must have been joking, but it was from an architect on my first job. And he's like,
whatever your estimate, double it and then increment the unit. If you think it's going to take two
days, it'll take four weeks. Right. But that's, I mean, but that's just good. What is the, what is
the term? Optimizing for planning fallacy? Yes. Yes. Right. Yeah. Whereas I, in Star Trek,
I don't think they have to optimize for the planning fallacy because they're so perfect at
everything. That's right. They've got a spot where you can get it down to the millisecond.
It's pretty awesome. Yep. Yeah. All right. So, oh, maybe that, maybe that's what it was. Scotty
was the only rationalist on the crew, so he was always optimizing for the planning fallacy.
All right. I'd like him more now. Good. Plus he was always just like jolly and fun. So,
that 70 series was weird, man. It was so 70s. Anyways, Steven, should we get into the less
wrong posts like we always do at the top of every episode? Let's do it. Okay. Our first less
wrong post is the meditation on curiosity. It starts out with what might seem like a tangent
at first, but it's something I really like because it, you know, speaks to the rider in me.
That's good to say. It starts out with saying Roger Zalazny wants to distinguish between wanting
to be an author versus wanting to write. Mark Twain said, a classic is something that everyone
wants to have read and no one wants to read, which first of all, very true, right? Yeah. I mean,
every now and then people do read a classic and they really like it. I, one of the co-hosts of
the Reason podcast is reading through Moby Dick right now, which from everything I've heard is
just a terrible idea. They've heard it's not a very good book as far as books go, but she's
really liking it. So, maybe there's something to be said for some of these classics.
I think there's a difference too between being forced to read something and being,
like, you know, pursuing it at your own interest. Yeah, that's true. And so much of the
quote classics I was forced to read in school and therefore never read. And although I do remember
an Amake chapter from Methods of Rationality, there was a two sentence summary of Moby Dick
that I really liked. Was it revenge on what? The whale? No, I think I'd rather just get on with
my life. Yeah. And I didn't realize until sometime later that the author, that was Inyash Brotsky.
Oh, cool. Yeah. Yeah, that was fun. That was your first published short story.
Was it? But no, I don't know. I think it also matters like who determines what the classics are.
Like a lot of the classics of the music canon are were just decided by
people who I don't have a great deal of respect for and same with the like the literature canon,
whereas like the classics of cinema are generally decided on sort of by popular,
well, I guess the Academy has some say in that, but a lot of the stuff when people
tells you this is a classic, they mean like this is a great movie and people would enjoy watching it.
It's just old. I mean, so it's a bit of a digression from the post, but my thoughts on that,
we watched Terminator 2. Yeah, it's definitely an action classic. This is a classic movie and I
don't know where the list of classics are if it's on it, but when my wife hears that from me,
she knows what to expect. I'm like, you know, 80s movies? This is the perfect 80s movie.
Buckleyn, we're gonna have a fun two hours. It doesn't mean that it's necessarily good.
Although in this case it is. Right. But like we watched,
I mean Predator actually was great too. I'm trying to think of like a bad classic that
well, it doesn't matter. Point is like that and as long as I'm gonna rant at the Academy,
I don't think Endgame got nominated for anything. And so that tells me that they're completely
disconnected from the populace because it made the most money of any movie ever. And so I'm like,
oh, so you guys aren't basing this on like what people actually like to watch and spend their
money on. So what are you guys spending it on? What you like? Fuck you guys.
Well, I know I've rented about this before, but Pulp Fiction lost the year that it went up.
And I think what was it? Forced Gump one, which is a fine movie, but like you compare the two
and one of them is groundbreaking. And the other one is just a schmaltzy feel good movie.
And that makes sense why one would get nominated, right? Because who's gonna stand up in front of
the crowd like, no, you know which one wins this one with, you know, a bunch of swear words and
murders and graphic. But the thing is, like they're supposed to recognize groundbreaking new
artistic achievements. No, they're all about just patting each other on the back for being warm
and fuzzy, man. Yeah. And a lot of it is like, you know, which movie is the best about showing that
we are good white people who aren't racist, but still love our country, but also really liberal.
I think that's why Forced Gump did so well. I haven't seen Forced Gump, but I know enough
of the plot. And then there's a subreddit I like called shitty movie details. And it's like,
I saw this yesterday. Forced named his boat Jenny because like Jenny, everybody be riding it.
God, that is so fucked up. I don't know enough about Jenny other than the fact that I guess
she has sex with lots of people in the movie or something. She was just a perfectly normal
60s chick who happened to be attractive. Fair enough. And then like she had to get punished
by it for by getting AIDS because it's that kind of movie. See, I haven't seen the movie. Yeah.
All I know is that he runs long enough to grow a beard. Yes. I mean, it's like I said, it's not
a bad movie at all, but it's not certainly not groundbreaking. Yeah. It's more like, you know,
if you are a good American, these are the values you believe in.
The other reference I know who is from Tropic Thunder, but we can't go into that.
So such a good movie. Okay. All right. Back to the post. Yes. Wanting to be an author versus
wanting to write, which are distinctly different things. I mean, and I can relate to this is
not digression. This is just another point from nonwriter. There are lots of things like
people want to be accomplished, but not to work to accomplish stuff, right? Like,
everyone wants to everyone wants to be respected and esteemed, but getting there seems hard. Yeah.
It'd be great just to fast track and be like, look, I've got the respect and esteem of all my
peers. Yeah. Well, and for those people, like the problem is like putting in the work, it's just
work. Whereas people who just want to write or people who just want to noodle around on their
guitar all day, they they already want the thing that is going to get them that esteem. So it's
sort of a byproduct. That's a good point. Yeah. Like most the great guitarists are people who
just love fucking around with the guitar for hours and hours every day. I wonder if there are
musicians who really hate music that got popular. No doubt like in the age where people are being
selected as children, you know, Britney Spears or something. Yeah. You know, that that probably
happens. But maybe not as far back as like, I'm not gonna say maybe not the 70s, but I don't know
if Michael Jackson would have gotten into music if his parents hadn't forced him. I mean, I think,
I mean, the boy bands are a good example. The lot of the 80s hair bands were, you know,
one or two members would be really into the music. But you could tell a bunch of them were just in it
for the girls and the money. And two good reasons to get into music. Right. But it's not going to
lead you to make really wonderful art. Yeah, the lack of passion. Yeah, it's gonna you're gonna
just make whatever you think is going to get the most radio plays. Anyways, long digression
continues on sing. So this this is comparing to curiosity, because that's what the topic's on.
Eliezer says, criticizing yourself from a sense of duty leaves you wanting to have
investigated so that you'll be able to say afterwards your faith is not blind,
but it's not the same as wanting to investigate. Which I guess is everything we're just saying.
Yeah, and it's a great distillation of it. I think that this should have been on the
like, the back cover blurb of rationality AI to zombies. But I think he summarized
Eliezer's writing perfectly when he said, has like, some of the best information to word count
ratio of anything I've ever read, that that sentence is a perfect blurb for everything in this,
right? Yeah. Yeah, you'll want to be able to say afterwards that your faith is not blind,
because you have wanting to have investigated. Yeah, look, I did the work. Yeah, I'm a good,
you know, rational believer in this. Yeah. And he says that as long as that is your main motivation,
then, you know, you'll consider an objection, and then a counter argument to the objection,
and then you'll stop. Or maybe you repeat with several object objections until you feel that
you have done your duty, and then you will stop. As opposed to when you're really curious,
you'll gravitate to inquiries that seem most promising of producing shifts and beliefs,
or inquiries that are least like the ones you've tried before. Like, you'll just
want to know what's actually the case, and you'll keep looking until you're satisfied that
you're as close as you can get. Yeah. And I mean, we were looking at COVID charts right before we
started recording. And like, the numbers in Colorado look great. I think even nationwide,
there's big dip in cases. You start vaccinating a bunch of people. It's amazing how that happens.
I know, right? And like the holidays are over and stuff too, which helps. But
yeah, it's so like, but if I was like, if I was motivated to want to see stuff like that,
so that I could go back out to restaurants, then like, I might stop looking, right?
Like, oh, great, look, numbers are down. We only had 1200 cases last week in Colorado that were
reported. Of course, that's not true curiosity. And I actually want to know what the real
state of the world is, right? So I can't just stop at the one bit of happy thing that I've seen.
And then when I encounter arguments, show them that graph and justify myself, right?
Yeah. Yeah. I will say that I know I've made this argument before in our podcast,
no less. But at this point, we're going on what, four years?
At least. Yeah, maybe longer. So it may have been a long time.
But we were once discussing religion. And it's, it's been my position for a long time that you
don't need to have any sort of necessarily anti religion, mimetic device. All you really need to
teach people to instill in people is a love of truth. Like if you really instill in someone a
love of truth, strong enough that they're going to pursue and try to find out what truth is,
they're eventually going to stumble up across the scientific method. They're going to
stumble across critical thinking, because these are the things you find when you want to know
what's actually true. And like you, you find your own way out of religion if you care about
what's true on a deep enough level, because you know, it's, it's, it's very easily demonstrably
false. So yeah, there's a lot of societal shit to get over. But once you get over that, if you
have a deep enough commitment to truth that you're willing to, you know, take the hits in whatever
social standing you need, you're like, I don't, I don't care if this will make me unpopular in
my church, like I really want to know the truth enough, you eventually get yourself out of religion.
Like that's all you really need. And it's one of the, one of the components of that is like,
you learn how to ask good questions. And part of that is being curious. And then you realize very
quickly there are no good answers. Like, and I have a religious deconversion story that is like,
apparently so seemingly sincere that I've been accused of it, of me making it up. Like the
short version is like, at some point when I was like 11, like in sixth grade, I learned something
about how, you know, the very pleasant history of the United States when Columbus, you know,
brought Christianity to the United States. And I'm like, wait, they weren't Christians before?
My understanding was that you had to be did not go to hell. And I asked my parents about that. And
my dad was like, yeah, that's where faith comes in. I'm like, what the hell does that mean?
And so then I ask around. And then I was talking, asking questions comes in.
Yeah. And so then I, as this went on over the years, I asked my friend, my friends and peers
of various religions, like, what are, what are your religions, what reasons for believing that
God exists? Because I was actually curious. I came from a position of wanting this to be real,
because that would be great. And I'm like 15, trying to figure this out. And then I found that,
like, I finally just like, I had asked a Mormon friend, and she was just stoked that someone
was asking her about it. And she got me a book of Mormon. And I'm like, well, no, I'm just more
curious, like, what, what the reasons are? Like, why does your religion think that this is true?
And she didn't, I don't think she'd ever been like, asked that question before.
And so then it sort of just comes out to, I think, Sam Harris is still this way, that there aren't
like 100 reasons for believing in religion. There are three. One, like, you think you're really,
there are 100 reasons for believing that, or for saying that God, long story short,
there aren't, there aren't a litany of great reasons for it, right? There's like a handful of
the same ones, some version of the creation argument, some version of we need this for morals,
or some version of meaning, right? Like, and I, those aren't the same three that he gave,
because he's answering a different question. But like, the, when you think about it, like,
those aren't good reasons to believe something. Like, the creation argument is the most compelling
of the three, until you look at other explanations for stuff. And like, the lack of meaning and the
lack of morals, that's not, that's not how the world works. Yeah, sure be nice if it did. But no,
I mean, you know, why, why did we evolve from like, apish, fuzzy ancestors? There's no moral
in that. There's, there's no meaning necessarily there. Like, that, that, that's not how truth is
uncovered. And so I, I came to the reluctant conclusion in my midteens that like, oh, I guess
this just isn't true. And I, I remained open to it for a while. And then it kind of switches to the
other kind of this, this post where then it's just fun to argue. Like, once I came down and like,
art God isn't real, then I had a couple fun years of the New Atheist stuff. This was right around
that boom and, you know, arguing with people and enjoying all that. So yes, that was actually a
really good time. Yeah. I'm kind of surprised like how that was really enjoyable, whereas
culture war stuff is just hell. I think discourse has gotten worse. I mean, I'm now old enough to
say that thing. There was a great spit on us now last night. During weekend update, they had two
people on who were like pro cancel culture. And they're like, it's not going far enough. We need
to start canceling children. And so they pull up like Twitter and like, the last one was this baby.
And it's like, this baby cried when they were delivered by an African American doctor, cancel
this baby. Maybe it's, yeah, maybe it's just that the stakes are higher. Like before, if you went
into a chat room and you argued for or against atheism, you wouldn't lose your job. You wouldn't
be outcast. No one knows who the fuck you are. Yeah. Right. And now it's like, yeah. Well,
I think even now like people will try to destroy your life for arguing these sorts of things.
And I maybe it happens, but I'm not, and I'm sure it happens in deep religious cultures,
but I've never heard of anyone being attacked like, you know, trying to get fired because they're
non religious, right? I mean, it would happen. It would happen in the 80s, 90s. Well, sure.
Even before them, like in the 50s, if you said, I meant since like 2000, during the new atheism
stuff. Okay. Yeah. Back in the day, they babies, don't you know? Like, I mean, that was the thing.
But like now, you know, you can make up allegations and say, yep, this person's
non religious. So I hear they're a child molester and go talk to their boss, but you can't get them
fired for not being non religious anymore, really, in most cases. Nowadays, no. Yeah.
Anyway, the fable of science and politics showcases the reactions of different characters
to an astonishing discovery. Ferris, the last character, embodies the power of innocent curiosity,
which is lightness and an eager reaching forth for evidence. And this was one of the very early
posts. I remember we did cover it. And I think didn't I know we all read different parts from it,
didn't we? I want to go back and look that up. But yes, that was the one where living underground
culture, who has a big culture war over whether the sky is blue or green, and they've never seen
it, which is a pointless thing to care about when you live underground. But that's that's how cold,
that's how, you know, that shit happens, tribal politics happens. Yeah. Yeah. And then the ground
cracks open from this one really far expedition team, and they see the sky. And it's all about
their reactions to seeing what the actual color is. One covers up the hole and says, I can't tell
people this. And one freaks out. And then one's like, Oh, what else is out here? That's supposed
to be the nice, happy one. Yeah, you know, backtracking just a little bit about the religion
thing. I have some sympathy now for people who think like, religion might be necessary for social
cohesion to have like a society that functions. I don't think that's necessarily the case. But
like, I understand their point of view. But I think that's where like, if you care enough about
knowing the truth and saying the truth, you just don't care. You're like, if society can't handle
it, then that which can be destroyed by the truth should be right. Like, it's true. And I love truth
so much that fuck you and you're crazy, you know, this is what is needed for society to function.
But at that point, you know, if that's actually true, the people who stick to truth
opposed to lies are going to die out and the people who are okay with lies for social sake
will prosper. I'd be willing to draw the line somewhere at, you know, that is the
like, like you said, the conclusion of that. I don't I can't think of a truth that might
cause that. But like, if the widespread acceptance of this fact would, you know,
lead to the end of the world or the end of civilization, I think it'd be okay to like,
you know what, let's not turn over that rock until we're ready, right?
I think I mean, there are some rationalists who are religious, which I think is nuts.
But I believe their argument is something akin to these things that were invented were
done for the purpose of keeping civilization from falling apart. And we got to preserve that.
And I disagree with them. But like, because now there's evidence to the contrary.
Yeah. But that is that is the the one sympathetic argument I can think of for a reason.
It's so ingenious. I can't think of that. That's their actual reason.
Well, and also like, then you have to tell your children what you know is a lie. It's like living
in, you saw the Shyamalan movie, The Village? Yeah. Yeah, not a very good movie, but it would be like
living in the village and telling everyone things that you know are lies. Because you think it's
better for them and like, fuck that. I'm trying to think. I mean, I don't know. I've given time
and we wanted to spend the episode on this. I could generate examples, you know, like if
COVID works differently or something. And like, I'm trying to think of a plausible way that this
could work. But like lying to everybody and saying, yes, actually staying home is the only way to
stay safe. When in fact, wearing masks is plenty, but like, you just know that won't work. Then
like, all right, look, everybody, because we had this experiment in 2020, y'all won't wear masks.
So look, if you go outside, there's a 50% chance you'll die. Like if we just told everyone that
for a month, this would have been over, right? No, because people wouldn't have done it. And
then they would have seen that they didn't die. It'd be like dare, where they told all the kids,
drugs will kill you forever. And then some kids did drugs and they didn't die and the whole
program falls apart. All right, so you go full conspiracy with this and start spraying people
who go outside with drones, they get them sick and kill them. And now enough people walk outside
and die. Then you know, then the word catches on. Right. I mean, then you got to murder a lot of
people though. Yeah, you might have been better off just murdering them whether or not there was a
I mean, everyone knows that birds aren't real. They're just waiting to come by and spray you
with these germs. Anyways, if anyone's curious, birds aren't real.com. I discovered that on a
laptop sticker when I was walking by it at the office back when offices were a thing. And I was
like, I did a double take and I was like, what the fuck is this? And I spend a glorious hour
reading this website. Awesome. All right, so he has a cool quote here. If in your heart,
you believe you already know, or if in your heart you do not wish to know, then your questioning
will be purposeless and your skills without direction. Curiosity seeks to annihilate itself.
There is no curiosity that does not want an answer. Which is just a cool quote. But then
the rest of the post goes into, you know, what if you're stuck in a situation where you just aren't
curious about a thing, but you still feel like you have a duty to investigate like what do you do
there? I'm trying to think of an example of something that I really don't care about. So the
first example is I was thinking of came from a post that I read called the things you cannot say,
I think. I think it's like a 2004 internet post from back where things were posted on the internet
in 2004. And it's on the audio podcast. Shoot, it's on the tip of my brain. I'll find it. Anyway,
it's a great thing and it does like audio readings of lots of blog posts, not just from Less Wrong
or Slate Sarcotex, even though that was kind of the idea at first. But the podcast is called
Second Enumerations. And it's not in the story. You got to go find the website and click the
RSS feed to download it. And they stopped updating in 2017. But it did, I think, 16 episodes. And
one of them was on this post called The Things You Cannot Say or What You Can't Say. That's what
it was. And so it's written from the point of view of a very curmudgeony professor at Cambridge
or somewhere. So he gives all these examples of... Think of the things you can't say for
various reasons. They're heretical or they're... And he didn't use the word because it wasn't
popular in 2004, but problematic is the word I would use now. If someone says that's problematic,
then it's like, okay, that's a good lazy reason to... That's basically calling it heresy.
And so think of the problematic statements that you can think of. Those are things that
may or may not actually be true, especially the first things that come to mind. If there was
a violence discrepancy between men and women, or intelligence discrepancy between men and women,
or between races. If there's any discrepancy between races on anything, really.
And so there are some places where you'd be like, yeah, it's racist to say that some people are
taller than others. And so these are the things that... I bring all this up because I don't really
care if there's truth value to those things. So what ought I to do there? I guess just let
other people do the homework and when something comes out, believe it. I suppose. Let's see what
the post has to say, right? Yes, we can do that. The post says one of the things you can try is to
try to take an interest in your investigations, your dutyful investigations, and keep a close
eye out for any sparks of genuine intrigue or even genuine ignorance that you desire to resolve.
And if you can find one of those sparks of something that actually does interest you,
jump on it. Yeah. Like a random tidbit I heard some long time ago was like, tall people on average
make more money. Yeah. But like... Statistically. Statistically, yeah. But I haven't verified
that because I really don't care. I guess because I can't make myself taller, right? So like if there
was... We're like bigger heeled shoes. I go into an interview and I'm suddenly six feet tall and
as long as I'm not sitting down, they don't notice. Yes. And even when you are sitting down,
you can like have pads under your butt or something. You're just like, I just got a really
nice round butt, guys. That's right. Another thing you can do if you can investigate honestly
so that each new point really does have equal potential to shift your belief upwards or downwards,
this may help to keep you interested or even curious about the microprocess of inquiry.
Yeah. I guess for things I just genuinely don't care about, that's fine. As long as I do that for
things I do care about, maybe it was the point, right? It's really hard trying to find an interest
in things that don't really interest you. Yeah. And so like maybe if a surprising result came out,
that would be something that would spark my interest. If a result came out that said
Midwestern white guys born in the late 80s or early 90s have the highest violence,
genetic predisposition of any humans in history, I'd be like, wait, really? I don't feel very
violent. Let me research because now I'm curious. Yeah. And so but then the proper use of the
curiosity would not be to go try and refute it, be to say what's going on here. Yeah. I get the
feeling that like, obviously this isn't the case for most people, but do you get the feeling that
people get less curious as they get older? Yeah. I mean, I think that's almost tautologically true,
right? You get like, you get little kids banging pans together to see what sound it makes. Yeah.
I don't know, dropping things to see how high until they break. The kids are little scientists.
Until they make too much noise and you tell them to shut up and then the spirit of science is
stamped out of them. Well, I mean, I think part of that is as once you've banged enough pots and
dropped enough things, you know what sound they make. So you that's not a thing that sparks curiosity
anymore. You're like, yeah, I know what it's how it's going to sound like. Like just in general,
just general curiosity drives seems to wane as people get older, right?
Maybe. Yeah, that's probably true. Especially I know it's not true of all people. There's some
people are super curious right into old age, but it seems like as a general statistical thing.
Well, like then you kind of extrapolate out the making pan making noises with pans thing,
you know, if you're 75, you've made all the noises and, you know, looked at all the things.
And it's like, yeah, I don't really care to bang these two things together because I'm pretty sure
I know what it sounds like because I've done it 10 times before. And that's true for everything
they encounter and not not just making things and making noise, but maybe that's what scientists
retain their curiosity longer because they run into more and more things that they don't
know the answer to. So they keep wanting to know. Whereas like, you know, if you're an expert wood
carver by the time you're 70, there's not much more for you to learn about woods. You're just not
very curious anymore. Then again, if someone came along and told you like, oh my God, did you know
that, you know, Kamagong is the best thing to build a canoe out of or something. You'd be like,
wait a minute, no way. That was way too heavy. I could see that sparking interest.
Yeah. But maybe it maybe it varies. Like I'm trying to, I'm trying to,
right now I'm spitballing like, is it a bi, is it a biological thing? Where just your
hormones changes, you get older and we are more naturally, you know, inclined through the various
hormonal reasons to be more curious when you're younger. And as your hormone profile changes,
if that curiosity fades away, and if this is something we could fix in the
transhuman future by like, you know, I, I would like to be curious again for a number of years.
Let's amp, you know, alter my home run level so that I'm back to that sort of childlike wonder,
or if this is purely like a, a matter of what you already know and what you are encountering
your daily life, not being interesting anymore. Yeah. I don't know anything about hormones. I'm
guessing it's more the second thing, but I, you know, I'm open to believing whatever someone had
evidence. But like, I think it's more just like, yeah, I've seen a hundred of these, you know,
they're, they're probably like the other hundred I saw. I think it's probably mostly those things,
but that might be part of why, you know, there's such like this association with, you know,
giddiness and, uh, wonderment in general with, with taking a psychedelic drug,
because suddenly all your experiences are novel again. It's like being a child.
And it's like, I didn't know I could hear, I didn't know, I didn't know I could see,
see sounds and taste colors. And I've still never been able to do that. Have you been able to do that?
Not quite, no. But I mean, I get like, I've had visualizations in my head to noises that I'd
never had before. Okay. But it's, I've never seen color or seen, you know, color when sound goes off
or something. But even the two things are still weird enough that like it puts you in this light
curious mode or something, right? Right. So maybe, maybe something kind of like that,
just because that's a new novel thing, unless things are novel when you're a hundred years old.
So yeah, litany of Tarski again is brought up here. If the box contains a diamond, I
desire to believe that the box contains a diamond. If the box does not contain a diamond,
I desire to believe the box does not contain a diamond. Let me not become attached to beliefs I
may not want. That's a good one. Meditate upon the possibility that there is no diamond,
the subsequent advantage that will come to you if you believe that there's no diamond,
the subsequent disadvantage if you believe there is a diamond. There's a great tie-in here to
the New Atheist stuff. This was a good fun argument in one of Sam Harris' books, either The End of
Faith or Letter to a Christian Nation, where people talk about like the community building
aspect of religion. And he's like, you know, that's fine, but you don't need that for, for
community building. And imagine how absurd it would be if you just did it around a blatant lie
because of like the joy it brought to you. Like, oh yeah, every Sunday my family and I get together
in the backyard and dig because we believe, for the sake of our family community, that there's a
diamond in the backyard the size of a refrigerator. And so we get together every weekend and dutifully
dig in the backyard. And it's a great way to bring the family together. And like how insane is that,
right? So I like that there's also had into diamonds because yeah. Diamonds are tight.
It ends, I think this is near the end anyway. Not sure if it's the last sentence. If you can
find within yourself the slightest shred of true uncertainty, then guard it like a
Forrester nursing a campfire. If you can make it blaze up into a flame of curiosity, it will
make you light and eager and give you and give purpose to your questioning and direction to
your skills. I love it. And the opposite of meditating on curiosity is a single thing.
Basically, not quite, not opposites, but a way to not meditate properly on curiosity is a
single thing. Assuming I'm understanding this correctly. I don't think you are.
Okay. Then maybe I'm paraphrasing it poorly. Okay. To me, I'm thinking like, I've got my
rehearsed reason for this. Yeah. I'm no longer curious. Or like, I don't care about the true
explanation because I've got my explanation already. Okay. No, I mean, like that's definitely a
thing. I'm not sure that's what he meant by the word single thing though. All right. Then let's
actually get into it. Okay. Next post is single thing. And if you go way, way, way back in the
show, Eleazar told this story on the episode of the podcast he was on. Oh, really? Yeah. Oh, cool.
I know I'd heard it before, but then I thought I must have heard it before because I've read this
before. He talked about it, I think. Yeah, I definitely remember that, I think. Well, shoot,
we should. I'm saying we should link that. I think it was like episode six, though, and our audio
quality was off and we didn't have the good mics yet. And we're recording in a closet. Yeah. Yeah,
it was episode three or four. It was way early. All right, three or four. Our patrons have saved
us and made the audio quality much better. We will link the old episode if you want to hear
Eleazar speak. But yeah, it's bad quality. This was before we had all the good tech and good
money that you guys have brought to us. So thanks for that. And practice. And practice. Yeah,
that's made a big difference, too. All right, so he summarized it. Eleazar wouldn't go through the
spank machine. He thought it was out of principle to not hurt others. And then he realized it was
just because he didn't want to hurt, he didn't want to be hurt much later. The spank machine in
this case was like handing out Wiffle bats to everybody and like banging each other on the
head, wasn't it? No. It was legit a spank machine? Yeah, it was one of those, you know,
you have to crawl through the legs of all the other kids and they spank you as you go through.
Oh, I thought it was the, I thought it was the bad thing. No, not according to the post. Okay.
Either I'm misremembering what he said or he misremembered the story when he told it to us.
Okay. I'm going to give equal weight to either of those chances. I'm misremembering something.
Yeah. All right. So yeah, the thing was, was like, when he was a kid, he was like, oh, yeah,
I did it out of principle because I didn't like the idea of hurting other kids. And
I thought that was terrible. And then I realized when I was 15, looking, or ish, looking back,
be like, that wasn't why I just didn't want to get hit. It's like, obviously, that was it.
And then there's this moment of realizing, oh, I knew that the whole time. I was lying to myself
to give a noble reason. And that's what it feels like to like the subjective feeling of, oh, so
that's what it's like to shove an unwanted truth into the corner of my mind. Okay. Yeah. Now I'm
going to do this for every unwanted truth in my head, you know, all my corners. Yeah. It's one
thing to say that it's harder to do that. Yeah. And that was what he called when his teens single
think, because as opposed to Orwell's old double think George Orwell's old double thing thing,
which is when you forget something and then you forgot that you've forgotten. So like, you can
have thought something and now you think something else. And he said single thing is when you,
when you notice that you're forgetting something, but then you remember it and you hold onto the
single non contradictory thought. I thought double think was the thing of like where, you know,
two plus two is five, because you know it's four, then you have to think again to give the right
answer. I, that I also agree. I think he is not correct about what double think is in this
essay because yeah, to me, I mean, yes, part of 1984 was the whole forgetting and then forgotten
that you've forgotten, but like you can't, right? That's that's part of what double think is, is
that you can think two things at once and not notice that they're different because you've
internalized this, this lie so, so deeply. Right. That's what I think about it. I mean,
it's definitely possible to forget something and then forget that you forgot it and then learn
an untrue fact after the fact like, Oh, I just learned this and not know that you're lying to
yourself, but that's, that doesn't sound like double think that just sounds like being forgetful.
Yeah. Whereas double think is like intentionally lying to yourself.
Yeah. And like reflexively lying to yourself. Yeah. So like your conscious mind never catches
onto it. Right. But at some point you, you know, because you have to like Draco, you have to know
what you have to excuse on some level. Yeah. This, this similar point is made in that essay that
I mentioned on the other podcast, you know, second iterations, what you can't say by, it doesn't say.
So in the description for the episode, if I clicked it, it would, but yeah. Anyway,
that's, that's sort of exactly what he comes up with. It's like, yeah, you think of all these
things. And then you think, Oh, no, I can't think those things. Yeah. Yeah. And the single
thing was, yeah, I can't think those things after all. And so it should, because it's true.
Single think was what? Just realizing that you would shove a truth into the corner of your head
to not look at. I think single think was like realizing that you had double thought and correcting
for it. Okay. Good way of putting it. All right. I can dig it. Cool. And yeah, you already said
a double think you forget and then forget you've forgotten and single think you notice you are
forgetting. And then you remember you hold only a single non contradictory thought in
your mind at once. Right on. Yeah. Cool. Yeah. That was a short one. Good. All right. So next
time we've got no one can exempt you from rationalities laws and a priori, or if you're
British a priori. Really? Or wait, maybe that's the English pronunciation. I don't know. I learned
philosophy from a British guy on an audio book when I was 15 named Colin McGinn. The audio series
was called Eternal Questions, Timeless Approaches, I think. And would say a priori?
I think he said a priori. A priori. But I remembered him saying or a priori, if you
say it wrong or something. I can't remember exactly how it came. But yeah, when I was 15,
that's what I wanted for Christmas was this philosophy lecture series from Barnes & Noble.
You won that? No, I wanted that. Oh, you wanted that? That's pretty cool. That makes
me sound way more ahead of the nerdy curve than I actually was. In other regards, I guess I was
perfectly average 15 year old, but I was really interested in that stuff at that time. Cool.
I was 15 or 16. I mean, you were 15 year old enough to get into a game of chicken with
weird people in a different car, right? There's nothing philosophical about that, man. I'm just
saying that's a very 15 year old thing to do. You know, I reflect on this every time I think
about my childhood and those random adventures. The fact that we never had to call our parents
from the hospital or the police station blows my fucking mind. None of us ever got really hurt.
Even if you fell off the car while car surfing, just light scratches. Oh my god, you car surfed?
Yeah. Holy crap. More often than it would be like we're instead of standing on it because that
turned out to be very easy to fall. You'd hold onto the back windshield like a terminator in the
movies. Okay, okay. And so you could get a grip around like a little rubber edges of the windows
on either side and then feel your feet swing trying to shake you off and none of us ever fell off.
Yeah. Yeah, we were dumb. Yeah, I didn't go that far. Maybe I was just boring.
You're probably better for it. Like I said, I think we beat the odds.
All right, so there's the post for next time. What are we talking about this week, Yash?
This week, we are talking about an article titled, Provocatively Hate is the New Sex.
And I think this is going to be an interesting discussion because of the way you described
it when you first showed up at my place. What was he said? I can't remember something about how
it's entirely wrong. And this is a piece of shit. I'm looking forward to destroying it.
Something like that. Yeah. I'm looking forward to ripping it apart. Yeah. Yeah.
So, Hate is the New Sex. I thought made a interesting argument and I don't know how I feel
about it, but I think it's interesting enough to talk about for an hour anyway.
It's interesting to talk about. Yeah. So... Even things I disagree with, I enjoy talking about.
Totally. And maybe I'll come around. Maybe it'll convince me to be a more hateful person.
No. No, you shouldn't be more hateful. What's the point of the post then? Is to not demonize hate?
It's not even to... Well, yes. To undemonize it. To not make it into these
things that is how you can tell the bad people from the good people. And, you know, we should get
into the post. But it's certainly not trying to encourage anyone to be more hateful.
Okay. Maybe I misread it. Okay. All right. So, it was written by John Michael Greer in 2017.
And it starts out by saying that there's this... There's this idea that seems to be pretty prevalent
in Western culture that it's an assumption that we make, which is a bad assumption. And he says,
there's a disconnect between one of the... This common assumption that we make about how to make
the world better. And then the results of that assumption when it's put into practice. And
we seem to never see these despite the fact that they're constantly coming into conflict.
It's almost like a selective blindness. So, what he's saying is that the assumption that
a lot of us make in the West about how to make the world better is that we have this conviction
that certain human emotions are evil and harmful and wrong. And the way to make the
better world is to get rid of them one way or another. And that belief has been taken for
granted throughout the industrial societies of the modern West. And it's been welded in place for
a very long time. All right. I'll let you get this out. Then I got to put a pin in just that first
thing. Go ahead. Go ahead. Do that. All right. So, once upon a time, I had a blog where I think I
wrote on it every day for at least a year, maybe two. Nice. And then didn't maintain it and deleted
eventually. Oh, you should have kept it back up. It might still be saved if I tried to log in again,
but I don't. I mean, it's, you know, 10 years ago, Stephen thought that probably weren't that
interesting. But this is the kind of thing that I would have read. And then taken basically
paragraph by paragraph and explained why I didn't like what this was. Okay. This is already setting
up to be like straw manning the fuck out of people. Okay. So, I will admit that these first
paragraphs are very strongly worded. And uncharitably so to the point where it's like,
you might, it almost sounds like somebody, you know, a nice new hotheaded 17 year old atheist
making fun of religious people. Yeah. This is not the way that you engage with people.
No, on the face of it, you know, it's obviously plain wrong. This is not literally the only problem
in the world and how things have always been done. But like, I think it is certainly an aspect of
things that we do and is an important aspect. Oh, that's not the part I was thinking about,
that it was the, what you just said, it was the, the common, that common human emotions are evil
and harmful and wrong. You don't think that people think that? Some people might, but I think that
he's engaging with us with the weak version of the argument. Like, I don't know, I think that's,
maybe this is where we agree or where we disagree, because I think that he's right when he says that
a lot of people have this conviction. Okay, so there's certain emotions that are evil and wrong.
I guess I'm the, you know, the equivocating, annoying religious person to argue with in this
case, if we're gonna run the, the duet theist analogy, like I, so the, the, as the title of the
post implies, he's talking about the emotion of hate. So like, and also about sexual desire.
Oh yeah. But, but as a, as an example that we kind of overcame a bit. Yeah. Historically,
that was the thing, which seems to imply that in the future, we'll be societally much more accepting
of hate. And that's a desirable outcome, like it was with, with the sexual revolution. Right.
And so like, I, I, my position on hate isn't that it's evil and harmful and wrong and that people,
you know, shouldn't, you know, good people don't feel this way. My, my conviction is that it's not
a beneficial way to feel about stuff that for virtually any problem that you have with the
world or any person you're having a problem with, that it is not the most productive way to solve
it and that you're better off not engaging with, with that impulse. So I mean, that's basically
what I would say about hate as well. And like this article is the first time I've had to challenge
that, but it, it has been my conviction that if the world existed exactly it is as it is now,
but the emotion of hate didn't exist, it would just be a better world. I think it's true. Okay.
So you do think there was an emotion that is harmful and evil, because the world would be
better off if it was completely scrubbed from existence. Doesn't have to be harmful and evil
for it to be. If it has some good things in the world wouldn't be better off without it, right?
Well, I guess harmful and evil are two different things. Evil, evil implies that it's this, you
know, the, I mean, like the, I don't know if mosquitoes play an important part to the world
ecology or not, but if they didn't, the world would be better if they weren't here. Yeah. But
it might not be, it might not be more or less evil. Like mosquitoes aren't evil. I guess evil
doesn't play in tent. Yeah. Yeah. And evil has this, this heavy connotation behind it. That's just,
you know, I, yeah, let's, let's keep rolling with it. Cause I'm curious, like if, if, if in a
world without hate, it's not that we'd all be lovey-dovey and accepting of everybody and,
you know, there'd still be ways to disagree, but you do so productively. You wouldn't, you wouldn't
hate, you wouldn't disagree with the enemy because they're the hated out group and fuck them. They're
all monsters. Right. Imagine how much further you could get with, with deliberations of the people
if you didn't immediately, uh, disown them and discount them as, as hateful monsters, right?
I mean, I agree with you 100%, which is why I like this article because this article keeps
making the point that, uh, I'm wrong about this, that, uh, I agree with you that hate is awful
and the world would be better without it. And the fact that we treat it like, that we treat hate in
that way, it leads to some serious dysfunction, I think is what it's saying. All right, let's keep
rolling. Okay. Um, so he says, yeah, these days, hate has roughly the same role in popular culture
that original sin had in traditional Christian theology. If you want to slap the worst imaginable
label on an organization, you call it a hate group. Is this correct? Yeah. I think so too.
Totally. Uh, if you want to, um, if you want to push a category of discourse straight into the realm
of utterly unacceptable, you call it hate speech. Check, check. Yeah. Like, I mean, seriously,
generally even people I know who are very much like pro free speech in every single way, they're
like, except hate speech, we need, you know, an exception for that. That should not be legal.
And so he's correct about that anyway. And it works from both sides too. I mean,
it's easy. The easiest way to, if everyone's mind isn't going to politics like mine is,
you know, um, I'm on the right, you know, people are trying to cancel, if you're, if you're on the
right, your perception is that people are trying to cancel Christianity and, and these, these people
just hate your, your, your, your spiritual convictions and your, your right to bear arms or
whatever it is, right? And they hate you for liking those things. They think the same things
about us, that we think about them, right? Yep. He says, if you're speaking public on,
be sure that everyone in the crowd will beam approve. Let you, all you have to do is denounce
hate. And, uh, so I think we are on board that all these things are true. And he asks, what
happens when people decide that some common human emotion is evil and harmful and wrong
and decide that the way to make the world, the way to make a better world is to get rid of it.
Again, I don't think he ever doesn't lump evil, harmful and wrong together when he talks about
it, which is part of what makes this hard to dissect, right? Cause then it's easy for him to
motton Bailey be like, Oh yeah, you know, when I say evil and wrong, um, you know, I don't know
those words mean, you know, like in the context of me hating somebody. Like I kind of get evil,
but like, what does it mean that it's, I mean, I, I get those, but if I just say it's harmful or,
or it's, or even wrong, like any one of those on their own is a different claim.
And so that's, that's sort of my thing.
Well, I mean, could we agree that hate is a common human emotion?
Sure. Yeah.
And I think we've both already agreed that the world would be better off if there was no hate in
it, right?
I think, I mean, like that is probably, that is something I've always held and, and like part
of my, my case for this, other than just my own personal level of how I live my life and how happy
I am, like compared to being a hate filled person. I don't, I, I don't remember a time
where I was really hate filled, like utterly, but I, you know, I know the emotion. I'm not like
some saint. Um, but like that this is the trend that has led the world to be a better place
is that we're, you know, we're, we're less about, uh, as a society rallying behind hate and hating
the enemy and you know, stamping out those horrible wrong religion people crusade style
or those horrible wrong politic people Vietnam style, right? Um, that seems to be just purely
a progressive move. And this seems like the way that we're going, right? And the world's a better
place for it.
Yeah. Yeah. I very deeply agree with you on an emotional level, but I think actually there
are some positive uses for hate, which we can get into later and which, why the world might not be
better off without it.
Those will be the crux of it. I think of the argument here.
I mean, that, that is one major crux for me.
Yeah. But I don't think for me, that's not the major crux because for me, the thing is, um,
even if we were to admit that the world would be better if hate was expunged from the human, uh,
psyche, like what happens when people decided that the way to make the world better is to get rid
of hate, uh, is the problem because you can't expunge it from the human psyche in the non-trans
human future. And so we have the problem of what are the effects of trying to expunge it in a
human animal?
So that seems like a different argument entirely because I'm not saying that the way to, to
towards this better future is to start expunging hate theoretically by expunging people who are
filled with hate. That sounds terrible.
Oh, I don't think that's how you do it.
So how do you do it?
Well, you do it the same way Victorians got rid of sex.
Well, all right. I was thinking more like you aspire yourself.
The same way Victorians aspired about sex.
But they also, they also, uh, aspired to make everyone else hate sex.
Yes.
Okay.
Just like we want to make everyone else not be hateful.
Okay. I've got my, I've got my ace in the hole, but I'm going to hold on to it until it comes
out. There'll be a better time to whip this out.
But all right.
Okay. Well, I mean, so, so that is, that what is what really got me is that like,
even if you do hate hate, well, even if you do disapprove of hate and then want it to be gone,
the, um, acting on that belief is, uh, net harmful.
And he says, he says, you know, we've made this, we've done this experiment many times
through human history, most recently during the, the whole Victorian, um, sex, not sex
craze, anti-sex craze, I guess you would call it.
He says, during its heyday, people in Britain and America loudly proclaimed exactly the
same attitudes towards sex that their great grandchildren now display towards hate.
If you wanted to define something as utterly beyond the pale.
But wasn't the Victorian era like 1700s?
Yeah. I think he's not using the right term for Victorian era.
And he's not using enough greats, or he's not using enough greats.
Greats?
He's great grandchildren.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
But I mean, that, it really did last for quite a while.
Like even in the early 1900s in America, we had like this.
It's still sort of a thing implicitly, you know, like the, that serial creator guy, you know,
campaign, yeah, the whole reason that, you know, my dick is mutilated is because he was,
not the whole reason, and not mutilated, but less than perfectly functional,
is because of giant, it's so, when I learned this, I thought it was some troll.
And it's on the guy's Wikipedia page.
So therefore it's got to be true.
Yeah. The, the same guy behind cornflakes was the same reason that is one of the leading
champions behind circumcision in the Western world.
Because he thought both cornflakes and circumcision would prevent people from masturbating.
How did cornflakes help?
It did not excite the senses.
It was just a bland food subject.
Oh yeah, you know, if my cereal is too sugary, I just, I need to sexually get off.
Right. Well, I mean, when you suppress sex that bad, any sort of maybe, you know,
stimulation might give you a boner.
When you're hyper religious, anything that supersedes the pleasure of prayer is wrong.
Yeah. So pretty much everything.
Exactly.
Prayer sucks so much as a thing meant to be fun.
Yeah.
So that, that, that was an issue.
But yeah, if you wanted to, to make something beyond the pale, you just made, made it, you know,
seem sexual and everyone was supposed to recoil in horror upon hearing that something is immoral.
Is there a good example of people decrying something as, oh, this is obviously sexual nonsense
that like we, we call things hate groups, right?
Where often it may be appropriate, often it may not be.
Are there examples of people not correctly calling something what a sex positive thing?
Like if someone was for something that the Victorians didn't like,
was it decried as a sexual positive, even though I had nothing to do whatsoever with sex?
Oh, I have no idea. I don't know the history that well.
I was trying to think if he brought anything up in the article and I can't quite remember.
I mean, I do know they encouraged circumcision because they thought it would stop people from
masturbating. So.
It slowed them down.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah. So.
I mean, life finds a way, you know, to, to, to get off on one's own when they get, you know,
feel like alone for long enough.
When the pussy is dry.
Wow. Okay. That came out really wrong. I didn't mean, I meant the well of the pussies
out there is tapped. You know what? I'm just going to keep going.
I was thinking more like if you had a foreskin, you don't need to like,
it's, I think it's easier to masturbate without lubrication or something, right?
Yeah. So, but, you know, you'll, you'll find something to do it with if you, if you want to,
like it's, again, it slows you down.
Humans are not unaware of oils.
Right.
Yeah.
He says the Victorians hate was an ordinary emotion that most people had under certain
circumstances, but sexual desire was beyond the pale. It was beastly, horrid, filthy, and so on.
But the problem was that insisting that sexual desire was beastly, horrid, filthy, etc. didn't
make it go away or deprived of its substantial role in motivating human behavior. It just
meant that people got hypocritical about it. They pretended they weren't getting sexually
aroused and acting on their arousal when in fact that's what they were doing.
And he makes the argument that hatred is the same way that no one can admit when they hate
something and they are being motivated by hatred. So they pretend that they aren't
hating a person or a thing or an idea or whatever, and they aren't motivated by that when in fact
they are, and that leads to all sorts of dysfunction.
Okay.
Much like the Victorians had.
It might be time to whip out my Trump card here.
All right.
I'm thinking about the Trump card.
My first, before that, I'm just thinking, I always hate this kind of my reading argument.
You know, like this is, this is the same thing the religion example keeps coming up.
You know, they would say, if you're arguing with a religious, a disingenuous religious
person, they'd say, oh, you're just, you just hate God. That's why you're not religious.
It's like, no, that's really not it.
All right.
And you pretending to know my mind is better than me kind of annoys me.
Yeah.
So that's what he's doing here.
You know, so someone who's actually out there espousing a life of positive emotion and love
over hate, he's saying, oh no, they're really motivated by hate.
Well, no, I mean, I'm sure there are people like that who really are like the, you know,
hippie-dippie Jesus types. And I mean, I've even met some of them.
But there's also a lot of people who I have also met who are like, you know,
love conquers all and love is love and, you know, all about inclusion and everything.
But really, really hate certain people.
Really, not just certain people, but like just entire large swaths of the culture.
Yeah. I know exactly what the kind of thing you're talking about.
Yeah.
And they're even the kind who can espouse truth and love in one sentence.
And then before they finish the breath, you immediately turn on some group that they,
you know, vociferously and passionately hate.
Yeah.
And yeah. So those people, we're not mind-reading, we're just watching them.
Right. Exactly.
Okay.
Like you can tell those people, often they're the people that say, you know,
this person slightly to the right of me on the political axis is a Nazi,
because first of all, it's okay to kill Nazis.
And so anyone who's the right of you that is a Nazi, now you are saying it's okay to
commit violence against them.
But no, no, we're all about love. We just can't tolerate intolerance.
Yeah.
Like you, you know the people I'm talking about.
Oh yeah. No, I absolutely do. I'm just thinking it's always brings to mind the question of like,
I wonder what form their intolerance will or their lack of tolerance will take.
Yeah.
I await a knock at the door.
Right.
Yes.
I think that's a line from the end of faith too.
All this religion talk, put all those books back in my head.
All right. Well, so now that he's not doing mind reading and he's just, you know,
reading what people are saying, all right, I can move past that, we'll keep going.
Okay.
Well, so yeah, like the culture is a pretense, right?
The hypocrisy, the evasion springs up to allow them to vent the unacceptable emotion on some
set of acceptable targets without admitting that they were doing so.
Yeah.
And that's exactly, yeah, that, I mean, I mean, imagine, and this is, the knowing part of this
too is like, and I'll never not, like, it seems like every time we talk about something fun
and engaging like this, I'm reminded of Dan Dennett's quote, there's nothing I just like
more than a bad argument for position I agree with.
Yeah.
And so like, or even like bad representation of an argument that I agree with.
And so like, I'm a big fan of all gender and trans inclusivity.
And I found that in many cultures where they're also big fans of that,
they're some of the most hate filled people I've ever met.
Yeah.
And so like, they apparently care about the same thing I care about.
And then they turn around in the next sentence and say,
we should stomp, we should curb stomp to death, the people who don't agree with us.
And I'm just like, holy shit.
And like, not even, I mean, yes, that too.
But okay, so this has been something that's been mentioned on the discord recently,
that the running joke is like, every group that ever exists needs some sexual minority to beat
up on.
And the current sexual minority that the left wing beats up on is incels.
And, you know, it's sort of a tongue in the cheek.
But on the other hand, yeah, there's a sexual minority, they're people who
either can't get laid or feel like they can't get laid.
And therefore I've stopped trying.
And they are just absolutely hated by the people, you know, a lot of people who consider
themselves liberal and, you know, full of love and anything like you bring up incels.
Like incels are their go to, this is the group we hate and they are the worst group in the world.
Like even worse than Proud Boys generally.
Everybody needs a sexual minority to hate on it.
I didn't think of it that way.
I guess I have, like, I don't know a lot about the incel community.
Like I think that there's the strong version of it and then the weak version.
Like there are people who are just textbook involuntarily sell of it.
Yes, I'd love to have a partner.
I don't have one.
Yeah.
Like that's textbook incelism, right?
I mean, part of the problem with the incel community is a lot of it is super misogynistic.
Well, so that's the definition 2A or 1B, right?
Yeah.
That's the second part is like, it's not merely that they can't get laid,
is that they're crazy pissed and then they've turned that into, oh, it's because women suck
or whatever, right?
Like that part's insane.
But like I, and some people, you know, I guess they find a culture to rally behind
that shares the similar frustration, right?
Right.
And so I guess all that's true.
But I mean, like I've recently managed to give up my hatred of the incels too,
just because I guess I'm committed to trying not to hate things,
which probably means I'm fucking something up really bad in my psyche.
If this guy's right.
Right.
If this guy's right.
But yeah, there's no better a group than if you want to see real hatred from someone
on the left wing than just mention incels and they will, but they won't say, you know.
Or transphobes or whatever, right?
Yeah.
Like I remember, I went to the women's march in 2016.
And even on the ground in throng of thousands of people,
I heard people complaining that it wasn't inclusive enough.
Really?
Because they didn't make it part of their first objective to include women of color
and transgender females and stuff.
Okay.
And it's like, I thought we were all just here, like as a group,
two night against like our dislike of the this misogynistic pig orangutan
that's got elected into the Oval Office.
Like, isn't that enough?
No, we have, we've not even done walking yet.
And we're going to rip, we're going to start eating our own tail about how we're not,
we're not doing it well enough or something.
Yeah.
So I mean, you always got to practice for the oppression Olympics.
They only come once every four years, but the training is nonstop.
That's just the thing that was like, there might be a case you made about that,
but like, isn't it okay that that wasn't the purpose of the women's march?
Yeah.
To like, you know, make it make its first priority being trans-inclusive.
And it was never trans-exclusive as far as I know.
It just, it didn't, it wasn't vocally enough trans-inclusive early on enough or something.
Yeah.
I think, I think that even like, you know, before all this had, you know,
before the people started walking, like while they're organizing it,
they've got this, this kickback.
And so they, they had changed their message a bit or rather not, not changed, you know,
like they suddenly decided they're going to include this, but they're like, oh yeah,
that, that is an important point.
But then of course, changing your mind is just, you know, the devil's trick and
really you're still a hate filled bigot.
And like, I mean, it's like, wait, I'm, I'm, I acknowledge that I was doing this incorrectly
and not sufficiently before.
Now I'm doing it more, but you're saying that that proves I'm being wrong here?
Like I don't quite get it.
And the thing is like, I don't even necessarily think, like I, ideally I do think a world
without hate is better, but I think hate, I've lately come to think that hate serves very
useful purposes and that in fact, it may be right to hate on incels that are just these,
when you read some of their, I can't describe it as anything other than evil
rantings, the misogynistic, crazy bile, like I am okay hating that and I think it's good
and right to hate that and people should hate that.
So I can't even say that like it's wrong to hate certain things.
I think hate does serve a useful function sometimes, but the, the suppression and the
being unable to, to, you know, say that hate is an okay emotion that sometimes people feel
and it's justified and right leads to these sorts of dysfunctions that we're seeing.
Same way that the Victorian dysfunctions around sex led to them becoming super fucking obsessed
with sex.
Just not willing to admit it.
And maybe, you know, this guy's obsessed with masturbation and shit.
Yeah.
And maybe the author of this is, you know, is, is tuned into parts of culture that I'm
not because I don't see a lot of people burning a lot of fuel,
are, you know, on hate is bad and okay, right?
Like that might be an implicit message in some things, but I don't see a lot of people,
you know, fighting on that hill.
Like, so maybe they're, maybe they're out there and I'm just missing it, but I don't see
anyone like making that point a lot.
I know I keep saying that, but I guess I'm just, who is he talking to?
Well, he's talking to the people who say that the best way to make a group and
outcast from society is to label them a hate group.
Yeah, for sure.
Or the best way to silence speech forever is to call it hate speech.
And, you know, maybe, maybe that, I guess I can think of examples when I picture.
Because then you can't even like, you can't even talk about what the actual
speech is or whether it's legitimate or what the group is or whether they have
legitimate complaints.
Now the conversation has to be, oh, no, we're not a hate group or oh, no, we're
not a, this is not hate speech.
And here's why.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
I can see that when I'm picturing like different online sections I've been on
where people act that way.
And like, you know, I haven't spent a lot of time ingesting the like incel memos.
I don't, I don't imagine I have the patience for it.
It's like, I, rather than hate the people, I feel more bad for them.
And not like in the condescending pity way, oh, you poor thing.
I'm so much smarter and wiser than you.
That's why I don't, you know, but it's more just like, man, I understand why
you're frustrated.
And this is not the way to feel that way.
Yeah.
And like there, there, this is not the way to resolve those feelings.
Like, and, and frankly, you know, so if you're arguing in favor of hate, the, the
argument stops at like, no, just hate them.
They suck.
Right.
Is that kind of the case?
Or am I, am I straw manning that?
No, I think that, that is kind of the case.
Just hate them except that hate is the thing people feel.
And that's all right sometimes.
So here's an example of, do you want to go?
Well, I was going to say like, we were talking about the Mandalorian, which I
just came across a couple of weeks ago and I finished all of season one.
It's delightful.
I don't know the actress's name.
She's the WW or is it the same thing?
If women's wrestling, whatever.
She plays Angel dust and Deadpool.
Oh, God, that is awesome.
Yeah.
Dude, I really wish they had more like female action stars like that because you
see some of the people like Scar Joe or just people who they look small.
And, and okay, I get they have superpowers and that might make sense.
But I really would like to see more actual built beefy women in those roles because
that looks just seems more realistic to me.
Just having mass makes a big difference in physical confrontations.
What's fun is on the digression there, like it's like Arya Stark versus Brienne of Tarth.
Yes.
Right.
And so if, if Arya tried to fight like Brienne, it would be kind of ridiculous.
But instead she plays to her strengths.
She's small and nimble and uses that as her, as her technique to win.
And it's very successful.
No one expects the eight year old scullery made.
And so, so, and just like, I mean, even her little fencing sword is, I think,
unique in the whole series.
The idea of just, you know, tons of pinpricks to armor rather than
cleaving them in twain like Brienne of Tarth can do.
Yeah.
So, yeah, I mean, there's a difference there.
But also, so I bring up, again, I'm going to call her Angel dust because I can't remember
the actress's name.
And I'm assuming this is semi-common because I've also heard this from other avenues that
in the fighting circuits of the, of parts of the world, there's disagreements on like
trans inclusivity.
And I mainly know this from having heard Joe Rogan complain about it once or twice.
And like, I think the argument is that, look, if you grew up with the bone density
and whatever musculature of a male and then transition at 35 to female,
you'll start dominating in your weight class.
Right.
You went through a male puberty.
And I actually don't know if that's true.
Anecdotally, it's true from Joe Rogan, but I'm not sure if there's what the,
if there's been actual investigations into this that aren't people complaining about it,
I'm not sure.
So I'm agnostic as to whether or not that's true.
But anyway, I think she bought into that.
And so she said some things that were like,
that the hate-filled group would say transphobic, she's evil and wrong,
that, and I don't know what these exact quotes were.
Maybe they were, you know, hateful and evil and wrong, or maybe they were just misguided.
Point is, is if you just missed her, I was like, fuck, hate her.
She sucks.
She would never, she never has an opportunity to get better.
And so what happened instead was apparently she had a nice long talk with Pedro Pascal,
the Mandalorian, and came around.
And like, and I only heard the cliff notes of this, so I'm not sure how much of this is all
accurate, but the moral is that if you throw out the person as a hated enemy who's beyond
redemption, you're never going to breach them.
And like, if you actually want the world to be a better place, that better aligns your goals
short of killing these people, the best way to talk with them.
Sam Harris had that episode with Christian Somebody, it was a few years ago, Neo-Nazi.
And like, the guy acknowledges, yeah, it was terrible.
I'm sure, I forget his whole autobiography of how he came to be that way.
For whatever reasons they were, I'm sure there were good reasons to him at the time to be a
Neo-Nazi. And yet something clicked in him and he had the opportunity to grow. And now he leads
groups in Neo-Nazi reform rather than in putting on hoods and punching Neo-Nazis, which probably
doesn't help them reform. And that's also that's definitely not what convinced him to change his
mind, right? Like, the way to reach people and to make the world a better place. And if even if
you want to mark a group as a hate group, the way to beat them is to teach, show them the way,
right? Like, my ace in the hole here is Fred Rogers, right? I don't think that he secretly hated
people. And I think that if more people acted like him, the world would be an unambiguously
better place. And you know, did Fred Rogers, Carl Sagan, and Bob the painter, Bob Ross, thank you.
I don't think that they had a hate bone in their body, right? I think, and if they did,
they did whatever. But like, yeah, I mean, I don't know them personally well enough to say,
but it's certainly given their public persona. It does not come through in their public persona.
You know, Sagan and some of his attitudes would come off as impatient with some religious nonsense,
but never anything less than engaging and understanding. Like the only time I saw him
be impatient was on like an interview on a radio show where the guy kept interrupting him. He's
like, look, I'm trying to answer what you're saying, but you keep interrupting me. And like,
that's his version of getting pissed, right? And so like,
So how do you feel about people who throw acid on girls' faces for going to school?
Not a fan or shoot them. Right. Like that's so the reason I ask is because this, this came up
just last week to me, IRL, someone, God, I think it was just a few days ago that Canada classified
the Proud Boys as a terrorist organization. And the headline from NPR was Canada classifies
Proud Boys as terrorist organization alongside ISIS and Al Qaeda. And since I know that NPR is,
you know, swinging pretty far left over the past few years, I get the feeling that they were trying
to say, look, these guys are as bad as ISIS and Al Qaeda. And, you know, the person who shared this
did so, you know, praising it and saying, what is taking the US so damn long? And my comment was
maybe the fact that ISIS and Al Qaeda, you know, murder people and try to destroy our civilization,
whereas Proud Boys are just, you know, more of a group of angry, possibly even hate-filled people.
And the conversation went back and forth for a little bit, but, you know, he said Proud Boys
are a hate group and like, yeah, yeah, they're a hate group. I can dig that. They may not be,
as far as I know, however they are, but that doesn't make them a terrorist organization.
Like a terrorist organization, the correct response to them is to send in the troops,
murder them in their sleep if you can, because then our soldiers won't be in danger,
like, end them because they have put reporters in cages and burned them to death. Like, they
rape young girls for going to school and then execute them. This is, this is disgusting and
that is how terrorist organizations should be treated. And if you aren't okay with sending the
troops into the houses of Proud Boys and murdering them in their sleep, probably don't classify them
as a terrorist organization, because there's a world of difference between the two. And I would
have pointed that out, except NPR already did it for me in the headline. How are they not seeing
this? I think that some people would happily chug that bullet of let's go into their houses and
kill them at night. Yeah. So how are those people possibly not hate filled if they're willing to
say that? Yeah, they're definitely right. Okay. Yeah, I mean, or they're, I mean,
you know, it's possible to think that the right thing to do is to sneak into the bedrooms of
everyone in Hamas and kill them or something, right? But not do that with hate in your heart.
I'm just saying it's possible. You said, how is it possible? Okay. Like, it might be like,
look, yeah, this sucks, but it's the best thing we can do, right? You know, if
when Harry wanted to guillotine all the blood purists, it probably wasn't from a place of hate.
It was like, you know, this would make the world a better place. And I'll bite that bullet if I
have to. Then it turns out that biting that bullet was not nearly as tasty as you thought it would
be. But the, so, yeah, I, this is like a definitions argument, right? Like with the
Proud Boys, I don't know if they fall into the group of terrorists or not, because I don't really,
like, I mean, we went back on this when we were talking about the insurrectionists,
like, were they terrorists? Like, in the sense that they politically inspired terror, sure. But
I almost don't give them the street cred of a terrorist, right? Like, I'm more scared of
terrorists than, or if I lived near them, than I am of the insurrectionists that live in my
home state, right? Like, these are, for the most part, a bunch of just, you know, in, you know,
impotent, weak willed and, and that's, that's, that's discharitable. I mean,
but for the most part, they are politically impotent and not scary. You know, who did,
who, I forget who it was, someone called it the
gravy seals, you know, watching these people just huff and puff walking up the stairs. Didn't
two of them die of, like, overexertion? Something like that. Yeah. And so I don't think the actual
causes were ever released, but that, yeah, is what it looks like. And, you know, I think at least
one fell and died climbing that thing. So, you know, they're not, they're not the kind of nimble,
and then again, you know, they're our most terrorists, they're not going to be the nimble
navy seal folks that I have to worry about jumping into my second story window from ground level,
like a Spider-Man creature. But, all right, I realize that's the, that's a high bar, but
I mean, you could do it with an assist from someone. Yeah.
Yeah. Where was I going with this about, about the Proud Boys and what was the setup?
That hate groups and terrorist groups are kind of indistinguishable in people's heads. And
I don't think they necessarily should be. And maybe that is a symptom of hate is this horrible
thing which must be expunged. Yeah, maybe I can see that. Yeah. And also, like, I think,
I mean, I kind of wanted to get this later to this later, but I think hate does have a place,
it is motivating. Like, you're not likely to go down to, you know, Afghanistan or the places
where ISIS held territory, I think they've all been kicked out of them now, and fight against
them just because, you know, yes, the world would be better off if they weren't in power, but like,
hate will motivate you to go down there and get revenge for the things they've done.
Yeah. As I know, this was off the air, we were talking about this, but when you were saying about
if someone tried to sue you out of absolutely ridiculous grounds. I would fantasize about
violence. Not only would you fantasize violence, but even if you didn't resort to the violence,
the fact that the person I was talking about settled for, you know, a certain amount of money
because they were like, yes, this is a completely ridiculous lawsuit, and if I went all the way
to court, I could win, but we've already spent so much money that it would be cheaper for me just
to settle now than to keep going. Whereas if you are incensed and angry, you will pay extra costs
just to take them to court and make them lose because fuck those fuckers trying to,
trying to sue you for, for literally made up reasons. And that is, I mean, that's basically,
that's vengeance, that's hatred, right? Yeah, I mean, I don't want to equivocate,
like, a strong sense of justice with, with hate and vengeance, but it almost kind of is. Yeah. Maybe,
but that said, this guy actually lost, right? You're the guy you knew that settled. No, no,
he lost. He lost all the costs to settle to get this taken care of, because he didn't want to win.
But he won in monetary terms, because it would have cost him even more to keep fighting. I thought
that if you win, and maybe I'm not a lawyer, if I thought if you won in court, they, the loser
has to pay the costs. As far as I, not the loser, if the claimant makes an, if they make a claim
against you that you win, they have to pay your court costs. Like, as far as I could tell,
that was not going to be the case in this particular thing. Oh, then in that case,
it makes perfect sense. I was under the impression that he just was tired of fighting and didn't,
you know, was, so that's different. If I, if I thought I would lose more money by fighting it,
then I might just settle, right? But if I, if it was just a matter of me being worn out by it,
I feel like I would be right justly indignant enough to never be worn out to fight this, right?
But given the fact that you would lose more money by fighting it and winning,
then you would just by giving up and giving into their demands, would you keep fighting anyway?
Well, that, that, that was where I, that was where my misunderstanding came from. I thought
that he forsook making back his losses just to get this out of his life. Yeah, right. And so,
I mean, I mean, I was putting a lot of stress in your life as they cost as well. Yeah, exactly.
So that depends on like how much money, you know, if the difference was, then you were like,
what if they accidentally slip and fall on a sledgehammer? Yeah, I mean, I was being tongue
in cheek. I'm not a violently impulsed person, but the, you start fantasizing about that shit.
Well, I, I mean, somebody doing something so egregious and terrible out of, so like, I was
talking with a co-workers about this. Some years ago, my grandmother got scammed on the internet,
you know, some pop up, you got a virus call us, give us your credit card number. And they,
they took like 140 bucks from her, maybe 340, like not insignificant sum for her. And like,
that, that again, I'm not an angry or violent person. And yet I remember what I, I am capable
of feeling those things when somebody robs my dear old grandmother out of her, her, her money
that she needs to live, you know, she budgets to go to pay a doctor's copay, right? Like someone
stole fucking money from my grandmother. Are you kidding me? Love to spend an hour with you in a,
you know, in a basement with a baseball bat. Like those, those are the joking thoughts that come.
I don't know if I've beat this person to death. If I've met them, I'd probably tell them maybe
just halfway. I'll tell them that they suck, but they know that they're okay with it. So like,
this is the kind of person where like, but you know, then again, I've got to ask myself like,
what, what is the value of hating this person versus some other way of handling it? In the
abstract, there's no point in hating them because I have no idea who they are and they're unreachable.
You know, they're, they're half the, half a planet away, probably. So like,
I gain nothing by being angry or hateful about it.
Um, you know, and I certainly, you know, don't gain anything to prevent this from happening in
the future by being hateful or angry about it. I mean, maybe you do. Well, I, I didn't in this
case, I just explained to her like, you never click these, no one will ever ask for your information,
no one will ever ask for your password. And another thing to keep in mind, none of your
grandkids will ever call you asking for a wire transfer. So never do that. Um, like, you know,
so it doesn't take hate to motivate that. It's just like some incident that inspired the like,
like, oh yeah, you need, it's funny because like,
And if enough hate filled people went and found and got some sort of revenge,
it might discourage this sort of behavior.
It might. Yeah. I mean, you know, there, there,
I mean, there's, there's a reason hatred evolved.
Yeah. But I mean, uh, there, there's lots of negative things in this that evolve that we
don't want to keep around. So I, I, I think it's one of those things like, do you,
do you want to foster this? And, and that's not necessarily,
do you want to also accept in the transhuman future that a certain amount of people in
second and third world countries will just scam a certain amount of first world people out of
their money because the first world people have a lot more money and sometimes are gullible.
And we won't do anything about it because we no longer have the hatred motivation to stop that.
I mean, are we just willing to accept that cost and have that redistribution of wealth via fraud
in the transhuman future? Yeah. I mean, I feel like that's a pretty contrived example.
Right. Cause we wouldn't have scarcity in the transhuman future.
And we'll just, we'll have better internet security or something, right?
Like, but, but, but, but the point taken, like, you know, is,
is this an emotion we want to take with us to the stars as, as a species, right?
Like, well, yeah. I mean, probably not, but it has useful aspects.
If we came across a spaceship full of baby eating aliens, do we hate them
for what they do? Because they're terrible. Or do we just stop them?
I wouldn't because it's their own species they're eating. I might be disgusted.
Yeah. So I mean, I'm trying to think something in Star Trekian terms or something or whatever,
right? Like if I found out they were eating our babies, I might hate them.
Yeah. I don't know. I guess I, so, so the point of his essay, maybe this is part of my
issue with reading it was I was like, Oh, this is going to be juicy to tear apart.
Then maybe I missed some of the point. He's not arguing that we should all
like take a more laid back position to hate and, or is he that like, this is,
Hey, this is natural. Feel it. It's, it's totally normal. You know, don't, don't,
don't shut this emotion down. It's not that don't shut this emotion down because you shouldn't.
He even says at the very end, I don't want a more hate filled world, but repressing it
is leads to like one of the things he said is that the way people flocked to Trump and just,
you know, we're absolutely devouring everything he did was the same way that Victorians would
get in trains and travel for hours more days to see these crazy flagrant sexual expressions
and just be shocked by them. They're like, I'm so scandalized. This is happening.
And, or as Fox News would sometimes do, like these spring breakers are going wild and showing
all these gyrating hits. It's the same kind of thing. Like people would just flock to
watch the hate and denounce it, but you know, they were getting off on it, getting their,
their outrage porn was expensive and time consuming back then. Now you need to scroll
through Twitter. Yeah. Like, okay, so, I mean, outrage porn might not be nearly as big of a thing
if people did not suppress hate as much like is part of the problem with the culture wars,
the fact that people are trying to suppress their hate. And it's coming out in these culture war
ways where we tear the, the hated out group to shreds, even though we're not willing to say that
because we're trying to suppress all this hate as opposed to acknowledging that it is a thing.
And it's just the thing normal people feel and it doesn't make you bad to hate people or things.
I think most of the, most of the exposure I have to the, this, these kinds of people is from
like one place that I've, I've seen on the internet. So like, it's hard for me to
like know if they're a general example or if they're an edge example. But I think they wore
their hate proudly on their sleeves. And so I don't think that the fact that they, I don't think
their allergy to hate, if they had one was at all part of the problem. You don't think it was part
of the, they, they're constant. Like we are the people who love others and are accepting.
I think that was the side effect. I think the Senate proudly and say we hate all these out groups
and that they would, they would love to have badges that said that. Okay. And, and if they
didn't, I can easily imagine it, right? Like a lot of this, I mean, saying, you know, sending
up proudly and saying you hate the Proud Boys or you hate Al Qaeda, that doesn't lose you any political
capital. No, it gains you, gains you political capital. I guess it depends on which, which
side of the nation you're talking to. If you're talking the either side of the nation in 2001
or 2002 earned you points by saying we hate them, right? Yes. Yeah. So like, not the Proud Boys,
but Al Qaeda. And so like, it's, I mean, I do remember when Osama bin Laden was killed and
almost immediately a lot of people said we shouldn't celebrate his death because any human dying is
a tragedy. But like, if Trump had died in office, people would have been partying. People did party
when Scalia died. And you know, I don't think they were wrong. And I was also on the side of, you
know, hey, let's not, let's not celebrate the death of a human at that time. And now I'm thinking
back, I'm like, was I being a hypocritical son of a bitch? I mean, because I also like, to be fair,
I wasn't hypocritical because when Scalia died or when any right wing person I hate dies, I also
always say, you know, it's always a tragedy when a human dies and we shouldn't celebrate it. So at
least I'm not hypocritical outwardly like some people I saw. But on the other hand, I was kind
of happy on the inside. I remember when you told me that, what's his name? Mitch McConnell fell and
broke his shoulder. Right. And I was like, I hope it hurts. And, you know, then I immediately was
like, well, on the one hand, you know, I don't like this guy. The idea of him, you know, having to,
not getting a good night's sleep because his shoulder hurts, you know, puts a skip in my step.
But that's not a way I want to feel. Right. And so like, you know, again, I like the-
You don't think you might be more psychologically healthy to admit that I hate this person and
that is a natural way to feel? I think it's like, what do I do with that hate? And then maybe we
need to either taboo or define hate carefully. But like, I go back to my example with Angel Dust
and Pedro Pascal. Like, if he hated her, he would never talk to her and brought her to the light
side of the force. And like, that's my main hang up on this. It's like, I can acknowledge that,
yes, it's understandable and human to respond to this person with hate. But then I can also say,
and I should, you know, either allow myself to feel that move past it or even suppress it,
so I can do the right thing. And so like, I don't see that as a contradiction or even a bad thing.
There was, this is going to maybe sound like a slight tangent, but I forget which presidential
election it was, where the first Bush ran, God, who did he run against? Dukakis, maybe?
But I remember in one of the debates, the death penalty was a bigger deal at the time, I guess.
And the Bush asked his opponent, God, I swear, I think it was Dukakis, I don't know,
asked his opponent, would you be for the death penalty for someone who raped your wife?
And like... Man, that's a hard-hitting question. Yeah, that's a brutal question.
Leaving everything else I know about George Bush senior aside, that's kind of a baller
thing to ask during a debate. Yeah. And like, I found that question incredibly hard and I've had for
a long time, because how the hell do you answer that? Like, you're not supposed to be for the death
penalty for anyone. And you're definitely not supposed to say, no, the state shouldn't kill
them because I want to kill them. Yeah, yeah. But on the other hand, like, I mean, I think that was
one of the things that made him lose the election, because you look really weak. Like, either you
go back on your principles or you say, you know, no, I don't lie, I love my wife that much, I don't
think the guy who raped her should be executed. Like, ultimately, this, this, I think that was one
of the side effects of at the time, it hadn't spread to the right yet, but the left was already
feeling this like, we cannot abide any sort of hate. Like, maybe the right answer would have been
like, I would want to kill him, I would hate him, and I would hope he dies. But I don't think that
the state should have the same emotional drives that I as a person do. And like, as it's good
policy to not allow the state to execute people. So even though I would want to kill him, I'm still
not for a law that allows the state to do so. Maybe something like that. I think that's a
perfect answer and one that would have been quote mind and lost to the election. But what is the
right answer, right? But that is a part where, you know, it shows that either you have hatred,
or there's something wrong with you as a human, if you don't, like, how could you not hate someone
like that and want them to die? I mean, you would have to be who my mental picture of Fred Rogers
or any other saint is where it's like, you're somehow your first impulse is, gotta hope we
can help this person. I would think even Fred Rogers would be like, I could see maybe someone
like that saying, no, I hope we can help that person. But I would consider them a damaged human
if they didn't feel I hate this person, and I want them to suffer and die. Yeah, I can see where
you're coming from. And I mean, then it's kind of maybe damage is loaded there. Because, you know,
that might actually be the better way to feel may personally and be decidedly. Like, if humanities
take on on justice was reform rather than retribution, we'd be way better off. And
like the idea of you've done wrong, you need to you need to pay, you deserve what you know,
whatever happens to you in this dark, terrible pit we throw you in because you're a bad person
that that attitude doesn't help anybody doesn't help you doesn't help society doesn't help the
person. And so but maybe if we could acknowledge that and work through it as opposed to trying to
suppress it, Mike. Yeah, I mean, I don't know how much suppression is going on in the legal
system, but I'm not a legal person. So I wonder like, I mean, I guess I'm trying to think of where
where in my life should I have more hate, if any, like that's that's the thing is I, I see
hating people I felt hate, I can feel it like again, I'm not some some alien. But I'm never happy
when I'm feeling hate. And I, I, it's not because I feel guilty about it, like I've, you know,
I'm a Victorian who wanted to masturbate. It's because it's not a good place to be.
Well, I don't, I don't think that you should feel more hate. I don't, I don't think that's a good
thing at all. I just the acknowledging, like, I think what was it that he say? So good to go back
to the article, like he said that in the Victorian era, the privileged classes define themselves
as good. And part of that meant they didn't have sexual desire. And now that, you know,
the lower classes were beastly, horde, filthy and sexual beings. And nowadays, what defines the good
people is that the privileged people claim they don't have hate, and they define the social
inferiors as hate filled bigots. So class bigotry hasn't changed in this case. But like, that,
that's what you hear a lot is, you know, their bigots, they were, they're full of hate, they,
they hate us for our freedoms or whatever. Like, it's, hate is what defines the outgroup,
the bad people, the people that no one should want to be like, right?
Yeah. And, you know, it's, and that impulse just ruins conversation and any chance for
fruitful discourse or, like, personal reform of a person, you know, like, I think you made the
case on the mind killers that, you know, like, people, people disparage JK Rowling as this hate
filled bigot. And yes, while some of the things that she said are probably inaccurate and are
textbook transphobic, I don't see her as coming from a place of hate. And I didn't do a deep dive,
but on the quotes that I've heard, like, it struck me as somebody who is misguided and
doesn't understand the situation. And so the correct response isn't to say that isn't a lie
and say that she's full of hate and that this is her real motivation. No, she's just wrong.
And there's a huge difference. You know, it,
Well, and the trump card was, you know, this is something that a hate filled bigot would say.
And maybe if that wasn't, you know, automatically saying, Oh, someone is hate filled, they're
automatically wrong and to be shunned, then you can say things that are just misguided that other
hate filled people say. And that doesn't automatically mean you have lost that you are also a social
pariah, because someone who did say something with hate said the same kind of thing.
That should definitely just be that people should just get that, right? Well, yeah,
they don't. Yeah, because that's the whole thing. It sounds like something someone with hate has
said. And therefore, it is evil. And you are evil for even entertaining a similar notion.
And those, those people are mistaken. Yeah. But I hear what you're saying, but it's, it's like
that the level of conversation should be beyond that. And so that, and that's where I can see
where this guy's coming from with like, if you just label everything that you hear,
again, so everyone who, again, Angel Dust, I'm not sure what she said. And I should just look
up her name and I'm not going to because I'm on the air and it's more fun calling her Angel Dust.
Like, you know, maybe she said the most transphobic thing someone can say while not being a hate
filled person. Maybe she even was filled with hate and it came around. But the point is, is like,
you should, you shouldn't hear that and be like, oh, she said she made the same
sounds as a hate filled person. Therefore, she must be full of hate because she could just be
stupid. And by stupid, I mean uneducated on the subject, right? And so like, then the solution
isn't to dismiss her as this hate filled monger. It's just like, oh, are you, you know, do you
know that this is actually the case here? And then be like, no, I didn't. Oh, thanks. I'm now, I've
now updated. Like, that's how these things go. And that's how they can go. So yeah,
so I kind of want to bring this back around to the people you said, you know, who wear their hate
on their sleeve, even though they're like, you know, liberal, whatever types, but just absolutely
full of hate. He this ties back to like near the end of the article, he said that Victorian sexual
repressiveness eventually gave rise to the sexual revolution, which so long to the opposite extreme
with an equal lack of balance, which first of all, I want to say I was kind of a big fan of the sexual
revolution. I really idealized the freed love hippie stuff. And like, I'm a slut at heart,
not in practice, sadly, because I guess my dick is just not okay having sex with people. I don't
know. But I wish it was because that is my psychology. Damn it. But given his disparaging
of the sexual revolution, let's put that to one side and not argue with how wrong he is on that.
Before we set it aside, might that indicate that he might be off base here?
It's actually not central to the point he's making.
Yeah, I don't know. Like, maybe I'm wrong about how awesome it is for everyone to be super slutty.
I haven't really looked into it. I think it's great. But like I said, I haven't actually
looked into it. That's just my feeling. I'm not sure what societal harms could come from people
having sex with over they want to have sex with, assuming they also want to have sex with them.
Well, I mean, nowadays, probably not very much, but maybe still some psychologically back before
we had birth control and contraceptives and ways to fight STDs would have been much worse.
But yeah, nowadays, probably not nearly as much. But you know, there's can be arguments made for
less meaningful life or harder to form long term relationships. I don't know, man. Like I said,
I don't get it. All right, we'll move past that. In the same way today's attempt to repress hate
could quite easily give rise to a revolution of hate in which people wallow in hatred the way
the libertines of the 60s and 70s wallowed in sex. Like sex, like wallowing in sex sounds bad.
So pretending that it does and, you know, his bad analogy aside.
I mean, I think, as you were saying, we're already there.
Yeah, we're on the way there.
And they see it as like a virtue. If they're not felt with hate all the time, they're not,
they're not fighting the man well enough. They're not fighting the patriarchy and
the oppressors and all that. Right. If you're not mad, you're not paying
enough attention. You're a bad person for not looking at the stuff that makes you mad.
And if you look at it and you're not made mad, then you must agree with it and you're a bad person.
Yeah. Like anyone who could say...
I think we're already in the revolution of hate that he was worried about four years ago.
100%. And it's interesting because, you know, this has been the longest four years of,
I bet anyone we know knows life, right? I can't believe it's been four years. I, you know, I remember
November 8th or 9th, 2016, like it was yesterday. And it, like every day you think, well, you know,
this will be over soon. And then it just dragged on for 50,000 years.
And kept getting worse.
Yeah. And so, like, no doubt that this will have been and demonstrated itself to be.
There was enough time for all of this, during all of this, to have all these huge cultural shifts.
And so, I mean, you know, before, I can't imagine even being introduced to people who would say,
I want to dance on their grave, right? And certainly, depending on whose grave it is,
you're like, that's your version of disagreeing with somebody. Like, okay, you don't like the
blog posts they wrote, but holy shit.
Yeah. Like it's not even someone who's murdered people and raped people and stuff.
It's just someone who wrote a blog post that you disagreed with.
And so, like, I could, I could imagine breaking bread five years ago with somebody who would
say, I would, you know, love to dance on, at that time, it would have been, you know, whatever,
who was the vice, you know, Dick Cheney's grave or something, right?
Where I get the feeling that Bush is kind of just more, I mean, no, no doubt they're
sinisterness and stuff. He definitely succeeded at his error of like, I don't know what the
fuck I'm doing. And so, it makes him like, seem less culpable.
Right. Like the doofus that was taken advantage of.
Right. But Cheney has none of that, right?
Right.
And so, like, I could imagine breaking bread with somebody in 2008,
who had said, I can't wait to dance on Cheney's grave.
I can't imagine someone saying that, what else was I doing in 2008?
Who would say that about, you know, whether it was Richard Dawkins or Dinesh D'Souza, right?
Those are just, you know, Dinesh turned out obviously to be the worst person.
Did he?
Yeah, he's a felon of fraudster and stuff.
I think he got a pardon.
I'll double check. I wouldn't be surprised.
A Trump pardon?
Probably.
Don't quote me on that, I'll have to look it up.
But I feel like I saw his name when I was reading through the list.
I just, just for my Daily Dose of Outrage porn on Inauguration Day,
I skimmed through the list of 100 pardons that 100 and something pardons Trump gave.
And it's amazing how we were...
You were acknowledging your hate kink?
I get, well, I was also just kind of curious what the damage would be.
Indulging the hate kink, I guess.
It may be a bit, but I was also, like I said, large part of it was just legit curiosity.
And like I'm wondering, because I wanted to see, you know,
is Ivanka's name going to be on here?
Is he going to pardon himself?
And I'm sure that would have been the top of the article, you know, Trump pardons himself.
But I was just curious, you know, did he pardon Giuliani?
No. So a lot of it was curiosity there.
He didn't even pay him.
He didn't even pay him.
But I mean, like he pardoned people that, you know, so the rumor, I don't know what you call it,
I guess not substantial enough to bring him to court yet about it, but
he was alleged to have been soliciting money for pardons at two million pop,
which would explain how like, you know, the guy that did millions of dollars worth of insurance
fraud and on giving people medicine they didn't need, which caused deaths and blindness and
fucked a lot of lives up, that guy got a pardon.
Like why on, you know, it's one thing to pardon Snowden, you know, whether or not you agree with
him, you know, but like that, that you could get, like that's the kind of pardon I imagine
existing that if there's any excuse for the pardon power to be a thing, it would be for cases like
that. Like, oh yeah, well this, this whistleblower or fucking, you know, Martin Luther King Jr.
broke the law by, you know, not getting a permit for this rally, but I'm giving him a pardon because
he did the right thing. Like that, that sounds like a good use of the pardon power to pardon
a guy who didn't do any good for society and just harm people. That blows my fucking mind.
And so why did I bring all that up? We were talking about about the, the hate revolution.
Yeah, something about that. I don't know how this came up. I'm clearly sucked up in the hate.
I, I bet her realisms to it. I could, I could get there, but I'm not a good way to do that
while recording. So what were you gonna say? Sorry.
Oh, I was just gonna say one, just one of the reasons I love Scott Alexander and what is used
to be SSC, but is now Astral Code X10 is that like he never, ever gets swept away in that. And I
don't know if he just like doesn't hate things or if he has a really healthy support system of people
that he can like hate next to, and they can all have hate parties together or whatever it is they
do or I don't know, but he, he never, ever does that. He's always reasonable and, and measured and
calm. And there's, there's never like a seething loathing that, that gets through like just a
vilifying of the outgroup in his public writings. I get, I get the impression that he doesn't feel
a lot of vilification of the hated outgroup in his life, but that could just because he does have to
do a convincing job of it in his writing, you know, it could just be that he has decided,
or he decided early on, like I'm not going to let that be part of my writing.
Maybe he's just that good of a person. It could be. But at the very least he, when he has the time
to carefully lay out his thoughts, he leaves that aside, right? Yeah. But it doesn't even,
it doesn't even sneak in the way you would imagine that if it was, you know, if it was there,
and you know, it doesn't even sneak in like if he was trying to hide it. Yeah. But the, you know,
again, what we're talking about people, you know, are we in the middle of a hate revolution?
Probably. I don't know that people have been suppressing it for so long that it's just
bursting out now. I wonder if it's suppression or if it's just like my impressions that these
people feel like they've just, they've, they've had enough, you know, and maybe they saw we're
being nice, got them, it got them four years of Trump. And so like, I mean, four years of Trump
was a backlash against their constant bigotry and hating on like what you said about, they didn't hate
hard enough. Well, no, I mean, what you said about the people on, in the, you know, on the right
that they hate our, our Christian values, they hate that we love our guns and our Jesus and all
that, I think that's entirely true. I think all the people did hate that they just pretended not
to. They would, you know, call them the flyover states and, and make fun of gun ownership.
They would call them a basket of deplorables, I guess they would pretend that they were full
of love and everything, but they hated them and you could tell and they could tell and I think
that's why that's one of the reasons Trump got elected. And that is when things kind of started
falling apart and people stopped suppressing the hate so much and we got into the new hate revolution.
Yeah, I'd be curious to read if this guy wrote a follow up four years later,
just to now analyzing what we've seen since, because like we, I don't see people suppressing
their hate, I see people, if you're not hating, you're not, you're not caring enough.
I see some people still trying.
And again, I'm not out there very much. So what I see is very limited.
I think that's, yeah, I don't know, maybe that's part of what has driven me away from the left,
is that I'm still pretending I don't hate things and they aren't anymore and we couldn't
abide each other. Well, but then I mean, would you be a better person if you were screaming right
alongside them? No. So that's, that's where I get tied up with this is like, but I mean, I've never,
I've also, I don't know. That's why I feel like maybe this article almost hit the point pretty
well, but I feel like it set itself up too high to try and equate these two and like the sex
revolution or the sex positivity and hate positivity. Like, so that's where I was like,
oh, I ripped it a new one. Because the points that I think it was trying to make it could have made
more clearly. And like the whole thing about just, I don't know. So I guess what would my takeaway
be then? All right, so I'm convinced, you know, if you wrote the article 300 years ago,
I'd be like, okay, you're right. My whole obsession with sex is ridiculous. People
should just be allowed to do whatever they want. I feel, I feel, you know, I've come around.
That's the update I made from this. What update am I supposed to take away from this?
I mean, it can't, it certainly can't be analogous to how I should feel about sex
if I'd come around 300 years ago, right? The, the, what he says at the end is that
there's actions that deserve to be condemned and individuals and ideas for whom the
hot fury of flame or hate is appropriate. And then he says hate is like sex. There are certain
times places in context where it's appropriate. There are many, many others where it's not.
You can recognize its place in life without having to act it out on every occasion. And in fact,
the more conscious you are of its place in life, the more completely you acknowledge it and give
it its due, the less likely you are to get blindsided by it. That's true of sex and it's true of
hate. And maybe- How was that true of sex? Like other than people not having sex with each other
in front of, in front of me in line at the bank. Yeah. Like what, what is he talking about?
The weakness of analogy is, is tripping me up. Well, I think, no, I think he's right. There's a
lot of times places in context where sex is not appropriate, like in the workplace. Sure. Even
just like flirting is probably a bad idea in the workplace. I mean, I mean, is, was anybody even
in the midst while they were wallowing in the horrors of the sexual revolution in the 1960s
and 70s was anyone saying we should be allowed to have sex at work? I mean, there was a lot of
sexual, I guess you would call it harassment now, but they're like,
it wasn't viewed as harassment then. And a lot of times, sometimes it wasn't even,
like it was considered okay to be sexual and flirty at work, depending on your workplace.
Okay. Yeah. I guess I'm picturing sex as like literally just sex. Okay. And so like, but, but
yeah, the, the foreplay, the, the, the enticement, all that stuff. Okay. Yeah. The, the stoking,
the flames, whatever. Okay. Yeah. I mean, I have no issue with people flirting with them,
flirting with each other in front of the line or in front of me in line at the, at
fucking Chipotle, right? Yeah. I mean, I don't either. Yeah. And it, it would be weirdly prudish
of me to, I mean, so maybe it is weirdly prudish of me. I don't like watching people make out.
Like if I am standing behind them in line at Chipotle and kind of stood in the line at a
place in the wild, but back in the day, um, people are making out and I can, you know, and it's like,
you know, I, I'm not, maybe I'm old, maybe I'm prudent. It's like, you know,
I, I, I just don't think I like watching. And when I'm trying to look at the menu and they're
right here and I'm pointing like just my line of sight, they're like, I can't miss it. And it's
like, I don't want to, I don't want to watch you guys make out. See, I don't mind them making
out so much. I always think that's, it's kind of sweet to have those expressions of love in
public. Let's push our food holes together. Yeah, right? That's what food holes are for.
But I was thinking more along the lines of like, you know, having a pent up calendar in your
cubicle at work, that, that is just, you know, like pretty girls off the side that you like to
see. There ain't nothing wrong with that, but it, you know, you don't want that at work. It brings a
sexually charged like atmosphere that you just, you don't want that there. It's not a place for
it. It's, it'll be distracting for lots of people. It might even be distracting for yourself. You know,
maybe that's half the point. You can't stand your jobs. You're trying to distract yourself with
pretty girls. But like the, that's the sort of thing where you don't want a pent up calendar
at work and people would have that back in the day. Okay. Yeah. All right. So I see the analogy. So
then what was the, the point you was making it said that, you know, acknowledging it, giving
its place. So where is its place? Hate's place that is. So we've acknowledged that sex's place
isn't in the cubicle at work in any form really. You know, maybe, you know, if I'm having a conversation
with my wife on the phone and being cute or something, that's different, but, you know,
I'm not going to have a salacious photo of somebody, you know, as my desktop wallpaper or whatever,
right? Well, I mean, I think keeping sex and politics out of the workplace is a good thing,
which is part of the, you know, hate is basically the politics part of that, right?
Politics is hate. Yes. Yeah. So that's, that's keeping politics out of the workplace. But,
you know, you can talk sexy shit jokes flirting with your friends. And maybe that would be also
an appropriate time for grousing about how the Jews are taking over the world or
as a joke, obviously not really. But like,
yeah, no, I wasn't not responding because of the joke. I was just trying to think of,
um, like, you know, if you're flirty and sexually free with your friends, I can see that as just
being, you know, more in true with yourself and everyone's happier. If I get together to have
a good hate session with my friends, do any of us have a good day after that? Maybe. I mean,
that's what trolling is, right? Are they happy? I don't know. I don't know, man. I'm not the kind
of person that likes that sort of thing. Just like there's people who don't like, you know,
getting together with friends and being flirty and salacious. That's not their jam.
When I put the question that way to myself, I can absolutely think of examples. I've gotten
together with friends and railed on something or some, some society thing or some group of people
or whatever. And it is a grand old time for an hour to be like, wasn't, don't these people suck?
Oh my God. Yeah. Let me tell you my story. Oh, no way. You hear this. It is a way to pass time
in an engaging way that I didn't come out of feeling worse off, right? So maybe that's what
he's saying is don't pretend that's not hate. I guess so. Yeah. Don't, don't think that you're
above hate, that you're not a hateful being just the way that the Victorians thought they weren't
sexual beings or not hateful because that makes you sound like all of it is hate, but you know.
A person capable of it. Yeah. A person not only capable of it, but sometimes motivated by it.
All right. I acknowledge that and accept it. We might have done this at the top or we might have,
we might have ought to have done this at the top of the episode. Does hate just mean exactly what
we think it means? The harsh negative emotion? I would think of hate as, I know, I know we talked
about this last episode too, but I think of hate as a combination of anger and loathing that makes
you want to see somebody suffer. Okay. So I haven't quite shared the makes people suffer part.
Like if I, if I had those, I mean, so I think it was at my bachelor party where we told him
about Mitch McConnell and we had that, that joking conversation in the hallway. And then
I think he felt bitter when you thought about him suffering, right? And you, I think were even
the one who was like, well, he shouldn't be in pain. Right. And, and so like don't go wrong,
you weren't wrong to say that, but like, I don't know if I'm not sure if that's the,
now I'm like, was I, was I in denial? No, you're fine. That's not what I was thinking. If I was
just thinking like, I imagine like, I've had, I've had conversations with people where it's like,
oh my God, aren't these people the worst? And, you know, whatever group it is, I mean, the,
we all sat and didn't quite make fun of, and I think we were quite charitable to the
insurrectionists and, you know, last month. But like, that was basically us having fun
petting each other on the back for like how dumb and wrong these people are, right? Yeah.
But it wasn't us saying, and I hope, man, you know, like the one who fell and broke his leg,
I don't know if anyone did, I'm so glad that he's going to limp for the rest of his life.
None of us said or thought that, right? Right. Or maybe, maybe some of us thought that, but I,
like, I kind of wish we had Wes on this episode, because he's my example of someone who like
acknowledges and embraces the fact that he hates some things and is okay with it,
and some people and is okay with it. Because I think he's pretty functional.
Yeah, I mean, I, I, and it's just willing to say, yeah, I hate these people and fuck them.
Well, I guess then my question to the hypothetical West is of the world is like,
does that, is that an avenue to making the world a better place? Are you going to reach the people
and, and, or maybe that's just not your job? Maybe you don't care to. But I mean, if you've
ever had a conversation with somebody and brought them around to the, the right side of, of an issue
as you, as you understand it, it's definitely better. Yes. And like, you know, I've, I've, I've
had conversations where I've talked people and I've never, I guess sat down with somebody of
proud boy level hatred or whatever, like that I had to talk with. I've talked to people who, you
know, were what hate filled people would call transphobes, but I would just say we're, we're
ignorant by the sort of thing. And, you know, to the point where they're even like annoyed about,
you know, some of the issues of trans rights activism and stuff. And I would, I would talk
with them. And then at the end, they, they, they're like, I hadn't thought of it that way.
You make a compelling point. And like, that's immensely rewarding. And you don't get there
if you just say, fuck you, I hate you. Well, I think there's a social advantage, a sort of
defensive advantage to being seen as spiky, that if you, you know, try to hurt me, you will be
hurt in return. And that's what hating will get you. Like, people will will say, you know,
that group hates me, I'm not going to go fuck with them. And of course, you would much rather,
like you said, have the conversions and, and, and have everyone be more Netsum working together
positive. But lacking that having some defensive air of, you know, don't fuck with us because
we hate you and we'll hit you if you come over here might be adaptive in situations.
Yeah. And, you know, like you and I will never get a chance to bring Donald Trump to the light
side of the force. So if you and I wanted to, you know, hang out and shoot the shit for an hour
about how much he sucks and how uncomfortable we hope his jumpsuit is when he's in prison,
like, you know, that's, that's more of the, like the appropriate place for hate that the
author's talking about then. And, and while that might not be a productive conversation,
because we're not getting anything done, we're having fun, right? I mean, I guess,
like lots of times, nothing has to be, not everything has to be productive.
Lots of times hate is reserved for people that you fear for some reason, because they've harmed
you or you're afraid they're going to harm you. Like you can hate Trump because he had a lot of
power. You can hate the people that were trying to sue you because they were trying to take things
from you and were, you know, showing a willingness and ability to at least try and impose costs on
you. Like lots of times hate is defensive, right? Isn't that why the, some of the homophobes that,
that really hated the gay people were hateful that way because they themselves were gay and
were trying to fight against it? Yeah. And maybe I'm reaching at this point. Well, no, there's
definitely something to that with the, I mean, it happens too often for it to be a coincidence,
right? I mean, you get a pastor who's just been anti-hate, pro-gay conversion therapy their whole
life and then you catch them doing blow off the, you know, erect penis of a male prostitute and like.
And like generally the people who hate Jews are people who are also scared that they're
taking over the world, right? So hate doesn't sound at all beneficial in those
contexts. Well, no, but in part that's because they're wrong.
So like it might make sense to like correctly hate the invading alien species who's trying
to wipe us out if they were real, right? Or Al-Qaeda. I think it's right to hate them.
They do terrible things. They hurt people. They want us to stop existing and impose
their values on us, which are important to us. I think it's entirely right to, to hate them.
Is it possible to hate like a set of ideas about hating the adherents of it?
Because I mean, there are reformed, there are people who left Al-Qaeda and so I can't believe
it. They were horrible. But all ideas reside inside people's brains. Yeah. I guess if like.
That's a deeper conversation that we would have to spend more time on.
Yeah. All right. So here's, here's my dictionary definitions of hate. Okay.
One of the examples is I hate Mexican food. So like that's not. That's very different.
You're right. We're not talking about that kind of hate. So we've got the verb hate slash to test
dislike intensely, feel antipathy or aversion towards. And then there's the noun,
the emotion of intense dislike, a feeling of dislike so strong that it demands action.
That I like, I like the second one there. Yeah.
Because like intense dislike, you know, that's, that's the verb. I hate onions, right?
Yeah. But that demands action. The action is I won't cook with them or whatever, right? But like.
No, the action is I will destroy all onions in the world. So yeah, it's, I guess, and I am not
going to the dictionary to define reality. I'm just trying to figure out if we're talking about
the same thing. I think we are. All right. So let's, let's, I want to go back to the,
what he was saying that we should do. Oh, you had a thing, quick digression into the,
into, to like the lightning. Oh yeah. Okay. So this is just a little note, but
um, mainly because on the discord, Wes has been pushing pitching to like the lightning
to be our next book club book, which is a great book by Ada Palmer. I did an interview with her
it was, wow, it's great. But one of the things it's set in the
distant ish future several hundred years in the future and society, you know, advanced in a lot
of ways, but they have gone back. They have readopted the idea that sex is not something that
should be really discussed in public to the point that they don't even acknowledge the
biological sex of humans. Everyone has, they, them pronouns, except of course for, for, from
a protagonist. He is first of all insane and also an outcast from society. So he genders
everyone that he runs across, but because he was raised in a society that doesn't have genders,
he's misgendering them constantly and doesn't know it. It's really cool. But anyways, in too
like the lightning, they have suppressed all their sex deeply, much like the Victorians did.
Do they like not acknowledge that's where people come from?
No, no, no. I mean, they acknowledge some realities of it. But that ends up being one of the
conflict points in the books is that when they run into someone who has acknowledged the fact
that sex is a human drive and that people are driven by it and no one is willing to admit this,
so she exploits the hell out of it to redirect powerful people to do things she wants to do
because she knows they're motivated by this thing and no one else is willing to acknowledge it.
And she, she knows a, you know, secret engine working within them that they can't acknowledge.
And so she has some way to change their actions that it's, it's, it's a really cool way to,
you know, show how denying reality and denying that we have certain drives can give other people
power. And I think, you know, that was part of Trump's thing. Like he knew people were motivated
by hate and he exploited the fuck out of that. Do you remember the, on both sides, the enormous
concern of the, the, the caravans marching towards the border of immigrants right up until
November of 2018 and then they vanished? Like this, this was, this was parroted nonstop. I do remember
that. This enormous concern. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh my god, they're coming. They're gonna, they're
gonna do whatever it is they do when they get here. Would everyone run in vote? November of 2018.
They stopped talking about it because they were never real. And the election was over. Oh, and
the election was over. Okay, okay. So this was all there for election fuel. And then the second
that the election was over, these, these caravans mysteriously vanished and were, were to never be
talked about again. It's like, it reminds me kind of like that, right? Oh yeah. And it's,
it's almost not a good analogy because they were allowed to openly acknowledge the hate.
But if this was 15 years ago, they might have been more closeted about the hate aspect of it
and just talked about the security and the, the American way or whatever, right? Yeah. But yeah,
I think the fact that we spent a lot of time not really talking about hate was, was a thing that
Trump was able to use. He's like, he knew everyone has some hate in them and that it motivates them.
And he used the fuck out of that and really got the left to go fucking nuts when he managed to,
you know, overcharge and explode their hate engines. And we've been seeing the effects of
that for a while. He was just like, I know you got that engine in you, let me keep pouring more
nitro in there. So like, should Biden be focusing more on a message of hate and, and like getting
people amped up to be angry and, and make that, you know, use that emotion to, to charge action?
No, not at all. But the fact that we were hiding it for so long meant that we had a secret lever
inside us that we was, someone was able to exploit. And so what's the, so the solution to that is to
just be open about the fact that you hate people and that weapon can't secretly be used against
you. Right. But then it can just be, you know, like it was in 2018, just affirmally used against
you. I think that would be better than the secret use against because you, you end up having much
worse, I don't want to use the word perversions, but much worse perversions and exploitations
when people can't acknowledge that this is a thing within them that is being exploited.
I, I can see that. Yeah. And certainly, I mean, there's, there's also just something
disingenuous, you know, arguing with somebody who pretends like their motivation isn't what it really
is. And I don't like, again, to play the mind reading games, but sometimes you don't have to
pretend, right? Like they're, or you're not reading minds, you're just reading what they're saying.
And so you say it's not hate, but you use the word would love if they died a lot. Can you,
can you explain that? Like, I think a lot of the fact that we have things like scissor statements
in the modern world and we have so much scissor statements. Oh, you don't remember that you
didn't read the scissor statements story? No. Oh, okay, great. It's a, it's a, you're going to love
the story, but it's basically a statement that is obviously true to anyone who sees the statement
sad. But depending on who you are, it is either obviously true one way or obviously true the
exact opposite way. And when you discover that someone exists who thinks it's obviously true
the exact opposite way, you want to destroy them forever because how could they be so wrong?
You know, is there a good example? Yes, many. I'm afraid to say any of them because just don't
say which side you come down on and you should be safe. Or if we want, we can save it for later.
I'm just, well, okay, so I don't sweat it. I've heard this one personally.
The cops involved in the George Floyd killing didn't necessarily do anything wrong.
Okay. Yeah. Yeah. So some people, wait,
some people would say that is obviously false and everyone knows that.
So the, the, the scissor statement is that's an obviously incorrect or correct statement
depending on how you say it to. Right, right. Gotcha. I think the, the, the, the sharper
scissor there for me would be like they, they didn't murder George Floyd. Right, right.
They were justified in some way. Well, like the, and don't get wrong, I, I'm not,
I'm not defending this argument, but this is one I've heard. Like they, because let's assume that
they're not complete fucking idiots. They're just, you know, regular people. They're being filmed.
And they knew they're being filmed. They were not about to just, you know, murder someone on film.
Right. They, the, the, the guy leaning on him probably just thought he was restraining him,
not that he was choking him out to death. That's my guess. I don't, I don't think that
it's entirely possible. He was brazen enough to say, watch me murder this fool.
And he was just, he was really that, that bad and dumb. I think it's more that he was just that
dumb and, and everything else around the situation was as pigheaded and fucked up as possible.
And it led to the death of this guy. It's, so like, like I said, I'm not necessarily
taking the, a side on that, but I can see how someone could, you know, some non-stupid person
could say, he didn't, you know, when you use the word murder, you know, you picture what we were
talking about sneaking in and doing to Al Qaeda people. Right. Like that, that's different.
He killed the guy. No one's gonna. Right. The guy's dead now. Yeah. Anyone, anyone who dies,
that's an idiot. Or a conspiracy theorist or whatever. Or who's that congresswoman who
everyone's giving shit for? Because she's literally the worst. Don't remember her name.
But I know who you were talking about. And she represents Colorado.
Wait, isn't, well, one of the, one of these nut jobs does. Son of a bitch. Hold on. Let me,
let me double check. I got to make sure it's not the same person. I thought it was Wyoming.
Well, in any case, there's, there's one in Colorado. Okay. Who, she was one who was tweeting
Nancy Pelosi's location during the insurrection. Oh Jesus. Okay. She might not be the one that's
saying Jewish space lasers are turning the frogs gay or whatever it is they're worried about.
But that one, I think she did have some of her like board seats or something stripped from her
because that's insane. Anyway, why don't I bring that. Oh, because you'd have to be that level
of crazy to say that George Floyd didn't die, but she is the level of crazy, you know. Oh yeah,
those, those kids in that mass shooting were actors or whatever. Nobody really died in that.
Yeah. God damn. So what was I saying? Oh yes, that's a scissor statement, I guess. Okay.
I hear. So how did scissor statements come up again?
Oh, because I was just thinking that like we, we have a lot of outrage porn. We have the tax
toxoplasma of rage nowadays. We have scissor statements really popular. Like these are things
that drive media that drive clicks. This is how people make money. And maybe if we didn't have
all this suppressed hate in us, we wouldn't be so easily exploited by hate mongers, basically.
If, if we were more in touch with our hate, we would like, okay, so I know this is a fictional
example, but the Jedi strike me as a perfect example of an order that was absolutely out of
touch with the hate within them. Yeah. Like they were like, no, we have no hate. Hate is the dark
side. Like you're a human being, man. I mean, I guess they technically might not have been because
this happened in a galaxy far, far away. But we were presented with humans and the fact that
they pretended not to be hate is what led to all the dysfunction within the Jedi order. And why
and their failure to acknowledge anything like that. Yeah. Yeah. And why they ended up being
like these basically mercenaries going around killing people, trying to impose their own order on
the universe. Yeah. All right. So quick digression on Star Wars. There's another separate I like
called brand new sentences. And this was a screencap of a tweet. Star Wars facts, contrary
to popular belief, George Lucas said Jedi are allowed to have sex. You know, quoting George
Lucas, the Jedi Knights aren't celibate. The thing that is forbidden is attachments and possessive
relationships. So you can have sex with someone as long as you want attached to them. The reply
tweet was imagine being a Jedi just finished clapping cheeks, shoddy says I love you before
leaving and you turn around like, may the force be with you because I won't.
So yeah, I, if the Jedi, I can't torch the Jedi analogy too much because we can't generalize
from fictional evidence. But yeah, where would this help us? If you can, if you can help me find
an example in my life where I could be better off acknowledging my hate of stuff, then I'll,
then I'll give you a beige point. I mean, I think it's just a general acknowledgement of who you
are and how your psychology works. It's just not, not being in denial. I don't, I can't think of
anything personally. Well, because that was, we were talking about like hate mongering and stuff
like that and how it's easier to do to people who are, you know, closeted hatists rather than,
than brazen hatists. Well, I'm not sure you're a closeted hatist though. I think you're pretty
open about the few people you hate and that you are generally a very not hateful person.
So, and then I guess I'm also skeptical. I feel like it's harder to rally closeted hate people
than it is to rally openly hate people. Oh, I don't know. I think those closeted hate people
very quickly became openly hate people. Well, that's, and then at that point, it's,
I'm not saying I'm like convinced, but I'm skeptical if you told me that. Oh, I see. Well,
okay. So before that, they, they were rallied in the sort of snooty upper class way where you don't
acknowledge your hate, but you're still banding together against the, the evil people like back
in the day, the British people who just casually oppressed and genocideed the, the, the people,
the natives in the colonies that they conquered and didn't really remark on it at all because it,
it wasn't a thing. It is not spoken of. We will just stay in solidarity. And I think that was the
same kind of thing you would see in the, I guess nowadays they would call them the liberal elite
or whatever where they would just, you know, acknowledge that the people in middle America
are filthy beasts and we're better than them. And we don't really have to acknowledge them
or care about them. And if they happen to, you know, die of math in their trailers,
well, maybe they shouldn't have been such hate filled bigots. And would the situation there
granting the, you know, leaving aside the moment, the point where they're,
anyone's ever thought that string of thoughts before, but something like that, probably sure.
Would they, would, would the world be a better place if they were open about that or would it
be a worse place? So the argument in this article is that it would be a better place.
Yeah. That's what I'm hearing from it too. So then I'm wondering if, if, if I believe that
and I guess like, well, you know what, if I think about it in real time, which I'm great,
I'm sure it's just great listening. My thinking sounds really interesting.
If they, if they wore their, their, their true beliefs on their sleeves,
then you can engage them where they actually are rather than engage them where they pretend
to be so they can mott and bail away from you. Right. And I mean, part of it is I don't think
they're pretending necessarily, they're suppressing, like they don't think or they didn't think that
they had hate, they would have never thought those exact words because they're the loving people.
But we don't hate the sinners. We hate the sin. Exactly. Yeah. All right. And then when it comes
out, oh, you guys actually do hate the sinner, then you can at least engage them where like on the,
on a train closer to reality. Yeah. All right. Like now you, yeah, now you're engaging with
other people that you may hate these other people, but engaging with them as people and not as like
a beastly horrid things that are subhuman because they are hate filled yokels or whatever.
Right on. All right. So my takeaway on the article is that I think it could have been more
persuasively written. I think you made the case better than he did. Whenever I had questions
for stuff, but I enjoyed reading it and I certainly enjoyed talking about it. So yeah,
that was fun. Can I end with a thing that he said? Of course. Okay. He says it's one of the basic
presuppositions of our culture. Again, he's going to be over speaking here and you're going to
disagree with this and I'm not going to disagree with you on it, but that's just warning you.
All granted. Yeah. It's one of the basic presuppositions of our culture that we're supposed
to become perfect and the way to become perfect we're told is to amputate whatever part of ourselves
keeps us from being perfect. The quest for perfection by self mutilation doesn't work.
It's as simple as that. We've given it every possible test down through the centuries and
it's painfully clear that one more variation on the same misguided theme isn't going to change the
verdict. I wonder what it means by perfection. Like, you know, someone who doesn't hate people,
doesn't have sex. He's speaking more generally about perfection by self mutilation. Like,
is the Buddhist who seems to sincerely not have physical attachments to stuff,
are they mutilating a part of themselves because physical attachment to stuff is
super normal? I would argue yes. I think they might be mutilated in the context of the sentence.
They'd be mutilating themselves, but I feel like they might be actually bettering themselves.
Like, I mean, there's a level of, you know, to the extreme where, you know, if...
Are you ever going to see a Buddhist create a rocket and, you know, colonize another planet?
I don't know if we've had enough like hardcore Buddhists working in space technology to help
me think about that, but you're right. Okay. If they don't care about possessions,
why would they bother? Where's the want to go to Mars come from if you don't have wants?
Yeah, yeah. Huh. Yeah. So I guess, I mean, I don't know if that's necessarily tied to, you know,
like I had a car get totaled, I don't know, 10 years ago. I was, I wasn't in the car at the time.
I was hit in the middle of the night and I went out to go to work and like I hit the clicker
on my key thing. I look up down the street and I'm like, I parked there. Where's my, what's
going on here? And then I kind of just shrug and I head back inside and as my parents house and on
the door, there was like, you know, the little business car to the police officer saying,
we tried to wake you your cars with these people. And I know they didn't try to wake anybody
because they're, my parents had dogs that would have woken up, but so he clearly tipped
it up to the patio, delicately set that in the, in the door and ran off. But I called the,
the place and it was a solid yard and they're like, Oh yeah, sorry, Mr. Zero, your car was
hit last night. I was like, Oh, is the person okay? Like, Oh, I have no idea. And I was like,
well, I just put a CD player in literally yesterday. Can I go and get that out? And she's
like, you're taking this really well. And I'm like, well, what am I going to be mad at you
about it? Like you didn't do anything. And she's like, well, you'd be surprised people get mad
at me all the time. You know, the bear bad news, I guess. And so like, I didn't care about my car,
right? I wanted the CD player out of it. And because I was nice, they, what usually what
happens, the appraiser will come out, assess the car and then they get it, right? What this junk
adult me do was they let the appraiser come out, assess it, then let me strip the car bear
of everything I wanted out of it. Oh, nice. Floor mats, steering wheel cover, CD player,
et cetera. So I kept the floor mats, huh? I just I figured I'll take everything that I could lift
out of the car. Okay. But like, I feel like my non attachment to my car there had, you know,
perfect corollary to the story. My car, when it got hit, pinballed into my friend's car,
parked behind me, damaged his bumper. And he was furious. Granted, it was his was a car that
cost 10 times as much as mine. And he was making payments on my car was a cheap piece of crap,
maybe cost 20 times as much as my car. I think it was as a, you know, $30,000 new car, mine cost
14, 1500 bucks from somebody down the street. So he was understandably upset. And yet, all this
is for me was like, well, how am I going to get to work? You know, but I wasn't mad. And I feel
like that was a positive, right? So there's a level of, you know, having detachments from wants.
Maybe there's something, the reason I'm making this point, there was actually no reason when I
started, but I can drive at home and say that there, there might be a place to, you know, have
these, you know, the strong detesting hate filled emotion, but you can have it in a way that is
like in way smaller doses than people often have without eliminating it entirely.
Yeah. He makes the same argument. Yeah. Okay. There's a good medium.
And we're not there. And most people who, you know, you'd know as hate put has,
as hate people aren't, aren't there either. Yeah. Okay. All right. Author guy, we're getting
long better now. Let me find his name. So I'm not just, it was a Michael Michael, John Michael
Greer. John Michael Greer. I'm familiar. I know I've heard the name. I'll have to look into it
later. Okay. All right. Well, cool. Yeah. That was everything. I had fun. It was an interesting
conversation. Yeah. And, you know, if we get some feedback, and if Jace wants to talk about it,
or maybe we said everything he wanted to say, or maybe didn't find that this interesting or something,
we might revisit the topic. But before we go, we've got to think,
man, I'm sorry. Carol, William Acasson? Acasson? There's a, not a tilde, a little umla, no,
not umla was the two dots. What's the comma above a letter called? Oh, that accent mark?
Yeah. Maybe a accent mark? I'm sorry I butchered your name. I'll say it like three different
ways, and I'll probably be wrong each way, but hopefully one of them is close. Carol, William
Acasson, Carol, William Acasson, and Carol, William Acasson. Anyway, however you say your name,
I'm really sorry. You rock. You saved the day today. Yes. By none of us hate you here at the
No, we have immense respect for you, and all of our listeners also are happy that you are here
and donating to us because you have managed to bring this episode to everybody. Yes, you rock,
and I'm really sorry. I'm not a very practiced, like, I don't know, well-traveled reader to the
point where I can say things properly, so. Stephen really hates names, so he's never gotten good at
them. As a proud bigoted American, I only know English, so everything else that's not an obvious
American, I just completely can't get my head around, so that was ingest. You rock. Thank you so
much. You are awesome. Thank you. Thank you, everyone who helps support us. I mean, we do this
because you guys help make it possible. And it's fun. And it's fun. Yeah, that's true. But help
helps. Yes, it does. Saw the budget breakdown for this one. We got the new mic stands. It's,
yeah, you guys, it feels weird saying the same thing every time, so we should just find a good
script and stick to it that has all the sincerity laid out, so I don't have to, like, feel sheepish
about saying everything every time. But if it's a script, there's no, there's no actual, yeah,
no personality, no emotion. This way, we like, have to actually come up with something and...
They pay for the hymn and hove, me trying to say thank you very much for your gracious
support of the show. And anyway, it means a lot. You guys all rock. It really does. Okay,
this has gone on for a while, so we should cut it now. Sounds good. All right. Catch you back
here in a couple of weeks. Bye, everyone.
