Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Eniasz Brodsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, I'm Jay Stiggy,
and we have an interesting conversation today, but before we do that, we're going to do less wrong posts like we always do, right guys?
Just like always.
Like we helped do last time.
Yes, it was good times having Wes on last time, wish I could have been here.
It was. Speaking of good times, I listened to the Mind Killers episodes, I finally got caught up on the backlog, including the most recent one, and that was a lot of fun.
Thank you.
Is your mind currently dead?
Yes, but for other reasons.
Okay, good enough.
Alright.
So, we have some sequences.
Yes, our first sequence today is called positive bias, look into the dark.
I just want to make sure that is the one we're on, because I missed last week, but then you didn't do last weeks?
I think we're doing a positive bias and say no to complexity.
Okay, good.
And we can just skip positive bias, because everyone here has read Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality, and if they listened to the companion podcast, we want more.
We covered this in, I think, chapter eight, which I think went by the same name.
I think we can do it again, though, because...
I'm just kidding.
Okay.
We're all rationalists already, we don't need these sequences.
Yeah, we're all already perfectly sane.
And, I mean, people who are coming back listening to archives afterwards are not necessarily listening to things in the same order, so maybe they're going to get to the we want more after they're done with this or whatever.
I was confused because these are in the opposite order on less wrong dot com.
Oh, really?
Yeah, saying no to complexity comes before positive bias.
I think that they kind of, I don't know, doesn't matter what order they're in, kind of, but not really.
Now, particularly, positive bias was posted on the 27th of August, 2007, and complexity was 28th.
So, in chronological order, this is correct.
So, let's start with positive.
Excellent.
Steven, you have told us what this is about already, so would you like to kick us off?
Oh, sure.
So, positive bias is essentially where, in a sentence, it's where you try to confirm my hypothesis rather than falsify it.
And this is distinct from confirmation bias, because that's more like seeking out sources to fit with the preexisting position.
And this is more of like, all right, I've got this idea.
Now I'm going to try to test to see if this idea is true rather than see if this idea is false.
And what is the example he gave us that was later immortalized by Hermione Granger?
The 246 task.
Did they call it petals around the rose in the story?
No, that was the one I used and we want more because Brian had already read the chapter before I gave it to him.
Which I stole from a, I might have been a Alexander Wales 2 chapter fanfic.
That was the really good one that wrecked me.
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Zombie.
That one.
Hey, does anyone else want to be destroyed? Read that story.
No more emotions.
Speaking of being destroyed by stories, I just finished the first Last of Us video game today.
We did talk about that like four or five years ago on the podcast.
So everyone who wants to go find it, it was I think on our episode on like utilitarianism or something.
So anyway, the 246 task is essentially where, what was it?
Peter Watson, not Watson.
Basically the premise is I have a condition that the integers 246 passes the condition and I want you to guess other numbers to see if it passes or fails.
And then when you've done enough experiments, tell me what you think the condition is.
Yeah, I think they gave them, I don't know if they gave them three or if that's just what they had as students guesses in the article.
I want to say I think they got three chances that no, no, no, it says you can test as many triplets as you like.
Okay.
Yeah, and the one in the article is one student's guessing.
So they do 462, which returns a no.
468 returns a yes.
And 101214 returns a yes.
And I like this.
At this point, the student wrote down their best guess at the rule.
What do you think the rule is?
Would you want to test another triplet?
And if so, what would it be?
Take a minute before continuing.
Now, this isn't fair because we already all know the answer.
I think if you've been reading the sequences, even if you don't know the answer, there should be something about Eleazar's tone there, at least to me, that was like, haha, how you're trying to get me right now.
There's some trick here.
I'll let Stephen reveal it.
Oh, well, I guess before I give the answer, it was, I think the replication of that study shows that there's a success rate on the first guess of about 20%.
Which means that 80% of people think they've got it and they haven't.
So the actual, the rule is the three numbers must be in ascending order.
And it's that simple.
People would make these convoluted rules or they would, you know, like again, 468, oh, increases by two each time.
101214 also increases by two each time.
Okay, the rule is it has to increase by two each time.
And that's not it.
So it's, it can be as long as they're in ascending order, that was the rule for this task.
So it's a fun little test.
And if you get a chance to test out on your friends or coworkers, it's a great way to make friends and enemies.
Yes, and enemies.
But the point is that the person who wrote down 468 and then 10122, it didn't occur to them to, it occurred to them to keep testing things that would confirm,
but never testing one that would disconfirm by saying, for example, 4610, because that would disconfirm their guess that it always goes up by two.
And they never asked something like that.
That's the generalizable lesson is if you have a hypothesis, try to see what wouldn't happen and test for that.
Yeah.
Right.
Yep.
Yeah, I liked that.
It's further on in the article, but there was a really good line that I want.
Yeah, here it is.
We ought to think about both positive and negative examples, which automatically pops into your head.
You have to learn wordlessly to zag instead of zig.
You have to learn to flinch toward the zero instead of away from it.
And that's hard.
Like it's rationality is not easy because it does mention this is like, I got this wrong.
Or I think he says that he got it wrong when he tried it.
Yes, he did.
That was in the next.
Yeah.
It's like, so like, it's not like, it's not about being stupid or smart.
It's about you have these instincts that you have to have some kind of heuristic to check for you.
You're checking yourself constantly.
I know that people are reliably wrong in this way.
I know that I'm a person.
It's hard to do though.
And that the subtitle of this post, it's called positive bias, look into the dark.
And the reason he calls it look into the dark is because looking for examples that prove you wrong
kind of like feels bad.
It's not natural.
That's why he says look into the dark, like look for things that would prove you wrong
or that would prove your hypothesis wrong at any rate to find out whether the hypothesis is actually correct or not.
Yeah, I think this is a small scale example of what ended up leading to the replication crisis.
We're the same thing with, you know, scientists still want to get a yes.
Sort of how we're, I guess, trained in school.
The whole idea is that this all rolls into guessing the teacher's password and so forth where we're kind of taught to be conformist.
We're kind of taught to try to get a yes.
I feel like it's almost kind of antisocial to look for a no.
Yeah, that's a good point with the replication crisis.
If you're always just looking for ways to confirm your data, that's much easier.
But if you look for things that might disconfirm it, it's work that, you know, you don't want to do because then it disconfirms your idea.
Well, it's hard to get more funding when you say, yes, I showed there's nothing here.
Another main thing.
And this is like a nice neutral, non-emotionally charged way to test this sort of general principle.
But it gets like the look into the dark part where it's actually scary where you have to flinch towards the scary thought rather than away from it.
Is when, you know, if you're considering something of emotional salience to you and, you know, what would make my important belief that I have?
You know, this is just a hypothesis about some number game, right?
But if you have like this important belief about especially something political or whatever, trying to, like even the idea of looking for numbers or looking for contradictory evidence just feels uncomfortable and wrong for, I think everybody, or at least most people.
Not, I think, you know, if I were to count myself among them, even rationalists like testing to see if my, you know, emotionally salient political belief is true or false, or especially to see if it's false.
There's like a bit of a fear reaction there.
And so it's important to just face that and try to be less wrong about stuff.
Hey, that's the name of the show.
I remember this was actually like a college professor I had.
It was an art teacher.
So maybe this gets more of a free pass, but he was talking about something about like the mysteriousness of nature.
And I like being smart.
I said something about like, I knew the biology of how the thing he was describing works.
So I said it and he's like, you said just always trying to quantify things.
Oh my God.
And I was just like, yeah, that actually that's what we're, that's exactly the did you not, do you not know the scientific method?
Do you not realize this is the name of the game?
This is how the world works.
It's like that it ruins the beauty here destroying the rainbow by running it through a prison or something.
Whatever that poet thought.
I actually know what he thought of just being intentionally obtuse about it.
It's because Keats was a sour grapes nerd.
And if you want the real awesomeness of it, check out Unweaving the Rainbow.
That's going to be my fifth plug for that book on this show so far.
And yeah, plus one.
Should we go on to the next post then?
Why don't you lead us in on this one?
This one's kind of fun.
All right.
This one is say not complexity.
So as far as I can tell from this one, it's basically he's saying, look,
just saying something needs complexity is very much like saying something is an emergent behavior.
He says he was talking with someone he was working with on how to create an AI that could discover how to solve a Rubik's Cube.
And several times in the discussion, the other person said, well, I think the AI needs complexity to do X and complexity to do Y.
And Eleazar said, don't, don't say complexity.
Or I believe his words were, yeah, don't say complexity.
All right.
I'm imagining him leaning forward and placing one finger on this other guy's lips and going, don't say complexity.
Leaning really close.
Oh my God, creepy.
And the guy asked him why not?
He says it should never be a goal in itself.
You may need to use a particular algorithm that adds some complexity, but complexity for the sake of complexity just makes it harder.
Can I bring up the next thing, though, because he put in a little parentheses after that one.
I was thinking of all the people who had heard advocating that the internet would wake up and become an AI when it became sufficiently complex.
I was called out by that because that used to be one of my pet theories when I was in high school.
I didn't necessarily say because complexity, but I think that was what I was thinking about, though, that surely when it gains more functions,
it just needs to be bigger and more complex like a brain.
It's got neurons like a brain, right?
And then it'll become a brain.
That was totally a thing in high school for me, too.
It is a compelling idea until you look at it that way.
He pointed out that what you're doing when you're saying things like complexity or emergence is just skipping over the mysterious part.
And that's not helpful at all.
You need to pay closer attention to that.
And is this the one we said?
Yeah, this is the one where they introduced magic.
So as a workaround for this because there were some issues that they couldn't tackle everything all at once.
They had to lay out some things and they developed this convention that whenever they ran into something that they didn't understand,
they would use the word magic as an X magically does Y to remind themselves that there was an unsolved problem here.
And they had to come back to it.
And that was, you know, they were like, if you use the word complexity or emergence that can hide the issue.
But if you say magic, then it's really obvious that there is something missing here that you need to go back to later.
I like that it reminds me of a writing technique where if you have a placeholder when you're writing a first draft to make sure that you see it, use the swear word there.
I forget if a friend of mine made that up or I might have even made that up.
But when you're going back and editing, you can't not see it.
But yeah, it's that kind of thing that like, wow, that doesn't belong.
Do you remember what Mark Twain said about very and fucking?
Which?
Okay, so I think it was Mark Twain, but this may be suffering from the whole, you know, all quotes eventually get attributed to famous people.
He said that you should remove, everywhere in your document when you're writing, you should replace the word vary with the word fucking.
Because afterwards, your editor will go back and remove the word fucking from everything and your manuscript will be better.
That might have been actually where I got that idea from.
Okay.
Although I don't think I had heard that before.
That does sound like a very Mark Twain thing to do.
Yeah.
Instead of just saying, don't use the word vary.
He gives more practical advice.
I think that the application of calling out a mysterious part of your plan, whatever it is with the word magic is generalizable beyond solving friendly artificial intelligence.
I've at least used the technique in small form, like when talking with how to, I'm not architect level.
So like, when planning out something with a coworker at work, and look, all right, well, we'll find a way to do this or, you know, whatever, bus messages from here to there or something.
And I'm like, all right, well, since that's not an actual implementation, I'm going to, you know, let's put magically move this from here to there.
So that we know that this isn't like a solid part of the architecture yet.
And I think complexity is a good word to look out for.
And it makes me think of, I have an issue with people using the word just, not as injustice, but, you know,
I just wanted to let you know.
I mean, even that's actually not so bad.
Mainly it's like, if someone says, Oh, that's just because you're whatever a Democrat, or, you know, oh, we're just atoms.
And that's close to like the not near that we've talked about, or at least isn't the sequences somewhere.
But I find that in most are like, Oh, why don't they just go out and get another job or something, or whatever it is.
Like, so many times when people use the word just, it's using, it's doing a lot of heavy lifting that I don't think they realize that it's using.
So I have this little flag that goes off in my head.
Whenever someone uses the word just kind of the same way that I think Dan Dennett had an article at some point somewhere that said whenever someone uses the word, obviously,
he also has a flag that goes off simply.
That's what it was.
Yes.
I use a lot of I like to read stuff on Blinkist, which is a app that creates, or I guess someone writes them distillations of long works of fiction.
And it's great because it's like, here's an entire novel in bullet form, but it gets so obnoxious sometimes when it's like, And how can you do this?
Well, simply you just have to reconfigure your entire life goals and and learn to be assertive.
It's as easy as that.
And it's just like, I feel like the original author probably didn't put that in there.
Or if they did, then they're douchebag because like, I just, it drives me nuts.
You know, and I always hear this with like programming, people think programming.
Oh man, there's this stereotype, you know, that programming is hard and boring, but actually it's easy and fun.
And I'm like, no, if you tell kids that, especially or if like somebody who is not already psyched about learning programming, and you tell them it's easy and fun,
they're going to try it, find that it's hard and boring and be like, well, I guess I must be an idiot because I'm not, I'm not finding it easy and fun at all.
That's anyway, sort of.
It's a nice combination of all four of those things.
Probably someone who wrote like programming textbooks back in the day is the kind of person who would find programming to be fun.
And as an extension of that, probably like easy enough to understand in concept that it feels easy and fun to do it, right?
Yeah, or you're already at like, I learned this when I was trying to teach art lessons for beginners.
If you've already like reached, like if you have an art degree, and then you're trying to explain the basics to somebody, it's so easy to just inferential distances again, coming all back to the sequences.
But you can talk right over their head without realizing it.
I was trying to like teach how to draw the proportions of a human face and I kept having people like raise their hand, be like, wait, go back.
Where do I put the eyes? Where do the eyes go? Stop.
Like they're in the middle.
No, you drew them on the forehead.
Surprisingly lower than you think they would be.
Yeah.
I went over that in detail.
So I was a bit annoyed, but it seemed like people weren't listening, but I'll say like you have to, I don't know, from like the perspective of someone who's like obviously this thing.
But like you really have to hammer something home if it seems unintuitive, you know?
Because people are usually trying to draw a face and the face like starts at the eyebrows and ends at the chin.
So the eyes are way up.
You're not thinking about the whole skull part of the head.
But it looks super weird if you put the like eyes way up on the forehead.
Anyway.
Yeah, I actually feel like learning to draw would be a really good, like I might do that once we start being able to like have,
in person meetings again, but learning how to see is sort of key to learning how to draw things correctly.
And a lot of people see things in symbols and you don't realize you're doing it until it's pointed out that like,
actually, that's completely anatomically incorrect.
Were you looking at the thing?
Like, oh, yeah, no, wait, no, I wasn't.
Oh, dude.
Yeah.
When I had someone teach me how to draw a hand and particularly fingers, I was like,
well, that that tells me a lot about how my mind works.
That was very interesting.
Hands are complex.
Your brain wants to simplify it into.
I don't know.
Usually people draw like a bunch of little hot dogs.
Yep.
Little thing.
And I'll blame them hands are awful.
Humans are really hard to draw.
Like I actually like to teach people.
Okay, we're getting like off topic, but I like to teach people to draw humans or animals because they're the most complex things like drawing
blacks and blacks and whatever.
Super easy.
If you can draw a human, you can draw anything versus squishy.
I can draw small straight lines.
Pretty good.
You know, like a neck or cube, but I really, I've never been, I've never had anything like whatever.
And I guess it's probably, I mean, some people have some no doubt native talent for it, but, you know, they get there and then make it look easy through lots of hard work.
But I, you know, I've seen people who can, you know, sit there during notes, you know, in high school rather than take notes or sit there and sketch something.
And it comes out looking amazing.
And I have no idea how they can put what's in their head onto the page with their fingers.
I'm not dexterous enough.
Yeah, exactly.
It's practice.
But I think that's the only thing and just totally a one sentence aside that like anything that looks effortless, but you try and is really hard.
It only looks easy not because the person who's doing it is like just naturally really good at it, but because they put in a lot of work to make it look that easy.
Yeah.
And some things look really easy.
And you're like, oh, I can do that.
And then it turns out to be fucking impossible without lots and lots of practice.
I think juggling is a really easy example to pick up like to illustrate this point quickly.
Like watch somebody who's good at juggling for 30 seconds on YouTube or Reddit or whatever.
And then, you know, it's like, oh yeah, they just throw it and catch them.
That's easy.
And it turns out that the word just there is doing a lot of work.
They are doing that, but it's the all of the little motions and and whatever maneuverings involved that are like, I guess, sub noticeable.
Those those have a lot of hard work there.
So they're just tracking the trajectory of three balls at the same time and using their two hands to keep them in the air and make sure that they maintain those trajectories at just the right rhythm.
It's easy.
Right.
All right.
Well, I think that covers these two.
Yes.
Did you guys have an additional anything to add?
That was pretty thorough.
Yeah, I think I'm good.
Okay.
For next time, we are covering the posts my wild and reckless youth and failing to learn from history.
Spoiler alert.
My wild and reckless youth is not nearly as sorted as it sounds.
I don't know.
It depends how you feel about epistemic hygiene.
I like the one after the other two.
Go on.
I was going to say speaking of epistemic hygiene, that's actually a decent tie into part of tonight's episode.
Oh, yes, it is.
So I have a thought that I have now as a quick lead in into this episode whenever I see a cop that has pulled someone over on the side of the road.
It's this joke that I heard and honestly, you guys are going to have to tell me if maybe I should not include this in the episode like edited out or something.
Expensive cops do it.
Well, hey, it is, but I think it may be an even too poor taste for that.
So the joke is that the modern day trolley problem is you're driving along and you see that a cop has pulled someone over on the side of the road.
They're standing by their window and do you just keep driving and let something potentially horrible happen?
Or do you swerve and hit the cop with your car and potentially save dozens of lives?
That's fucked up.
Leave it in.
Okay.
Stephen, I don't I think it's too ridiculous to be considered a bad thing.
It's a dead babies joke.
It's like, obviously, I don't know.
I just use the word obviously and I'm like, I need to get rid of words from my vocabulary.
But like you said, it's a dead baby joke in the sense there's there's no way anyone would actually ever do that.
I mean, the dash cam on their on their cars on they would see you hitting them even if you were seriously considering the idea of murdering somebody, right?
Very well.
Even yeah.
No, I think that also like a lot of people are mad at cops right now.
The cops know like some of them know some of them are very in denial about the fact that like, yeah, we did kind of fuck up a bit here.
Now lots of people are mad at us.
And I feel like it's almost a sort of little justified poke.
Like a cop themselves might make that sort of joke kind of cringe at the joke like, yeah, like now I know that we have this issue.
I think that is the most cop sensitive way to say what you just said that they're like, oh, yeah, man, I guess we kind of fucked up.
I was like, wow, I've never seen anyone put it so gently.
So yeah, what we are talking about now is going to be the the cop and cop brutality and Black Lives Matter movement thing, which was somebody on our discord mentioned.
Sam Harris's podcast, which I had heard just I think the day before this was brought up in our podcast or in our discord.
But it's what kicked us off and the and it is I guess what we're going to be talking about today.
And by I guess I mean I pushed for it.
So yeah, this is my fault.
But I figured is something that should probably be addressed.
Sam Harris and his podcast brings up the fact that the crime rate in black neighborhoods and as he puts it like among the black populace is in fact quite a bit higher than in white neighborhoods, which are mostly full of white people.
And so even though cops kill roughly an equal amount of black and white people, slightly higher on the white people.
But as everyone keeps pointing out that is drastically disproportionate because there's six times as many white people than there are black people in the US.
But then as is pointed out by many sources now, including Sam Harris's podcast, there is roughly six times the amount of crime in black neighborhoods than there is in white neighborhoods.
So this is not necessarily an overrepresentation of police presence in black neighborhoods.
If one would assume that the thing you would want a good police commissioner to do is put more cops in high crime areas and not put as many ones in low crime areas because obviously that was a waste of resources if you do that.
Thus, the contention being that this may not be about racism at all. This is more about using your resources in the appropriate way based on what the crime rates in different areas are.
Before I continue, was there anything I wanted to either of you guys want to say anything about this?
Yeah, I thought that we were talking about something a bit adjacent to this because I mean Harris talks about that in his episode, which he did put up some links and sites and sources a few days after that episode aired.
So if anyone's curious, they can listen to that episode and then check out the website for that and follow the data that he failed to cite when he was doing the podcast.
I thought we were talking about the discussion on Discord that was mainly around the
Was it the efficacy of the Black Lives Matter movement?
Or slogan in particular?
Yes.
That the contention was from one of our Discord members that it seems like it's epistemically disingenuous for them to say, you know, for like the banner behind Black Lives Matter to be, you know, stop killing us or, you know, stop overwhelmingly killing us
or unfairly whatever it was. And I thought this was a really fun, like I think the conversation went on for about a day and then went off and then came back on for another day.
And I thought it ended really well and in a nice understanding and it was like the person who brought this up lives outside the US and while they're right, that shouldn't matter.
I think living in the area of, and I mean, not that I live in like in a high crime area or something, I live in a medium low, I'm guessing.
I live in West Wilkex.
Nice. So yeah, you see some stuff.
Oh, I do.
But the, like, it's what I was trying to ask him was like, you know, the sense on the ground. Well, all right, I'm getting ahead of myself.
My point is what we're talking about, like, does it make sense for a political movement to have a less than like 100% thorough epistemic status on their slogan?
Or is that misleading and therefore disingenuous slash wrong?
Yes, but I thought we couldn't get into that until we started off with this, right?
Yeah, I suppose so.
We could have left it as vague as possible.
Oh, well, okay.
There's no sense in trying to do that that had been really annoying.
I just wanted to make sure that I wasn't going to have to have a conversation about the stuff covered in Harris's podcast.
I wanted to talk more about, like, the sense or nonsense of having overly brief messages on your slogans for a political movement.
Yeah.
As a freelance graphics designer who cares about things like this, who has been forced to care about things like this because money, and now I actually find myself getting upset about fonts.
It makes a lot of sense for a political movement to have a brief, compelling name or slogan or statement from a marketing perspective.
Just you want people to have an emotional pull towards what you're trying to say.
So stop killing us is a pretty good emotional pull.
It's hard to, it's hard for really anyone to argue.
No, kill us more, you know, like, or that's not a legitimate complaint.
I don't think you also could have a long, complicated slogan.
It would be hard to fit on a banner.
Wouldn't make a good hashtag.
People won't remember it.
I'm not sure, like, if there were alternative proposed.
I think as, as people who care about having an accurate picture of the world and and truth being represented, it should be kind of important as to whether this is a thing that's actually true or not.
Like, for example, if the alt right, sometimes they there are some people in the far right who say that there's some kind of white genocide going on.
I don't know exactly what their arguments are and they sound pretty ridiculous from what I've heard.
So maybe they are just completely crazy.
The word genocide is weird, but you could argue that like Southern whites are doing pretty bad, like rural, rural Southern white people in certain areas in particular.
I totally agree.
Yeah, but if someone is saying, you know, stop killing us, there's a white genocide happening.
I think the fact that there is not a white genocide happening is actually relevant to the issue.
But like if you're talking about, say, the opioid epidemic and there was some kind of movement that was like stop drugging us, it wouldn't be exactly correct.
But I feel like it's hard to get an entire like correct statement in one quick phrase or hashtag or banner anyway.
And I think I can see the utility of the slogan.
That's what I'm trying to say from the perspective of it being strategic.
No, I understand.
As a white person, I see the utility of opposing white genocide because I do not want to be murdered.
But that is why an organization that claims there is white genocide.
I think it would be in everyone's interests to know that there isn't an actual white genocide happening, right?
Like the truth matters.
That's one of the...
The truth does matter, but did Sam Harris disprove Black Lives Matter's claims or did I...
I didn't read...
I didn't listen to the podcast episode, but like...
Well, no, because he, I mean, he made this point.
But the fact that the amount of black people killed is sort of proportional with crime rates in black neighborhoods is sort of besides the point.
It's about general police brutality overall.
And the fact that that one particular number may be in proportion doesn't really capture the actual statistical facts of how police treat minority communities, which is really badly.
But it does capture the emotional aspect behind that.
Yeah. Are you saying that was what Harris said?
No, no, no. What Harris said...
That was not the conversation?
That was basically how the conversation ended up.
Yeah, like basically, even though the actual...
And we should probably cover the Simpson paradox here if we want to actually get into why the numbers are what they are.
The metric of black people killed may match the greater crime rate in black neighborhoods.
But the fact remains that the black neighborhoods are overpoliced in terms of the police targeting black people far out of proportion to how much they should be targeted, harassing them a lot,
Extracting a lot of money out of those communities through fines and fees in order to fund themselves and continuing to militarize and make their presence more and more onerous for people while not actually helping reduce the crime rate very much.
So it is a burden. It is unfairly placed on black communities.
And quite honestly, the police need to be fucking reformed for all communities, as it is anyway, because police brutality is a problem for everyone.
So for a number of reasons, Harris isn't actually correct on this, but the slogan that they use doesn't quite capture that.
I don't know, a better slogan would be like, stop the cops.
I mean, if you want to motivate people, there is no better slogan than stop killing us, right?
Yeah, I mean, yeah. Also, as a white person, I also...
It doesn't feel like Black Lives Matter excludes me.
It was a movement started by black people because they're upset about being killed all the time, the other things that you mentioned.
Yes, but it was pointed out that the over-policing in black neighborhoods is crazy.
Black people are pulled over far, far more than white people and have their cops searched far more, much more than the demographics of a neighborhood would suggest.
And importantly, the cops, when they stop and frisk black people, they find drugs and weapons at a far lower rate than they do on white people,
which means that they are basically stopping a whole lot of black people and harassing them for no reason because of this prejudice.
So they are not even correctly implementing their heuristics of who's more likely to commit crime because they are getting more negatives off black people.
All sorts of bad things with what they've been doing.
Yeah, and that's what I eventually brought in because it's hard to find statistics on easily calculatable who's pulled over the most across the country.
I'm sure those are out there, but I knew that some of the most salient and obvious statistics came from the stop and frisk in New York.
So anyone can Google those and find them.
It's the first thing that comes up when you Google stop and frisk.
Can I say something about that when you're done?
Yeah, of course.
But it was like, I just cut and paste the numbers and then a link to the article and it was, I don't have the numbers in front of me,
but it was something like tens of thousands of more people, you know, I think these were in the hundreds of thousands a year.
So whatever it was, it was many times more black and Latino people were pulled over or rather stopped and frisked by the police.
And weapons slash drugs were found at a slightly lower rate than among the stopped white population.
And if this didn't show a bias that wasn't even playing into the favor of stopping crime, this clearly showed a bias in the part of the police.
And it was this fun moment during the conversation where it's like, well, hold on.
I would expect then to see numbers that would show disproportionate stopping of minority people or something.
And I was like, dude, look at the numbers from that.
And he's like, well, hold on.
Wait.
And they found less.
And I was like, yes, these other numbers mean and they're just like, well, that's fucked up.
Why aren't people protesting that?
And it's like, bro, that's what they're out there protesting.
However, in his defense, that's not what's on the banners.
But it was just a nice kind of getting to watch a light bulb go on in someone's head.
It's almost as fun as getting to watch one go off in your own head.
Stephen had been talking about the stopping frisk or statistics on who they pull over more.
This reminds me.
I was actually talking to a friend about cops a little while ago because I had a weird experience with a really friendly cop who pulled me over.
On the East Coast, cops are way, like, I don't know, my experiences with cops is just all negative.
They're like super mean and gruff and have no sense of humor.
And I'm always like, oh my God, okay, cops pulling me over.
I better make sure not to move my hands off the wheel.
But this guy comes over and he's like, hey, I just noticed that your plates are expired.
And I know the DMV is closed right now.
Things are really hard with COVID.
Here's my card.
Give me a call if you have any trouble with this.
But I'm just pulling people over to let them know the DMV is actually taking appointments and you can go on their way.
And I was just having this weird mental implosion where I was like, is this a police officer?
What is happening?
But I was talking about this experience with someone who's left here longer than me.
And they were like, oh yeah, I have about, like, maybe about 50% of my experiences here with cops are like that.
Because I was like, is it always like that?
And they're like, there's this other thing that happens where they just, like, right up your ass on the road.
Like, you won't see them and you'll just be driving along doing the speed limit.
And suddenly a cop's going like 120, they're on your butt and they're trying to like get you to make a mistake so they can arrest you or something.
And I was just like thinking, well, I don't know.
I feel like maybe they're just, I mean, yeah, that's definitely like, I don't love the fact that they're speeding around in their bullet cars for reasons.
But I was like, well, maybe they're just trying to get you to like move over so they can go in the passing lane.
And it's like, nope, there was like, I was in the right lane.
I was doing the correct speed limit.
And I was like, huh, that's weird behavior.
And then I was like, wait, if they put their lights and sirens on, they have to call it in, right?
But if they don't, do they, because I've had cops do this before too, and it's kind of baffling behavior.
It does feel like they're just trying to harass you or freak you out.
And I don't know if this is true.
And I don't know if either of you know this, maybe if they don't put their lights and sirens on, but you pull over anyway,
and then they like search your car and find drugs or something like, then they can call it in, right?
But if they don't put the lights and sirens on, that means that they didn't call it in, right?
So they can't use that as a negative.
It doesn't look like they're pulling a bunch of people over at random if it's not on the record.
I think that the lights and sirens directly turn on the camera on the car.
And I don't think they have to call in every time they turn their lights and sirens on.
Or at least something about it being on the record.
I don't know.
Again, this may just be me concocting some conspiracy theory.
I think the record is that it definitely turns on the dash cam for the car.
But this might have been a few years ago, statistic back when they couldn't just leave the lawn all the time.
I would be surprised.
I'll take that back.
I wouldn't be surprised, but I would be disappointed if their cameras weren't on all the time in the hood of the car.
It's really easy to, I mean, you know, for a hundred bucks, anyone can get forward and backward cameras on their own car
and have those cameras recording all the time.
And so I'd be kind of annoyed if our police vehicles were not fitted with, you know, muggle technology that was really easily accessible.
That said, I think that the, like, it would be weird and stupid to pull somebody over on the highway, especially, well, it really had any time,
but especially, you know, after dark, with their lights off, because that's a great way to get hit.
And that's one of the main reasons that, you know, the lights are on and flash both ways.
It's a signal to traffic coming up behind the stop to vehicle.
By the way, there's a cop car up here.
Don't hit the car that stopped on the side of the road or the people standing next to it.
Unless you are pulling the lever in the trolley problem.
Right.
Which is a, I mean, I guess I just, even that joke, I never, like, it doesn't, it strikes me as much less like,
Yeah.
Of a head scratcher than a real trolley problem.
Yes.
And that's interesting.
You mentioned, like, an encounter with a nice police officer.
And this is something that I've changed my mind about over the last couple of years.
I can't remember, maybe it was during one of the last protests a couple of years ago or something,
but I remember Inyosh was on the, like, no cops are all bad.
And I was on this side of like, no, some cops are bad.
And I've had an update over the, you know, having analyzed this issue with people and having nothing to do while sitting at home,
you know, for the last, I don't know, 3000 years during this pandemic.
And I am now fully on board with the, even if you're a good cop, the system itself is too fucked up for good cops to really,
really do much.
Yeah.
So like, yes, any individual encounter you might have may or may not be with a nice police officer,
but they're part of a system that is, is overwhelmingly negative.
Yeah.
And also like, yeah.
Oh, well, okay.
I was going to say, yeah, good cops do exist.
And it's great that there are some, but the institution as a whole protects all cops very strongly,
which makes it a great place for evil people to go because they can do whatever they want and they know they'll be protected.
And so more and more evil people go there, more and more good people can't stomach to be there anymore.
And the whole thing rots.
Well, and the good people get forced out.
Yes.
You make complaints about, hey, I watched this officer brutalize somebody and they're, they will, you know, they'll haze you.
They'll give you shitty shifts.
They'll give you a, whatever, a region two hours away from your house to give you a four hour round, round way commute.
Or you just have to like, watch George Floyd get like, knelt on for nine minutes until he like suffocates.
Yeah.
Or wait, that was George Floyd was the.
Yeah, that was George Floyd.
That was George Floyd.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That reminds me, we should definitely put in the show notes.
Dave Chappelle's 30 minute special.
I think it's on Netflix, but if not, it's also on YouTube.
It's not really funny.
So that, that, you know, holds your laughter there, Jase.
The it's, it's mainly a response to all this.
And I thought it was really well done.
And I mean, I've never, I have cried watching comedy shows before because they deliver some heavy emotional beats.
But, you know, Rachel and I watched this and where I, I guess I wasn't watching her face, but you know, I'm assuming she was too.
But I mean, I'm crying and then it, then it ends and I'm looking at her and I was like, well, that was really great.
Like it was a really beautifully constructed kind of monologue on this that I don't know.
Like I, I think of the special he mentions that he didn't watch the George Floyd video for at least a few days.
I'm happy to say I never, I'm not happy to say, let me rephrase that.
I won't hesitate to say that I have not yet watched it and I probably won't.
I don't think I have the stomach for it.
And I know it's terrible.
I know it would wreck my day.
And I think it's kind of just like, you know, people who know that their food is made in terrible conditions but don't want to Google pictures of factory farms.
I think it's the same sort of reaction keeping me away from this.
But I'm just happy to be like already at the conclusion that I need to be after watching it.
Like I wouldn't, I don't think I'd get much more out of watching it other than sad because I don't need persuading.
I'm mad enough already.
Like it's not going to make me more upset.
Yeah, mad and sad enough already that I don't need more motivation.
But he mentions that he watched it.
I think, what was it, eight minutes and 47 seconds or something?
He says that was the time on my birth certificate.
And Dave Chappelle brings, he brings a lot of this home in really great ways.
You know, I know that he hits some beats with parts of his humor over the last few years that aren't awesome.
He said some body transphobic shit.
I still like him.
Yeah, I mean, and like it's kind of like he said transphobic shit.
I won't get derailed on that.
But it's like, I think that this is perfectly palatable to everybody who, you know,
whether or not you agree with 100% of his humor all the time.
Yeah, I don't agree with the idea.
This isn't really a comedy special.
Right.
That's why I was laughing when you mentioned it because I was laughing at the fact that you called it a comedy special.
I wish I guess it was titled that, but yeah.
But no, I don't agree with the idea, you know, of people being problematic the way that they would, you know, using some leftist circles.
This person's problematic throughout everything they've ever created and nothing they've said is valid.
And it's just he can have shitty opinions about trans people, but great opinions about Black Lives Matter and all kinds of other things.
And I don't know why.
I don't know.
It's like, I wonder if people think that if they watch Dave Chappelle talk about Black Lives Matter,
they're going to start becoming transphobic just by osmosis or something.
You're allowed to have your own opinions.
No, man, that's how opinions work.
You listen to someone and they can have your opinions now.
I guess.
I haven't broadcasted this special to enough people because I haven't like posted on my work Slack channel or anything because it's not 100% the kind of thing that you share with work.
So like, I haven't gotten feedback from people who like, oh, I won't watch it because I don't like Dave Chappelle.
I'm not sure if that's a reaction people get or not.
I might have said that a few years ago, but.
I'll also say that I think problematic is one of those words like complexity that I have no idea what the fuck it means.
I take that back.
I have some idea what the fuck it means.
I'm pretty sure that the person using the word problematic has no idea what they're talking.
I mean, they have not articulated the point they're making.
They get to just use this lazy catch-all problematic to say this person said something I disagree with or whatever, right?
It's their way of saying boo.
Boo this person.
They've got a black mic on their record.
Yeah.
So, Jayce, you mentioned that the thing about the cop, like just pulling up right behind someone and tailing them, trying to get them to do something wrong.
That is like, that is one of the major problems in all this is that cops basically no one can go a day without breaking some sort of law.
Maybe that's exaggerating a bit, but because there's a book called three felonies a day, which I think is an exaggeration.
Is that like the statistic where like you ate several hundred spiders in a year?
Well, yeah.
There's a book with an actual name.
Is there a spider's Georgia felonies anyway?
No, but there, I mean, with how many laws there are in our society, it is nearly impossible for anyone to simply live a normal life and not break some sort of law on at least a monthly basis.
And in particular, traffic infractions while they're not felonies are so ubiquitous that most cops, not most cops, a lot of cops have a sort of game where they say, let's just follow any random person until we can pull them out.
Until we can pull them over and it's impossible to not get pulled over within the space of five minutes or so because there's just so many.
If they're three inches away from your bumper and like you're doing the speed limit, that's really intimidating and you're going to freak out and probably like turn without signaling.
Yeah, slam your brakes on.
I don't know.
I used to drive an ambulance.
People freak out when they see an ambulance coming and don't know what to do.
It's kind of a problem, especially like you want people to actually just get out of the ambulance as well.
But with cops, they want you to fuck up so they can give you a ticket.
Yeah.
I mean, that's part of the thing.
Like basically everyone is guilty at all times.
So cops can at any time pull over anyone they want, which is just a ridiculous thing in our society.
We should not have this whole everyone is guilty at all times so that the authorities basically basically choose who they want to target because everyone's guilty.
And one of my more fun statistics that we picked up over the course of this discord discussion was that the worst visibility is the less frequently black people are pulled over.
Like on really bright sunny days, black people get pulled over a lot.
When it's like raining, it drops and like during the night, it drops a lot just because the cops can't see who the people are.
So they can't target black people as much.
It's pretty fucked up.
But I think that was what you weren't done.
Go ahead.
Oh, well, that this last thing was what kind of brought the discord commenter over when they realized that in America, everyone is guilty at all times and the cops can randomly enforced use force on whoever they want for no particular reason.
And they're like, that's that's basically you're living in a tyranny.
Why aren't people protesting this?
And that is when everyone slept their forehead and was like, what do you think we're doing?
Well, and it's this kind of brings it back to the central point.
Like what they thought we were doing because of the signs was saying, you know, black people are killing or excuse me, black people are killed by the police disproportionately.
Yeah.
And so they they read the signs there and they, you know, they weren't here watching the protests.
And so they're like, well, hold on.
That doesn't seem to actually be the thing.
What are they actually complaining about?
Or that's not quite charitable.
They were saying, like that it's not clear to me that their central argument is is frankly true.
Yeah.
And so what it what it amounts to is that while the the messages that fit on signs to carry out a rally or that fit in hashtags are overly brief, the broad message that you get, you know, if you go to their website, if you go to blacklivesmatter.com and hit the about page.
It doesn't say anything like, I mean, so it uses language like, you know, we want to protect.
I should just pull it up, but I hate typing while we're recording.
It uses language that is about as as succinct as it can be.
I think the about could probably fit in the tweet.
But it's it's it's definitely too long to fit on a sign to carry, you know, at City Hall.
And so, like, you know, I guess I just need to do all two quick things.
One, I'm not 100% cognitively present for this recording.
It's been a crazy long day and we're recording later than we ever recorded.
So if I'm a little jumbled, that's why.
But I'm also just I need to be perfectly clear before, you know, the opportunity slips by.
I'm 100% in favor of the protests and of the black lives matter movement.
I, you know, any any discussion about the epistemic solid solidity, solidity, you know,
whether or not the the slogan on the signs or whatever is epistemically sound.
This that's more this is more just like a discussion abstracted about that sort of phenomena.
I use the example during the discord conversation of like bumper stickers endorsing a political candidate.
So I see I told you I was tired.
What I'm trying to say is that I'm 100% in favor of the movement and everything that they're doing and that they're arguing for.
We're having an abstract conversation about like, when is it okay to be, I don't know, less than 100%.
Like I said, epistemically sound in your sound bite arguments.
And I think that this is sorry, go ahead.
Okay, I agree with you 100% on being on the side of we need these police reforms.
Everything that black lives matter is pushing for is stuff that needs to be done.
And oh my God, thank God, someone is finally doing it.
So absolutely with them.
On the other hand, you said like, maybe their slogan isn't 100% accurate as if it was like a minor thing.
But from my understanding, like most people get the impression.
And even like if I didn't already know what the issue was, if I was from a foreign country and I was going into this cold,
I would have the very distinct impression that the issue is that a militarized racist police force is targeting and murdering black people because they are racist.
Is that not the impression that you think one would fairly get from the movement?
I think that that's, that is the impression one would fairly get from the movement.
And that's completely not true, right?
That leads to the core contention here.
Like I'm okay with the message that you get from the quick sound bite without doing any digging in.
You know, so if all you see is news coverage of the protests and you see the signs,
I'm okay with the message that people get from that being a little inaccurate because I agree with all of their goals.
And I realize that that's a slippery spot to be in, but I sort of am okay with that.
Are you okay with anyone on the alt right at all pointing out that what I just stated before is literally factually false
and therefore anyone who reads that, who reads that refutation will then say black lives matter as a bunch of liars.
Why are people supporting them?
I mean, there's nothing that they could possibly say that would convince the alt writers.
Sure, but what about people who are in the middle?
What you said sounded like you said we are protesting against the fact that a militarized police force is killing black people disproportionately or like,
or because they are racist, they are targeting black people more.
Yes, there's a racist force out there that is murdering black people.
Is that wrong?
I think that's not...
I think it's an oversimplification for sure, but I mean...
I mean, I think it's an oversimplification to the point where on the face of it, it's wrong.
Can you explain more?
They aren't death squads created to weed out black people and not even created.
They have not become death squads that try to weed out black people.
Even though the result of their absolutely corrupt system that protects what used to be pedophile priests and now is murderous cops
and needs massive reform and does end up making the lives of black people dangerous and scary
and really drastically negatively impacts black communities much more and makes their lives more dangerous,
all that is true, but saying, you know, there's this racist government organization murdering black people is so far from that.
That's the impression that you certainly get.
I think that that is a fair interpretation of an outsider who didn't know how things actually are on the ground,
what they would think, or just someone in middle America who doesn't watch the news very often and doesn't know a lot of black people.
What I want to know is, is it like the impetus of the person who is being oppressed to make sure they like are doing science and posting statistics
and big numbers on their signs while they're doing their protests?
Or like, I think just the way politics are done is that people will oversimplify and come up with a catchy slogan for a much deeper concept,
a much deeper issue that has all of these other...
Right.
Because basically what you were saying was, this is a thing that sucks.
It's like a bad system that does disproportionately affect black people.
And that's kind of, I think, the impression I've got is that is what people are saying.
I mean, maybe in like a much more emotionally charged words, but I don't disagree with that.
On the one hand, like I do agree because I believe Zvi has this great post called You Have Five Words
that says, anytime you want to reach more than a thousand people, maybe more than ten thousand,
but the more people you try to reach, the less words you have to do it in.
And he says, if you're trying to address the nation, you have five words. That's it.
Trump succeeded because he needed four. Make America great again.
Or in some cases three, build the wall, right?
You can...
Lock her up.
Yeah, yeah. You can never have a complex message.
So on the one hand, yes, absolutely. You have to be simple.
And also, like it's really fucking hard to motivate people.
And so focusing on the deaths, like lots of times it takes someone being murdered to affect any change.
And then it's also the salient issue to the deaths.
Yeah.
And while I agree with you on all that, like for the practical purposes, that's why we're doing this, right?
To affect change.
But I think one of the problems is that for the practical purposes,
anyone who can turn around and say, look what they're saying, it's obvious bullshit, right?
That also really hurts the cause.
I don't think what they're saying is obvious bullshit.
Unless I maybe have been out of the loop.
If people have been like...
If people representing the movement have been like going up at a podium and going on TV,
claiming that making up statistics or charts or lying about what is actually happening.
But I don't think that they are.
They're talking about people who have been killed, like George Floyd.
They're talking about events that have happened.
If your five words are racist police, murder black people, that's...
Is that what they're saying?
I'm just saying, is that your five words?
Because stop killing us, I guess, is their three words, which works.
Or Black Lives Matter, which I think is hard to disagree with.
Also, stop killing us at Black Lives Matter.
I think as slogans go, you'd have to be a monster to disagree with those.
Right.
But they don't imply any sort of statistics.
That's how good slogans work.
They certainly imply, as I was saying, that the impression most people get or seem to get
is the one I stated before, unless I'm wrong about that.
Do you not get that impression from their public face?
I don't, because I am already here and I'm informed about this.
Maybe I could see the possibility that an outsider, someone from another country,
or whatever, coming in and looking at the press.
But then I start to wonder about, is it just the media too?
Because is it what the Black Lives Matter representatives are saying that's giving them that impression?
Or is it the way it's being reported on?
The sensationalist media?
I'm playing a little bit of Devil's Advocate here,
but I don't just want to have this be a podcast where all three of us agree with each other enthusiastically
because that's not good air.
Yeah.
Well, we're not.
On the points, on the questions you're raising, Inyash.
So I am, like Jayce, unable to put myself in a position where I don't know what their actual message is.
So I can't quite say what my interpretation would be if I just got back from the ISS without internet
for the last 18 months and then saw a bunch of headlines or something.
But I'm willing to even grant.
Okay, let's say they're getting, let's say that the general population is getting the wrong message.
Like you said, the alt-writers will take the ammunition and go nuts with it,
but they'll do that literally no matter what.
So I don't think that the goal should be make your message palatable enough to persuade the alt-writers
who are already inclined to disagree with you no matter what.
I think that it should be let's try and get attention and get shit done.
And so I will grant, for the sake of argument, let's say that, yes, it's giving a possibly,
no, not a possibly, that's a dodge.
It's giving a less than accurate depiction of reality in order to accomplish their goals.
Like in general, that's really, I think, like we mentioned, how slogans have to be.
And we could pick an example that we all disagree with.
The anti-abortionists stop killing our babies is what's on their signs, right?
So that's catchy. It shares a lot of the same problems and a lot of the same strengths.
But the problem is, or the difference is that I disagree with their goal.
I do agree with the Black Lives Matter goal.
So if their sign says Black Lives Matter or stop killing us,
I'm kind of fine with it delivering a message to the uninitiated's head
that isn't exactly a perfect map to reality because it's achieving goals I care about.
I realize this isn't a generalizable philosophy, but I'm just prepared to bite the bullet on that.
This is a, you had that throwaway line about pedophile priests or something.
If there was a big movement to strip the Catholic Church of a lot of its powers and liberties that it's abused for ages
and it's used those to become fabulously wealthy and to abuse children,
if people are marching in the streets saying, stop raping our kids,
it would be kind of disingenuous because most people's kids aren't being raped,
but they're using that as a shorthand to point a big neon light at the Catholic Church and saying, everyone look at this.
Yeah, kids are being raped. It doesn't imply a number.
And I think the implication there is any is too many.
And yeah, so certainly in that case, yeah.
Well, probably in any case, either of the ones that we talked about, right?
So I guess there's that.
And I would also just put out the legitimate question of what is the alternative
if you're going to have a rally or a march or something to garner attention
short of carrying a sign with a QR code that people can scan to go to your website.
Is there an alternative other than having a slogan that can't perfectly capture the essence of your argument?
I'm looking at the George Floyd protest pictures in a front and center.
There's a sign that just says, I can't breathe.
And another one, am I next?
Those are good signs.
Yeah.
Well, but the first one's wrong because they can breathe.
I'm being an asshole on purpose.
But that's my point.
It captures the emotion and it's doing it to an end that I think everybody who's not an alt-right police dictator fascist lover can get behind, right?
And I realize that just painted people who disagree with me into a corner.
So let me walk that back.
But does that make sense?
It does.
But I think that's my main problem.
I don't really care about getting the police, you know, philaters, alt-right people on our side anyway because they never will be.
I'm more worried about the people in the middle who see that's something that they are not being told the truth to or that they get that impression, I guess.
And it's the people in the middle that I am more worried about because, you know, they're the ones that are going to decide to go with one side or the other.
And I would like them to go with our side.
Are you concerned that they will see a sign and then do their own independent research and do some facts and figuring with numbers and determine that the sign was misleading and therefore throw the cause out?
No, I'm concerned that they will hear someone say that black people are killed at about the same numbers as white people, which is a rate that's six times higher than white people.
But since black neighborhoods have crime rates at about six times higher, this is justified, and they will be like, oh, what's going on here?
Why are all these protests, if resources are being used correctly?
I mean, like, and so one of the things too that came out of the Discord is the number of police encounters per lifetime.
Yes.
And we, you know, there's there's not at least during the, you know, I also have these conversations while I'm doing my day job.
So like, I can't spend an hour doing research, so I didn't find anything to give good numbers on this.
But I'm prepared to guess that with with a high level of confidence to the to the sake of a, let's say, $100 if anyone wants to give me some right or wrong on this, that black people on average are stopped more by the police than white people.
And that's going to be true across every neighborhood.
No, here's the thing is like, I'm on Black Lives Matter side.
I'm on your side.
I want this movement to succeed.
So like, I think that given the number of police encounters go up, your odds of being killed by the police go up because you don't die in a police encounter.
You don't die at the hands of the police without encountering them.
And so if you stopped 500 times and the rates of being killed are only one in 10,000 or something, your your odds of being killed are much higher.
If you stopped 500 times, then if you stopped five times, depending on where you live and what kind of lifestyle you lead, you know, I don't think I don't remember the last time I had an altercation with the police officer, maybe once in the last five years.
And so like, if I was stopped three or four times a week, I'm away to and from work.
Yeah.
You know, so like the one time where you show impatience or you, you know, they again, they get you out of their car to feel you up and kind of.
And you show Sandra Bland thing again to with the talking to strangers.
That was the whole sort of premise of that book.
Oh, nice.
Yeah, I'm glad it ties in.
I was going to say just like the one time that you show annoyance and this is one of the things that I drew contention with with Harris's podcast because he's mentioned this before.
And is he's correct, but it's so easy to be correct when you're not when this isn't a problem that you really have.
So like what he what he's correct about is that if you're stopped by the police, what you should do is cooperate with everything that they're saying.
Now, as lots of videos over the last few years have shown that often gets you or that doesn't always guarantee that you won't be shot to death on the sidewalk.
But, you know, like if you're pulled over and you know you did nothing wrong, what you should do anyway is have your license and registration ready when they come to the window.
Have your car off.
Have your keys on the dash.
Do all the things they taught you in driver safety or somebody should have taught you or, you know, if no one taught you Google what to do when I get pulled over and just do those things.
But, you know, again, you have the car off the window down, and you just do what they say and, you know, live with the fact that you're being stopped for no reason.
That's what Harris says to do.
And then if you're a savior detained and you're arrested for nothing that you did, you don't resist, you come back the next day with your lawyer as if everyone can do that.
Again, that's really easy to say from from Harris's perspective, and it's it's true if your odds of this happening to you are very low.
But again, if you're the kind of if you're the guy that gets stopped every other day on the way to or from work, and it's like, OK, I'm getting stopped again.
This is literally, you know, three hours out of my week that I'm being spent groped by the cops.
You know, this one time I'm going to tell him to fuck off and keep going to my work going to work.
Then he's going to tackle you and arrest you and then you're going to be, you know, or your career is ruined forever.
And I think that's that's exactly what I was trying to get at that like the movement makes it sound like the answer to this problem is to remove racist monsters from the murderer.
From the murder force.
But the problem is drastically different.
It's exactly what you said.
It's a system that is corrupt and that protects bad people and that can harass anyone at any time for any reason, basically.
And those are the things we want to change.
So the movement may not even fix the problem if all the people who are pushing it who join up get the feeling that what they have to do is fix the problem of murderous racists being
being in here rather than the system being fucked up and making people's lives miserable in this way.
Is that what they're actually calling for?
Again, I like I'm looking at their website and I see defund the police is the main hashtag here.
The things they're calling for are all awesome and would help quite a lot.
It's just the messaging behind it that that is less than honest, I guess.
I again just wonder is this messaging coming from Black Lives Matter?
Is it coming from like reporting?
And in that case, like if I just came from again, yeah, like I don't know outer space and I heard, oh man, people are having some kind of conflict here.
And on one side they're saying, I don't know, stop killing black people on the other side.
They're saying in white genocide, I would be like these both seem like pretty incompatible exaggerated claims of the sort that I would expect the media to report on.
They actually Google for two seconds to see what they actually are saying.
Whether or not they're being like misrepresented or exaggerated or even, you know, like it's probably the case that the people in charge of the movement are saying the, you know, defund the police do these reform measures.
And then but maybe, you know, some random person on the street waving a sign is going to say something like cops are racist and and and the police.
And but like, but yeah, maybe that person gets interviewed.
I don't know. That's not how are you going to stop that as Black Lives Matter?
And is that really your top priority?
Well, I get the impression that most people aren't like Googling their actual goals and what they're pushing forward in in Congress.
And instead just is that what matters fault though?
Are they responsible for fixing the fact that people have the wrong impression like what I'm saying is what they see is what people are yelling in the protests on the streets.
And that is you're never going to get people yelling in protests on the street that statistics show that.
No, but what they are yelling is what people see.
And the organizers of the protests have some or at least some influence over what gets yelled on the streets, right?
I don't agree that they should be spending their time and resources on trying to organize people in such a way that they are all like yelling the statistics.
I think that that's not the best use of their resources and time.
And I just think that this is always going to be human behavior.
Like you have movements that have leaders and all this one, I think actually does not have centralized leadership.
But maybe that's part of the issue.
Well, somebody put out those those policy goals.
Yeah, there are the articulate people who are composing the goals and writing the website.
And there are the angry people whose like cousin just got shot marching in the street waving a sign.
And that is how like protests and things like this are just going to happen.
Like if we could solve this through civil discourse, then that would be ideal, of course, but we're not living in this ideal world.
And I just have a hard time holding Black Lives Matter responsible for things that seem like it's not even their fault.
Yeah, there's there's this great scene in Malcolm X the movie where a whole group of like black men show up outside of I think it was a courthouse.
I don't remember the exact details, but they are all really pissed off, but they're all dressed kind of similarly.
And Malcolm X is out front and there's sort of a face down with some white authority figures there.
And he raises his hand and like makes a signal and all the black man just like turn pretty much at the same time and walk away.
You know, at first I was like, nothing happened. Why didn't he make something happen? There was an injustice being done.
But then I realized like he was showing his power.
He was like, this group of people behind me are doing what I said.
And that was a huge demonstration of power to the people he was speaking with.
And I guess, I guess that's what you need. You need like one, you need some sort of leadership that has.
Yeah, you need a leader.
I think you need Malcolm X and you need Martin Luther King.
Someone who will give rousing speeches and someone who will.
No, no, no, no, no. No, what I'm saying is you need both the leadership, the Malcolm X who can talk and make demands and negotiate.
And you need the large crowd behind him who is willing to do what he says and also showed their displeasure.
And so maybe you do need a mob that is riled up by slogans which may be incorrect but are emotionally compelling in order that you have that base of people who are angry,
who have demonstrated they are willing to loot and burn stuff so that you can negotiate if you have the leadership.
And so it doesn't matter entirely what they're yelling as long as what they're yelling keeps them motivated, right?
Am I thinking through this right?
Like, I'm literally going through this thought process as we're speaking.
It sounds like we need a light lord and people who will take his mark.
Yes! Thank you, Steven. Oh my God.
Thank you for...
And I used gender and language there because that's what Quirrell used during his Christmas speech.
Yeah, but everything else he was saying there.
Thank you for lightening the mood, Steven.
This is an upsetting topic, but...
I think we're kind of on the same page.
I still disagree with the statement that the signs are factually wrong because the signs again are saying black lives matter.
Stop killing us.
Will I be next?
I can't breathe.
These are not scientific or statistical statements.
Right.
I don't think those are incorrect.
I don't think that the impression someone else takes away from what they have seen in all the chaos is really necessarily what black lives matter needs to be worrying about, at least at the top of their priorities list.
I also am sort of, like I said, playing devil's advocate, so I don't...
I obviously think that honest epistemics is good practice.
I just don't think that that's usually how human behavior works in these kinds of scenarios, and that's maybe the whole rationalist versus barbarians sequence.
I forget if we've even done that one yet.
No, we haven't gotten there. It's later.
You adapt your strategies for what your goals are.
In this case, they are not trying...
Or maybe to some extent they're trying to resolve this through diplomatic discourse.
But that hasn't been working.
Malcolm X and I was just thinking, yeah, the original American civil rights movement had incredibly articulate, well-organized, nonviolent...
These were model protests, and yeah, this should have still happened in 2020, so I can sort of get on the side of the people who are mad.
Okay, it's 2020.
Oh my God.
We've been through this so many times.
Well, to be fair, the problems are different. The ones that they had in the 60s...
They're different, but they're the same.
There's still an element of racism here, and that's another thing that I'm wondering.
I think that obviously racism is not the only problem, or I don't know, maybe even the main problem, but with the main problem being more just the militarized, overfunded police that are out of control,
but it does affect black people more than most other groups.
So yeah, what's my real opinion?
That's what I'm trying to figure out now, now that I'm kind of like taking off the black fedora or whatever, when you're pulling devils advocate you wear a black fedora, right?
I need to... I don't know, the thing is that I almost... I have a hard time even talking about some of the other things that I wanted to bring up,
and it's like, I feel like this isn't even my fight.
It's definitely a fight that I support, but I got pulled over by a cop, or I've been pulled over by cops many times, and I've had good and bad experiences,
but I've never had experiences like my Hispanic or black friends have had where they get dragged out of the car,
I had a Hispanic friend who was playing a little keyboard and sitting in his car,
waiting to deliver Christmas presents, and somebody saw him and it was in a white neighborhood and they were like,
he's casing the house for robbery, you know, called the police.
The police show up, drag him out of the car, arrest him, slash all of the seats in the car, looking for drugs or whatever, impound the car.
It's just like... I think they found a tiny amount of weed in the car, which justified them being able to put him in jail,
and impound his car, and this is just not even one of the worst things I've heard.
I don't want to get into too many, and here's my anecdote.
There's a pattern to the anecdotes that is concerning, and I also don't know how much I even get to really talk about it as someone who's not as directly affected as other people I know.
I think that, like, I still, I understand the contention that the mental model that the blank slate viewer would get from watching the movement is like,
like you said, Inyash, like, oh man, I didn't know that like the KKK ran the police force, they're out there killing black people left and right and willy-nilly.
I do think that, depending on what news you watch, that might be the impression you get.
I'm with Jayce that I don't know if you just, maybe if he even talks to a random attendee of one of these rallies, that might be the impression you get,
because maybe they're wrong and they've got an incorrect, poorly calibrated statistical analysis of the situation because they're emotionally charged,
or maybe they're deliberately misleading people because they want to get attention to this very worthy cause.
So, like, I, again, I get how that's kind of a problem, I think, and this is kind of a fun conversation because we're all kind of emotionally charged,
or at least I don't have anyone knows this about listening to me on the show, I rarely get emotionally charged about anything, so for me to have an emotion is nice and refreshing because I'm dead inside.
My mind just killed right now.
Well, I don't think it's wrong to have an emotional reaction to it.
If I was so emotional that I was unwilling to engage in discussion or to see my people.
We're not straw tokens here on the Beijing conspiracy.
Yeah, or if I couldn't see the people I'm disagreeing with as people or something, if I was that far angry, then I would have a problem.
But I think it's right and proper to be bad when, you know, so if the rallying cry is, you know, stop killing us, then the response, and this is actually a quote from, we'll post this in the show notes.
Eleazar Yudkowski wrote a medium article called A Comprehensive Reboot of Law Enforcement.
Of course he did.
Oh, if you haven't read it, it's really good.
I'm sure it's excellent.
It's a 23, 23 point argument or not argument, but 23 list items for the agenda of helping solve this problem.
And I, it's not that long of a read.
I recommend everyone check it out.
If you want to get into some of the longer winded parts of it, there's a second link at the bottom.
And he elaborates on one of his points, which was a zero tolerance for deaths of unarmed persons caused by interactions with law enforcement.
And this is what I really enjoy about like philosophical debate books or essays or whatever is that it's a taught practice that you are to anticipate your opponent's responses to your arguments and respond to them in advance.
And so anyway, I will just read the one paragraph here that I really like from this.
He says, I am fundamentally on the side of any faction, group or just plain people whose only request is please stop killing us.
If the response is, but we aren't killing most of you most of the time, statistically speaking, I also support their further request.
Please kill us even less often or please kill us so infrequently that we no longer feel afraid.
If this requires an extremely low frequency of killing or harsh public public penalties for killing them, so be it.
And that is, I think a really great way to put this, like it also has the downside of being too long to put on a sign.
You know, maybe you could fit please kill us so infrequently that we no longer feel afraid on a sign that that actually might work if you have a big sign.
So it doesn't drive the point home for emotional salience to the people taking pictures of the crowd or something, or seeing pictures of the crowd that is.
But that one sentence I think encapsulates the marches when they're talking about fear, you know, the deaths specifically involved, right?
It's, it's not, it's not that like, I don't know, everybody knows somebody has been killed by the cops.
There simply aren't enough police murders for that to be true.
Again, please kill us so infrequently that we no longer feel afraid.
I am, I've mentioned this before, I think I, when I'm in the right headspace, I can get very empathetic to the point where Paul Bloom would be able to say that's probably a problem.
But like, I can very easily put myself in the situation.
And I, and I know that I'm under imagining it and it still puts me in a properly terrified headspace.
And that really drives this point home for me.
If I'm black and I get pulled over, I don't know what the fuck's going to happen with the rest of my day or the rest of my fucking life.
And that is terrifying.
And again, if I can get there as a white guy who never sees the cops, it probably helps that I literally never go outside.
I think I filled up my gas tank for the first time since January last weekend.
So my ability to be interacted with is less.
But the actual fear that lives with people and just as it is disproportionately people of color, that's the core complaint of the community.
I know that it sounds like I'm arguing with somebody who's not like someone who's not here because that's not you're, that's not you're correct me if I'm wrong, but you're not challenging that.
No.
Exactly.
So I don't know why this is what happens when I get emotionally charged.
I make points that I'm.
You start fighting an imaginary opponent.
Yeah.
Yes.
Thank you.
I do that in my head all the time.
It's such an obnoxious habit.
I try to catch myself and I noticed I'm doing that in my head, but I, depending on the kind of day I'm having, I'm more or less successful with it.
So I guess that's what that's what they're saying.
But I, I, because I agree with that and I can't think of a more succinct way to put it on a sign and march in a group.
And so like that's the thing is like, if there was another way to do it, again, a QR code that they could carry around in the sign that actually might work.
And it goes to a well thought out.
It only needs to be a few paragraphs.
You know, it doesn't need to be a book to really drive the point home.
But if you're there trying to get quoted for a headline, you know, what do you say that that is 100% of actually true and actually gets people's attention?
Can we solve that problem?
I don't know.
I so maybe I'm just not paying enough attention.
But how is it that everyone has this impression of what Black Lives Matter is about, including myself?
That is who's everyone, by the way, like, where, where are you pulling this from?
Is it just in your typical mind?
Because I have not, I don't get the impression that this is.
I have, I don't know.
Wide, I guess, social contacts.
I don't even want to say friends necessarily.
Some of them are friends.
I know a lot of different people all over in various places.
And those of them who are not very in touch with the movement at all, definitely seem to have this impression.
And I don't know if it's from what they've read in news articles or if they've heard people speaking at rallies or where it's coming from.
But that seems to be the impression that people outside of any specific movement have.
Okay, can I, this might fault Italy flat, but my brain just made this association.
I don't actually know what JK Rowling said that was supposedly transphobic.
And I just revealed that he doesn't listen to the mind killers podcast.
I am not caught up on any podcast right now.
And it's really upsetting.
But the thing is that I got the impression that she said something horrible.
And now she is a bad with the capital B or problematic.
And the thing is, but I know, and I think people generally are starting to become more savvy to this that like the media, all news outlets are just like outrage maximizers or just will actually click click maximizers.
I expect everything to be exaggerated to the point of ridiculousness when I see anything in the news.
I like, okay, yeah, let's share.
I'll read up on that later and see.
Or like in the case of JK Rowling, I'm like, I don't fucking care.
As a trans person, I do not give a shit of JK Rowling is transphobic.
And like, probably she said something that like my parents who are like, pretty uninformed, but well meaning ish might say, and I would just roll my eyes and be like, whatever, like you don't, you don't know enough about this for me to care about your opinion.
And I'm not taking that into account anyway.
Like, this is off topic now, but I was just kind of drawing the parallel there of when I hear something.
When I like when people have generated enough outrage or interest or morbid curiosity about something that's in the news, I like never take it at face value that this is what happened.
Or like this is the true factual thing.
Yeah, but I got a question for you then.
Like, if you have you've heard of this crazy outreach thing that all these people are pissed off about and you're like, oh my God, probably more clickbait bullshit.
Nothing that bad actually happened.
And then you hear that there is rioting downtown a few blocks from Colfax businesses are being burned because of what JK Rowling supposedly said.
And there's people demanding laws be changed.
That's why I didn't look it up because I don't that's not happening.
No, that's not happening.
But like, if if those things were happening, and you were like, oh my God, all this outrage is over something that isn't actually that outrageous.
Stop burning things and stop trying to change laws.
Like, that might be a thing for you.
Right.
I just it might.
But I think that like those matter.
What is happening is actually quite outrageous.
And I do think that they should change the laws that like if I looked into it and I found out that it was out JK Rowling said some dumb thing.
My mom might say I be like, OK, then this is quite a disproportionate reaction.
And I would probably like the against the protests.
Yeah, but what if you looked into it and it turned out that it wasn't the fact that the KKK have taken over the police and are using them as a excuse to.
Again, he was saying this.
No one's saying this, but like what is that if that is the impression that you got and then you looked into it and that wasn't the case.
Wouldn't you be like less supportive of Black Lives Matter?
No, I would think that people in the news naturally do their thing of exaggeration.
But like I actually just read the Wikipedia article about the George Floyd protests and I am quite mad about what has happened.
Another thing that I should probably disclaim is that my two best friends were in fact killed by a cop.
So I have a horse in the race here or a appropriate metaphor for being emotionally compromised.
Right.
I don't know if that even counts as compromised.
Well, yeah, I'm struggling to find words here mostly just because it's a million degrees.
So hot.
So I, I don't know if we have can put a neat bow on this, but I am going to just go ahead and try and segue a bit just because we are nearing the, I don't know, the last bit of our this section anyway.
It seems like the problem more is like, how do you succinctly illustrate a message this complicated to a crowd that is uninformed?
And that, I think that's a hard question to answer.
Is that sort of where we're at?
I don't know.
I don't think no, I don't ever think that would be what I would try to advocate for.
Be more along the lines of how do I make the general message be more reflective of reality?
Even the five word message be something that I could get behind wholeheartedly so I don't feel like I'm misleading people for good purposes.
Because in my opinion, even for the best of purposes, it's not good to mislead people because once they find out you've misled them, you've lost their allyship.
I mean, so then, I know we're going to go in a bit of a circle, but like, what is the five word message that you disagree with?
Like, Black Lives Matter?
So it's none of the ones that we've talked to?
No, I don't disagree with any of the specific words or any of the slogans I've seen, just the feeling.
And maybe this feeling is entirely something that is due to the news media trying to create outrage.
And maybe this is something that we got to take up with the media instead then.
But the general feeling seems to be somewhat misleading.
And I don't think the average middle American would feel like they were given a correct impression of what solutions are being requested.
I think I hear what you're saying, that they'll hear about this problem and they'll be like, oh my god, that's terrible.
And in the off chance they do any of their own independent research, they'll say, hold on, that doesn't sound like it actually lines up with what I thought this was saying.
Maybe these people are being misleading.
Well, that sucks and they will fall off the wagon of supporting them.
Is that the concern?
Yeah, and also that I'm not even concerned they're going to do their own research.
I'm going to concern that they will be presented by research by the right because that's going to happen.
People aren't going to do their own research, but someone with a horse in the game who wants to keep the police brutal and evil is going to give them this other side, which while it's also very misrepresentative,
shows that the other side was like trying to play to their emotions.
I think that both sides are going to be trying to play to people's emotions and I just don't expect that anyone doesn't know this.
I don't know.
Then again, I might be typical minding with like everyone knows the media is bullshit.
Yeah, or maybe you're definitely, you're definitely typical minding there.
Or maybe I'm just very naive.
I think it's a complicated thing because like, and then, you know, just to wrap this up, I think in the next couple of minutes, because there's one more thing we've got to talk about before I finally go to bed with or without making a last ditch stab at installing my microwave.
Like, this seems to be a general problem across all political campaigning.
And it like you can't make a quick soundbite headline, hashtag, etc.
That reflects reality, like totally gives an accurate map of the territory because the territory is takes more than five words to describe.
And so I'm trying to think of a not Trump or, you know, anything from I don't even know what Biden's campaign slogan is.
Is it not Trump?
Literally just not Trump.
Yeah.
So like, this is I think going to just be a problem across anything where you are trying to get anything done politically or through the system.
And if that's the case that this is just an a terrain where epistemic, I wish I thought of the right word before we recorded because I keep stemming at I keep stammering after this, you know, a full, wholehearted epistemic understanding is available.
It or excuse me, it might be unavailable across the entire terrain of political campaigning.
Right.
And if that's the case, then that's just the name of the shitty game and that's the those the shitty rules.
But it's the shitty game that we all have a stake in.
And so if you are of the variety who like is just kind of needs an epistemically pure life, then anything involving politics just might not be for you.
I literally can't think of anything political whatsoever or involving political reform, etc.
That can be or that is advocated, honestly, and very, very quickly.
Yeah.
Anyone got any last thoughts on this?
Fuck the police.
Gosh, now my brain is thoroughly killed at this point.
All right, speaking of things that are killed.
This is late to the party because we do a biweekly podcast and this happened like two days after our last episode.
But for anyone who's listening to this who doesn't already know, which I'm guessing is nobody slate codecs that wonderful resource of thoughtful insight and like hard discussion on every topic under the sun is gone.
Scott Alexander was approached for an interview with the New York Times and they never got past the initial questions because one of the first ones was probably was along the lines of, can we publish your real name?
And he was like, no, thank you.
I published under a pseudonym for a reason and the long and short of it is that he was told that there is a New York Times policy of using people's real names.
He said, please don't.
And they're like, well, we're going to and he's like, then I will delete my blog so that you guys have nothing to report on.
And they said, fine, go ahead.
So we did.
He did.
I mean, in the sense that Scott Alexander deleted his blog.
You know, it's, I have a lot of thoughts on this.
Like on the one hand, it's really annoying because it's now much harder to link to a slate star codex post.
You know, a lot of the vocabulary, you know, Molok,
The worst argument in the world.
Right.
All of those are Googleable and probably have pages on less wrong.com.
So like, you can share the vocab with somebody, but you can't link easily to the original post.
That said, it's the internet.
Nothing has gone forever.
Way back machine preserved the entire website.
And also Scott wrote, I archived it.
I'm not a monster.
Yeah.
So in the event that he wants to be that he's comfortable at some point to restore it, he totally can.
It's not obliterated.
It's just gone.
So like, I, I don't know.
My, my immediate thought on this was like, I don't know if that'll do anything because now that now the article just comes, you know,
links to the way back machine post rather than to slate star codex.com.
Wait, will it?
So like, I'm just saying it could.
I don't think the New York Times.
No, they wouldn't do that.
Why not?
Well, there's some rule.
I've never just seen that done before.
Yeah.
Nonetheless, they were to change the article about why it is they're linking to this and the blog is gone now.
Yeah.
They would also have to implicate themselves.
Oh yeah.
So by the way, we, we, we did this.
That's not going to look good for them.
That is one perk of doing this two weeks late is that they're so far as far as I know have yet to say a word on this.
I don't know.
I hear conspiracy theories, which I'm not going to say what my opinions on them are that like, they just wanted to shut Scott up.
Their, their internal slack has been leaked to a new source, the Daily Beast or Buzzfeed or one of those, which showed that a number of people on their staff are pretty upset about this as well.
Good.
Well, and that's the thing too, that I thought was kind of interesting, like this, this move on Scott's part.
And so like, this is the thing where like, I'm totally prepared to say Scott is smarter than I am and probably did this with foresight.
So he anticipated the, the likely consequences or it's entirely possible that this was a decision that was, so that's what I think is most likely.
What's also a possibility is that he just kind of did this out of a rush of like, fuck, I need to kind of get off the grid.
And as part of that move, blew, blew the website away.
I think he's been thinking about this for a long time.
I mean, he's even mentioned it.
Well, then that's weird because like what happened after this is everyone up to Steven Pinker and Sam Harris and people with aggregate millions of Twitter followers retweeted, hey, the New York Times just, you know, made Scott Alexander or, you know, basically threatened to dox Scott Alexander and you shut down the wonderful Slate Star Codex.
So now not only is literally everyone aware of the website, people may who may have not even noted it before.
But I think there are, and I got garnered this from Reddit threads and stuff on Slate on r slash Slate Star Codex.
A lot of people didn't even know that wasn't his real name.
Now granted, if you're a longtime breeder, he explicitly says it's a suit in them.
But, you know, if you if you read the occasional popular post, you'll just think that some guy named actually named Scott Alexander runs a blog called Slate Star Codex.
Yeah.
But he still doesn't have his real name linked to the blog, which was his goal.
So he's fine.
Right.
And I think that's gone through some effort to try to keep himself like a moderately paranoid.
I think that there's a word that I can't pronounce.
But that word pseudonymus pseudonymus.
But like, because HIPAA and his third psychiatrist, it's like very reasonable to have expected this is going to be the outcome of him ever becoming famous at some point.
He's written about it.
I think like the other may be foreseen maybe unforeseen circle fallout is that people are going to be like, oh, who is this guy?
It's not that hard to connect the dots.
If you try, I haven't checked.
I wonder if I Googled Scott Alexander's real name, if his real name would come up.
So I actually have found Scott Alexander's real name.
This was like a year and a half, two years ago.
I was just kind of curious.
It's not terribly hard to find if you are.
It used to be easier to find.
Okay.
Yeah.
If you're a religious reader of his blog and you've picked up a lot of like small details here and there about his life, at least, yeah, several years ago, it was pretty easy to find.
Much harder now.
But that doesn't really matter because first of all, I had to be a religious reader who had picked up a lot of small details over a long period of time.
And also, there's no way you can Google Slate Star Codex and get his real name.
Like you have to put effort into it.
And that's basically what he wants to just not make it so that you Google Slate Star Codex and he pops up.
Yeah.
And I think maybe that was the goal, but now I think people will be inclined to maybe look for his real name.
I mean, that's not what he wanted.
That's the exact opposite of what he wanted.
I intentionally did not look for it because he requested like, please don't Google my real name.
I just don't.
Well, that's because we're nice.
That's because we're nice and we're not going to.
Oh, no, definitely.
A person, this hit the front page of r slash out of the loop the day that it happened.
And I don't know how popular it is.
I could check, but I won't because I'm live on the air or at least on a hot mic and it's annoying to hear typing.
But it's a somewhat very popular subreddit.
I think with the hundreds of thousands of subscribers and anyone who's on there saw this post of, oh, what is going on?
What's, what's Slate Star Codex?
Who's this hidden psychiatrist?
So like, it's, it's interesting.
I came across his name happenstance like five years ago, maybe more, whenever we started doing the lesser on meetups.
And I actually was like, wait, who's this?
And they're like, oh, that's got Alexander.
And I was like, oh, why not just put that?
And so now we do have that actually on our whatever the local meetups Facebook group on the little primer doc.
It used to contain Scott Alexander's real name, but the published version on our website doesn't.
So I don't know, I don't have much to add other than like, I wonder what all the follow will be from this.
If this will lead to more people knowing who he is.
And I mean, obviously, it's worth mentioning the lamenting fact that like Slate Star Codex was a treasure and the universe is worse off without it.
Yeah, not only is it worse off for not having the things that used to be around easily accessible, because they are still accessible with some effort,
but having it to go through all the extra hoops really is a pain in the ass.
And I dislike that too.
But like, it was a community.
It was where a lot of less wrong eventually coalesced around after the original less wrong sort of dissipated and much more.
What really, really upsets me is that if Slate Star Codex stays gone, it's all the future work that will not be created now.
It's like if someone had murdered a brilliant scientist when he was in his mid 30s and all those other decades of things that he would have discovered and published on are gone.
Or if someone like killed Kurt Cobain when he was 27 and all the other decades of groundbreaking music he didn't create.
And you know, and someone did kill him, it was him and we lost all those decades of music and that sucks.
And this just to me feels like the same kind of thing.
Like all the years of amazing shit that Slate Star Codex will have been putting out in the future might never happen now.
And that is really what I find just awful about this whole situation.
I have really mixed feelings where on one hand I think it would be cool if this did actually lead to Slate Star Codex becoming more widely known.
And then there's also the negative.
I just honestly can't understand how the previous social justice community that I was in, like everyone had this incredibly negative view of Scott Alexander as another capital P problematic, capital B bad person with QT's where if you read one of his blog posts now you have the QT's.
Have you read any of his posts because he's just the most reasonable kind of person willing to bend so far backwards to like not offend anyone?
Yeah, well it's because sometimes the reasonable kind things he said were unwoke and that's enough to make you a literal Hitler.
Yeah, I've seen these conversations happen in just the last couple of weeks.
Well, I guess in the last month, I think it was all before Slate Star Codex exploded.
But I know some people who would no doubt be rejoicing over it.
Oh yeah, me too.
And that's just whatever.
I don't have the energy this late in the night.
I spent all my emotions for the month on our last conversation, so I don't have what it takes to engage with that sad nonsense.
But if there are people who, that's not to say I agree with literally everything he's put to the page, but I've loved all of it.
If that makes sense, if I don't agree with it, I find myself even more engaged with it and that's a rewarding experience.
And more often than not, I do agree with it.
In fact, more often than either of those things, I'm just learning something completely new.
Oh my god, the amount of stuff I've learned from Slate Star Codex is just probably more than I would have learned if I went to college and got a bachelor's degree in psychiatry.
Especially the stuff about the surfing uncertainty.
Now I'm blanking on words again, but that whole thing.
It was just earlier this year that we did his conflict versus mistake theory on this podcast, right?
Yeah, and there's just so many excellent ideas and concepts that he's brought up.
Or even like, but I wouldn't be surprised if in like a couple of weeks there's like a blog titled something that's a pun or an anagram of Slate Star Codex written by some other pseudonym person.
That sounds a lot like Scott.
Does anyone remember the last psychiatrist?
Alex Skopskerson.
Yeah, I was talking about that.
Actually, the friend who messaged me when he heard about this and he was like, this is, you know, saying all the same things like this is a fucking tragedy.
And it's, you know, the this is a resource now lost forever.
And it's that's, you know, I can't link my friends to them, you know, the meditations on the malloc or whatever.
And I was like, you know, I think that in the in the in the in the future outcome where the blog stays dead, you know, keep your eyes open for a burgeoning new rationalist blog with a different author's name.
I can't imagine.
I think it would be weird.
And I only say that because like, he seems like the person who doesn't just like really, really enjoy writing posts.
But I feel like he has like a drive to do it, which maybe is part of what makes you enjoy it.
I don't think that he'll stop writing.
I think he might take a break.
I think he like needs a he deserves a vacation.
It was one of my like first thoughts that like a jumble of thoughts jumped into my head when I saw that this had happened.
But one of them was like, I hope he like goes to Hawaii and like sip some margaritas on the beach for a bit.
Because like, we should like start a go fund me to just send Scott Alexander on a nice vacation as a community.
I hope he's well enough off being, you know, having been a doctor for this many years.
And I'm not sure what the ad revenue is from Slate Star Codex, but I hope he doesn't need to go fund me to take a vacation.
But he might need like the encouragement.
Well, we should start a what's that a change.org petition.
Say, Scott, take a vacation.
Please be kind to yourself.
Do some self care.
Yeah, I'm sure he's done up on the literature on all that stuff, too.
So I want to mention I have one more thing to add.
Yeah, yeah.
I believe it's Tumblr, Slate Star Scratchpad still exists.
He'll probably keep posting there.
I feel like it's fine to share that with the facing conspiracy community.
And I doubt that it's going to get back to the New York Times or that they're going to be able to do anything about it.
And also you'd have to go through two hours of a podcast to get to this.
Who wants to listen to us for that long?
Right.
Only all those people on Discord.
Sometimes I'm just like, why are you here?
These people who inexplicably like to listen to us ramble.
I like listening to us ramble, though.
I think we're pretty good at it.
All right.
Shall we wrap up then?
I think so.
Super do that.
It's late.
Cool.
I know we usually think of patron.
I was thinking maybe this time, can we just thank Scott Alexander for all the work he's done for the Ranchlist community?
Yeah, what?
100%.
He's done a lot.
I think that makes sense.
He's been a guiding light for a long time and he's like really helped a lot of communities grow up across the nation,
probably even across the world with Slate Star Codex meetups and having that focal point on his website where people can say,
hey, I'm in this city.
Is there a meetup near me?
Has really helped people get to know other rationalists in their area.
And that's awesome too.
So thank you for everything you've done, Scott.
I know you're probably not listening to this, but God, we appreciate it so much and I hope this ends quickly and in your favor
because I want more Slate Star Codex and the New York Times can die in a fire for all I care.
For real.
I think he said that on the mind killer.
Right, Inyosh?
That they would prefer a world where Slate Star Codex existed over a world where the New York Times existed if we had to pick one.
Honestly, I agree with you.
I agree so hard with that.
The amount of value that I get out of every Slate Star Codex press, they're funny.
They're educational.
They raise good questions and promote excellent discourse.
And then there's New York Times, which does some of those things, some of the time, maybe.
Yeah.
And then they randomly docks good people for no reason.
Or threaten to. I guess they haven't actually done it yet.
Yeah, and we didn't get into all the confluted nonsense of like, does this count as doxing or, you know, what is pseudonymity or whatever.
Like, all that's a sign.
Long episode that we married men after.
And I'm kind of just fine, totally ignoring that and just saying like, look, he asked you not to, you said you would do it anyway.
So now the blog is gone.
So that's kind of a fucked up bully move of you guys to poll.
So yeah, three cheers for Scott Alexander.
I hope you continue to, you know, create stuff for the world.
But if you want to lay low for a while, we totally get it.
And, you know, the, I am prepared to guess, I was going to say speak for, but I'm prepared to guess that the entire rationalist community is 100% behind you.
And, you know, I imagine right now is just kind of like a PR storm over at the New York Times trying to figure out how do we defuse this without saying we did anything wrong.
So when they finally come forward with their conciliatory but non guilt expressing statement, then we all come out winners.
Hell yeah.
We'll see how it shakes out.
I'm very curious to see how it shakes up.
All right.
Well, I think that's the end of the episode unless anyone has anything else.
No, just reminders that we're doing my wild and reckless youth and failings learned from history and do check the show notes for some stuff this episode.
We're going to link at least to the Dave Chappelle special and the Yudkowsky media mess a on police reform and probably whatever else we can think of.
Check the show notes.
Oh, and I need to mention once in a while during the episodes, the link to our discord is in the show notes for every episode.
Once in a while, you know, rarely, but totally worth enough to mention it on the air.
I'm asked like, how do I find the discord?
It is in the show notes for the episode.
So if you want to have these conversations with people and not just listen to people talk about it every couple of weeks, you can find us live and find dozens of active people and hundreds of lurkers on our discord.
So hang out with us there.
It's also linked right at the top of our webpage, the basin conspiracy dot com.
There we go.
All right.
Thanks for joining us, everybody.
And we'll see you in a couple of weeks.
Everybody.
Bye.
See you.
Yeah.
