Welcome to the Paising Conspiracy, I'm Injash Brotsky, I'm Steven Zuber, I'm Jay Sticky,
and Steven is going to kick us off with some kind of a story thing joke.
I just did something last night that most people haven't done in a long time.
Oh, did you go out to, crap, what haven't people done in a long time because of COVID?
You went out to a baseball game.
Does that sound like me?
No, it doesn't.
I went to a movie.
Ah, congratulations.
That sounds like you.
Yeah, what movie?
Quiet Place Part 2.
Okay.
I was trying to get Phoenix to go see that with me yesterday.
It was fun.
It had the same kind of thing from the first one where like, the reviews are saying it
was better than the first one, which was baffling because I was like, that never happens.
Yeah, I think it was good.
Like, to me, it's just one of those things.
Like the first one, my main gripe with was like, why didn't they have anything smart
planned?
Like, you know, the fireworks was one thing to distract from the, I didn't mean to make
this a long thing, but the only main, they do have a lot of like smart, clever shittiness
that I like.
The one thing that they didn't do the entire time is like, nobody throws things for a distraction.
And if you guys realize throwing a coffee mug also makes noise, right?
Your only noise doesn't have to be you shouting or, you know, jumping on something to make
noise where you are.
You can make noise at a distance.
Other than no one ever doing that, it was really good.
So yeah, fun plot, fun, everything.
I was going to mention though, going to the movies, I guess I, maybe this wasn't the
best movie to start with because, you know, there's a lot of quiet moments and you can
hear the synchronized chewing of popcorn all around you.
You can hear the people talking the whole time, you know, that aren't supposed, like
the audience, not the movie.
And I, I used to love going to movies and I'll try it with another movie at some point,
but maybe I'm not a movie theater person anymore.
I mean, you also have this weird thing where you hate all the noises that people make with
their mouths, except for talking, I guess.
That's not weird.
Thank you.
Okay, well fine then.
I'm the weird one.
Well, I mean, I just don't care.
Yeah, but that's, that's like a weird minority thing.
It's like claustrophobia.
I know a lot of people.
I have mesophobia and I don't know, I know a bunch of rationalists specifically that
have it.
I just think it's just more like, it pulls me out of the movie.
Like I, the experience is lost because I'm like, I can't get immersed when I can hear
you chewing and I can see the light of your cell phone over on my left, right?
Oh, fucking people checking their cell phones.
Yeah.
I hate when people talk about, like, I'm okay with people talking about the movie.
I hate when some of these having an unrelated conversation during a movie though.
Or even work.
Yeah, definitely.
Like a stupidly really, like 15 minutes in, someone leaned over on the, like, you know,
there was only four people on my left side.
It was a fairly empty theater and it's like, yeah, this whole thing is like a sequel to
the first one.
And it's like, no shit.
How far in were you when this person figured this out?
At least 15 minutes.
Oh my God.
And I'm like, even if you weren't here for the first one, which is fine, it's called
part two.
Yeah.
Come on.
We, so was it like packed in there?
No, not even close.
Okay.
We went at 545.
So I think that later shows definitely were.
Okay.
But even then they had buffers between groups of one seat, which is close to six feet.
Jason and me went to Milk Ditches, the local goth club.
Well, it's a club in general that has goth nights.
We went there Saturday.
They're non goth nights and it's still full of lots of goths.
Excellent.
I think it is just a goth club that has plausible deniability of having other genres of music.
And man, the pent up demand for going out was fucking huge.
There was a massive line out the door.
I've never seen that many people there.
I have before, but when I see that many people, it's like, well, after midnight, whereas this
was just like packed from the beginning, there was a line starting at like a nine.
I showed up at 830 and I think I was like 30 40th in line.
Yeah.
Geez.
Yeah.
The line was going out like the tour down the street.
There's never any cover before 10 o'clock.
This time there was cover for everybody right at the start.
The drinks were jacked up to like 50% higher than they normally are.
Yeah, people were just like, yes, yeah, we're here dancing again.
It was it was really cool.
But yeah, it was a cool vibe.
Like it usually has a cool vibe there.
I just I liked everything in general where people are just friendly and chill and like
dogs.
But this was just like, I don't know, you could feel how happy everybody was.
And there was a lot more goodwill for your fellow mankind.
So humans can go out again.
Nature is healing.
Humans are part of nature.
Okay.
Yeah.
Fair enough.
Alrighty, so this week we are talking about a tell us about these new teens, the teens
2.0.
They're the same teens that have always been teens.
The so it's a two a pair of books written by Robert Epstein and he's not the only one
in this movement.
These are just, you know, this is where I came into it.
The more scholarly one is the case against adolescents.
And perhaps I should have read that one because it would have probably quoted a lot more and
had graphs and charts and all these other things.
But instead I read teens 2.0, which is very lay person friendly and has lessened the line
in the terms of like quotes and statistics and has a lot of anecdotal stories instead.
And then like it just has a big stack of appendices at the end of the book.
They're both written by the same person.
Yeah.
I wonder how common that is.
It would be fascinating if more people intentionally wrote two versions of a book, the one that
the scholarly one and the like, like you said, lay person friendly one.
I'm just remembering how much better literally getting things done for teens.
I have a copy of this book because it's so good that David Allen's like GTD getting things
done productivity system.
But like when he was forced to write it for teens and like it used pictures and diagrams
and metaphors to explain stuff.
And I actually like was like, oh, this was an excellent explanation of getting things
done.
So that's cool.
Do we at the risk of saying hello fellow teenagers, I think it's a, what was a good
day fellow teens.
Okay.
Hello fellow kids.
D.
Bushemi and 30 Rock.
Yeah.
You guys remember being teenagers at all vaguely.
Okay.
Yeah, I do.
It wasn't good.
No, no, it was not.
I would not recommend.
It's weird because like the further I get from it, the more I remember just like the
good parts like, oh yeah, man, I'd like to go back to that.
But then reading this reminded me of all the shit bad parts and also reminded me that
there was a decent chunk of my life where I was literally suicidal and one particular
night, if I would have had access to like a gun or something, probably wouldn't have
made it through the night.
So I like, well, I don't know.
I'm over that now because I'm no longer a teenager.
I gained some meaning and independence and in my life, but you know, I'm glad you didn't
have access.
I didn't want to just push past that without saying anything.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yes.
Me too.
The world's a much better place for you in it.
Oh, agreed.
Well, thank you.
All right.
That's pretty cool.
Okay.
Thank you very much.
But for a long time, like I just thought this is how teenage years are.
This is how everyone is and how they've always been and how it's always been.
Yeah.
And then I started reading the stuff and got eventually channeled over to this book and
I was like, oh, things don't have to be this way.
Like we're literally traumatizing almost everybody and it, it lasts for decades.
Like, I mean, I still have nightmares about being in high school sometimes, but I have
like school nightmares, like at least once a week.
Oh my God.
Yeah.
I'm at this point, I think I'm mostly over it, but like this is a process that took literal
decades and it kind of sucks for subjecting almost everyone to this sort of crap.
And anyways, I'm here to talk about all this and how badly we're fucking up everybody and
what we could do to not do that.
And I can insert some levity since that was kind of heavy to get us started.
So the author is Robert Epstein.
And when I glanced at that, I was like, oh, Jeff Epstein, of course he wants us to cheat
to treat minors as more adults so that he can, you know, not be in trouble for fucking
them.
You're a bad person, Stephen.
I'll own it.
But I promise I followed up with another joke.
The founder of my company's name was Jeff Epstein.
And so his name is still on a bunch of stuff of like, you know, old test accounts, some
of the like bill invoices.
And so still most weeks, I'll see Jeff Epstein somewhere in the company.
And so I just, I love that I'm sure when we're marketing this people, it's like, oh yeah,
not that Jeff Epstein.
I'm sorry, marketing people have to deal with that.
Different Jeff, just to preface the conversation, I think I probably agree with the points
made in this.
I read some of the notes that said, I will do my, I think I can do a, I've been taking
the virtue of the ideological tearing test more to heart in the last several months.
I think it's super valuable.
The idea that you should be able to properly engage with somebody that you disagree with
one technique for really getting where they're coming from is if you can pose like basically
in your head or especially a dialogue with somebody, pretend to be somebody from that
group well enough that they can't tell that you're pretending.
I will do that for the, the large part of the status quo, I think.
Okay.
All right.
Trying to keep us honest, ask the questions, all that.
Sure.
Yeah.
I appreciate that because I was worried that this is going to be one of those episodes
where just all three of us are like, we agree with this book.
That's it.
That's the podcast.
Except now and ever we're going to just agree for two hours.
Yeah.
We're going to just sit here and jerk each other off for three hours, but have kids aren't
taken seriously enough or something.
Basically.
All right.
Yeah.
Well, I'm not going to let that happen.
Okay.
So let's start with a quick hypothetical as, is the way that I got into this.
Like if someone.
Yeah.
I love quick hypotheticals.
Yeah.
If someone right now told you that for the next five years of your life, you couldn't do anything
that had any meaning at all.
It might be kind of demoralizing the least, demoralizing would be the least of the terms
I would use to describe it.
Like along the lines of you can't really do anything that matters to anybody you care
about.
You can't make the world better or worse.
You can't contribute to your society or your friends or your family.
You can't own your own property.
If you need food, how food or clothing or shelter, that'll be provided for you, but
also anything you own can be taken away.
You can't pay your own bills or make your own money.
And if you try to, that'll usually be taken away from you.
You're just stuck waiting for five years to pass before anything can happen in your life
at all.
And you got to get a school.
Well, I mean.
You might have to go to school too, but I'm not even, you know, including school in
the equation right now.
It would feel to me a lot like fucking Groundhog Day, because no matter what he did in any
single day, it didn't matter.
It all got you reset the next day and it led him to suicide eventually.
And that didn't take either because nothing he can do matters not even killing himself.
And obviously it's not to that extreme because we don't have magic powers in the real world.
But for the most part, nothing you could do would matter.
You couldn't even have legal consequences for most of what you do unless you do something
really bad in which case you get treated like normal person again.
But no one even takes anything you say seriously in part because that's good so that you won't
have reputational effects later in your life or bad things you do now.
But on the other hand, you can't.
On the other hand, nothing you can do is nothing you can say or contribute is taken seriously
either.
And I don't know.
I personally would get really depressed.
I have one funny quick thought on that and then one serious challenge to that.
The funny quick thought, you mentioned Groundhog Day.
I saw one of those last week or this week, a movie that was called Boss Level, starring
the guy who played kind of Captain America's antagonist from S.H.I.E.L.D. and Captain America
Winter Soldier, big brawny guy, short black hair.
Oh, that guy.
Yeah, Rumbleau is his name, but I literally have to look it up.
His name in the show.
I forget his name in real life.
Anyway, it was a fun Groundhog Day movie, Strong Recommend.
I think it was on Hulu.
Okay.
Boss Level.
I love Groundhog Day movies.
Yeah.
And second of all, I don't think that he's remotely accurately describing what it's like
to be an adolescent.
Almost all of that sounded like dog shit, like he's painting like this ridiculously absurd
corner where you have to agree that this is bad.
And then, I mean, the first part was nothing you do matters and you can't make your own
decisions and you can't impact lives or something.
You can absolutely do that at 15.
Not legally.
Of course you can.
You can join the Science Olympiad, Math Club, Chess Club, Make Friends.
You can win national competitions at 15.
You can make friends, but unless you're actually the person who's winning national competitions,
what can you really do?
Well, that's true of adult life.
You can't...
Adult life, you can...
So one of the examples given is a kid who grew up in Mexico that around the age of six
started helping out, selling things on street corners, and he eventually made it really
big in life, became owner of some major company.
But anyways, just selling stuff on street corners and...
That kid's name?
Mark Cuban.
Yeah.
Sorry.
He would get money to help pay the bills, like to pay the electric bill for his family
and help buy food and felt like he was really contributing something.
And kids that can work with their parents or work on farms actually do something meaningful
that improves the lives of their family when they're doing it.
Whereas, if you're going to competitions, I mean, if you make it to the very top, you
have something to put on your resume later, I guess, but it's not like anyone else's life
is positively impacted by what you're doing.
I don't know.
I mean, I don't want to say that you can't have a positive impact before you're allowed
to have a gainfully employed job, because, A, gainfully employed jobs, the vast majority
of them don't impact anyone's life positively, unless you're a particularly chipper, checkout
person that safe way, you're not making anyone's life that much better, right?
You have some ownership in your life, and you actually can make people like your family's
life better just by contributing to paying the expenses.
So in those limited capacities, sure.
But as a kid, this sounds like I'm patting myself on the back, but it's only because
it's relevant.
I mentioned you had a rough night in your youth where you were very seriously suicidal.
There was a kid, I was in junior high, told me he was going to kill himself, and the long
story involved me almost getting in trouble for talking in class, and the principal was
in the...
I'll tell the medium link version anyway.
The principal was in the class just observing or something, and the teacher told me, hey,
stop talking back there.
And I was like, actually, it's really important to talk to the principal about it, because
the principal was there, and go sit in the back.
And then I sit back with him.
I was like, so do you want to hear what it was about?
And he was like, sure.
And so I was like, well, we should leave the room.
And I told him, and he's like, well, which kid was it?
I was like, he told me not to say.
And he's like, well, look, this is really important.
Like if he goes home and dies, this is on me because I could have stopped it.
Well, he said, quote, this is on me.
And the implication was this is also on you, but I don't think he wanted to say that to
a child or an adolescent, a young adult.
Did you tell him who it was?
Yeah.
The kid and I got along great for the rest of our primary school education.
And I don't know if he was going to kill himself that night or not.
But there's a non-zero chance that he was.
Yeah.
Regardless of whether it was or wasn't, clearly something wasn't going right for him.
Yeah.
And he needed help.
I don't know if it's all his problems or not, but he went off and he went and talked
to the counselor.
And then he came back, gave me a hug sometime later that day or the next day, and I'm hoping
that this helped him, helped his life.
I wasn't gainfully employed.
No one paid me to do it.
Yeah.
You did a great thing.
I did that without being able to have a job.
Yeah.
I could very easily imagine that scenario, not having that happy ending, though, where
if the adults hadn't taken you seriously, if they'd just been shut up, shut up, stop
talking in class, I've definitely had that happen.
Not that exact scenario, but I've had abusive teachers or just incompetent ones.
Yeah.
I totally could have gone that way, too.
Some teachers I had in some institutions, I was at sucked, but this was a positive
moment in my, there's probably, you know, like school sucks in the most part.
You mentioned how like you look back on it with like rose-covered glasses.
And you know, I think other than the bullies and the boredom, I had a decent child, I had
a good childhood.
You know, like I, there was a lot of running around outside, goofing around, a lot of doing
stupid shit that, you know, you can't get away with as an adult.
But anyway, I guess I'm bringing that up as a counterpoint, you know, so yes, the six-year-old
is able to contribute to his family's food income, which I think is a horrible responsibility
to put on a six-year-old, like, no, no, you need to hit this quote or your family is going
to starve.
You know, yes, it's on you.
It's certainly not how it was put.
Yeah, I think it's not, the kid is being forced to do this, like it seems like the actual
crux here is the autonomy question of it's not sort of whether, you know, a childhood
where you work.
Does this make sense?
Sorry, I'm just trying, I'm trying to...
It does make, I'm gonna stop trying to make my own tortured, terrible metaphors and just
go into the actual argument in the book because it's done better than what I've been doing
so far.
Sorry, I didn't mean to hit on that too hard.
No, no, it's fine.
Now that's your job.
Yes, it is.
So his argument is that the main need teenagers have is to become productive and independent
and that this is something that starts happening for most people somewhere around 12, 13, where
they start wanting to gain their own lives and just, just gain some autonomy.
When you said, started to, usually we said what, 12, 13, like I would argue or not argue,
clarify puberty around, yes, yes, like it's the actual like physical and mental changes.
Yes, I guess someone becoming adolescent are caused by the process of puberty.
Yeah, I shouldn't, I shouldn't put an exact age on it because actually one of his major
things in this, in one of his major arguments is that the physical number of years you've
been on this planet is an absolutely horrible metric for almost any of the things that we
just put an age on and should be instead based on the maturity of the child, which is in
large part due to puberty.
So yes, I should say more like when you have, when you're in the mid to late stages of puberty.
So I mean, this kind of brings us back to our last episode about gauging mental aptitude
slash maturity.
Yeah.
Is this going to be like Game of Thrones where it's like, has she bled yet?
And like, so then, then that's like the question of whether or not she can get her learners
permanent at the DMV.
The clerk gets to ask, you know, like,
I mean, we can get into this later if you want, because it does come up later.
But I mean, the main question as to whether you can get your permanent at the DMV is,
are you able to operate a vehicle?
And that's, that's the only thing that should matter for a license.
And that's the only thing that would be considered as opposed to how many days has it been since
you popped out of your mom's womb?
When you say, now we're getting bogged down, but when you say operate a vehicle that's
separate between operating it, operating it well.
Yes.
Okay.
Operate it well enough that society says you're allowed to do this.
Okay.
There's definitely some adults that should not have a driver's license.
There are a lot of kids.
That should not be an age thing.
Who sat on their parents lap, you know, in an empty parking lot when they couldn't reach
the pedals and got to turn the wheel and stuff, you know, like I could operate part of the
car, but you'd be insane to let me tie wood blocks to my shoes and drive like short round
from a temple of doom, right?
Well, I think being physically not tall enough to reach the pedals means you probably aren't
ready to drive a car yet, but I would say that I know plenty of 13 year olds who I would
trust to drive a car.
A lot of this is a combination of both experience and literal physical maturity.
Attitude.
Yeah.
And if your body is there and your brain is a part of your body.
Okay.
So, yes, he goes into the fact that this is like the main thing that teens are supposed
to be doing and is kind of how it has happened all throughout history.
Let me just jump into the history thing real quick.
That up until the industrial revolution, there wasn't really a term for adolescence.
There was like young adulthood and people would realize that people who had just gotten
to adulthood were still, you know, inexperienced would make some dumb mistakes, but there wasn't
this protracted period between childhood and adulthood called adolescence that is just
full of drama and and terribleness and is its own phase where someone is kind of stuck
in this limbo period.
And he says that of the 168 societies, pre-industrial societies that were recently, recently as
a relative, this book was published in 2006, but that were studied.
Over 100 of them didn't even have a word for adolescence yet.
And most of them didn't have a recognized period of all this drama and confusion and
rebellion that teens go through.
Instead, the teens just kind of transition into adulthood and the closer they are to
Western societies and more industrialized, they become the more and more they start getting
the same sort of pathologies that we have right now.
So he believes that this is a very modern thing, very modern meaning in the past few
centuries and goes into the history of how exactly we came to have an adolescent period,
which is pretty interesting in its own.
But before we get to that, and if we get to that, he's mainly saying that in the pre-industrial
society, people would, as they joined adulthood, just start transitioning into their own adulthood
where they started learning skills and what I mean, they had been working alongside their
parents or some other adult members for the entirety of their lives and didn't have that
much of a problem transitioning to being their own autonomous individuals, whereas now we
specifically have customs and lots and lots of laws.
He journals the increase in laws starting in the, I believe, 1880s and then having a huge
jump in the 1960s that drastically restrict what children can do and strip them of their
rights and otherwise called protect them.
Yes.
The first example he gives is a really good one where, and I don't mean to put too big
of a, oh yeah, I got to raise a flag here, Mary Ellen Wilson was a nine-year-old girl
who was beaten daily by her foster parents.
In 1874, mission worker Edda Wheeler took it upon herself to rescue Mary Ellen, but the
authorities were uncooperative.
No laws existed that prohibited such abuse.
As a last resort, Wheeler approached the NYS PCA for help, Berg took the case arguing
that New York Supreme Court justice or arguing to a New York Supreme Court justice that Mary
Ellen deserved protection as a human animal.
They did have protection for animals at the time and the NYS PCA was one of those animal
protection committees.
Yeah.
And first of all, it sounds like, what was her name?
Weller Wheeler, Edda Wheeler sounds like a, oh, and then Jane Adams later, she sounds
like a fucking hero, helped found the ACLU, helped found the double ACP.
She sounds awesome.
She does.
But the, like when I say laws, you know, not just holding the back, like what, in this
case, the law was holding her back from the, you know, the, the freedom of getting her
ass, her ass whipped every day and no one to, to complain to, right?
Yeah.
So in many cases, this actually did help.
Initially, yeah, they didn't have any child protective laws at all.
Children were treated more like chattel, that they were their parents' property.
And yes, but also it has come way too far in the opposite direction.
He actually, this Adams lady that you're saying of who was vital in all sorts of reforms,
he, you know, he does praise her for starting up these organizations and making a huge
impact in the world.
But also she was one of the people who was very much along the lines of children are
completely helpless and should be protected from themselves and started pushing for all
these laws, which eventually got passed, including creating brand new crimes, which
didn't exist and didn't hurt anyone and were defined as crimes against the self, which
included things like going to movies or dance halls, staying out past a certain hour and
behaving, quote unquote, incorrigibly.
So she was very much of the Puritan, we must protect people from their own sinful nature
kind of thing.
There's definitely a way to turn it up to stupid.
Yes.
But they're, but having, having no threshold sounds like a terrible idea.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The argument is that our threshold now has gone way past stupid and is continuing to get
even worse.
I would say it's better than it sounded back then.
Now we can go dancing.
We can go to the movies, etc.
Well, teenagers, though, like,
you're not allowed into milk if you're,
I was going to say, yeah, there were, there were some 18 year olds are probably younger
about like these dudes behind me were like, Hey, did, did they let 18 year olds in here?
Like, no, they've been here before.
And I was like, now they're the cardio at the door.
I was like, well, why?
Like, I guess because they serve alcohol and it's like, yeah, we weren't going to drink
it.
I was like, it doesn't matter.
Yeah.
I, yeah, we can, we can keep rolling.
I, I wanted to, I mean, unless we want to drill on that particular example.
I mean, I, I don't know, you know, I guess I don't know if it's the fact that the
establishment, the establishment is the establishment milk bar thinks that 18 year olds
aren't or 17 year olds aren't people or whatever.
Well, it's also illegal for them to, it's below 21 actually.
21 is the drinking age.
That's my point.
Yeah.
So it's not like the, it's not like every institution seems to bind to this.
It's like, no, sorry, we'll lose our liquor license and our business will get
shut down.
So no, yeah, no can do.
I mean, the laws are the problem.
And yeah, I mean,
Like if I wanted to do anything as a kid, I'd have to ride my bike.
Uh, I used to ride my bike 45 minutes to go to the library.
Like there's a restriction there just on like, I, I could have gone to movies and
gone out dancing, but I didn't have transportation and they didn't have like
good public transit in Jersey.
Yeah.
So I was just kind of in the middle of nowhere.
Yeah.
Public transit in four Collins where I grew up sucked, but it was at least
existent.
Um, you know, I had a friend who was in second grade to take the city bus to
the, uh, at least to the bus stop or maybe all the way to school.
Um, I don't know how old their second graders, like 11.
Like, you know, so he at the, at the, at the risk of just saying, yes, we
shouldn't infantilize every child forever.
I'm definitely, uh, in the camp of Jonathan height where, you know, we're
cuddling kids way too much, but I, I am, I will do my best to play the role of
the person who does think that some cuddling makes perfect sense and should
be, should be upheld.
Okay.
So, but don't, but don't put words in my mouth.
Discord discordians.
The primary initial argument is that children soon after they hit puberty are
ready to start taking on adult roles and, uh, want to do that.
And nowadays society does not let them and represses them and starts
has taken away all their rights and just puts them more and more through
this coercion and through the saying, you are still a child.
You can't do anything, uh, and we must protect you from yourself.
And this leads to all sorts of pathologies.
Starting with, uh, children, not children, sorry, uh, young people, uh, in
their teens often have absolutely awful relationships with their parents since
the parents are the jailkeepers that have been appointed by the state as the
people who have to, you know, keep their teens under control or they will get
fined or go to jail.
Um, and it starts causing pathologies for people as well to have these, these
basic needs, uh, thwarted for years and years on end like that.
And he says that you can generally track the emergence of full blown
pathological Western style adolescents in countries that are undergoing
Westernization and then give some examples of these pathologies.
And I mean, I think we can probably think of our own teenage hoods, uh, as
examples of this, but he, um, he goes ahead and lists a bunch of statistics.
Uh, he says crime rate rises in teens until peaking at age 18 and then
dropping steeply.
Uh, the peak crime for almost every single crime out there is around, uh, 18
years of age.
He says, uh, rates of most substance abuse peak at about age 20 rates of
more automobile accidents and fatalities are the highest in the late teens.
Rates of sexually transmitted diseases are peak in the early 20s.
Two thirds of all STDs are contracted by people who are under 25, uh, spending
on behavior, altering drugs for minors has now edged out spending for all other
drugs, including antibiotics, medications for asthma and allergies and skin
conditions for minors, more than half of high school juniors and seniors drink
regularly as of 2008, about, oh, I guess this was published in 2008, then about
20% of American high school students smoked cigarettes.
Suicide rates for 15 to 24 year olds have tripled in the last half centuries.
Even as rates for adults and elderly have declined and for every youth suicide
completion, there's nearly 400 attempts 40% in 2007, 40% of American
teens were treated for major depression.
Uh, the peak age for sadness among American adults between the ages of 18
and, you know, the end of life, uh, the peak age for sadness is 18 between 18 and
22% of young people have purposefully injured themselves peak age for sadness.
Like you ask people in their 40s, when were you the most sad and the average
was 18, the, well, I mean, they start asking at 18 and then just, yeah,
keep going after that and peak age of sadness is 18, because that is, you
know, the time when you're closest to being a teenager in their age cut off.
I mean, that is one explanation.
That is one explanation.
That, that is something I'm going to hammer on a bit when we get more direct
towards it.
I'm not convinced that this is the cause of a lot of these problems.
Okay.
At least, at least not yet.
Maybe I may be convinced.
Well, I'll go ahead and wrap it up.
That was, you know, the best list of pathologies and all we need to do, I'm
assuming is think back to our own childhoods or look at what society has
as their stereotypical view of the teen to realize that this is a time with a
lot of pathology, uh, and your argument is that it comes from something else.
I'm saying that it, it's not convincingly argued that it comes from treating
them like kids.
Okay.
Uh, I'm not saying I have the other cause.
I can think of some, but like, I mean, well, one jumps out at me.
The rates of automobile accidents and fatalities are highest in late teens.
That's me.
Sounds like we shouldn't be letting people in late teens drive, you know, if
they're running around killing people.
If you wait to let it, you go even longer.
I think you're just going to push the age out even more further.
I mean, maybe I, I mean, there's something to be said about, and I think
there, there's a section here in your notes about the teen brain cause, you
know, well, and just your brain's not done developing.
You don't have a frontal lobe yet.
I mean, you technically have, you have one.
It's actually a misconception.
Um, to some extent, like the teen brain is different, but they've, they had
characterized it before as teens behave this way because they're undeveloped,
but it's actually a specific, like there are specific brain changes that make
you a teen that like evolved for, sorry, Wes, specific purposes of, um, making
you, encouraging you to like leave your tribe of origin and go find a mate with
like better genetic diversity and the risk taking and impulsivity, uh, is like
because you're gearing up to basically go, go to war with nature or other humans.
Like.
I mean, one could argue that you might want to keep a tight leash on those folks
then.
I mean, just, I mean, I'm not making that.
Trying to lease them is what they're arguing, uh, causes these pathologies.
And I think you, you do actually see, um, they're talking about pre-industrial
societies that the teen, that they don't have this like teen problem that we
have in the West.
Yeah, the thing that I find a bit more convincing as to why these, these are
the causes of the problems rather than something else is partly because, uh,
there, there is the whole before industrial society.
We didn't really have this and other pre-industrial societies don't
particularly have it, but, uh, also when this is taken away, people tend to do a
lot better and he specifically calls out Boys Town as one example.
There's a few other societies like this in the early 1900s where instead of
sending, um, young offenders to jails, they would send them to these societies.
And the, the Boys Town in particular was interesting because he said, uh, all
these young people were just put in a town without any locks on the doors or
fences around it or whatever.
But they were like, you live here now, uh, go for it.
And their courts where were other teens, the judges were teens, the advocates
were teens, the advocates or lawyers, whatever you want to call them.
The jurors were teens.
Yeah, they, they, the trash people that collect the trash every day were teens.
And he said, as soon as they started like being treated like adults with
real responsibilities and real things that mattered happening to them, the
vast majority of them started acting like normal people without all these, I'm
sorry, by the term of normal normal people.
Maybe that's a stigmatizing, but, uh, they immediately became much
more socially integrated and law abiding and importantly happy with life.
And it was a, a great rehabilitation program, which unfortunately has been captured.
There is still a Boys Town now, but it's basically like any other juvenile
detention system where they are still treated as kids that have to be
watched and protected.
And there's a huge amount of counselors that make all the decisions that matter.
Uh, it was a very interesting case study and it, he has multiple examples
given where once you give people responsibility and the ability to
affect things around them, they very quickly start acting like decent people again.
And I mean, personally, the thing that helped me, um, get over my mental
situation was I dropped out of college because college was still a world where
things were provided to me and what I did didn't matter.
Uh, uh, I, once I was out on my own, making my own money, paying my own rent,
it suddenly felt like I had ownership of my life and my decisions made a
difference and I really quickly rebounded after that.
And, you know, when you have to clean your own place or you're living in a
filth, you have to take out your own trash or the trash just builds up.
Suddenly there's actual consequences for the things you do with your life.
And that feels good.
Yeah.
I mean, there's something.
It doesn't.
Uh, you're, no, please.
I was going to say there's something, you know, um, reward.
Rewarding might not be the right word, but validating, you know, when the
pantry isn't magically filled every week and you like, you buy your own food,
you know, if you're out, if you're out of toilet paper, that's your problem.
You need to go get some.
It gives you a sense of authority over your life.
I can, I can dig that.
Um, and not just the fact that, you know, it feels good, but the fact
that this is what humans are supposed to be doing at this point and taking
that away from them causes all these problems.
I think you see this in any population where autonomy is with holes taken
away, minimized, uh, I mean, I was just thinking about like the prisons
in the Netherlands, which just your regular adult prisons, uh, I think it's
the Netherlands that might be Sweden, but, um, they basically have a prison
system where yeah, it's a open doors, no locks, like no barbed wire, people sort
of work at jobs and they're, they can come and go as they please and make
their own decisions and people reform in these conditions where they, they get
worse, the more you restrict them.
Yeah.
And like, I'm thinking like old folks homes, like that you've seen this
like psychologically over and over.
And there's some people that you can't have like that.
You just have to get rid of them.
Like El Chapo maybe, but in American prisons, when we do the same thing
that we basically do to teens, I mean, they're famous for the intense
levels of drug use.
That's the only thing you have to do as you have waiting for the time to run
out before you can get back to life, tons of drug use, violence, suicide,
self-harm, they're horrible torture factories.
And this is a big cause of that.
Yeah.
I mean, prisons are their own box of worms that I'm not going to defend, uh, or
can of worms, um, that, that, that's, that's a whole mess.
I mean, you mentioned old folks homes.
I mean, there, there's, there are definitely, uh, people in these, in, in,
you know, say like a secure psych facility or, uh, some, some nursing homes
where you want the doors to lock from the outside.
Yeah.
Cause if, cause if you're, if your grandmother wanders out and drowns in
the lake adjacent to the property, um, because she doesn't know what decade it is.
Uh, I think it makes sense that the, that the institution's at fault.
So I don't want to lump in.
Yeah.
I don't think we're disagreeing though.
Like the, this book is not saying immediately emancipate all teens.
It's saying competency.
Like I, I think that you should do competency checks for teens to see if they
can do something.
And for like elderly people, like the driver's license is a good example.
Definitely there's a lot of people on the road that should not have a license.
And I think there's plenty of teens who could drive a car safely.
Yeah.
I was, I was struck with your example of boys down and tried to skim the Wikipedia
page, but it's too big.
Um, I don't, so I don't have much to comment on that.
Half of a Robert Epstein's Wikipedia page is about him suing Google because they
put a warning on his site that his site was full of malware when in fact it was.
Okay.
And so he's like, you guys are lying, trying to, you know, make me look crazy.
And it's like, actually, no, it looks like, well, I was hacked.
This isn't fair.
Um, he sounds kind of like a crank, but, uh, that's also me just trying to
observe this to the lens of this guy's not right.
So I didn't read the whole thing on that either.
But, um, it sucks about the malware on a site.
I mean, I just think it's funny.
Like, I didn't do it.
It's like, well, actually, no, look, well, I was, I was tricked.
I was hacked.
It's like, okay, then that's what everyone says.
Um, anyway, uh, where was I with, um, the, uh,
He also cites a study that shows a large positive correlation between
infantilization scores and psychopathology scores.
That the more teens are treated like children, the more signs of psychopathology
they show.
Yeah.
I remember seeing that I was, uh, I mean, without being able to read the study,
I don't know what, like a lot of this sounds like, um, you know, Zimbardo
arguing that the, uh, the environment makes the person, right?
And that's an example of a crank who's just spent his whole career trying to
make a point that is probably wrong.
Um, and one, one, one red flag for a crank.
This isn't like, you know, it's never proof, but if they've dedicated a ton
of time trying to prove the same thing for decades, um, especially when it's
not accepted, correct.
That's all that, that is how a lot of cooled new correct things come out, but
it's also a sign of a crank.
Um, it's, so, I mean, there's, there's a, I'm not saying that it's, this isn't
not even close to proof positive, but it is evidence that this guy's just
got an ax to ground like Zimbardo, right?
Does it help that he's not the only one that there's a bunch of other people
also on this boat?
Absolutely.
Oh, yeah.
Um, and don't get me wrong, I'm not saying that this was, I was going to dismiss
him as a crank on this one thing, but it is a sign of crankdom.
Uh, let's see.
Um, there was a grander point I was going to make about something earlier.
I mean, you know, one of the things about, uh, pathologies around 18 and stuff.
I mean, so.
No, between in the, in the teens, right, before you have the ability to legally
control your life.
Well, I mean, that's what, that's why I wanted to see what the
specifics of these were for the record.
I didn't know the name of this book until two days ago, so I didn't get a
chance to, to go in and like do any real research, but you know, like the, the idea
that LSD can, you know, if you're, have a rent, if you have a propensity
towards schizophrenia, LSD can trigger it.
Um, that might just be bullshit because like people experiment with drugs in
their early twenties, usually mid twenties, and that's when schizophrenia
manifests.
Yeah.
So like it, if people are getting pathologies that are showing up in their
late teens and early twenties, like that's also just when these things often
arise, schizophrenia being one example, the specific pathologies start to drop
off after 18 since that's when people start getting rights.
And you also don't say since then, but you haven't convinced me that since
then, you don't see the pathologies and other cultures, um, at least not at,
like, you know, at these rates, I was curious.
That was more Western to get the worst they get.
That was one of the questions I was going to ask when you say
industrialized, can you explain what that means?
Uh, in like electricity jobs, basically the closer they get to American
culture and adopting schools, yeah, yeah, public schools are a really big one.
Sure.
And I mean, cause like a stripping people of rights.
Yeah.
I mean, like in 1874 or whatever, there weren't a lot of car crashes.
So like that, that's kind of seems like, uh, I mean, I'm obviously poking fun,
but it's a bullshit statistic to say, look, you know, a hundred years, 150 years
ago, kids weren't having these, these auto accident problems.
Like, well, of course they weren't.
There weren't cars to crash into each other.
Yeah.
Um, so he has a really interesting example given for the Inuit culture.
Uh, and I mean, we're kind of using industrial and Western interchangeably
here and as a shorthand for what's been happening over the past couple of
centuries, but he says, uh, that this is happening to Inuit cultures, uh, as well.
And it's, uh, quoting him, especially unsettling because it cannot be blamed
on either urbanization or industrialization because Victoria Island has
experienced neither one television forced schooling and social security were
enough to decimate the traditional culture and to create the new development
stage we call adolescence.
So it was, it was the fact that, um, they, they have the forced schooling and
the taking away of, of traditional rights that people had that started making
them have this adolescent period of drama and terribleness.
So even though we're seeing industrialization, it doesn't necessarily
take actual industry.
It's just the culture that has, um, evolved since industrialization became a
thing and what he said, it was social security and television television
for schooling and social security were the major changes that, uh, came to
Victoria Island.
Yeah.
I want to say something about, uh, social security, but Steve, I was just
going to point a skeptical flag at, uh, TV and social security being
proximate causes of badness.
Um, those were just the three major changes.
Right.
So, I mean, if, if I had to guess the problem was probably before schooling.
Um, I, I mean, unless we're arguing that no, no, social security gives people
a safety net and safety net as many people weak and sad.
So we should take rid of those.
Right.
Gotcha.
No, I think, um, what they're saying is like television, for example, is projecting
this like image of youth culture.
They talk about, um, marketing, sort of, you know, um, spreading this, this
misconception about teens.
And I basically reinforces everything we think about teens.
Yeah.
Uh, and the social security was a think about, um, about the workforce.
Right.
Like, uh, actually this might not be the same point, but I thought it was
interesting that the book talked about the way that like there were incentives
to drive teens from the workforce.
Yes.
I'm not actually sure if that has to do with the social security or not.
But, uh, we can, we can jump into that.
That makes sense.
I, I do have, um, and I just want to put this as like a thing to, because you
used the phrase a minute ago about, and this was, this was because of this.
Um, I don't, to me, the, the causation hasn't been established yet.
Like to take the example of, um, say depression among 18 year olds, uh, I,
I think part of this might be, I mean, just if I'm not saying this is the cause,
but I can think of other causes that sound just as plausible.
You know, so like, all right, now you're an adult.
Now you have all this responsibility.
You're 18.
Now you get to pick your career for what you want to do the rest of your life.
You get to go into tremendous debt to go to school.
So you can, so you can do that career.
You get to never afford a house because they cost seven times what your parents
paid for them.
You'll never make as much money as your parents did.
You'll never have enough for retirement.
Like you come to realize those things at 18 and of course you're super depressed.
And so like, I don't know if, uh, I mean, and that would also explain why these
rates are going up in the, another corollary fact is that we have more child
protection laws, but it could just be the fact that young people today are fucked.
Right.
And they realize that when they're eight, when they're, when they're coming into
the world and they look around like, oh, wait, I'm fucked.
I think young people now are less fucked than they were in the 1880s though.
And yet things are getting worse mentally and emotionally.
The thing that is better at establishing mental and emotional fuckery than we
were 120 years ago, 140 years ago.
Yeah.
I don't think there was the youth suicide epidemic back then.
Now you can again, look at pre-industrial cultures, uh, especially look at
intergatherers.
I mean, that's sort of a different topic, but I didn't mean to, to derail too hard.
But I mean, I guess I want to just like, every time you're inclined to say, because
of this, I just want, what is, what is his evidence that he's got that this is
the cause other than the correlation?
Okay.
All right.
Um, it was a good call out though, because yeah, these are, these are all a bunch
of correlations, but they, I have read all of your notes and I believe that they
do point at something.
Well, shall we get into the correlations?
Cause he kind of goes into a lot of them, um, one by one.
And I realized that we can't do a large scale blind study on this, right?
Um, so I'm not asking for, here's the experimental proof.
You can, you can do studies about criminality, or you can run statistics on, you
know, how many kids joined a gang, uh, OD on drugs, like commit suicide.
Uh, yeah.
Totally.
You just can't, you can't do controlled experiments on those things.
Yeah.
Well, you can, I'm saying that there are ways of gathering evidence and facts.
Oh yeah.
100%.
I was saying that I wasn't drawing the line at the absurd standard that we'd need
a controlled trial for me to believe this.
Yeah.
You can get really good, uh, you know, bet your house on it, uh, information just
from careful observation of, of the way things are in different places.
Yeah.
I mean, I actually want to, I was just going to say to you, cause you mentioned
the suicidality of people 140 years ago.
I mean, part of it might have been means of access, you know, part of it might
have been, again, you had something to do, right?
Right.
Like so, I mean, having something to do is actually a pretty big deal.
Yeah.
Right.
That's, that's what we're going.
Yeah.
But I mean, I, I mean that, uh, you know, an 18 year old today might have plenty
to do, but they, they don't feel like they can ever make an impact.
And that's not, that's not the case back then.
Right.
But that, that has nothing to do about when they were given the opportunity to
start working that has everything to do with the way the world is and they might
have impact you're allowed to have.
Like you talked about in the opening analogy of, of not being able to make
an impact on, on the world.
It's like, well, most of us can't, you know, even on your own local world, you
know, unless you live on a farm and like that has brought up a fair bit, but
this has nothing to do with age.
This has to do with the modern world.
Well, I mean, yes and no, the modern world specifically prevents young people.
What's the voting age?
The voting age is 18.
You don't get to vote about whether or not, you know, you get to make better,
like, like, uh, low, low-skilled jobs, better or more impactful.
That's not something you can vote on.
No, but you can vote on whether kids are allowed to work instead of going to school.
I guess I just, I'm not convinced yet that the, if someone is allowed to bag
groceries at 15, that they would be happier than if they got to bag groceries at 18.
No, of course not.
Bagging groceries is one of the worst jobs there is.
Right.
But that's why we allow teens to do them because that we prevent them from taking
any jobs that are meaningful or important or could develop skills that
they could use later in life.
But if that, I mean, that someone's going to be back in groceries no matter what,
right?
Until we get robots doing it.
So like, but why are we?
Okay.
So I'm not trying to get derailed.
I'm just, I'm, I'm pointing at that, like the, the, the fact that you can't make
a large impact that I don't know how much that has to do with age that has to
just do with the age, the time that it is now, right?
So I know, I know what you're saying.
And I, one of the things I kind of didn't like about this book is that it
is peppered all throughout with, I don't know if it gets to a hundred examples.
Maybe it's a hundred, definitely dozens.
Every few pages, there's another couple of paragraphs, just giving examples of
young people doing things that are important.
I pulled out one of them because it's Bill Gates and we all know and love Bill
Gates, but he started doing meaningful work with computers at the age of 11.
And that was one of the nice things about growing up in the late 80s, mid 90s was
that computers were a new thing, which were a lot of young people just jumped
into it. And there was no one telling you, no, you can't work on computers in
your own garage, your own home.
And that was a place where a lot of people could rest back control of their
lives. And he was one of the people that did that famously.
So, and so there are some domains where you can make an impact, but the typical
domains that adults usually pursue, like helping their community by being their
electrician or their plumber or whatever else it is, is just denied to
children, to, sorry, to young people, so that they, they can't do them.
The example I was going to go to was when I was a sophomore, I think, in high
school, one of the smartest fucking kids in my class.
Gosh, I don't remember her name now.
We weren't like close friends, kind of like peripheral friends, but she was
just driven, smart, very conscientious.
And she got a job working at Burger King, and she was the best fucking
Burger King employee they had.
She was amazing, but it was an absolute waste of potential.
There is so much more she could have done if she was allowed to become an
intern at some place that works with technology or even in the business world,
like any, any place would have been lucky to have this person as an entry level
employee, and she wasn't allowed to.
And it was a fucking tragedy.
I watched, um, the kids at the library used to work at, uh, we had a, like,
programming for kids, uh, activity.
And I watched these two kids, like, like this one kid sitting there, like,
so can you, can you tell me how I do, uh, like, my marketing?
She's like, Oh, you don't have any followers yet here.
Well, I'm going to be your first follower.
So what you want to do is, um, post on a regular schedule and like, here's how
you, like, basically she's giving this kid like SEO advice.
I just like, okay, you guys don't clearly don't need my help.
And how old would you guess she was?
I think she was nine at the time.
These were like two nine year olds.
The other kid was, uh, the one who read the same books as me.
He read the, the fifth season.
Okay.
He read all of the children's books and was bored by them.
So it just started like, Oh, he actually, he like sort of hacked into our open
source library system.
So we could see what books people had checked out, which like, actually, you're
not supposed to be able to do that.
But he would just like, see what I had checked out and then check it out.
And like, that's fantastic.
The Hogwarts for library restricted section.
Um, yeah, I mean, the library had a adult and I think most libraries, they
have like an adult section, a children's section.
And now they've started having a teens section and like what part of my job was
keeping adults out of the kids section and vice versa.
Adults couldn't go to the kids section.
You could if you had a kid.
Or you were like there, they were, you know, Oh no, like a pedophile might.
Oh, I, I guess I was just thinking like, I could imagine myself swinging by to
grab a baby shark book for my three year old niece, right?
Like that should be allowed.
It is like, but it was this sort of like, I don't know, there was actually a lot
of design work that went around making the area like visible from all sides, you
know, so we could look up for perverts, but also so you could monitor the kids.
Yeah, one of them starts taking a piss on the bookshelf.
You want to be able to stop them before they finish, right?
I think it would probably happen on the adult side.
Like the, the thing that really struck me about that library was that there, it
was full of smart kids and dumb adults.
Like I was trying to also test myself like as I was driving over because I was
like, okay, I totally agree with everything in this.
And I feel really like actually, like it was just making me mad reading all this
shit.
I was like, but is this like my real opinion, you know, like, and I like ran
this scenario is like, okay, so what if like it's a survival situation like
zombie apocalypse and I'm in the library and I've got two guns and I was like,
okay, do I give the other gun to an adult or a kid?
And I was just immediately like, oh, no question.
Like I could think of which specific kids I would like be like, okay, you take
this gun, like you guard the kid's section.
I'll like whatever, and I was like, and I couldn't just like specific adults
that I would not want anywhere in New York.
When you say kid, what are you talking about?
I'm talking little kids.
Like, I mean, like the first thought was one of our teen volunteers.
What do they definitely showed much more like just capability.
Have you fired a gun?
Have you shot a gun?
Yeah.
You know, like that there's some kickback.
Yeah, I'm talking about like a survival scenario.
Yeah, me too.
But I'm not sure if I would trust a nine year old's, you know, forearm
strength to handle the recoil of a gun and not drop it or freak out at it.
Right.
I mean, like I think I'd hand it to a logistically whatever.
What I'm trying to get at is if you've grown up in a rural area, you fired
guns at nine.
Fair enough.
And I mean, that's sort of besides the point, like I hit on the
stupid point.
Sorry.
Yeah.
As you're saying, for the conscientiousness and how old is
Ellie in the first Last of Us game?
Uh, it's just 12, right?
12-ish.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
And I mean, that's, you know, it's a good example of fiction where there's
no real childhood, right?
Cause there's, there's no time for it.
That's one thing I really liked about Last of Us too, because it'd
been some years after probably 10 years of the zombie apocalypse, right?
10 or 13 years.
No, the Last of Us one started 30 years after the apocalypse.
30?
I believe so.
Oh, damn.
I thought I could have sworn it was like 15.
Anyway, so yeah, this, I mean, so you have, you have.
Maybe it was, I mean, it was definitely more than a decade.
I thought it was like two or three decades.
In that case.
Yeah.
I mean, you've got generations of people that didn't have childhoods, right?
Um, so.
Well, they still had childhoods.
They didn't have adolescence.
They had, I don't, I mean, they had some childhood, but their
childhood training included, here's, here's the end of a gun that, or here's
the end of the gun, the bullets come out of.
And they included essential skills for life.
Yeah.
Um, anyway, the, one thing I was going to mention too was about, and I guess I
don't want to harp on this the entire episode, but about the, the meaning aspect
of, of what you get when you magically turn 18 or something.
Um, you know, like I, I still think much of that lack of meaning comes from your
lack of ability to influence the world at a large, at a, at a meaningful scale
because of the way the world is, not because of how old you are, but you're
maybe thinking of meaning differently than they are talking about it in this.
Like, it's not like, it's not an, you get to go change the world.
It's, it's like more just the feeling of control over your life.
Yeah.
Or even your own life.
Like the choice to do it or not.
Um, also, like it's more meaningful to be able to choose what you are going to
eat for breakfast tomorrow than to have someone slop something down in front of
you and said, this is your food.
Yeah.
Um, I, I definitely agree that there are ways to treat children, including young,
young adults, uh, with more autonomy than we do now.
And I mean, this is a trick you can do with toddlers, you know, you let them
pick, do you want peas or carrots for dinner?
Right.
And the fact that you give them a choice gives them authorship and they still
have to eat the vegetable, right?
So like you're tricking them into doing one of the smart things, you know,
which army do you want your COVID vaccine in, left or right?
Like they don't, they don't get a choice of not getting it, which I think is a
good idea.
Well, they technically do.
Depriving people of choices, like straight up causes depression though.
Like we, you can reliably create like really miserable environments for people
by one, restricting their choices, uh, putting curfews on people.
Like, you know, right?
Yeah.
I'm just saying that as far as making them feel helpless.
Yeah.
So you give them, you can give small children the way of putting it.
We're enforcing helplessness.
Yeah.
No, it's like the business concept of learned helplessness and I see, I see
adults with it, but like it is literally like, you can teach, you can teach a
behavior of helplessness.
They did like the study that actually coined the term, I think was they took
dogs and they had them in this maze or something like that.
And there was an area where you would get a shock.
I might be like, they had jumped through a window basically once, like the
floor at electrocute, yeah, close the window.
Then they just lay there and if you stick dogs in there and then like you leave
the box open and yeah, they will like run away as soon as they start getting
shocked.
But like, if you close the door and they have no choice about whether or not
they're getting shocked, uh, if later, like, if they've learned that behavior,
like, okay, this, this sound happens and then I get a shock and there's nothing
I can do about it.
When they, when they've learned there's nothing I can do about it, which doesn't
take very long.
Like you can open the door and the dog won't leave the box, even if it's
getting shocked.
Yeah.
Cause it's already learned.
It's going to get shocked.
Yeah.
What's the point of doing anything?
That was, I think the experiment that taught me when I was a teenager and first
learned about it.
And then I came across the Peter Singer quote that put it so succinctly that either
animals aren't related to, like enough to us cognitively to where these
experiments are valuable to learn and think about people at all.
Or they are, in which case it's monstrously unforgivable to do these
experiments on them, right?
Like what good is it to know that you can torture a dog till it's sad forever?
Right.
That doesn't help us learn anything, you know, unless, unless it is
transferable to people, in which case you're a fucking monster.
I think it's kind of also to get back to the point, kind of monstrous that we
are spending a good five plus years teaching all humans helplessness.
Maybe, maybe this guy observes childhood.
And it's interesting because the book was published in 2008, which is the year
I turned 18, give or take a year.
I'm bad at remembering what age I am.
Me too.
But, but in any case, you know, so like my childhood is not at all like he's
describing, I had a job at 15, I had a job at 16 and, uh, you know, after,
after the shit job, yeah, but for the, for the part, your parents take
away any of your property if they wanted to, could they take away your
phone or your right to drive a car?
I, I wasn't allowed to have a phone or video games.
Yeah, I mean, there were, there were a lot of things that were taken away from
me because you can, you legally can't own property.
Like your parents can take away anything as a means of controlling you.
And oftentimes they do.
Yeah.
I mean, so part of me wonders if like this, I, and we'll get to the, like,
what are proposed solutions this guy has, but like my parents were also
pretty chill about most stuff.
Like, I had pretty good parents.
I had pretty good parents.
I mean, they, you know, the one thing that like we didn't have was like, you
know, a large set of books at home or something.
You know, like they, they weren't very academic, but like, other than that,
we had all the freedoms in the world.
Like, I don't think I even had a phone until I was 15 or 16 and it was a
handy down because I got a new phone.
Actually, I was, I was the last kid of us, I think, to get a phone.
But I mean, I grew up at the age where, uh, at 14, I could go to my mom and be
like, all right, I'll be, I'm going to go out and she's like, all right,
be home by dinner.
And like, granted, that's an impact being on my freedom or whatever, but it's
also kind of makes sense.
If you ever had a child or a pet that you care about, that like you want to
know where it is when it gets dark out, you know, like, I don't think that
that's an unreasonable restriction to put on someone's freedom.
And it wasn't even be home by dinner necessarily is at least call me and
let me know if you'll make it to dinner.
So now much food to prepare, which is again, I, I don't want to nitpick, but
like that's a restriction on freedom.
You're asking me to do something, but like, that's just, that's just life.
You know, if you're going to, if you're going to miss work, you're allowed to
miss work by an hour.
If you tell your boss, Hey, I'm going to be an hour late, you know, unless your
boss sucks like Charlie's, um, but you know, my boss, I, they don't care.
I sometimes this week, I'm going to take an hour off for a doctor appointment
and they don't, you know, like, Oh my God, they treat you like an adult.
Right.
But, but that's the thing.
Well, I mean, that's, I was also treated this way as a child.
So like my, I was not, I despised my father.
So I think, I think that's a main difference is that like, I wonder what
point, like part of this is societal slash legal and what part of it is just
like at home, you know, like my parents, uh, I mean, your parents were pretty good,
but the thing is, if you don't pick your parents, yeah, you don't pick your
parents.
If you don't have good parents, you're fucked.
Whereas, uh, one of the things he advocates is if you don't have your
good parents, you should be able to leave.
If you can demonstrate that you're capable, uh, of living your own life,
you should be able to be like, buy and go and have your own life.
This reminds me of like foster home situations where kids get older,
they're less likely to be adopted to the point where when you're in your
teens, like those kids don't want to be adopted.
They want to get jobs and like they've already sort of, in a lot of the cases
been in a situation of like taking care of younger kids and having to take
care of themselves in a lot of ways, but there's still this like, until you're
18, you have to be somebody's property.
That's an interesting thing.
He brings it later on in the book too, where young mothers are held legally
liable for their children.
Oh yeah, like 14.
Yeah, but like, but they are not given the legal ability to do any of these
things.
So they're put in this impossible situation.
Yeah, that's fucked up.
Yeah.
Um, but yeah, I mean, Charlie moved out of the house at 15.
She got her own job, she got her own apartment.
And once you are in a play, like, okay, my parents have gotten better, I think.
Uh, maybe it's just to mellowing with age, or maybe it's because of how badly
me and my sister rebelled against all this control.
But well, and now they can't tell you what to do.
This is probably another big part of it.
Yes.
But no, I mean, I'm talking about now my younger brothers.
My brother, Chris, he has never moved out of my parents' house.
He's 30, 31 at this point and they get along well and he pays rent.
They have extra room.
It's like a roommate situation where, you know, you can live that way with
your parents if, if you have a good relationship with them.
But there's always the option of like, if things go to shit, all right,
I'm moving out, you know, there's that difference in autonomy over your own
life makes a huge difference as opposed to, well, you are imprisoned in this house.
You have to sleep here.
You have to go to school.
You have no other choices of what you can do with your life.
If you report on where you're going and what time you're coming back.
And if you do anything we don't like, we'll take away everything that matters to you.
Yeah.
And in my case, my parents were the only way I could get transportation somewhere.
So like.
We can, we can take away your ability to see other people in your life that
matter to you for indefinite amounts of time.
Yeah.
I mean, so I guess that we'll, we'll keep moving through the book.
But like I said, there seems to be a big difference between shit parenting and
shit societal expectations of young people.
But in any, in previous societies, if the parenting was bad, the kids
could go and do other things.
Or they couldn't.
And they just, their, their, their legal recourse was, yeah, you said,
I'm gonna get your ass whooped.
Well, yeah, that in the nine year old example, she couldn't do much of anything.
But, you know, about once adolescence hits.
I mean, I, I know somebody who went 15 left home and it basically went super
terribly, um, you know, like it, the, the ability to leave home doesn't like, I
mean, it gives you an out, right?
It gives you autonomy.
It doesn't mean your life's gonna be great.
It might mean that it's way worse than if you had just cut your fucking hair
like your dad told you to, um, you know, and that was the reason you wanted to move
out.
Maybe you can go back and say, okay, my hair's cut now.
Maybe.
Yeah.
I mean, at least have that option when you see the real world, you're like, oh,
okay, this wasn't so bad.
Let's go back.
I think the freedom to make that choice is important too.
They, they made that point in the book about how, um, it's the things like
of the protect people from themselves.
I think are the most harmful part of this because like teenagers do have that
like risk seeking or risk tolerance, um, because that is the time of your life
when you are supposed to be going and trying things and making mistakes.
And like you learn how to absorb the consequences of mistakes much easier
when you're younger, whether they're physical or whatever.
Well, I mean, like it's sort of similar to, um, our last episode and then sort
of even like similar to the band goods store again, the whole like giving
people the choice of what they do to themselves.
And you, it shouldn't be able to just outright ban something because
somebody might hurt themselves with it.
That's like people are that's literally infantilization.
Yeah.
People should be allowed to make mistakes.
People should be allowed to be wrong.
I know, I, I know I say that a lot and in large part, it's because I'm
against censorship and the argument for censorship is always these people are
wrong and they shouldn't be allowed to be wrong in public where they can convince
other people to be wrong, but you should have the right to be wrong about things.
And that's okay.
Maybe I'm wrong about something, but if somebody tries to shut me up about it,
that's, that's going to be a problem.
There were people who were wrong about whether gays should have rights or not.
And the fact that they were allowed to talk about how gays should be rights is
what allowed us to see that actually they weren't wrong.
It was everybody else.
Yeah.
I mean, they're, I, you know, not to get on the free speech thing, but there,
there are cases where like, no, there's something that there can be true
information that the more wide, widely known it is, the worse off everyone is
or something, um, that's like this, the hardest steel man case.
Yeah.
Like an info hazard, or if it just turned out to be really easy, um, and it's getting
easy, uh, you can order, um, genetic sequences to, you know, for your own home
bio labs, you sure can.
And so, you know, in three years, you'll be able to make your own COVID that,
you know, COVID 20, what year is it?
20, 2021 right now, you can make your COVID 24 and it has a 50% mortality rate.
And like, so we shouldn't publish that recipe online.
And it's a true thing, but that's a, that's a whole other thing.
Was it COVID-19 named that because it was created in 2019?
It was discovered in 2019.
So all the dipshits were like, oh no, they, they found it, they found 18 of these.
You know, the 19th one isn't that big of a deal.
That's just because they heard that on the news and they listen to the wrong news.
But, uh, I guess, um, this does come down to kind of what we talked about last week
about, you know, what kinds of mistakes people should be allowed to make.
Cause I, you know, I had a hard time engaging with that properly last week
because, uh, you know, Charlie's, so much of the case was coming from Charlie
who was resting on her personal life experience.
And for me to argue with her would be like, I disagree with your life experience.
And so I, I couldn't be like, well, sure it worked for you, but I think you might
be the exception rather than the rule.
Um, or, you know, a lot of these things, I mean, especially on the younger, uh,
side of things are for people who are the exception rather than the rule.
But also I think those people are very important.
I know just recently we were talking in the mind killer podcast about how
California is getting rid of all their gifted programs for math because they
canceled the gifted program I was in as a kid because of, I think equality or
equity issues, yeah, because the people who are not as good as math are not
being served equally or something, but that's the whole point.
We want people who are exceptional in these things to have access to that.
They're the ones that are going to be driving society and they really need that.
So school is less torturous and they can make something of themselves.
And this is the same kind of thing.
We're like, yeah, the exceptions do matter.
And so if you're crippling all the exceptional people because some people
are not exceptional, that's not acceptable.
Yeah, it's the same reason like, oh, no, we can't make R rated movies because
what if a kid sees it somewhere?
I'm like, fuck you, fuck protecting the kids.
I like my R rated action movies.
I think some kids can also watch R rated movies.
Yes, they can.
Like I've never actually kids are pretty good about it.
I've met plenty of kids who have like the ability to watch gore and like sex
scenes and have like actual informed opinions about them and not be traumatized by it.
And if they can't, they do the thing where like they cover their eyes or look away.
Like there is a common protective response.
I do that if you're not mature enough.
Yeah, I was watching a movie a couple of nights ago where, you know,
this crazy woman is at the middle of the night.
She's cutting like celery and onions and stuff.
And I'm like, oh, she's going to chop her fingers off because there's a ghost in
the house. So I'm literally just got my, I'm waiting for it to happen.
Not looking at the screen, got my arm up.
And then I'm looking at Rachel and I watch her wins.
I'm like, yeah, I knew that was coming.
I told you and it was gross.
And then I watch up and, you know, she's like cutting them into pieces too,
or cut off fingers because ghost, ghost madness, right?
But like, I don't, I don't like, I'm squeamish about stuff.
And I watched a lot of our rated movies as a kid.
Some probably traumatized me. Some probably didn't.
You know, I don't know if I was terrified of spiders before the fifth
time I saw the movie, Arachnophobia, but probably didn't help.
The one that sticks out most in my mind, when I was a little kid,
I saw someone getting garaded in a public bathroom and like, that's, Jesus Christ.
I'm not in real life in a movie.
Otherwise I would have been capped as a witness.
Was it the Arnold Schwarzenegger movie?
No, I don't remember what movie it was.
It was just some random gangster flick.
And that like kind of fucked me up.
It came out of nowhere.
But like, you know, then I watched the Freddy Krueger movies
and those were so cartoonish, like whatever.
It wasn't a big deal compared to like seeing an example of actual violence
where there wasn't even any blood involved, but the dude was struggling for his life.
I was like, oh, fuck.
I think one of the creepiest, this is sorry.
It's a side topic, Labyrinth, the movie, The Labyrinth.
You know, that it's like a bloodless scene.
But that's the only thing I've seen in a movie that ever actually disturbed me to this level.
There's a scene where a character smashes a person's face in with a bottle.
Like he takes a bottle and he's repeatedly just smashing him in the face with it.
And the special effect, like it looks like real violence in a way that movies often don't.
I don't remember that scene.
Yeah, I remember.
And, you know, I saw that when I was in my 20s and I found that disturbing.
But sure, I think I'm only saying that because I have a hard time.
I was like going through my childhood memories and being like, actually,
I was like, I was difficult to traumatize in some ways.
I had like farm animals and I got to like see some of my like pet ducks
get killed by a fox and stuff in real life.
So it was like movie violence didn't even.
Right. You saw an actual.
Yeah, I don't know.
Um, should we move on to some of the ways young people get fucked?
I mean, I feel like let's let's frame it a little differently.
And like, let's let's look at the case for this, people get fucked.
And I mean, I just you're you're you're loading your your your well, of course,
I want to win. There's a word for this.
I will ask our lawyers where you're priming the jury or something.
Poisoning the well, maybe.
Yeah. Poisoning the well is the word I was looking for.
But yeah, there's there's a jury word for it, too.
I don't think of what I know.
Leading the witness, maybe, I don't know.
Like, yes.
So speaking of legal stuff.
All right.
The one of the problems is the juvenile legal system,
which has been completely divorced from the actual legal system.
He points out that the Fifth Amendment of our Constitution guarantees
that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, property,
without due process of the law.
And Sixth Amendment guarantees the accused shall enjoy a right to speedy
in public trial by an impartial jury.
But apparently, if you are under 18, you do not count as a person anymore.
Because as of the 1960s, in many states, less than five percent
of juvenile offenders were represented by counsel at all.
They didn't have juries at their trials and most hearings were held in secret.
That part's weird.
I was going to ask about trying children as adults.
You know, I do think that it makes sense.
I'm curious what the reasoning is behind not having jurors and stuff
like that for children criminality.
But you know, I saw a video on Reddit, I think it was r slash convenient cop.
And there's a cop at a gas station.
And as it happens, he was there while across the gas station.
Some kid was doing his gang initiation thing
and shooting into a gas station parking lot, killing some 79 year old war veteran.
And the kid was a kid.
You know, I probably post puberty because I think it was a young teen.
Reach the pedals. You could probably reach the pedals.
I don't know if he's tried as an adult or not.
But is this kind of arguing that, like, no, if you've, you know, if you're.
You should face consequences if you fuck up.
Well, yes.
So it seems to be kind of the argument is that if you break a law,
unless you are literally incompetent to the point of, like, you know,
an eight year old is where they don't know what you're doing,
you face consequences like any other citizen does.
So you get the right to a trial by jury.
You get the right to a lawyer and you're treated like a regular person.
I think you should have juries and lawyers and all that for whatever it is.
That one of the things you can do to be treated as an adult
is to commit a crime serious enough that people have to drop the force
that you aren't an adult.
So, yeah, oftentimes gang initiations include things like reckless behavior,
usually not literal required murder,
but reckless behavior that can lead to killing someone.
Because if you do kill someone, all of a sudden, the system's like, OK,
we're done fucking around pretending you're a child.
You're facing actual consequences for this.
But for the most part, they just take away people's right to have a trial
because it'd be inconvenient to treat them like a real person and just be like,
oh, no, you're going to Juvie where we decide your fate for you
because the parents face the consequences and oftentimes parents face consequences.
And like, that's then that provides another incentive to control kids more.
All right. So there's there's a couple things on back there.
I do disagree with the fact that children for the legal definition
aren't given juries and lawyers.
So I'm not I'm not going to argue that that point.
But I do think that there's something to the fact that I don't, you know,
my recollection of my childhood is not great.
I don't think at 13 I knew what a consequence 10 years from the road
down the road could possibly look like.
Right. I because my my memory of the previous 10 years was basically non-existent.
Right. So like, I couldn't imagine 10 years into the future.
What would it be like to spend 15 years in prison?
I would literally couldn't imagine it.
Right. I'm assuming I can't ask my 13 year old self.
If you were at the level of maturity where you actually cannot be held legally
responsible because you just haven't developed that far, you won't be.
Well, but that's that's the thing.
You treat children like children.
You treat people who aren't children like not children.
So, I mean, and I'm going to I wanted to save this for some point
and I don't want to get derailed, but we'll we'll put a pin in it of like,
how the hell do you measure that?
But well, let's move past that for a sec.
Because I mean, I do think that at some point, like, I guess when I think of parents,
I don't think of them as like, you know, jail wardens or, you know, owners of property.
I think of an idea. Ideally, huh?
You had pretty good parents.
Right. So I had good parents, but I think that in an ideal
the way that this should work is that parents should be like the stewards of their kids.
And in a way, in a not insignificant way, you are responsible for how they turn out.
There's, you know, a lot of shake up about basically they're going to turn out
how they're going to turn out, whether or not you fuck up or not.
And, you know, you have to really fuck up for them to be fucked up from your, you know, whatever.
If you don't traumatize your kids like too too much.
Yeah. Well, I mean, I mean, if you don't traumatize them, then they
I think have pretty successfully shown that like a large part of the way kids
turn out is just genetic.
Yeah. And so the thing is, like, doesn't matter that much.
If you did fuck up your children, even in pre-industrial societies, again,
using the term, not technically correctly, but whatever,
even if you weren't held accountable for their actions and the children would be
the one who was sent to the mines and punishment or whatever.
And by children, again, I mean someone who is physically an adult
and knows how to accept consequences.
It's not like people don't know that your child is the one that fucked up.
And you are held in some way, reputational responsible,
which is where the whole you have brought dishonor on the family name comes from.
Like, yeah, it is a mark against the family name
if the child goes and does something like that, because maybe the parents
fucked something up really bad.
And they probably could have done better if you're if you're 12 year old is shooting people.
Now, not in every case, but in probably many of them.
My sister used to work at a preschool or elementary school in Atlantic City.
And there were kids bringing knives.
Like, yeah, I didn't quote that the statistic.
But yeah, he also quoted how many how many adolescents bring weapons to school.
Yeah. And that they like busted for drugs and like just I don't know that.
Wait, you said preschool, they're busted for drugs, not elementary school.
What kind of elementary school?
So at that, I will say it's bad parenting.
I think that's bad parenting.
The parents parents will be held accountable, you know, because the kid
as we've talked about can't get a job with, you know, an income to buy
their own drugs from the drug you're looking on the street, they're finding
them at the parents house, you lock that shit up, you know, you put it on top
of the fridge where the nine year old can't get to it.
I wanted a similar point about gangs, how gangs actually serve a need
and give teens a lot of agency, because then you can make your own money.
You can support yourself.
And they even have like strict organizations with the ranks
that you can increase your standing in.
Like gangs are pretty decent aside from the whole, you know, breaking laws
and killing people thing.
Yeah, it's interesting.
We were talking about the, sorry, I just, before I forget, the kids will
turn out how they're going to turn out unless you radically fuck up.
That seems to be the case.
And yet we're all aghast that the fact that they're getting rid of
advanced standing programs for math and stuff.
But in the next breath, we're saying kids are going to turn out, they're
going to turn out, no matter, you know, unless you traumatize them.
Like I personally am making the argument here that all of society is
traumatizing almost all of our kids, and it is having massive impacts for decades.
Upset at them taking away like the opportunity for a kid to advance
themselves early.
Like there were so many savant like level, really smart kids at my library.
There was a kid who built a, he built a retro pie from a raspberry pie and
then made a cardboard console to house it in and uploaded a bunch of video
games to it as just like a public service to the library.
So we had like a little arcade thing.
And I was just like, this kid should be in the workforce.
And I could tell that this kid was this like sort of, you know, like
nerdy, shy kid that I could just see full of adult anxiety all the time.
It like, it kind of pissed me off because this kid was clearly like adult level
maturity and it was being treated like a baby.
And I could like, I would watch him pace and like pull his hair.
And I actually have trichotillomania and I was like, I remembered that I also
developed it around that age, which trichotillomania is a type of OCD where
you compulsively pull out your hair.
And I was like, I'm watching this kid like develop trichotillomania from these
circumstances is being held back, you know, he's not being recognized.
He's bored.
But the thing about gangs, sorry, getting back to that.
I just wanted to say that I really liked this one quote that you pulled out.
Gang activity is not childlike.
It's most definitely adult gangs emulate small governments and armies,
which gives kids a gives a, you know, I'm using the word kids in the not
pejorative sense, but we need some, it's too many syllables to say, young people
constantly, well, or young people, young people of adult physical age.
Sure.
It's got one syllable.
Yeah.
But I mean, then someone will quibble about 18 and 19.
But yeah, we'll we'll say teens.
Yeah.
I mean, it definitely gives teens a sense of authorship.
You know, you have to do what your boss tells you lest you get possibly killed.
But, you know, there's not a lot of freedom when your boss can kill you.
But there's there's some.
I'm not pro gang to be clear.
I hope none of us are.
I don't think the author is like a bad outcome of this system, though,
that like oppresses kids.
Yeah, I can see that point.
I started, this is like sort of related.
So I'm saying I started looking at jobs in the medical field that are not strictly
clinical research.
For example, I was looking at a medical assistant position and I was looking at
all the requirements and I was like, I have all these requirements.
And then they said must have spent two years in the field.
And I looked at all the other jobs that I was looking at had that requirement of
needs two years experience doing this thing.
And I was like, how does anybody get hired if you need two years experience?
Like, I can't.
This is this thing that you run into with teens and college kids too.
We're like, unless you work like an unpaid internship somewhere to get
experience, you like.
And people used to get experience just by going out and working in the thing
they were actually interested in.
I could like self, I mean, I'm self taught in all the fields that I went into.
And I've done a bunch of different jobs.
It's like, let me learn on my feet, you know, this is the eternal paradox of
basically every young person's attempt to get into any real employment.
Fortunately, they often don't even count internships because that was
something that my wife found when she graduated.
She doesn't like to brag about it, but I will.
She got an Ivy League master's degree and was told over and over.
Now you need, you need years of experience like I interned for three of those years.
Yeah, internships don't count.
It's like, how the hell does anybody get into the field then?
Right.
So it's just a kind of a huge fuck you.
That said, in your particular case and everyone listening, apply to those jobs
anyway, they're often put together by the HR person who has no idea what the job is.
And if somebody looks at your actual experience, then they're like, oh,
they actually know what they're doing.
I don't care if they haven't done this for two years that they got paid for it or
something, right?
I'm curious to see if I could get this statistician job where they were, it was
like, okay, the requirements again, where like, you need to have these licenses.
And I was like, okay, I could get those.
And then like, you need to know R or strata or like a statistical programming
language.
And I was like, I could learn that.
I'm just really curious to see if it's like, I have
all these other requirements.
I have like really related experience in clinical research.
Um, it's like, if, if you're willing to take me on and like, and let me just
self-learn this or even like, if you have an educational opportunity, uh, I don't
know, this is the kind of thing that I like.
What email can people reach you at?
Jaylyn Dickie at gmail.com.
Okay, we will put it in the show notes today.
I learned your middle name.
L-Y-N-N-E.
My parents had to, they had to do that.
Uh, yeah.
And I'll just put out there for everyone looking for jobs.
If it says, you know, two years experience, just apply.
Um, you know, it's at least worth the effort to apply.
If it says five to 10 or, you know, seven plus or something, probably
don't waste your 45 minutes applying, but nowhere says, you know, we'll take
anybody with no experience.
So just, just apply to jobs.
Well, I'm glad we're talking about jobs because the next section is about
labor and child labor loss.
And we're going to talk about crime and stuff too.
Um, oh yeah.
Did you ever thought you wanted to finish on that before we move on to labor?
Uh, not for, this is more for crime, but, uh, are we, are we done with crime?
Or are we go ahead and hit the crime thing before we abandoned that particular
boat?
So I guess it, it does want us, I need to know what criteria you use to
gauge, uh, maturity, competency.
The same criteria you would use for every other human, including what we
now call adults, because like some people aren't competent even when they're, uh,
in the age of majority.
And usually we have some exceptions for the mentally handicapped or something,
but, uh, well, not usually, almost always.
Um, but it would be the same sort of thing where you are judged based on your
actual capabilities as opposed to an arbitrary number cutoff.
How do you judge someone's actual capabilities when they're at the cusp
of gaining those capabilities?
We can get into that later on, but the short answer is, uh, when you can score
better than 50% of adults, you are, uh, considered competent.
And like, I think that was specifically a Raven's matrices, right?
Or some, some other IQ test.
Uh, it was, yeah, there were a number of comments and tests that, yeah,
yeah, so you can do, yeah, basic cognitive tests, um, just to determine
whether, you know, like, does this person have problem solving skills?
Um,
Hmm.
All right.
I, I will hold my reservations for that for the most part, other than to
throw out because I can't control myself.
Uh, I feel like an IQ test, A, you can easily bomb on purpose.
Yes.
And so you could make yourself seem incompetent.
Okay.
And if you're a kid who somehow has the.
That's a really strange thing for someone to do, but okay.
Well, if you knew you were facing 10 years in prison, otherwise you, I
would be very incentivized to plead insanity all the time.
I mean, right.
But, uh, apparently I was asking the lawyer, not as often as one might think,
but, and probably because the lawyers tell them, no, this will never apply.
Right.
Uh, but the, you know, if you're, if you're represent, if you're routinely
representing 14 year olds, you might say, look, they're going to give you a
test, take a long time and answer some questions wrong, right?
Or that would just float around online.
You know, yeah, the test wouldn't be done like after you've committed the crime.
This is something people are going to be doing when they want rights.
Oh, so like, you don't get to go get a job until you pass this test.
Yes.
And then once you pass that test, you can't pretend I'm a child.
Right.
Okay.
Okay.
That gets around some of the problems for me.
Appreciate it.
Thank you.
Sure.
All right.
We'll jump into the next topic here.
Okay.
Well, since we were talking about labor, traditionally when people, uh, wanted
to do things, they just went and did them.
And oftentimes they would help their parents and whatever their parents are
doing, which is how they slowly got integrated into adult society.
Yeah, or go, uh, apprentice.
And often apprentice.
Yeah.
I'm pretty annoyed.
The apprenticeship is not really like some fields.
I'm thinking of plumbers and I specifically apprentice people.
And I'm annoyed that more fields don't have an apprenticeship option.
I honestly can't think of any field that apprenticeship couldn't work.
Like I'm an accountant and that could easily work in accounting.
Like, is there any field where you can't apprentice?
I'm trying to think of one.
Uh, I mean, like, even like really high end research, you can still use an
apprentice to help you around the lab and they start picking up skills.
I mean, most, most people are actually just sort of self-taught for their job
anyway, that like, almost no one uses anything they learned in college or high
school.
You actually just can't teach too.
Like you do, you need the experience, but you need the experience by trying to
do the thing, fucking up and then learning from that.
I guess this is going to the school thing, which we will get to later.
I was going to say like biochem lab where you're working with really dangerous stuff.
I don't want to, I don't want a 15 year old interning with me.
I want somebody who's been doing this for 10 years and turning with me.
No, you don't want someone who's 10, been working with it for 10 years
because they won't intern with you.
They already know everything and they want a higher level job.
Let me rephrase that then.
Well, this is the highest level job, right?
If I, if I'm working on, right, right.
You don't get the highest level job.
I was, so I was, he said, is there any job you can internship for?
My first thought was like nuclear lab physicists.
You could totally be an intern in there.
I wouldn't want children.
I wouldn't want teens bumbling around when I'm building a nuclear bomb.
So one of the actual examples he gives where I complain slightly about these
being everywhere, the two to three paragraph things is, I think what is now
known as the nuclear boy scout, but the kid who at 13 started building his own
small nuclear reactor and it took him two years to finish it.
So this guy had, you know, some, some major, uh, what I would consider
adult, uh, ability to commit to a project.
But yeah, two years later, he had a very small working nuclear reactor in
his garage and it was even safe.
Michio Kaku claims to have built a particle accelerator in his garage as a kid.
I remember hearing about that.
Maybe they were very large particles.
I'm accelerating this BB gun ball.
I still doubt that some kid in the world could do that.
I don't know if I have like squinty eyes at Michio Kaku.
Yeah.
I specifically heard the particle.
Well, I mean, yeah, I don't know.
They wouldn't cost a billion dollar.
They wouldn't cost tens of billions of dollars to make if, if a 15 year old could
make one.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That said, I mean, I,
Maybe like a precursor to a particle accelerator.
The, the internship business makes a ton of sense.
I mean, you did mention way earlier on about like plumbing, electrician and all
that sort of stuff.
I wouldn't want a 15 year old, uh, wiring electricity to my house.
They don't do it on their own.
I wouldn't mind if they were watching a professional do it.
Right.
Yeah.
Like passing the, you know, wire cutters and hand me a screwdriver.
Saying, okay, this blue one is attached here.
And like, so when you do this yourself, you got to remember to strip this one
this way, you know, like.
There's another example given in the book about someone who started working,
uh, I believe this was in India, but started working in the medical field really
early and by the age 15 was doing his first, uh, surgery.
I think it was a cesarean section under the supervision of an actual, you know,
very experienced surgeon watching them.
But yeah, they were holding the knife and doing the surgery on their own.
And you can start doing that like at fucking 15.
Did the patient know that a 15 year old who had never done this before was doing
the surgery?
Didn't say.
There's actually, uh, going back into the school topic, but there was a discussion
on SlateStory codex, uh, when they were talking about how to, how to train a
prodigy, it was, um, there was this dude and his wife, uh, where I think both
mathematicians or something, and they, uh, wanted to see if they could train their
kids to be, if you could teach someone to be a child prodigy.
So they, they trained their kids at chess from like a really young age.
Uh, and I think they had three daughters or if you could have just two or three
daughters, yeah.
And I think all of them like achieved like master level chess skills at a very
young age.
Um, and then, so people were talking about sort of the intersection in the
rationalist community of, um, unschooling and this sort of thing about like
gatekeeping jobs.
And I remember people were trying to, they're like, are there things you couldn't
teach a kid to do?
Like, like if you're unschooling your kid and you want to train your kid to be
like the world's best surgeon at a very young age, like how would, how would you
be able to teach your kid surgery?
And somebody's like, well, I don't know.
You could go to the butcher shop and get like, I'm the way you would teach anyone
in college surgery.
Yeah.
But it was just people trying to come up with, I just was remembering like,
what, what's something that you couldn't like teach a kid from home or like that
I could, could the kid could not learn by doing.
And the limitations were mainly like, I mean, like you probably can't take your
kid to the large age around collider and like let them go poke around in it.
But aside from that, I mean, like you could teach a kid to do anything an adult
can do.
So speaking of job gatekeeping, uh, up until the late 1880s, there were basically
no child labor laws in 1879.
Only seven states had any child labor laws in place and all were being ignored
or circumvented to some extent.
Uh, the major change happened after the Great Depression when jobs were
suddenly very scarce and they started actually enforcing and passing more child
restriction laws in order to keep the adults with the, uh, the jobs with the adults.
Yeah.
They like wanted kids out of the workforce for like economics reasons.
Like, uh, it was interesting up until 1935, the Supreme Court would strike
down child labor laws on constitutional grounds because back then, I guess people
who weren't 18 were still considered persons with constitutional rights.
Uh, the first law that got through on a federal level was the Walsh Healy Public
Contracts Act, which, uh, prevented the federal government from employing females
under 18 or males under 16.
Yeah, what the fuck is with the age gap there?
Well, everyone knows that women achieve mental fitness at a higher, at later
than men, I'm sure it was the thinking a hundred years ago.
Yeah.
A lot of child labor legislation was also propelled by big businesses because,
uh, the, the big upper class industrialists didn't depend on cheap labor.
And because McDonald's needs like fry flippings.
Yeah, they could, they could drive out marginal manufacturers, uh, by, by saying
you, you cannot afford to hire people anymore.
So now we are the only employers left in town.
Uh, the major exception is that, uh, on family owned farms, young people can
still work without any restriction.
And it turns out more than 100,000 young Americans do so every year without
suffering any ill effects.
So, you know.
And farms like nowadays, uh, I mean, even back then, they're technically
complex, but like you've got like grain threshers that you could lose an arm
in like, you know, big combines, like it's like dangerous, hard labor with
like a lot of it being automated and stuff now too.
And kids are totally staying, you know, um, using the school exception and
working on the farm.
You handle a lot of heavy machinery.
I know, were you there?
Yes, I think you were there when we were talking with Charlie about, um, her youth
because she said by the age of 14, she was driving just fine because as she
grew up in an agricultural, uh, environment and she'd been doing the thing
you were talking about, talking, standing, sitting on her dad's lap and
steering, and then eventually handling more and more machinery because that's
just a thing you do when you grow up on the farm.
Yeah.
I learned to drive a tractor before I car.
Yeah.
I'm, I'm curious, you know, it, it seems like we can't have it both ways where I,
I suspect I'll have very little contention with the labor stuff.
Um, we'll, we'll see.
I'm sure I can think of some when they come up, but like no, no ill effects
working on the family farm or whatever, except for if you don't go out and plow
the fields till sundown, you can't, uh, whatever, watch TV tonight.
So you still have like that coercion level of, of, you know, dick ass parenting
where they're, where they're making you do stuff, right?
Um, you know, so I don't like how he can just say, Oh yeah, parents who force
their kids to do stuff are the worst unless they're forcing them to farm.
Like, I mean, you're generally not forcing them to farm a slave labor.
They're helping out on the farm and they're helping out in exchange for
having, uh, access to their, to their Game Boy that night.
Right.
Yeah.
I'm just a kid.
Um, I said it, I got a job at 14, but like even before that, my parents
both ran their own businesses and I worked with them when I got the opportunity
or when they needed the help.
I worked with my dad cause he, yeah, he had his own business as well.
And like he would pay me not a lot because my labor wasn't worth very much,
but enough that, uh, I bought my own Nintendo when that came out.
And it was, if I didn't want to work, I didn't have to, like he didn't say,
you have to come work with me or you can't do chores.
Yes.
See, I was, I mean, or you can't watch TV.
Yes.
See, I, I, I, I was just thinking that, you know, I could, I could imagine
on a family farm where it's like, no, actually I depend on your labor
and I need you out of here.
Sorry, you know, come home from school, save your homework for later.
Well, I mean, you might say that to your child, but like, then you tell them,
I depend on your labor, I need you out here.
And it's not like you're forcing them to slave labor.
It's like, I'm helping my family.
I am needed.
Like this is important.
I let the kids actually want to.
You want to be important to help your family.
I was reading some article about, or maybe it was a podcast, but it was about
like why specifically Mexican kids are so well adjusted.
And, uh, I realized they were talking about Mexican kids from Mexico where the,
the tradition, I guess, or the culture is that like you, you start letting kids
like help out around the house as soon as they, as soon as they start to like
show that they want to help and the kids like reliably will mimic their parents.
Like, and, uh, somebody was like, how come like Mexican kids can like balance
a checkbook and hold out a job or like do all of the house chores, take care
of the younger siblings and American kids can't like be responsible for goldfish.
And it's like, um, the answer was you have to let the kid be bad at a thing for a while.
Like there's a kid that was cooking dinner for his younger siblings.
At like age like six and he like using knives and gas stove.
And like, it's like, he learned how to do it because he started helping
when he was three, there's a quote from adventure time.
The sucking at something is the first step to being kind of good at something.
Yeah.
That that's the thing that like is kind of driving me nuts about this.
The, the freedom to make mistakes or whatever.
Or like to, uh, well, sorry, um, Steven, you said earlier, like parents
should be their children's stewards.
And I totally agree with that.
I think like, I mean, obviously I'm pro, uh, radical on schooling with the idea
that like a kid will kids will educate themselves.
Um, unless they're stopped from doing so.
Yeah.
I, I think I'm crap.
I don't remember where I saw this link, but recently, uh, they dropped off a crate
by they, uh, an international nonprofit organization dropped off a crate of, I believe
it was iPads, maybe not specifically Apple branded, but an iPad type product.
Uh, outside a village in some place in rural Africa.
It was a Ghana.
I think I know what you're talking about.
Yeah.
It was a place where they couldn't really get the infrastructure to build schools
and that they didn't have internet out there or anything, but they just dropped
off off these pads when I've worked at like these, these are kids that also worked
on farms and like, yeah, they had to walk everywhere.
So it was like, just logistically, there was no way to organize public school.
And this was sorry.
I'm sort of taking over your story.
I just think this is fucking cool.
It's amazing.
They found out that you can just give kids iPads and they will teach themselves how
to like, how to program literally just the box of iPads without instructions.
And they, I mean, they had to turn it on.
Yeah.
And then they just, they more and more, uh, played with it.
They taught themselves literacy using this stuff.
And like really interestingly, it was, I think less than nine months that, uh, some
of the smarter kids had actually hacked into the system and started, yeah, they
started programming.
Yeah.
They started routing around the restrictions they had put in on that pad.
Uh, it was, it was great.
And like they, the results study were like, we might be able to educate mass areas
of the world just by dropping off a crate of iPads with learning material on
them, cause kids like to learn.
They do it on their own.
They want to.
Yeah.
Uh, except I don't know, maybe some don't, but the thing is that you're not
going to force that kid to learn if they don't want to.
Exactly.
You let that kid go out and plow the fields if that's what he wants to do.
There's a, this is too unrelated.
Nevermind.
Okay.
And yeah, I guess, I mean, that's, that's putting together the labor with the
schooling thing, but they are closely related.
Cause a lot of the reason people's are people's, yeah, sure.
Let's call them people are, um, this allowed from working is because they're
supposed to be in school all the time.
And, uh, that, that is relatively new.
The first mandatory schooling law was in 1852.
And it required people between eight and 14 to attend school at least three months
a year, unless they could demonstrate that they were already knew the relevant material.
That would have been excellent.
Yeah.
And school, like I really should have been, I don't know, I was pissed off that
they took away the gifted program cause I, I went to school and I knew everything
that they were teaching me for so long.
I had already, like parents had taught me basic arithmetic and I read adult level
books at it, you know, and it was just like, you had to sit there staring at the
clock, like, Oh my God, are we really like going to do three plus three right now?
Like teachers wouldn't even let you quietly read a book.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Cause then you're not paying attention to me.
If I could have tested out, uh, you know, the stuff that I learned, I could have
like, like, blown through school.
That was the thing I hated school.
It was like just being, you know,
I mean, I can see the arguments for it was just jailing.
Yeah.
Basic functional skills that massively increase human capital like literacy.
They don't even teach a lot of those.
Like, most of the time, most of the time is taking home out of the
curriculum entirely where it was like, I remember that in home act, I actually
had one, um, some of the schools that like didn't get rid of their home act
program, they downscaled it a lot and they made it an elective, but I
learned to balance a checkbook, like cook a bunch of different meals.
Uh, so like, and then like, I also had learned a lot of stuff just cause
my, I don't know, my parents, my dad's a carpenter.
So I knew how to like fix shit and whatever.
It's just like, I, that was another thing.
Yeah.
They had shop class as an elective and I remember finding it hilariously,
like, it was a baby's first woodworking.
And I was like, come on, I, my dad lets me use a jigsaw.
Like, yeah, we're going to make a candle holder.
You're not going to find an argument for me that school sucks.
I think that, uh, if there's a big section on that that isn't like
original material, we can probably abbreviate a Brigitte.
It's basically all the stuff we've said before.
Yeah.
I mean, school, school sucks, you know, I, but everything about school sucks.
Yeah.
But everything about school sucks applies to everything else about how we
restrict young people.
It's, you shouldn't have a special carve out just for school sucks, but then
be like, Oh, but we have to treat them like infants, infants and all other respects.
I feel like you could fix school and not fix any of those other problems and vice versa.
So there, I think they are distinct.
Oh, well, not all the other problems.
You couldn't like let them, you know, start working full time and, uh, not fix school.
Right.
But, uh, no, there's, there's some overlap.
You would have to make school not mandatory anymore.
Right.
But I imagine a lot of people would quickly abandon school and go to work if
they had that option because a lot of school is shit and working is actually valuable.
Yeah, totally.
And like you mentioned too, I would maybe force the schools to become better.
I always thought school was basically just working and not getting paid.
Like you, you know, are working, uh, but it's not valuable work.
It's like, and then like, it's actually fucked up because you're in school 40
hours a week, right?
Basically, and then, but then you also have homework.
One of his major complaints about school is that it also nowadays, uh, restricts,
uh, it stratifies kids by age.
So they, they don't have that interaction with adults.
Yeah.
He's throughout history, people have learned from people that are older than
them teaching them things.
And even in the early school houses, that was the case.
It was one big classroom and the kids of various ages taught each other.
And, uh, now you're only allowed to interact for the most part, most of your
day with other kids your age, which he says is absolutely horrible.
That's not how humans learn.
Once upon a time, I was gifted or was able to, to pass as gifted at math.
And in sixth grade, so my schools went, uh, K through six, seven through nine,
and then 10 through 12.
I think middle school is, we had junior high and high schools.
The middle school breaks that up somehow differently.
Um, I think it's six to eight or something.
In any case, uh, in sixth grade, I was being bussed in the morning to the junior
high for math, um, which I think I quickly stopped doing because I didn't want to.
Um, cause it turned out that A, this was harder than I thought and B, just not
fun autonomy.
Yeah.
You were being a mistake.
You learned from it.
Yeah.
But, uh, yeah, I definitely, again, we, we could, we could sit here, uh, patting
each other on the back all day about, about how bad school is.
But yeah, that, that's definitely a problem.
Right.
Um, I, I know kids who, you know, the teachers struggled to find things for
them to do and they at least tried, um, you know, like, all right, cool.
Uh, everybody do this, except for you two, you guys do the
hard shit because you guys clearly demonstrated mastery over the stuff that
the rest of the class is doing.
I don't think that happens that much.
It didn't happen that much in my childhood.
And I suspect it happens less now, but it happened a couple of times.
And I think it was valuable for the kids who, who did really well at it.
Um, you know, cause they were able to take advanced and one, I'm thinking at
least of two other people, two people doing math, um, they're able to take
advanced math courses, you know, for third grade, you know, whatever the advanced
version of that was, um, I found all that beneficial.
And I suspect the labor thing, you know, I, I still have my, my minimum wage
thing that I, I ideologically like, but probably can't economically defend.
Well, one of the, one of the things that minimum wage does is makes it
impossible for young people to work because their labor often isn't worth
the minimum wage.
When I went to work with my dad at eight and nine years old, he paid me, I think
a dollar an hour initially and bumped it up to a buck 50 or two.
Once I started learning some things.
But yeah, when I first went, I was like handing him tools and stuff.
You can't employ someone at $15 an hour to like watch you and hand you
tools and maybe sand to some wood here and there.
Totally.
Yeah.
I mean, I, I do think that that changes at some point when it's jobs that only
adults are allowed to do.
And it's like, sorry, yeah, you must be 18 to do this job, but we're only
going to pay you seven bucks an hour.
Why would you ever restrict job to be only for someone who's 18?
I'm not saying I would.
I'm saying today the world does.
That's okay.
Um, you know, like, you know, other than again, to some level of
experiencing mandatory, you know, even if you have 10 years of experience,
because you started in year five, I still don't want you wiring my house.
Like, and that might be me just being a bigot towards children or excuse me,
teens, but like, if you can do surgery at 15, there's some people that have
had enough experience by the time they're 15 to wire a house correctly.
I think if I got the choice, I wouldn't want a 15 year old doing my surgery either.
Um, but that's just, you know, again, that, that, that could be society having
told me that children are incompetent and that I classify teens as children.
I actually like decided I want to do have kids when I was working at the
library because I had actually like sort of been brainwashed into thinking that
kids were incompetent and annoying and boring.
And I had like few examples of real kids and the kids at the library that I
worked at, though, that was sort of what I was saying earlier about, like, if a
terrorist came into the library, there were kids that I would have given it.
Like I got into fight back with first before some of the adults and totally
trusted them, like more than the adults to make the right decisions.
I don't, yeah, that's, that's the thing.
Some kids are better than adults in some aspects and adults are worse.
I mean, your intuition about not wanting to be a surgeon on, surgeon on,
surgery rise by a 15 year old is a pretty decent intuition for our society where
we do infantilize children up and sorry, people up until they're 18.
But, uh, in a society that didn't do that, you probably wouldn't have that
prejudice because there would be competent 15 year olds.
I would also just want somebody who's done it a thousand times and that there
is a causal link between how long you've been doing something and how old you are.
Yeah, but so you could get a surgeon who's 26, 28 years old, fresh out of med
school, hasn't done any surgeries ever before as your surgeon.
And you don't know that just because he's 28, you don't know if he's done, you
know, a hundred surgeries or none.
Right.
Totally.
And I, in, in my particular example, I am the kind of person who would want
information about my doctors, right?
For some reason, some people don't, uh, it's one of the surprising things I
learned reading, um, the elephant in the brain, uh, people will turn down
information about their, uh, their, their medical professionals.
They're trusting the system too much.
I guess, well, they wouldn't give this person a doctor's license if they
didn't not adopt or so.
Hanson argues that it's because they don't really think it does anything.
They're just signaling.
You know, but I don't know if that's true of, uh, I don't think it'd make
that case about like, you know, getting your appendix removed because it's
exploding, but he'd make that case about, uh, some trivial, more trivial medicine.
In any case, um, like I said, minimum wage aside for, uh, um, legal adults, uh,
I do see the benefit of bringing kids along to work, um, kids and teens.
Uh, and again, not having to pay them as much.
Um, part of me sees that as exploitable and where, you know, you might just
bring on kids, teens, sorry.
We have to keep, you know, putting asterisks, asterisks next to everything.
You might bring on teens to do work that teens probably aren't good at because
they, they can pay them less because they're being a perverse incentive there.
Like, you know, you need some level of, of other, other enforcement as an employer.
If you have employees that can't do the job, you're really bad at, um, doing
whatever you're trying to do unless you need competent employees.
Unless you're just cutting corners and trying to make money.
You know, like if a fifth, if you, if you don't really, again, I can get, I
can think of contrived examples.
Um, I don't think it's worth, worth generating them, but I mean, unless
there's actual corruption in the system, you're not going to stay in business
long if you, if your employees can't do the job, can't and can't do it.
Well, are different.
Um, you know, a lot of people don't care if the person could do it well, but
they want someone who will just come in and do it.
Yeah.
If your customer doesn't care if the work is shoddy, then sure, hire a cheaper
contractor that, uh, does crappier work.
Well, like Colorado has been raising minimum wage for the last few years.
And I think we're doing 12 something now and we're on track to do 15 in a couple
of years.
I suppose.
I don't know.
I looked this up in the last few months because I was surprised.
I was, because back when I was working, it was, you know, even just a few
years ago when I was working, when I was working jobs that paid minimum wage,
it was 750.
Yeah.
I made $3 an hour at my first second job.
Wow.
How does that happen?
Was it an internship or something?
No, that was a restaurant.
Oh, right.
They're allowed to pay lower.
Yeah.
The idea was like, but you get tips, but you never got enough tips that it made up
for it.
Okay.
Yeah.
So like that's one of the things where the establishment doesn't care if you're,
you know, it is systemically, you know, geared against you.
So I could see them binging on children to work there, children and teens, just for
the sake of having to pay their employees less, but it turns out when you pay
them more, uh, they are happier, more attentive, and you get better retention.
And that's just something that's happening in Colorado because now I don't need
two jobs and, you know, I, I can, I can actually afford to eat and pay my electric
bill.
You know, I also think that would be good for the teens.
They're learning the job and gaining experience so that, you know, when they turn
16, 17, they can move on to a better job where they're paid more because they've
been doing whatever for a couple of years already.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Totally.
Um, like I said, I was just saying that it's, it's not impossible that someone
could fuck that up, but that's not, that's, that's me grasping for a, uh, uh,
gripe, um, overall, like, um, sorry, you were still talking.
Oh no, I was going to say overall, I think it sounds like a fine idea.
Um, yeah.
The thing that, um, would be tricky about labor, I think is like that they're
trying to prevent exploitation of children, which I don't know how you can, how
to fix this really in a way that would let kids who want to work, work, but not
have like, you know, there's kids whose parents forced them to work because they
need to bring in an income, but they don't want to.
Yeah.
Like there's kids that are forced to drop out of school and go help their
parents.
And it's like, that's kind of,
I mean, the most, uh, the easiest fix would be, you can't actually be employed
until you have passed one of these competency tests.
That way kids who are competent in their team can work and the kids who aren't
competent enough can't be forced by their parents to work because the law won't
let you work if you haven't passed that test.
Um, like let's say, let's say you passed the test and you're allowed to my
concern is that a parent could force their kid to work if they don't want to.
But they couldn't if they can't pass the competency test.
Say they're competent, but the parent forces them to work.
That, I think that's, that's what you're getting at, right?
Yeah.
At that point, then they can keep their own wages and move out since they've
passed the competency test.
Maybe you don't want to work 50 hours a week to be able to afford your own apartment.
Yeah.
I guess being able to emancipate yourself does, yeah.
It gives you a kind of freedom.
It's the freedom like, Hey, yeah, you can go live a shit life with, you know,
uh, bad amenities and know, you know, whatever, air conditioning or, or heating.
But the thing you're proposing is better than being subject to slave labor for
shit parents, right?
Like if you're in the situation, it's already because your parents are shit
lords and you're kind of fucked.
Yeah.
Solving the problem of shitty parents is going to be harder than rewriting the
laws around letting kids work.
I think it's just, uh, I don't know, they, they clearly, they put that into place.
The, the woman who started all those organizations, um, they look out for the
welfare of children, Adams.
Uh, well, that was her last name.
Yeah.
I mean, uh, that was, that was a good thing to do.
And it was important.
Um, there were kids working in factories, like getting injured and being abused.
And some of it, some of those kids might have like wanted to work there though.
And like some of them would have probably rather gone to school.
Uh, it's just the, it was at least one way to prevent kids from, you know,
being exploited was to just be like, no kids can work.
It's, it's an easier solution.
You know, like you mentioned that, that nine-year-old Mexican entrepreneur or
whatever, right?
Like, I don't know if that, if that kid was allowed to spend his money on Xbox
games or, or if it was like, sorry, no, that all goes to the family because we
need it.
Well, it was his money that he had earned, but his family needed it, which was
why he used it to buy food for his family.
Sure.
His money that he earned, but unless he can open a bank account, then, you know,
his parents are strong enough to physically rest it from him.
Sure.
I know I have friends and, yeah, I've had friends who, who, you know,
grew up, their parents made them work and took their paycheck.
Yeah.
So like the, I mean, again, it would be hard to solve the problem of shit
parents, so I'm willing to kind of just set that aside, but, but it is a, a, a,
I think a plausible reason for why some of these things came to be in the first
place, because it's like, yeah, sorry, you could go to school and have prospects,
or you can go make 50 cents an hour working in the mines and the really
small holes because you're eight and I can have enough, I can have more money
for whatever, right?
Also, all the initial child labor laws targeted either 12 or 13 as the age,
and it was pushed up after that, which is less objectionable in my opinion,
even though there are still pretty just 12 year olds that might be getting
fucked by this, the fact that it's been pushed up as high as it has is where
we start getting crazy stupid land.
There will always be some, you know, exception at the very end of the bell
curve, right?
Where it happens to be at six, you're someone's actually building a particle
accelerator in the garage, right?
Well, which is why we shouldn't have the age limitations.
We should have competency limitations.
Yeah.
But I think I do think that if you're going to go broad strokes, then, you
know, if you're only fucking over 0.1% of people, it's a lot better than
fucking over 60% of people.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We just have to make a better system than what we currently have.
Yeah.
Any other stuff on labor?
Now we can move on.
I'm curious.
Well, actually, I thought that I thought it was fascinating the part about
the economic incentives for driving kids out of the workforce.
Yeah.
Um, it strikes me that also women would have entered the workforce.
Um, when did they enter in mass?
World War One?
Oh, World War Two, I believe.
World War Two.
The big major influx.
So like with a limited number of jobs and people competing for them, it was
also just strategically advantageous to older people to organize.
And it even said in the book, like teens can't really effectively organize
to advocate for themselves.
Because what was it?
They don't stay teens very long.
They always like, it's a temporary.
Temporary condition.
It's temporary condition.
I think that's how they said it, yeah.
But uh, yeah, unlike, you know, women not being allowed to work where you're
stuck being a woman, you know, in 1945, your whole life where you can't actually
like make a decades long movement behind it that you can stay part of.
You can't be part of a 10 year movement where you're advocating for teens as a
teenager.
All right.
I hope to be more involved in this movement.
So you can't stay in it, but it's not like you're forced to because you're a teenager.
You're not fighting from the inside.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
As, as to your, your point about the using it to restrict competition, the, he
pulled out one example in 1999, uh, a $45 million construction project in
California was shut down by a judge after a carpenter's union went after, uh, a
construction boss for bringing his 12 year old son around to operate a forklift.
And it was very much a, he's coming in helping his dad on the weekend kind of
thing, uh, but that, that particular firm was a non-union firm.
And so these, this union had been after them for quite a while.
And this was what they got to shut them down with that his son was allowed to
operate a forklift and it's, it's been used a lot by labor unions and by other
employers to, yeah, to restrict the, the labor supply.
What unions were the baddies here?
I, I know several people who would be like, Pikachu face.
Why are you shocked?
Uh, but yes, they, they, the, the point of a labor union is to protect the jobs
of its members, which is sometimes good and sometimes not so good.
Yeah.
I think that's the most succinct way to put it.
Um, the, should I move on to the next topic?
Yeah.
Okay.
This next topic, we probably don't have to talk about very much because just
last week we did a whole episode on it, but it's specifically about love slash
sex, which is, you know, very important, I think would be an understatement to
teenagers and is not something that is allowed them at all that, uh, there's
some allowances made for teenagers fooling around with each other, but even
then it's considered not a serious relationship.
It's called like puppy love and, uh, and that's something that they're just
you know, they're expected to get over it and go on to something else as, as
they get older.
And, uh, it, the point he makes is that implicit in the laws, uh, out, allowing
sexuality for, for young people is the assumption that all young people are
incapable of experiencing the same kinds of loving feelings that adults do and
that no young people are capable of engaging in sexual activities responsibly.
I'm curious about why it matters that people call it puppy love and that
they're expected to move on from it.
Like, because he says it's the meaning to, um, treat people who are physiologically
mature as basically no more mature than animals.
I guess I mean, I've heard, I mean, I, I sort of feel like people give that
same advice to 30 year olds, you know, like, oh, you were just infatuated with
that person, but you know, they sucked and you should move on with your life.
Like, I think it's the equality thing.
I mean, when you were describing that, I was kind of thinking, I don't know, I
think it's funny that they're like, oh, teenagers should be allowed to have
sex because they're just going to, you know, at least you're going to break up
anyway. But like, I'm like, you know, it's all most marriages.
Don't more marriages end in divorce now, or something like 50% in America.
Yeah.
And like, I don't know, it's like, if you're going to make that criticism
about teens, you should be making it about adults too.
Like, oh, well, you know, 50% of marriages end in divorce.
They know we should be allowed to get married if they're not mature enough.
Like, he also says that teenage relationships are already handicapped by
the system. They do move in and out of relationships extremely fast.
But he points out, we make it difficult or impossible for young people to marry.
We isolate them from potentially more mature, more settled partners.
We'd loudly dismiss their feelings as half baked.
We corral large groups of young people, often against their will, into crowded
pens for nine or 10 months a year.
It shouldn't be surprised that they shift partners, a surprise that they
shift partners frequently.
This is the, this is the loaded language of somebody with an axe to grind.
But also you can't be at, you can't, I can't believe that you,
Inyash, are advocating that we let children get married.
So my take on this is that no one should get married.
But if we're going to have marriage as a thing that people can do, any
person should be able to do it.
And young adults count as people, young people count as people.
It's weird.
I'm glad that I wasn't allowed to marry my high school sweetheart.
I am very upset that I was allowed to marry the very first person who showed
interest at me when I was 19.
So I guess we're on opposite ends of that.
Yeah.
I mean, I guess it's like a confidence thing.
Yes.
I don't know that this is something where I'm like, I don't know how exactly
you would test the competence of like somebody's ability to have a healthy
romantic relationship.
But I mean, I know I was incompetent because I mean, I bought into this for a
lot of reasons.
And one of them was that I was a nerd who didn't, who didn't think I would
ever be able to be attractive to a mate.
But I was told from by not only my parents, but my religion, all the people
who had influence on me in my early life that, uh, you don't date until
you're ready to get married.
Cause the whole point of dating is to find a mate.
And when you find a mate, you get married and since you ain't getting married
before you're 18, you ain't dating before you're 18.
So I had almost no experience with any sort of intimacy before then.
And yeah, I was, I don't think I was competent to make that decision at that
point.
And maybe I would have been if I hadn't been so restricted from doing those
things, but again, I don't know if I would have any way just because I was kind
of, I was late to mature sexually, I think.
I think many people can relate to, like, cause you were barred from your parents.
Cause again, solving the problem of, of, of parents.
A lot of things my parents barred me for, which I did anyway.
Like I could have rebelled and secretly dated someone if I really wanted to.
Yeah.
I guess I'm just thinking like, I think a lot of people had the experience of, you
know, getting their first crush, their first date, their first true love of what
they thought it was.
And then, you know, their first heartbreak and then only later in life, realizing
like, Oh, that wasn't real love.
That, that was me learning what it's like to have feelings for somebody.
But like, I'm not, I'm not saying that's everybody.
I'm saying, I am saying that's me.
I agree with you.
I mean, so part of the problem is that, like he says, we're stuck in a
corral with our peers and our role models are other people who are just as stupid
and inexperienced as us.
Like in a society where kids interacted more with adults, they would have better
role models for these things and might even be able to find a partner who's
had some more experience and knows a few things being like, okay, kid, you know,
slow down, this isn't, this isn't quite, um, this is not the ultimate true
love for everything that you, you might be thinking it is.
Let's not rush into getting married right now.
Like one of the tragedies of Romeo and Juliet is that they're fucking 13 and
14 and don't know shit about anything yet.
And they, if they had fit their, um, their society's model of what a relationship
should be like, they probably wouldn't have been dating each other.
Cause you're usually considered, um, too young to be dating someone your own age
at that time.
Yeah.
I mean, there's also, it was much more, I guess it was much more
common for people to have a more of a year age gap back then.
Well, and just the fact too that they were, I think in Romeo and Juliet, part
of the point is that they're both politely stupid kids.
Yes.
Yes, they are.
And so, you know, wasn't Romeo 21 and Juliet like 17?
No, that was usually Hollywood adaptations are a lot around that period because
they're, uh, they're, they're aging them up to make it acceptable for modern
audiences.
Yeah.
But I believe Juliet, either Romeo or Juliet specifically were named, uh, and
the other one was assumed to be about a year from the, the first one.
So it was either Juliet was named as 13 or Romeo's named as 14 within the play
itself.
Yeah.
I, I think we talked about that one last episode.
I don't have much new on offer there.
Yeah.
I did think you guys want to know about this.
We got a whole episode.
Just go back one.
I did think of like a rejoinder in the drive home.
Oh, go for it.
Well, like, cause we were talking, I was thinking, like, if I was 15 and some
30 something year old woman wanted to have sex with me and you were like, well,
I, you know, there's, there's probably a chance that you simply wouldn't have,
you know, if you're given the opportunity.
I'm like, no, I think I might have.
And in my head, I wish I had said, I was like, Oh yeah.
You know, if you really didn't want to, your body has ways of shutting that whole
thing down is, was, is what, was what you're sound like you were saying.
I know it wasn't what you were saying, but it would have been funny.
And I said, I'd opportunity to make that quip.
In our society, if a 36 year old woman wants to have sex with you, 15 year old
Steven, it's going to be in secret.
It's going to be a thing that's usually, um, not very healthy.
Whereas in a more mixed society, you would have peers around both you and her
that sees the relationship and, you know,
could vouch for like this woman's not trying to take advantage of this little boy.
Yeah, or be like, Hey, kid's a bit too young for you.
You know, that, that kind of thing, like depending on how things are,
having things socially open like that is a huge, uh, huge break check.
By the way, uh, just looked it up.
It says that Romeo was never explicitly given an age.
Okay.
Uh, Juliet was 13.
Okay.
And I'd, yeah.
And Bromeo was always assumed to be within a year or so of her based on things in
the play, I don't know, from what I've heard.
Yeah, I don't know.
You know, we were talking to, and this didn't come up in the last episode.
You know, I guess the answer would just be abortions, but like, you know,
there is a, I didn't put it in here because it's pretty quick, but there is
also a section on abortions where he says anyone who is a competent, uh,
should be able to get an abortion at any time without needing to go to the
parents or get a special order from a judge or something.
I would carve out an exception that you don't even have to be competent to get
an abortion because you can become, you can become pregnant before you're
competent.
That's true.
Yeah.
Uh, I, but like, you know, Charlie gave like an example of like what
happens if you have a romantic experience you don't like.
And somewhat sarcastically, she said like, Oh no, I regret it.
This is the end of the world.
And it's like, yeah, but for some people it's worse.
You know, now you're knocked up and, you know, like they're, or,
you know, as a 13 year old or something, you're not aware of all the
Wang shriveling sex diseases that are out there.
And now you've, you've, whatever, it's the Wang shriveling.
That's the bad part.
Exactly.
Um, so like there are lifelong consequences that can happen that you
just may not be informed of because you're a child, uh, or a, or a youngster.
Um, he does cover that in the section on competency that people know the
consequences of sex before they're considered competent.
I did sort of want to, to consent.
Sorry.
Uh, yeah, I feel kind of bad.
Um, last episode that we did where, how did this go exactly?
It was Charlie saying, um, that she had like basically gone through all
the stuff she had gone through and, and come out of it.
Okay.
And I was like, trying to say, let you seem to be more mature.
Like, like just like, there are definitely like, they're definitely lots
of people that get traumatized from sexual experiences.
Like that can happen.
That there can be really bad PTSD and consequences.
Uh, I didn't like mean to imply that that doesn't happen and that we should
not care about that, I guess.
I don't know if I came off as, as saying that, uh, I just wanted to clarify though.
They're like, no, but actually like, yeah, also PTSD can happen.
And so like,
I don't think that we downplayed it too much, but we didn't talk about it enough
that, yeah, I mean, you know, there, there are, and maybe it's
cause our culture has sex on a pedestal that's a thousand feet tall.
But like, there are special kinds of, of, um, I, even trauma, it's definitely
the right word, but like more broadly, just, you know, uh, reactions of
violations that can happen in that context that don't happen with getting
punched in the face.
Right.
Um, it's, there's something and maybe, again, maybe it's just cause, you know,
my mind is brainwashed from how we viewed sex or something.
But like, I would, I, I don't want to get too much into all that stuff,
but I, I will just say that I think that there, there can be kind of
special kinds of, of ways that that can suck that other things don't suck.
But, but we'll push past all that cause we talked about sex for
two hours last time.
So real quick, before we push past it, this is something I should have
said last time and neglected to.
So I'll go ahead and say it right now.
Uh, despite the fact that I think socially we should change our, our
attitudes about, well, young people in general.
Um, I don't think anyone in the U S should have sex with a minor.
If they're outside that age range, despite how much I think it's not
necessarily a bad thing because of our, um, laws specifically, there was, uh,
Yassim from the, uh, the Bailey podcast is a criminal defense lawyer.
And he said in his podcast that he legitimately does not think suicide is
an overreaction to getting put on a sexual predator list.
Uh, even if it's, you know, with a consenting person and you love each
other and all the parents, your society is good with it.
If you get on one of those sexual predator lists, your life is basically over.
Uh, so don't do that.
Yeah.
It's, it's not a risk we're take worth taking until we can fix society.
I don't even know how to fix society at that point.
We need to change people's attitudes about sex.
Fortunately, at the end of this, there's a couple of organizations that I can
name, but we haven't gotten quite that far yet.
Pushing on then.
Sure.
Okay.
Uh, shall we move on to the actual competencies and how to implement this sort
of thing?
Or did you want to touch on the teen brain thing real quick before we did that?
You know what, let's do the teen brain thing real quick, since it's related to
this very much related to this.
Sure.
Okay.
Um, one of the interesting things that he pointed out is that research, tons
of research, he links a lot of things unequivocally show that cognitive
abilities of teens are on average superior to cognitive abilities of adults.
Citation, not provided.
Well, not in my notes here, but, um, all the metrics of brain performance tend
to top out around 17, 18, and then slowly decline from there.
And he says that by the time adults are, uh, in their eighties, they usually have
roughly the same mental functioning as, uh, a child in between they just six and
eight, just in terms of how their brain, how quickly and how well the brain works.
And he does, you know, make the, uh, give the proviso that a lot of things come
down to experience and the knowledge you have accumulated, which is why adults
can often be much more, um, much more competent, much more, um, able to do
things that take a lot of intelligence because they already have all this
stored up knowledge and experience in them.
But they have that crystallized intelligence.
Yes.
But in terms of pure functionality, the brain is at its peak, uh, in the late
teens and only goes downhill from there, which made me very sad because
it means I'm stupider.
I've also heard things that contradict this.
So I'm a little puzzled.
Um, I do agree that I've seen pretty clear evidence that there are children
who are as intelligent as adults.
Uh, and that in general, I don't know, I keep thinking of the library again,
where it was like there, there was this huge tech gap that was, it was kind
of hilarious, um, where like, you know, the adults would come in for free tech
support for their stuff all the time.
And I just was like baffled at the amount that people couldn't use.
Like, like they, they didn't have basic problem solving skills.
There were just some like pretty dumb adults in there.
And they were like, there were kids that could take your laptop apart and put
it back together.
And, um, a lot of that is just sort of the kids like pick stuff up faster.
Like we were talking about the kids teaching themselves to program by like
being handed an iPad and like here, have fun.
He does side of thing that shows that it's much harder to acquire new skills
after the age of 30.
I disagree with, again, as a general, not necessarily an age cutoff or rather,
um, I mean, there's actual effects to be had here and I could be wrong.
But like my understanding though is that the brain doesn't necessarily get
worse as you age.
Yeah.
I think he stopped making new connections as fast.
That's cause you've already made connections.
So it's like, you know, it, and this is a lot of pruning is a lot of learning
is pruning in connections that aren't useful.
Being a lifelong learner, like there's, there's people that are completely
cognitively sharp in like their seventies, eighties, et cetera.
And like, I, uh, I don't know that there's like the stereotype about
old people being bad with technology, which actually is to really piss off
somebody from my, uh, Philly lesser on group.
It was an older person and like had a computer and a cell phone and like knew
what apps were.
And like, it's like, I hit that stereotype about, and I was just like,
well, you haven't seen the majority of old people.
They just, they don't even try to learn how to use this thing.
There were people that would come in the library repeatedly asking me to
log them into like an account of theirs.
And I was like, this is easy.
I could teach you to do this.
It's a few steps.
Like, you can do it for me.
I think part of the problem is that don't even try thing.
And he does state that we tend to discourage people from being lifelong
learners and more like you cram in all the learning up to 18, whether
you're ready for it or not at that age, whether you want to be doing it or not.
And then after 18, you stop learning as opposed to people should be learning
and working all throughout their most preprescent lives.
Compulsory learning for the whole life.
I like it.
I couldn't necessarily compulsory, but he, there, there is a section where he
says, uh, the back in the schooling section, uh, the way that we have mandatory
schooling that, uh, fucks people up on schooling often gives people both a
lifelong, maybe fear, maybe hatred, aversion, I guess, an aversion to
learning due to the compulsory experiences of being cooped up in school
prisons for, for so many years.
Learning wasn't fun.
Yes.
Learning was literally a way that you were tortured.
I've had to, uh, basically plant the seeds of, of joy of science in my wife
since we've, we've been together for like 10 years, but, you know, enough bad
science teachers through junior high and she just never developed an enjoyment
of the subject.
And I'm like, no, but it's actually really cool.
You said shit teachers and it took a while for that, for that to stick.
I hated math, uh, and a lot of it probably had to do with the fact that I was
actually bullied by a math teacher in third grade, which is just while the
teacher would bully kids to, I guess, like.
Those people shouldn't have teaching jobs.
They're like, Snape, why are you with children?
When you hate children.
Snape at least had a good reason.
Did he?
Yeah.
I mean, like he could have been groundskeeper, I guess, or whatever, but, but,
but he, he was there for, for cover, for, you know, for a war effort.
Okay.
I'm way more sympathetic of Snape than I am of half the teachers I had
in elementary school.
Right.
Yeah.
Um, I did have a couple, yeah, I do have a couple like things to pull out here.
One, I, I, I am, I do want to see this unequivocal research that con, that the
cognitive abilities of teens are on average superior to the cognitive abilities
of adult, of adults.
And again, by cognitive abilities, he means like the, the firing of neurons and
making new connections, that kind of thing.
Well, then, then that's a very specific use of cognitive abilities.
Like, yes, as a 10 year old, I could pick up a new video game way faster than my
grandma could because she'd never held a video game controller before.
It's nice to have to pick up languages when you're young too.
Yeah, yeah.
Like there's learning modes that your brain like snaps into.
Yeah, he does pass those.
It's kind of, your brain kind of evolves for different, or metamorphosis for
different purposes as you age.
Where you, you as, you get more stability.
You get better ability to like regulate emotions and much lower anxiety and
depression when people are older, but you're also less, less able to, you know,
bend in the wind, I guess.
He, one of the things he sends to really have a, a dislike, a visceral
dislike of the term teen brain because of the thing that you brought up.
He said, our brains keep changing all throughout our lives.
It's, it's an ongoing process.
And there's a lot of things that we do, which change our brain.
Like, I mean, on that simplest example, any kind of learning is literally
changing your brain.
And, and he says, yeah, things like meditating, reading, having sex, anything
that, that affects your mind, changes your brain a bit.
And that brains do change all throughout your life.
So calling a teen brain specifically, uh, this, this terrible time in life
because you don't have a functional cortex is bullshit.
It's developing just like every other part of your brain and body are.
Yeah.
And like the, the ways that teen brains are different from adult brains are
adaptive, not like a byproduct of the process.
Not because it's not fully formed yet.
Yeah.
If my, if my grandma has a lower like, um, mental acuity or mental
speed score than I do, she compensates for it with a higher wisdom.
And, and again, intelligence is, is, is a tough word there.
What's your dexterity?
Right.
But, but, but that, that's true.
Right.
So like, I would, I would have to sit, I would have to sit and figure
something out and just like, Oh, I remember that from 50 years ago.
Right.
Yeah.
So it calls that out.
Yeah.
I have two more quick things to pull out on that about the cognitive, the
teen brain cognitive ability stuff.
Cause we talked about incompetent technological adults and stuff.
Um, we were talking about learned helplessness earlier.
It was remarkable how often you see that with, with some people, even in their
fifties with cell phones and shit, right?
Blows in my mind.
Um, so you don't have to be a tortured child to have learned helplessness.
You were just, for whatever reason, don't feel like learning how to use your
phone and then you therefore never do.
But, uh, I remembered in, I don't know, primary school at some point, you know,
we're talking about technological advancement or something.
And if, if maybe that's less of a problem now than it was then, although I
suspect it's not because my wife still works with people who don't know how to
use their fucking computers.
Um, you know, when they all retire, the next generation of people who come in
will know how to use their computer and sent, you know, uh, email a PDF, right?
And I had like researcher workers who had sort of that adult it is around
technology too.
I was like, how, how do you have a neuroscience, like bachelors, but you
can't figure out how to do this email thing.
You know, like,
yeah, if you, if you can't grab an attachment from an email and print it
then like, how are you, how do you have a job here?
But I remembered I had a teacher who was, I think, defending their inability to
handle the computer properly or something.
And they're like, Oh yeah, it's just all been changing so fast.
You guys will all be there when you guys get to be our age.
And even at my young age, I was like, no, we won't.
We, we have been on the cusp of fast moving technology our whole lives.
You know, like I picked up a video game controller when I was, you know, six or
10 or something and picked one up, picked one up every year since then, you
know, put on a VR headset fears after they came out.
Like we're, I don't think that that's like inevitability.
Like people of this generation talked about.
I felt like I was going to drive that home somehow to this point, but maybe
it was just about the mental acuity stuff.
There's something there that I feel like anyway.
Yeah.
Um, whatever.
He does also specifically call out the year.
What is it?
Yergalin Todd research, which I guess is the, uh, the study which popularized
the term team brain because they used it, I suppose.
Um, but he said that their research, nor the research of anyone else that I'm
aware of provides the scientific evidence needed to support the claims made in their article.
So he, he, he specifically says that they are overreaching and their claims are
not supported by their own evidence.
So that is, that is something I can't get into because I haven't read any of them.
Basically they were, they were the ones that were saying that they don't have
a frontal cortex that's, yeah.
And that's why they can't make decisions or delay gratification or whatever.
Yeah.
That, that was basically just straight out.
You, I don't believe your numbers are correct, sir.
Call out.
And I'll have to, like I said, check this guy's numbers.
I guess again, research unequivocally proves and I'm like, you show me social
science that unequivocally proves anything.
That's fair.
But this is a like persuasive book though, right?
This isn't a science book.
These citing stuff to support his point, but.
Bringing it home now with proposed changes, I guess we can skip over the competency part.
I'd be curious about different ways that, I don't know if there were novel ways
that people proposed to measure competency.
There, there, like you can give a IQ test and you can get, you know, someone's
intelligence, but like, what about?
There actually are competency tests that are suggested in here.
There's one specifically called the Epstein-Dumas something test, which I guess
he developed in combination with someone else.
And you can test yourself sort of a little at home test, which is not quite as, yeah,
it's not quite as rigorous, I guess, but it's at the, in the first
appendix in the book called, how adult are you?
I probably am very adult in some areas and sort of still a child of a competency.
That's what he says, actually, that there's, you know, a wide variety and you
can be competent in some areas and not others.
And so we should give people more rights in some areas and not others.
His main thesis is that all the laws assume all young people are the same
and all adults are the same as well.
And stay the same.
Uh-huh.
And that this is a bad assumption and shouldn't be based on age anyway.
And so he has these proposed changes that he makes.
The primary one being, as I said, we should give people more rights over time
as they pass competency tests rather than due to passing a number of days alive test.
I would like to be given a competency test judging whether or not I can make
my own medical decisions.
Yeah, that was, you know, if we get time for like a fast queue and, you know,
rapid fire thing at the end, I want to do that.
So that you can like choose your own drugs that you want to take?
Yes.
Yeah.
That's basically the band good story again.
Those were the things I liked about Mexico at their pharmacies, you just go
and order your drugs you want and they're like, here you go.
At the kiosk at the airport, you get to do that.
Nice.
Yeah.
Coming back from Cancun for our honeymoon, I mean, you could buy probably
not the great stuff, but there was Tramadol, Viagra, a handful of other things.
And I was like, well, I would, I would just buy this, but I'm not going to, you
know, have them take it away from me in customs when I get back to the US.
So the assumption is if you're old enough to know the drugs that you want to be
slash should be taking, then you're old enough to buy them.
I sort of want there to be a competency test there too.
I do agree that like when it comes to the band good store, if you
can measure, and I think there's model measurements of this, like the expected
utility of having the band good store versus not, it's going to weigh in
favor of having the band good store.
But then like the main reason people want things to be banned is to protect
people from themselves, but you could also just have like, okay, you can go
in the band good store, but you have to take a competency test to show that you
know what drugs you're buying and that you're aware of its side effects and
stuff.
Yeah, I don't know.
It's not super on topic, just it's interesting how it
keeps coming up though.
Yeah, it's not far off topic.
I mean, I do have, need your reservations about competence, like a generic
competency test, just because like, you know, they used to have that for voting
and it just turned out that black people never passed this test, right?
So like, it's, I don't know how you'd make it fair.
You know, even, I think IQ tests are probably better now than they were 30
years ago, but even that had, you know, some cultural stuff in it.
They're still not perfect.
So that is like, actually the fact that there are different racial IQs, at
least in terms of like, people from Africa tending to score really low on
these IQ tests seems to be an artifact of just like, these are people who've
never taken some of these people or people who've never taken a standardized
test and are just like, they just don't know how to take tests, you know.
Yeah, for me, I think the simplest explanation for the Flynn effect where
they have to recalibrate so that the mean score on an IQ test stays 100 every
few years is that people are better test takers than they were, you know, a few
years ago.
I hadn't considered that, but that's the possibility.
Has IQ leveled out?
I don't know.
According to the Flynn effect it has.
That's, uh, because I, that they have to keep adjusting the IQ tests.
So wasn't, wasn't the main thing though, something to do with other people getting
more nutrition or getting less like lead?
Again, that, that would change the general IQ and that would lead to the
Flynn effect.
Yeah.
Those, those are both good candidates.
And the last time I heard about the Flynn effect was 15 years ago.
So like, I have no idea if it is done being a, you know, you know, if they,
if it has tapered off or not, but, um, I would submit that at least part of it is
that, you know, if, if I'm sitting down and take my first pen and paper test at
50, I'm probably going to suck at it.
Even if I'm smart, whereas if I've been taking pen and paper tests four times
a week since I was six, uh, I'll probably do fine at it.
Even if I'm dumb, right?
I know a lot of techniques and general test taking skills.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes.
So, um, yeah, I'm glad you brought out the, I, there's some places I think I'm
competent and others I don't because he does think that, uh, young people should
be extended full adult rights and responsibilities.
This is the thing that comes up often.
I'm going to stop quoting him just for a second, uh, throughout the, uh,
throughout the book that it's not just about rights and freedoms.
It's about the responsibilities that come with them.
And those two together make for, uh, competent people that can run their
own lives, that it's you, you once you have the ability to make these decisions
for them yourself, you also face the consequences of getting them wrong.
And that's motivating though, in a way that like,
that's a big part of it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Like, I don't know, having the artificially constrained choices, um, makes
you just sort of not even want to try.
Yeah.
And that's also again, didn't harm, didn't, didn't hammer on this
because we're going long as it is.
And, uh, we've been going on for a while, but that's also a big theme in the book.
So know that that is also in there.
If you've decided to read it, you will pick up on that as well.
The responsibility part is important because it, it's not just about like,
they should be allowed to do whatever they want.
They should be allowed to, uh, you know, have the consequences of doing
whatever they want.
A large part of the thesis is basically the Spider-Man credo with great
power comes great responsibility.
And he's saying, you know, if you give people more responsibility, they will
have more power in their own lives and vice versa.
It goes together.
Well, if you'd mentioned Spider-Man two hours ago, you'd have sold
me earlier, no, if you want more people to be Spider-Man.
I think also having a sense of self-efficacy, um, is one of the things
that'll push down on conditions like depression and anxiety, that they brought
up the, um, statistic of how many like mental health drugs are being administered
to teens now.
Just so you can make it through these lives when you have nothing.
I wish I had had antidepressants when I was in high school.
I mean, it's one way to deal with this constant learned helplessness and
prisoning that you're in.
Anyways, uh, young people should be extended full adult rights and
responsibilities in each of a number of different areas as soon as they can
demonstrate appropriate competence in each area.
Uh, a young person of any age who can pass a state approved adult
competency test should be able without court involvement to receive a
certificate of emancipation from the state.
He leans towards young people achieving a score that is at least the
50th percentile for adults 18 and over, meaning that on each test, the
applicant must score higher than half of adults currently do, which I think is
entirely reasonable.
If you're more competent than half of the people over 18, what, why would we deny
you of the, the, those rights?
Because we want to control kids.
Yes, exactly.
That, that is a big part of it.
Well, at some point, I was going to say, wouldn't like that leads to 15 years
down the road, people being very, very competent and the bar being raised
really high for 14 year olds.
I'm, yes.
Maybe that would be a great thing.
And maybe, um, eventually we might have to lower it to like the 40th percentile
or something if we believe that it is barring too many people from getting
rights, but, uh, it is a great starting area.
And yeah, I do think it would be a good thing if more people were more
competent, more early in life, earlier in life.
I'd love to see, uh, businesses run by teenagers.
Like teenagers are more creative.
They're like very driven.
Yeah.
They're, they know, like the latest cutting edge technology stuff.
Yeah.
What was the part in, uh, here where they said something about an obsession?
Uh, yes, that projities, prodigies, um, usually a prodigy, prodigy is just
a young person with an obsession and an opportunity.
Yeah.
That's the quote.
It's a good bumper sticker.
Yeah.
Just, I think that that type of thinking, I mean, I know I, yeah, when I'm thinking
back to like my teen years, it's like, I, that version of me, uh, would have come
up with much better business ideas than the version of me.
I am now, just like, I don't know.
Um, there's a way that like, I look at my old art sometimes and like, my new art
is technically better because I have more experience, but it's also like more boring.
I had like just a lot of ideas, uh, and drew lots of different things.
I was way more motivated.
Uh, yeah, I'd really love to see what kinds of like business ideas teens would
come up with or, uh, kids like releasing media, you know, like making, so like that
brought to mind, I was like, Oh, there are kids making money on YouTube.
And I think other avenues, uh,
In places where kids are allowed to excel, they often do great.
He said that chess is one of the few places where we allow young people to
compete against adults and, uh, they often do.
Well, some of them do extremely well because of that, because there aren't
artificial limitations placed on them.
We, we mentioned this at the top and I know we're kind of wrapping up, but like,
again, it kind of devolved into like, you know, parents suck and can take away
your computer, but assuming that you can solve that problem, um, you do get a lot
of, you get immense freedom on online.
I mean, you should have property rights at a certain age too.
Sure.
But, you know, even if you have property rights, but you can't afford a, you
know, $800 computer, um, it's cause you're only getting paid a buck an hour
because you're a labor's worth shit.
But, uh, it's, you know, if you want to create stuff, you can create stuff.
If you want to, um, learn about a new subject, you can do that, right?
So the, the advent of everyone having a computer in their pocket, I think it
changes the landscape a lot and that wasn't quite the case in 2008.
It was barely emerging.
Part of the problem of not having an $800 computer when you're a kid is even
if you have a great idea and motivation, literally no one will give you a loan
because you cannot be held to any kind of contract.
The right to be in a binding contract is important because then you can take
out even an $800 loan for a computer.
So you can get started on your little thing that you want to do.
Yeah, that's part of where it just be nice, you know, assuming your parents
have 800 bucks that they could lend you money.
Well, yeah, I mean, you'd have to get it from your parents under the current
regime, but if you took one of these tests and were emancipated enough to be
able to sign contracts, you could go to a bank or some other place that gives
out loans and take out an $800 loan and get started on your life.
Yeah.
I think then the concern would, I mean, just to bog that down while we're
trying to not do that is that your, your skills are worth so little that you'd
pay that back so slowly, but then again, 800 bucks isn't that much money.
So, you know, asking for $80,000, right?
Yeah.
Not like 17 year olds going to school.
Yeah.
One main thing I like about the proposed changes here is how sane they seem to be.
Yes.
And so it's not like do away with mandatory schooling, do away with labor laws and
that sort of thing.
He's like, no, no, like, let's just, let's put sensible things on that.
You know, it's not, not, not saying get rid of mandatory schooling.
It's saying, let's, let's cut down the hours and the time you need to do it.
Yeah.
Um, you know, if you, if you can read, write and balance a checkbook by, by 13,
great, you're done.
You know, there's, there's some sensible thing there.
Yeah.
I think this extends beyond just kids too.
Um, for example, like the person in an old folks home or maybe not even an old folks
home, there's, there's definitely age discrimination on both sides and hiring
because of the stereotype that old people are bad at computers or, you know, slower
or less cognitively flexible.
Can't learn things anymore.
And that's true for some people.
I mean, dementia Alzheimer's do exist or, and some people also just like don't
continue, they don't maintain their brain, I guess.
So you do see people decline if they're just not interested in reading or going
outside or learning anything new.
But like, that doesn't mean that all old people are going to be about at the job
either if they pass the competency test, they should be allowed to, you know, be
considered a candidate for a software engineer job or whatever.
The, yeah, he says that the incentives for young people to prepare for the test
will be enormous because of all these rights that you get, but also responsibilities.
And even if they don't pass all the tests, they still benefit from the process
of preparation.
And I remember, I think it was after our last episode on the discord, someone
was complaining about this idea of judging people based on competency.
He was like, well, a really smart young kid could do really good on an IQ test
or, you know, someone who's, who's really smart can trick a psychologist
into declaring them competent.
And I said, you know, that's, that's literally the point.
If you can convince a psychologist that you are mentally mature enough to, to
have rights, then you're mentally mature enough to have rights.
You have just demonstrated that.
And if you can't trick them into that, then obviously you don't deserve those
rights yet.
So, I mean, sure, there could be literally malicious psychologists, like you were
saying, trying to deny rights to black people.
But, yeah, it seemed at that point, the person was just trying to say, what if
someone who's young is declared competent?
That would be terrible.
And I'm like, no, that's the whole point.
I think just, and I didn't read the exchange, but to still man that, what
if somebody who was young was declared competent when they actually weren't,
you know, if there's a multiple choice test involved, there's some luck, you
know, if you don't know, you just choose B and you got a 25% chance of being right.
So like you, you could squeak by while still being under the actual threshold
to the, to the magic way that we've managed to measure this, right?
I don't can do this too.
But, but that's kind of like, that's kind of like an owned risk.
I'd be surprised if he doesn't call it out in the book, be like, yeah,
that could happen, but that's, that there's no way that can't happen.
Right.
And if you're doing better than 50% of adults, assuming that a portion of
the adults got lucky that way too, right?
Yeah.
That should definitely have had like co-workers who sort of faked their
way into the job.
I feel like I faked my way into every job I ever got.
No, I mean, like, I've also faked my way into jobs in the sense of I felt in
posture syndrome about it, but like, I'm talking about people who thought that
they had the necessary skills and put it on their resume.
And then like in the fields, they clearly didn't know what the hell they were
doing or they weren't very good at management or leading.
I love the, what's the opposite of an imposter?
Uh, I can't think of the word for authentic.
Yeah.
Authentic syndrome.
Maybe you could call this or somebody thinks they can actually do it, but they
can't, I've worked with people like that too.
Isn't that just done in Kruger?
What we've been calling done in Kruger?
Sort of maybe related.
Yeah.
Sometimes it's just people just like, Oh yeah, no, I got this.
And it's like, no, you don't got this where for the most part people like, Oh,
I can't do this.
It's like, no, you actually can just take a deep breath.
Um, I do like this too, you know, any young person, no matter what his or age
should be allowed to apply for any job.
And it's just, yeah, if you can do it, you get paid for it.
And if you can't, you don't, and you probably get paid to the extent that
you're good at it.
It says if he or she can demonstrate appropriate competencies, he or she
should be taken seriously as a candidate.
If he or she performs poorly, he or she should be fired, just like an adult.
Also interesting to note, this was back in 2008.
People were still using he or she instead of they, man, cultures changed fast.
We're teaching as proper.
It's tricky though.
Yeah.
Um, and yeah, he does the thing about school, which you already mentioned.
Should, should school should have shorter compulsory hours, a shorter compulsory
school year, fewer required school years.
Uh, the mandatory schooling should focus on the basics, reading, writing, arithmetic
and citizenship, interesting that he includes citizenship.
I actually really liked that addition.
Yeah.
Um, I mean, teaching you your rights, which like, then you can take a test to see
if you understand what that means and whether you have the maturity to do it.
Uh, I wish that like, I guess we have like civics classes sort of, but we don't
really have like a, unless you like go into law, um, or, or government, we don't
much about that, or at least I didn't, maybe I just had a bad curriculum.
But I was like, yeah, I don't know.
I went to what I think is a very good high school, um, I guess as far as public
schools go, and I had one elective civics course.
I think that was all that was available.
It's just something that isn't stressed enough.
Oh, yeah.
And that was something, uh, I wanted to bring up at the school part, but like the
whole, uh, idea of school being sort of where we like put teens to train them to
be office workers.
Like there was definitely incentives there from the industrial revolution to
just train a bunch of like robotic employees to do manual labor or not
manual labor desk labor.
He goes on to say that, uh, competent young people should be given full
property rights and concedes that we do lose a degree of control over them.
But acting, he thinks that's a feature, not a bug.
In return, we get more responsible, secure and independent young people.
And he says that even if un emancipated young people of any age who can
destroy, demonstrate appropriate competencies should be able to make and
revoke wills, sign contracts, file lawsuits and represent themselves in court.
After all, we automatically extend such rights to many older people who lack the
appropriate skills and understanding sick burn.
Um, there was my, my next door neighbor, uh, when I was like living in New Jersey
and growing up at my parents house, the house next door, um, was owned by this
woman who she was a divorced single mom and had a teenage daughter and maybe
not divorced, the dad might have been dead.
But anyway, um, I thought this was great.
The mom was kind of a bitch.
And, uh, when the, when the daughter turned 18, uh, she inherited the
house and kicked her mom out.
Wow.
And then I remember like all the older people in the neighborhood were like,
Oh, there's like some teenager owning her house here.
She's, it's going to be like, she's going to crash.
She's going to have wild parties.
Actually, no, she was blue.
He also says that no curfew should be allowed in the country at all, unless
it's for everyone, excluding emergency personnel.
Emancipated young people should be able to move about freely as adults.
The wanderings of un emancipated young people will have to remain under
parental control because parents of dependent offspring are held responsible
for the wrongdoing.
Again, another one of those incentives to pass these compensatory tests.
Were there curfews for children?
There are often in many places.
Yes.
Is that new?
Cause I mean, that's been around for ages.
I guess I, I mean, I ran into cops, my, my, my, probably above average
share of run into the police when I was a kid and I never had one say you're
out too late on calling your parents.
Apparently, um, it's a problem with people that, uh, unschool their kids.
Um, if like, they'll get ratted on by neighbors or, or a cop will come up
to them and be like, Hey, you should be in school right now.
And they, a lot of them like train their kids to kind of say, Oh yeah.
No, I'm, I'm homeschooled and we're on recess right now.
I think it's, it's also a lot of it is selective enforcement where you
look, you know, rich and white.
So we're not going to bother with you, but you look like a member of the
underclass.
So we're going to enforce the curfew on you.
I can't rule that out.
I mean, I was hassled, but you know, uh, maybe four Collins in 2003 didn't
have curfews.
I have no idea.
Um, I do like this one.
I don't want children, uh, them he says, but I, I'm assuming
it means youngsters, uh, to feign adulthood by drinking and smoking in
dark alleys.
I want them to be adults by drinking and smoking responsibly to the extent
that young people over indulge.
I think there's only one legitimate solution to integrate them into adult
society.
I will caveat and it doesn't say that adults don't over indulge.
Um, they're most, I mean, most alcoholics are probably old enough to
buy their own alcohol.
Right.
So I don't know if that's the solution, but that's part of the solution.
Maybe I mean, uh, there's European countries that people always bring this
up where if you normalize drinking, the kids grow up with like a much, um,
healthier drinking habits.
Yeah.
Like,
yeah, I hear what you're saying.
They are most vulnerable to mischief when they're, uh, with their peers and less
vulnerable when they're with adults.
He's arguing that their peers are incompetent, but, uh, but then they're not
their peers.
He means other people their age.
Yeah.
Um, regarding pornography, I believe that young person who can pass an
appropriate test of maturity, again, this is different than the competency
test. This is a maturity test.
I'm sure he talks about what that is somewhere in the book.
Yeah.
That, that's one of the tests where I'm like, I'm wondering how he could judge
competency here.
Yeah.
Ability to own pornography.
I mean, if you can look at the booby, you can buy the booby.
I don't even know how like, if you go on like Pornhub, I think, or wherever,
don't they usually just have a pop up that's like, I swear I'm over 18.
I, I've been to a number of sites where there isn't even a pop up.
Yeah.
It's sort of, yeah, like if, if you're looking for it.
Yeah.
I guess just not like an actual porn shop, I guess could actually ID people
like when they walk in, but like that's, I don't know.
It'd be nice that if you've passed the competency test, you can go in and buy
your own sex toys.
Yeah.
Yeah.
He talks about, uh, violence with, uh, young people, which is like, all right,
well, when they're emancipated, it's just like hitting a, hitting an adult.
It's a crime.
Yeah.
Um, you know, there's, I, there's.
Some special carve outs for striking, uh, non-competent children.
Yeah.
He says that if you're emancipated, then it should be treated as a crime.
Just like if you hit an adult, uh, parents have the right to strike
un-emancipated children the same as they do now.
He does say, you know, they have a duty show that corporal punishment was
reasonable and appropriate.
So it's not like you're abusing your children and that, uh, you've tried other
ways of ban, behavior management, but yeah, basically.
Once you're emancipated, you can't get spanked anymore.
Cause that's, that's assault and battery.
And yet another reason to maybe try to get that competency test done.
Yeah.
I kind of think that, especially in the last decade and a half that, you know,
things have moved past, like the coolness of hitting your kids, um, which
I'm super in favor of, you know, I get that like, you know, the fact that we're,
that that's less popular now than it was before.
Yeah.
I'm in favor of hitting your kids.
Right.
Yeah.
I never liked the argument.
Well, I was hit as a kid and it's like, yeah.
And that, that's, that turned out fine.
Well, and like, but that, that never made any sense to me.
Like, Oh, well, I went through it.
It's like, well, tough.
Yeah.
I'm sorry that happened.
Some people are more sensitive than others.
Sort of the same thing with the like trauma.
Uh, yeah.
All of us have been put through this bullshit that we're talking about right
now when we were kids.
And yet I don't think that's an excuse to keep doing it.
Right.
Yeah.
I never liked.
It's kind of to stop it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
He says young people of any age who can pass a test that shows they will be
competent voters should be given the right to cast full votes and relevant
elections, which people now don't have to do.
Yeah.
Well, first of all, people now don't have to do, but like you were saying,
this was a way to suppress voting among minority populations for a long time.
So I don't know if they have to be develop a test that like is thoroughly
reviewed and the, I guess, like experts in, I don't know what field that would be.
Um, social sciences.
I guess social sciences can like say that this is like a test that's designed
to be maximally non-racist.
I think society is in the best place we've ever been to design such a test.
Also importantly, like, I think you should be able to appeal any of these sorts
of test decisions to an outside, outside area.
Cause like, what do you mean?
Well, cause a lot of the, uh, say reading comprehension tests done in the
south in the fifties, people passed them just fine.
Like they were more literate than some of the white people.
They were taking the tests alongside.
And yet, uh, when the test was judged, it was marked as a failure because
the person judging it could see this is a black person.
I don't want them to vote.
Sorry, you're not literate.
Uh, so this should be one of these things that like, if your test is marked as
failed, you could potentially go to a different area, a different judge and be
like, Hey, can you look at this?
Because yeah, uh, I think that he flunked it because I'm black and not
because I'm not old enough and not mature enough.
Yeah.
I like, especially the caveat of going somewhere else.
Like if you just took it to the same, whatever, uh, courthouse or something,
then that same asshole will just cut you down again.
I'd really like to live in a country where young people were allowed to vote.
Like it's irritating that just age is what drives a lot of our policies.
Because old people vote and people don't.
I mean, like, you know, people don't because they're not old enough to
or the ones that are are apathetic and I sort of don't blame them.
It's getting again into the sort of the voting topic.
But I think this, yeah, just having a, having a voting test, a competency
test for voting would, I think, cross the board, like make a lot of things better.
If you could make one that's non-racist, um, and that would be an incentive
for people to, like, again, take the civics class.
And like, yeah, I don't know, just the empowerment.
Yeah, it says when you say to young people, okay, you want to be adults, show us
what you can do, many will rise to the challenge.
We will be tapping into one of the most basic of evolutionary imperatives,
the desire to be independent.
And as the number of young people who pass various tests or who achieve
full emancipation multiplies, adults will have no choice but to see young
people through competency colored lenses.
So he's very bullish on this thing working out.
Yeah, I mean, I think he makes a compelling case.
You know, some of it, he does, I need to dig into some of the science that he
cites because, you know, you can't say this unequivocally proves my point.
And then not, and then if I don't get to read it, then I'm like, oh, I just
have to take your word for it that your point is unequivocally proved.
But that aside, you know, I think this is, this is a same case.
I, I know where this is probably pushing one of our longer episodes, but I did
have a couple of quick rapid fire ones that I'll trim down for, for sake of, uh,
brevity.
Yeah, do it.
Um, you know, like, I don't know if the jury's still out on alcohol on, on
developing brains or not.
And I don't think a brain, again, unless some of his research that he found
proves me otherwise, but, uh, I do think that there are some, you know, we talked
about, uh, the malleability and sharpness, acuity of, of young brains as opposed
to older brains.
Um, you know, if, if say getting drunk damages that I, I don't know if a young
person understands what they're doing to themselves.
If they're getting drunk every night, right?
Yes.
Well, so two counterpoints.
Um, the first one being that, uh, like the Rad Park experiment showed when you
give, um, an actual enriched environment to people, they often just don't take
the drugs because they have better things to do.
Oh, there must be the rat experiment, the rat utopia.
Yeah.
That, that, I mean, that's one of the reason people turns to drugs in prisons
and in schools because they just need something to, to make their lives not
horrible as they're trying to get through these years of doing nothing.
And the rats that.
Have we talked about the, um, rat utopia before?
Should I like tell the listeners?
Um, they got a bunch of rats addicted to cocaine or was it cocaine?
I think it was morphine morphine.
Yeah.
Um, anyway, they had rats in a like shitty, boring environment, um, and they
gave them access to drugs and drugs and they got addicted to the drugs.
But even the ones that they had gotten addicted at that point, if, if they put
them in rat heaven, like, which was like a, a little playground with other rats
to interact with and different types of food, just novelty choices, et cetera,
then the rats would unaddict themselves to the morphine.
Not all of them.
There was like some small percentage that just biologically were addicted.
But almost all of them, yeah, just stopped taking the drugs when they had
better things to do with their time.
Yeah.
Like the drugs still haven't a bad effect, but it was like, it definitely
improved the rats.
Like, first of all, some of them, like if, if you just started them out in the, uh,
rat playground and gave them access to the drug, a lot of them just wouldn't
even take it or they'd take it a few times, but it wouldn't stick.
The ones that like were heavily addicted at that point, then there's
biological stuff going against, uh, yeah.
So part of the counterargument is just that people won't be doing drugs or
alcohol nearly as much when they can have meaningful, fulfilling lives and
relationships.
And the other counterargument is that like, as he said, half of, um, seniors
and juniors in high school are already drinking a lot.
You're not actually helping the problem.
And who knows, maybe you're making it worse.
I don't know if the fact that people are already doing it means, well, let's
just make it legal then.
Um, I think it would be safer if it was legal.
That's the case for every crime, right?
Well, I mean, that's also why we, um, well, I don't know about you, but I
personally am for drug legalization as well.
Making, having a drug prohibition has not stopped people from taking drugs at
any significant rate, and it has made things much, much worse overall.
No, I mean, I'm not insane.
I'm also in favor of, of drug legalization.
I'm just wondering if it, if we, if it did turn out that, I don't know, insert
drug cocaine turned out to be just radically more damaging to a, to a young
grand, actually weed might be an example.
There's an argument to be made for, uh, people should be over 21.
I think to smoke weed or, or forget if it was 21 or 18, but
there is actually, uh, there's some evidence that it might be more harmful
when your brain is still developing, uh, which is like, I'm, I'm actually
getting a bit confused about that right now as I'm thinking about it.
Because, and I think Steven, you brought this up earlier.
Um, I think one of the main things that like people were worried about with
smoking weed before age 21, it was the whole, like the brain's not developed yet,
but that's not actually true.
It might just be that like the brain is in a more malleable state, so it could
cause more harm, but like one of the things that you were saying could happen
is if you have latent schizophrenia, it could activate it.
But that could just be an artifact of like you're saying, uh, but you tend
to develop it around that age, right?
The weed might not have anything to do with it.
Also, if your brain is more malleable, that means it's also more able to, uh,
recover.
Yeah.
Well, unless you, unless you're using drugs throughout that entire period, like,
you know, I, I, I listened to, um, I had been somebody on one of Sam
Harris's podcasts or somewhere, maybe very bad wizards.
Uh, she was concerned about the over-prescription of like antidepressants.
You know, if you're on antidepressants from age 10 through 30, your brain never
developed without, without, into adulthood without antidepressants.
And that, that could lead to, we don't know what kind of problems.
Um, so I mean, I guess I was, I was kind of just wondering, you know, if, if you
could ever see an example where like, actually, no, it turns out that this is
uniquely damaging to, to young people, to young minds.
We should make a special case for this.
I think if there was enough evidence, I'd be in support of that.
I just, I'm actually questioning though, whether that's true.
Me too.
I, I, I, I, I, it's not like I can point to something and say, what about this?
I know this is for a fact.
I'm just thinking hypothetically.
Yeah.
The other one was,
Oh no, I don't know if I would be in favor of a straight out ban.
I think like if there might be a competency, like, Hey, I'm, you know,
an informed, um, adult and I am choosing to do this and that should
still be your choice.
This actually ties me into the next thing really well, which is medical
freedom.
Like I'm a big fan of, of, uh, especially now, uh, in what is it?
Uh, May 31st, 2021, um, of compulsory medicine.
You're in favor of compulsion medicine?
Yeah.
Okay.
I don't like that fact that half my neighbors aren't going to get a
COVID vaccine.
Um, okay.
You know, so like I, I don't get wrong.
There's all kinds of downsides with, you know, how this has gone horribly in
the past, how this could go terribly wrong in the future.
But in a, in a society that didn't suck, um, I think, I think it would be
great to, to take that freedom away from people and say, look, sorry, you
don't get to decide that you get to drive 10 miles over the speed limit.
And, uh, with your eyes closed, just cause it's your personal freedom.
There's already legal precedent for, uh, compulsory vaccination.
Like this was a thing that happened back in God, I want to say the smallpox
era, 36 or something.
I don't remember exactly when it was, but, uh,
they might, they make kids take, um, what is it?
Boostery shots.
Uh, this, this was an adult who didn't want to get vaccinated for this thing.
And the state took him to court and eventually the Supreme Court ruled, uh,
no, it doesn't matter what you want.
This is of sufficient public interest that you will get this vaccine.
I think the distinction is I don't want to, I don't want any laws protecting
people from themselves.
Right.
Uh, but when you could harm others with your actions is I think when, when
you need to like.
Which is why the Supreme Court came down on the state side in that point.
Cause like you can make a, if you, if I make a personal choice that only affects
me, um, you know, well, I don't know why I'm even explaining this.
Yeah.
Nobody else would be harmed.
So I should be able to make that choice.
Yeah.
And it's, it's hard to imagine what medical, well, I could think of one maybe that.
All right.
So I've got, I was going to say it's hard to think of like a medical decision
that just does affect you that I might have a contention with, but I could think
of one that might get us canceled.
So give me a second to finish up my thing on, on the COVID vaccine.
Like, uh, I did see a thing where apparently a concert in Florida, uh,
tickets are 18 bucks.
If you're vaccinated and they're $1,000, if you're not.
Now I don't know if this will do anything, you know, cause how do you prove
you're vaccinated?
You give them this fake, easily fakeable card.
Um, but you know, it's, it's that kind of stuff I'm, I'm kind of in favor of.
Uh, I was at a mall yesterday to pass time before going to the movie and one of
the stores said, if you're vaccinated, you don't need to wear a mask.
And it's like, I'm not carrying my vaccination card.
This is a, I'm assuming a trust basis thing, right?
Uh, well, yeah.
I mean, that milk, they were literally checking people's of vaccine cards.
So, you know, I laminated mine.
I have it in my wallet, but on the other hand, they would let people in that
weren't vaccinated yet.
If they stayed masked the whole time, but inside there wasn't anyone going
around to unmask people.
Yeah.
And you didn't get a special wristband.
If you were vaccinated, they probably should have done that, but yeah,
people just walked in and if you weren't vaccinated, you could take
off the mask and there'd be no way to, yeah, to check.
Yeah.
See, it's just that sort of like inconsiderate response.
Are you being so inconsiderate to your neighbors or to your community
by doing it that way?
You should be prevented from harming others.
I think that you should get to choose what happens to you.
What if like a kid wants plastic surgery, you know, plastic surgery and the extreme
case would be like, sorry, finish it though.
I was going to say the extreme case would be like hormone replacement therapy
to begin transitioning, you know, if they can pass a competency test.
Something that I was going to bring up, but I was like, that's going to be
too much of, you know, my soapbox or.
No, I mean, I think that is one of the major considerations that is important here.
There's places where they block people from even getting the hormone, hormone blockers.
Like there's an option.
Yeah.
Like there's a puberty blocking option, like, and I think there's also an age
limit there, though.
Does that have any downsides that puberty blockers?
Yes.
I would have to imagine that it would.
It depends on how long you're on it for.
If you're delayed puberty for a long time, there's like the possibility of
complications, but I think like what you really need to weigh there is like the
damage that will be done if this, if this is a trans woman and has to is forced
to go through a male puberty because, you know, you have to be 18 to be able to
make decisions about it or whatever.
Like by the time you're 18, it's already like stuff that's going to be
expensive to reverse or even impossible.
Your bone plates fuse.
Yeah.
And if you, if we have these competency tests and you can show that you are mentally
competent early, earlier in your teenage years, you could start getting on home in
replacement or whatever earlier, because you can make your own medical decisions.
Yeah, I guess, and I only chose that just because it was a salient example, but in
general, I'm thinking of just some sort of irreversible medical decision.
And yet, yeah, I mean, I guess this, that is the accepted cost.
I mean, if you're, if you're 15 and you have shown that you are competent and you
want a boob job, if you have the money for it, people have brought up your body,
your choice, like a counterpoint to, I don't know, let trans people get surgeries.
They're like, oh, well, should we let people who want to amputate limbs do that?
And I'm always like, yes.
It's their body.
Yeah.
There, there is something to advance something because you don't find it
aesthetically pleasing.
There, there's some extent there to where that is like a mental illness that can
be treated without amputating the limb.
Yes, right.
But you should strongly encourage people to try to get treated rather than making
their decisions for them.
Right.
I just meant specifically the limb amputation because I do remember reading
something about that a few years ago.
And you can't, we don't have a pill that fixes trans people.
So like the only thing we have right now that works is transmission.
Right.
Oh yeah.
I was thinking specifically the limb thing.
Like I wouldn't want to be the doctor that has cut off someone's arms because I
know that whatever they're in transjective therapy or something.
Right.
Um, there was the last thing with, uh, I suppose a surgeon could probably like
say this is against my conscience.
I won't participate in the surgery.
I'm a big fan of that freedom.
I'll get, you know, abortion stuff is in the news.
I don't think anyone should be required to do any surgery.
They don't want to do, um, you know, and abortion is a tough one because.
What about the thing where like people have a certain religion won't like provide?
So I was raised as a Jehovah's Witness and I was, yeah, I was often in church, uh,
given stories of these heroic young people who refused blood transfusions or these,
uh, these adults who were willing and then did die because they wouldn't get a
blood transfusion after a major accident or whatever.
Uh, and every now and then there were stories about the horrible Satan directed
courts that would force blood transfusions onto minors because even though the
parents didn't want them to get it and the minors themselves didn't want to
get it, the doctors would say, look, the parents are fucking stupid and the
minor is not competent to make their own decisions.
So they are being forced to get blood transfusions.
And like I'm glad that they, that they were forced to get the transfusions
and they're alive now.
I had heard many stories of adults that died because they wouldn't get
blood transfusions, but on the other hand, if you're a competent adult and you're
willing to die for your religious belief and you're not actually killing others,
I don't know.
I guess I would want to ban it, but I, but principles like, I don't know, I
stand by my principles and I think that that would be really like sad.
I think that's really sad that people died.
Yeah, I, but I mean, I'm also on the, I'm also on the
people should be allowed to kill themselves, bandwagon, that, that suicide
should be an option for people who want to do that.
And this is kind of just like another case of that, right?
No, I think this is importantly distinct.
This is because you're brainwashed into believing magic about blood.
This, this is, this is not because you're depressed.
Yeah.
Like I was actually thinking, I wonder if, could you do a competency test for
that, which is just like, do you believe in science-based medicine?
What's interesting is that that does strike me as importantly discriminatory.
And this is getting us kind of too far a field and we've been here too long.
But, um, I wouldn't, I, while I would love that, like, look, you have to be
science literate to decide something like this.
I almost don't want to make science literate and still have a crazy religious
belief.
Lots of people do.
Yeah.
Yeah, I suppose you say, I mean, some of the people that chose to die because
they wouldn't have blood transfusions were literate, but you know, the courts
were like, okay, you have, you have this sincere religious belief.
So even though, you know, it's going to kill you, you are allowed to make that
decision as an adult.
I'm in favor of, of the courts and the hospitals overriding the wishes of the
children and the stupid adults to give blood transfusions to, to youngsters who
needed them, right?
You know, and it sucks because that kid might think he's going to hell or
something, right, which is stupid.
Um, but, you know, the whole thing about it is stupid.
But at the same time, it's like, I'm not going to let some kid die just cause,
you know, he's got dumb parents.
No, I agree.
Miners can and should have that decision overrided.
Uh, but once you are treated as an adult with your own rights, even if you're
15, if you've proven that you're competent to make decisions for your own
life, the choice to die is one of those.
My last thought was it's not related to adulthood or competency or anything,
but it was the puberty blocker thing.
The reason that I knew without having to do research that it must have some
side effects is because otherwise it sounds not like an immortality pill, but
like a longevity pill for sure, because you start aging a lot more once you're
post reproductive age, right?
So if you never hit that, because you keep pushing it back for years.
No, you can't prolong your adolescence indefinitely with this.
Like it just, uh,
it's, it, it, it puts you from 50 miles an hour to 30 miles an hour or something.
Right?
Well, it's more like you need hormones.
Uh, so estrogen and testosterone are important for how long can you delay it?
We don't know.
Um, we should find out.
Uh, it's hard to do it without doing experiments.
Yeah.
But like you need hormones in order to complete your development into an adult
body and like, and, and, and be healthy.
So you need to get one or the other.
But adult bodies age into, into decrepitude.
So if you never get there, you can just stay young and 11 forever.
Hell yeah.
That would be awesome if it worked like that.
I think it does not.
I think it doesn't either.
They would have figured this out in rats or something.
Um, anyway, this was fun.
I, yes, I found the case compelling, um, certainly for, for large parts of it.
I, I would have to go back through.
We have a lot of notes, way more than usual.
Oh, there's a lot of things I didn't touch on.
Yeah.
Well, one of the things here near the bottom was like, uh, the enemies of this
progress, uh, a lot of government agencies are just have power to, to control
teens and they won't want to give that up.
Yeah.
There's incentives to get them out of the workforce.
Yeah.
A lot of, uh, churches have, have incentives that, yeah, the labor unions and
various other places have an incentive scheme out of the workforce.
We talked last time about the laws that give parents veto power over their
kids' sex lives.
Yep.
There's a lot of, um, industries that cater specifically to the culture that
develops when you have a captive population that can't do anything
interesting, but that is still given money by their parents.
Uh, and those would probably strongly oppose this.
He lists a lot of teen spending numbers in here as well.
Yeah.
They market really, like it's sort of, it's, it's weird that the teen culture is
sort of a product of this marketing.
Like it's sort of self perpetuating in this creepy way.
Yeah.
Or it's like, Hey teens, you're these like sad, mopey, depressed people.
Right.
Like, you know, it'll make you feel better about your shitty situation.
New Paris shoes.
I will, I mean, on the one hand, I'll kind of miss a lot of the, a lot of the
art that comes out of this traumatizing period.
Cause trauma often makes the best art and, and I was really into the angry screaming
type.
Yeah.
They're all obese trauma.
That's true, but like it was, I do not think that this would make the world worse.
I think the world would be better by a lot.
And sure, there'll be less art about this specific sort of trauma, but that's
probably a good thing.
Like maybe if we had, um, enforced rape culture or something, there'd be a lot
of art about how terrible and traumatic that is, but that wouldn't be good.
So, um, yeah, we don't want to invent new traumas to make better art.
Exactly.
So this was like the worst argument to try and like solve the
odyssey for me in my philosophy of religion class was like, Oh yeah.
You know, now we know about the wisdom that was gained during the horrors of
the Holocaust.
So that is not a sufficient, uh, like benefit for the cost that we paid to get it.
Yeah.
And if anything, what you're saying is that if we could have, you know, if more
children could learn the lesson of the horrors of what we should have let it go
on for 10 years longer, what are you shitting me?
She's like, well, I'm not saying that.
Like, I think you are saying that.
Tell me how you're not saying that.
I remember this argument because I didn't, I, I was like the only person
making this case.
This wasn't my like college, uh, philosophy of religion class.
Philosophy of religion.
Yeah.
And I was the only person really making this argument and I wasn't as, uh, brazen
then as I am now.
So I backed down fairly quickly, but I, I was, I, I, I still wish I had challenged
harder.
I, it's not, you know, I wouldn't have gained anything, but maybe I'd have
changed someone to mine or something.
So if you had a time machine, you'd go like make a stronger argument.
Right.
Think of some moments.
So real quick, other resources, youthfacts.org gives a whole bunch of data
and information and the national youth rights association at youththrights.org
is a place to go to help support these sorts of changes and do activism in this domain.
Hell yeah.
And there's various other ones too, but that was like the, the biggest central one
that I found.
So I'm just using that one.
Okay.
I like it.
Yeah.
I mean, I think the, the analogy to other minority groups pans out really well here.
I remember this was an argument that I came across, uh, another philosophy class.
It was, um, about animal liberation, but it was, uh, a quote from, I want to say it,
an abolitionist during the 1800s.
And it was like, look, even if what you're saying is true, that, you know, my cup is
only half as big as yours.
Am I not entitled to my little half measure?
Um, and the, the case was like, sure, an animal has a 10th of the capacity, but
why aren't they allowed to enjoy that 10% or whatever, right?
Uh, this, if you, if you, if you look at the analogy to, um, again, women being
able to work, you know, all in, in mass in 1940, that's insane.
You know, it's easy for people to forget that that like,
it's not even that long ago.
Yeah.
You know, people who, who were alive, you may know people who are alive, uh, at that time.
He draws direct comparison between laws, protecting women and laws, protecting teens
that women were considered weak, incompetent people and desperately
need of protection.
Protecting is a good word there.
Cause we know it doesn't work for, for women.
And so we're like, wait, why doesn't it work for teens?
And it forces that dissonance forces you to face that dissonance.
Yeah.
And he says now, um, but it's like 12% of the military is composed of women, 15% of
law enforcement, and, uh, turns out these opinions can change in society.
And these are stupid arguments.
Yeah.
I, you know, it's kind of 15 year old carry as much, uh, you know, gear as a, as
a 35 year old, probably not, but you can then you let them join.
Well, or a competency test, they need to carry some, some measure, right?
You know, some, some portion of whatever they probably don't need as many
resources either, right?
If you're carrying water or whatever, right?
Um, so it's like, no, just like, yeah, let them do the thing.
It makes, I think, um, like firefighting is like my favorite example.
Cause it's like, look, it doesn't matter, uh, anything else, but can you, can you lift
this much weight?
Can you, can you deadlift a person?
You know, there's also, yeah, with firefighting, like, I mean, I, I was,
I was an EMS, not fire, but I, I can't carry as much as the other people, but I
can squeeze into a car and hold C spine.
And in firefighting that they're, and war, it's useful to have someone with a
small frame sometimes, you know, or like more dexterous fingers, having a, I get
why like, I don't know, there's the stereotype of like, you want like a big
strong man to fight the fires and sometimes you don't, but like, you need
some diversity.
Yeah, exactly.
There's different jobs in the military.
Yeah.
Having child soldiers gives you the opportunity to fit into lots of small places.
Yeah.
It was like actually thinking about child soldiers earlier, but we're talking,
we're talking about young adult soldiers.
That's different.
That's right.
Um, yeah.
So I, there's a lot of things that we didn't touch on that are in my notes.
I will go ahead and put them all up at HP, no, at the basin conspiracy.com, uh, so
that anyone can peruse them if they want.
It turns out when I exported my notes to, uh, to a more shareable format format.
Yeah.
Uh, Kindle told me that I had highlighted 4% of the book and I was like, wow,
that's, that's actually a pretty decent percentage of this book.
So yeah, there's, there's a number of notes in here.
And like I said, there's still 96% that I didn't cover or that I didn't highlight.
So more for people to read if they want to actually get the book teens 2.0.
And he didn't read the second book either, which was called the case against
adolescence.
That's right.
And that one is the, yeah, more rigorous planning on reading it.
If I get the time, but I mean, there's another podcast episode in two weeks.
And I, I don't have, I still got my nine to five job and all that other stuff.
So I don't know.
We'll have you guys and don't worry.
Yes.
All right.
I think we've gone on plenty long.
I had a good time.
I hope you guys did too.
Uh, we got time to think a patron though.
You've got the notes up.
We always have time to think a patron, but I do not have the notes up now.
Let me go find those.
Hey, so for this episode, we are thanking Clement or Clement.
I don't know.
Our patron Clement helped provide this and make it possible to all of you.
And we thank him very much for that because you are listeners and
Clement and specific this week are what lets this happen.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You rock.
I don't know what, I mean, it sounds insincere because I sound tired, but I mean it.
This is, this is great.
And, uh, thanks for helping bring this to, to the masses, including the young adults
who are, have yet to be emancipated by society.
Uh, you know, maybe this, uh, I mean, it would be interesting.
I, I, maybe in 30 years, let's be a thing.
And, you know, I, I, I don't know.
It's put me in a forward thinking mood.
So thanks for letting this conversation happen.
You rock.
All right.
Uh, we'll be back in two weeks.
Bye everybody.
Bye bye.
I'll try to buy a lip post, baby, believe you alone, but not me all together now.
