Welcome to The Basin Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky.
I'm Stephen Zuber.
And I'm Jess Dickey.
And not to get all political or anything two years before there's even going to be
a vote, but hey, let's talk about the presidential candidates.
Just one for today.
Just one for today.
Because I, well basically this started because I posted something tongue in cheek and everyone
was like, what?
Why?
And I'm like, okay, fine.
I really like Andrew Yang.
Me too.
Okay.
All right.
What was the thing you posted?
I posted.
Can you give us a background?
I just posted on my blog.
I just a simple two line thing post, I guess.
All right.
I'm going to come out and say it.
Anyone who doesn't vote for Andrew Yang is a bad person.
I missed that.
Yeah.
And that was, that was just kind of a call back to the old, old, um, less wrong post
of LDSerck saying, I'm just going to come out and say it.
Anyone who doesn't get cryonics for their children is a bad person.
Which is actually, you know, like a serious thing I could get behind.
But uh, I was, I meant to tongue in cheek, right?
And then everyone was like, that seems really strange coming from you.
I, I have a hard time seeing you calling people morally bad for their political judgements.
I was like, okay, people are taking me way too seriously.
I should expand on this.
Um,
Or people just don't know you well enough.
Or possibly.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But, uh, I linked to an article saying, uh, Andrew Yang comes out as ex-goth or something.
Which is
I did see that one going around.
Yes.
Yes.
It's pretty wonderful.
Wait.
Andrew Yang came out as ex-goth.
He says he's ex-goth, but can you ever truly be ex-goth?
No, the, the, the makeup and stuff just sinks in and becomes part of you.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So he is, he is, um, pretending to be a normie for a while, I guess.
God, if he, if he came out with like black lipstick and I like to give his inauguration
speech, I would probably solve with patriotic pride.
Yes.
Yeah.
We finally reached there.
It's been a long time since I've actually been excited for any presidential candidate
ever.
And the reason I posted that was because I was actually excited for Andrew Yang.
As my quick pitch to why you guys should vote for him, even though he's sure not to
win the primary, but vote for him in the primary, then I guess at least, uh, this sounds really
weird to say.
I, the more I read about him, the more I think I like him personally.
And I know people are always saying, you shouldn't vote for the guy you want to have
a beer with, right?
Vote for the guy who's actually capable at running the country.
And for the most part, I agree with this, uh, but I think people's personality is also
important because you can't predict all the shit that's going to happen in four years.
You could be living at like the height of American peace and prosperity and suddenly
someone flies two planes into your two biggest towers and now the world's going to chaos.
And no one could predict that and how you, who you are as a person affects somewhat how
you're going to react.
Well, and also like, isn't the kind of person you want to have a beer with that I'm trying
to think of somebody that, that I wouldn't want to hang out with who I'd also want to
be president.
Maybe Hillary Clinton might be an example, but I think it'd be interesting talking with
Hillary Clinton for, you know, as long as a couple hours.
Yeah, she's not the person I'd chill and have a beer with.
Yeah.
Although it would be, I wouldn't pass up the opportunity, you know, then again, I wouldn't
pass up the opportunity to have a beer with Trump either.
And that's, that's more out of just like, for the spectacle to finally be able to say
things that, you know, I've always wanted to say, I just want to observe him like, is
he always as weird as he is when he's, I mean, he has to be right in public appearances.
He's so weird. He's probably even weirder in non-public appearances.
I mean, he allegedly drinks like 12 Diet Cokes a day and like orders McDonald's every single
day and has delivered to the White House.
Like that sounds like a weird dude, even if he wasn't president, right?
That's a Sun very American.
It sort of does, but like, that's not even, I don't have any friends who eat McDonald's
every day.
And nothing, not like a judgment thing.
It's just like, that's, that's, that's judgment.
Yeah. So just like, you know, I, for whatever reason, hitting like,
low hanging fruit with his food choices, like, you know, well cooking an expensive piece
of steak and then putting ketchup on it.
Like that's, that's weird, right?
Apparently you've just touched one of Jess's issues.
That is a pet peeve of mine. Yes.
Ruining expensive food.
No, I, um, I like cooking and I have an ex who I would like spend a long time marinating
a nice steak and then like cooking it.
And then yeah, he would put ketchup on it.
And I was just like, why, why would you do this to me personally?
But what if they like it better with ketchup?
Yeah, you can get a cheap piece of meat that doesn't take the long.
Like you can, you can put ketchup on anything, right?
And it tastes the exact same.
It's so, so overpowering.
Well, whenever I go to a bar and I ask for, you know, a Coke and vodka,
people ask me, what kind of vodka you want with that?
I'm like, get me the cheap stuff.
I'm putting it in Coke.
I won't be able to tell.
That's what the Coke is for.
Yeah, exactly.
But if you, but if you mixed Coke, if you drink Coke, like with, you know,
three parts Coke and one part $60 vodka, we think you're weird, right?
Right.
But I mean, that's the thing.
Like what if you're having a really expensive whiskey that's been aged in a
barrel for however long they do the whiskey things?
I don't know shit about whiskey.
And you mix it with Coke.
Okay.
You could overpower with Coke and ruin it, right?
Or you can add just a little bit of Coke, just like to enhance the flavor.
And maybe that's what he was doing with the ketchup.
It's not like he was smothering it with ketchup, right?
He was smothering it with ketchup.
Oh, anyway, let's get back to Andrew.
Well, I just, I feel bad about shaming people for what they like.
Me either, but let's just be fair.
Trump is not a person of moderation of anything, right?
So you can be, you can, you can bet without looking at anything.
It's probably too much.
And I'm only, I'm always willing on the food because I remember this was like a
thing for years when Obama put Dijon mustard and it was like, how, how
un-presidential or something.
Have you ever had mustard?
Yeah.
I don't know why, but.
Okay.
And a tan suit thing that was, you know, on the news for months.
So you mentioned it's been years since you're excited about a candidate.
Was it like 2008?
The last time you were excited or was it before that?
With the original Obama run?
Yeah.
I was somewhat excited about that too.
I don't, I don't, I don't think I knew anybody who wasn't so
up top and how exciting that was.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, I was also turning 18 because I'm secretly a baby.
So I was definitely, I was excited for Obama, but not quite the same as this
because there were other options that didn't suck in 2008.
Whereas like, I cannot vote for most of the democratic primary candidates,
candidates right now, because they all voted for foster sesta.
And I have a hard rule that I will never, ever vote for anyone who voted
for foster sesta.
Unless they're running against Donald Trump in the primary in 2020.
I will never, ever vote for anyone who voted for foster sesta.
That's super annoying.
I know.
I've had a number of people say that and I guess I should address it at some point.
I just, to me, someone who voted for that, it shows their absolute lack
of character and the fact that they're willing to sacrifice whoever they need
to, especially the most powerless, if it'll get them political advantage.
And to me, that says they would be more than happy to usher me into the ovens
or wherever if they needed to do it to win an election.
And I'm just not okay with that.
I wait a second.
Can you define what foster sesta is?
I know you talked about it on other podcasts, but just in case people
are listening the first time.
Oh, and wondering why you're running straight to the Holocaust.
So what makes that the same as Hitler lining people up in Auschwitz?
Because it is singling out the most vulnerable in our population for further
abuse and degradation of their lives.
Can you define what it is?
Foster sesta is the bill that supposedly is supposed to make human trafficking
illegal, which is dumb because first of all, human trafficking is already illegal.
But it was touted as we all think that sex slaves are bad.
So you should vote for this.
And literally everyone who's ever been in the sex worker industry, anyone
who's known any sex workers, anyone who knows anything about women's issues, went
to the lawmakers and were like, Hey, what this actually does is make the lives
of sex workers much more dangerous.
It forces them back into the streets, back into under the the quote unquote
protection of pimps.
It takes power away from people to choose their clients and to be safe and makes
everything risky again.
Was prostitution legal for a while and I missed the memo?
It was never technically legal, but there was online resources where you could
advertise and where you could screen your clients and things like that.
And Foster sesta not only get rid of that, it gutted a lot of internet
protections for even people who aren't doing anything with sex or with
pornography.
It's probably the reason why Tumblr went all crazy anti porn.
Now a website can be whole held.
I can just be deleted.
Yeah.
Well, the website can be the owner of a website can be held.
In criminal contempt, like go to jail.
If anyone on their website did use their website for anything that might be sex
and money related, prostitution related, wasn't, wasn't Tumblr's thing that it
hosted child pornography for years and that I'm pretty sure that was a big part
of it.
You had a, a, a ULA that said you can be 13 to use this place and we're not going
to check if you post nudes of yourself.
And there were tons of nudes of children on there for years.
So like porn hub's fine.
You can still post your own amateur content and porn hub.
Yeah.
Again, I don't know the ins and outs and you know, way more about this than I
do, but I'm just thinking like the, the, the Tumblr thing, I think was largely
due to the fact that they went unchecked for the bunch of stuff that we all
probably agree is not cool to have on the web.
Right.
But the rest of your point stands.
Yeah.
Like, except for the part where you're running all the way to saying that they
would sell out, I know you're being hyperbolic, but where they would sell out
anybody, not anybody, but they would sell out me if it was an advantage,
advantageous to them.
If for some reason I was a hated minority and people didn't care about me.
Okay.
I like Archer.
Great show, right?
The cartoon show in the very first episode, though, they have a dead
hookers in the trunk joke.
His friend at the time says, aren't, don't we call them call girls?
And Archer goes, no, when they're dead, they're just hookers.
Right.
Which ha, ha, I guess that's funny.
But again, it's like sex workers don't count as people.
Even up to a few years ago, it was okay to joke about how they aren't people.
I, I knew some sex workers, probably still know some sex workers in my life.
And I'm not okay with that at all.
And so it, it really bothers me when someone's like, okay, here's people
that no one cares about, they joke about how inhuman they are, let's make
their lives even worse and less safe.
That's what they were doing for political advantage.
And so if I was someone that society didn't care all that much about and
considered borderline, unhuman anyway, then the politician that voted for
soft host assist that would be just as happy to vote for something that would
make my life more dangerous for whatever little political advantage.
So I guess two things.
One, it depends on, you know, the era, not defending the Archer joke, but like
the, the joke that like X person isn't human.
I've spent a set on the show that like when somebody's handing me coffee at
the drive through, they're not like a person to me.
They're a coffee delivery person.
They're a coffee delivery machine, right?
Yeah, yeah.
Um, so like in that sense, it's dehumanizing.
Um, and so othering people to the point of nonhumanness isn't
necessarily a sign of psychopathy or, or anything like that.
There isn't a whole culture about how it's okay to laugh about dead coffee salesman.
No, probably not.
And I, I guess I didn't know a lot of people in the dead hooker comedy community,
but was there any impact that was positive to this about like actually
doing anything about sex trafficking?
No, no, was, was there any things worse?
Was there any, was there any plausible way that it could have even law enforcement
came out and said, this will make our jobs harder.
It will make sex trafficking worse.
And it has.
Okay.
All right.
I mean, I was going to say, if it, if it did make sex trafficking harder to do,
then I was like, Hey, you know what?
That sucks.
Maybe including all this, you know, uh, what do you call Puritan bullshit about
prostitution is the only way to get make it, get it bipartisanly passed.
Then it's like, all right, that's the cost we paid to, you know, to help with
some slavery issues, right?
Um, but if it didn't even do that, then that's super annoying.
And it's forced things back under, deeper underground and has made things worse.
Womp.
Yeah.
All right.
Well,
so anyways, long ass tangent.
None of that is relevant to why like Andrew Yang, aside from the fact
that he didn't vote for it, which I realize is only because he's not a
politician and he didn't have the opportunity to vote for it.
But from the things I've read about his personality, he seems like the kind
of person who wouldn't have voted for it anyway.
Yeah, or at least he would have had some kind of thoughtful process behind
why he did or didn't vote for it as opposed to knee jerk of like sex
trafficking, gotta vote against that or it'll look bad.
Sex trafficking is the current satanic cults.
Well, yeah, and I guess like he said, it is political expediency and
whatever, all that stuff, but that's just politics, which again, it sucks.
And that's a drag.
But like, if anyone's like, Hey, no, we can't do this, they'd be thrown
through the mud and be like, look, that person's, you know, pro sex trafficking.
There's six people.
I think it was six people that voted against it, extremely small number,
but there were a few.
Yeah.
And I'm sure if there were big figures, they would have got a bunch of shift for
it, I don't know if they were big figures.
They could have said, Hey, this bill is bullshit.
And this is why I guess it's just, you know, it's, it's politics in the
biggest scale, but even like at a low, at a low scale, you know, the standing
up and saying, this is a bad idea.
And I'm going to side with the criminals are going to side with the drug
dealers or something.
You're going to, people will take the advantage of that to say, look,
they're a terrible person.
We shouldn't, we should get them, we should take away their power.
Well, I mean, and that's exactly what happens and how you get to look
this person side with the Jews.
He's a terrible person.
Yeah, prefer more people to stand up for their actual principles.
I did too.
I'm just saying it's not, it's not, I don't get me wrong.
I'm, I'm very much for that, but it's not a sign of a monster or, or a, a, a
gas chamber loving asshole, no, no, no, no, no, to endorse that.
I think, but now I think evil is pretty banal in it's not monsters and mutants.
It's people who are just doing some expediency things here and there and
sometimes things get run away, you know, with that.
Uh, so I don't, I don't think any of these people are evil.
I just hate them for not being at least a little bit good.
All right.
Well, we'll, we'll, we'll table all that for a while.
Cause I, I have a lot more to say about that, especially giving the
upcoming election, but, um, I like Andrew Yang too.
Okay.
So I think that's great.
Yeah.
Um, so no, Andrew Yang, the reasons that I'm excited for actual Andrew Yang, in
addition to not having any, um, viable, uh, other people I can vote for is that
he seems to be kind of more or less our people.
He comes from Silicon Valley entrepreneurship culture.
Oh yeah.
Just like the rest of us.
Well, he is very concerned about future tech, uh, issues that are coming up.
And as far as I can tell, he's the only candidate who actually can see the
looming AI apocalypse coming and is trying to do something about it and meet the
future head on instead of just doing the normal road things that everyone else is
doing, like, Hey, let's work on the economy and keep the military strong and
do whatever it is that we do.
Yeah.
Let's maintain the status quo, maybe make things slightly better.
Yeah, exactly.
He's a, he's not disruptive ways.
He's, he's like, with, as an asteroid is streaming towards the earth, all the
other politicians are worried about unemployment rates and, and crime rates,
which are also things to worry about, but no one's looking at the asteroid.
And he's like, we should do something about this fucking asteroid.
Yeah.
And I, I think it's great.
He has, um, a literacy with tech and with, I don't know, a level of in touchness
that I can't, because the last three years have taken, you know, 50 years.
I can't remember if, if, you know, this has been around before, right?
Where, um, you know, I think Obama made, he definitely made noises about
like automation and stuff.
And in fact, they, like the White House, you know, had that memo, like his last
month in office about, you know, by 2030, we estimate what 25% of jobs will be
automated or something.
Oh.
Like they, they conduct some study about, you know, like waitress jobs, retail jobs
and driving jobs.
Yeah.
Like all of those are going away in the next 15 years, next 11 years by, by, by
a lot of estimates.
I think MIT had a concurrent study that also agreed that came to that same
conclusion.
So, I mean, he's aware of it, but yeah, Yang's big on that.
He's got, I mean, he's not, and he's not just that they're complaining either.
He's got solutions, which I like too.
Yeah.
I mean, for starters, he's proposing creating a department of technology and
a secretary of technology, which I'm shocked that no one else has done this
yet, considering how freaking important that is in, in the current day.
Yeah.
Our current president like conducts his policies, like directly off Twitter and
yet like.
And then our secretary, or what is it?
The, um, the head of our information security council or something, whatever,
uh, Chris Christie, I forget what his title was.
Um, when he had that tweet that he forgot to put a space between the
period and the next sentence and the next word that HTML can render that as a
hyperlink.
Oh.
And so somebody bought that domain and like, you know, said like Trump sucks or
something, just put that on there.
Awesome.
Um, and he's like, I've been hacked.
It's like, you don't know how a hyperlink works.
And this is the guys, you know, our, our, our chief in this area in the country
or in the White House.
So, um, yeah, it'd be nice to have tech leader people actually in charge of tech
decisions.
Yeah.
Like cybersecurity stuff too.
Um, thinking about like the Russian hackers, the, I had something else and
I forget.
No, it's good.
Yang's literacy on the influence technology in our lives and they're in a
way that like, uh, social media platforms have gotten away with basically
everything to this point by just saying, oh, we're just a platform and people
sign up for it and they can, we, so we can do whatever we want.
And, you know, they, they submit their data to us and they said, it's okay.
And he's like, yeah, that's really weird.
We wouldn't sign up.
We're like, we wouldn't be okay with that literally.
I know us in our lives.
We can't let that keep going either.
So we've got to start holding them accountable too.
Yeah.
He's, he's proposed the policy of everyone owns their own information.
Uh, the privacy issue.
Yeah, that was the thing I was trying to think of that.
The companies have to tell you what information they're collecting on you
and what they are doing with it.
And you can tell them no, which would be pretty cool.
Yeah, we should own our own information.
I wonder how that'll ever pass.
Cause I mean, something like that, they, you can ask them to give it to you,
which one, again, my book club gets so fucking pissed at his phone.
He's like, I can enter my contacts into my phone, but it will not tell me what I
entered into it unless I agree to these terms of service, which I refuse to
agree to.
So he now cannot get that.
I mean, he already knows the information, but he's fucking pissed off that he can
enter it into the phone, but the phone won't give it back to him.
That's weird, right?
Yeah.
You know, there are non like social media example in phone examples, like, uh,
I have a credit card with the chase and somewhere in my 40 page agreement says,
like, Hey, we're going to give your information to, I guess, like everything
that you buy and when you buy it and where we're going to give all the
information to whoever wants it and, you know, Experian and the other big
three credit agencies.
Yeah.
The big credit agencies.
We're going to give it all to them.
So I got an agreement.
I don't have an agreement with Experian.
Is it Experian?
Am I saying that right?
Yeah.
Experian's wonderful.
Um, uh, but they, they keep talking about credit score.
If they have a data leak that I didn't know that I had to contract with them and
my information's out, well, that sucks.
And that's, that's, that's my problem now.
Right?
Yeah.
Um, so it would be cut.
And when, when did that act pass?
It was recently in history where I'm allowed to get a copy of my credit report for
free.
Yeah.
Um, was that in the 2000s or late 90s?
It doesn't matter.
It was, it was way too late to be like constable.
The fact that I had to pay somebody to be like, all right, you guys are using this
fucking magic number to determine my life.
Can I please see it?
And they're like, yeah, sure.
Give us $200.
And that's, that's a weird way to go about doing this.
Right?
That's sicking you hostage.
And before we jump on, uh, on words, his department of technology, he specifically
called out would look into AI existential risk related items and keep the White
House appraised of them.
That's pretty cool.
That is pretty fucking cool.
How what other candidate even knows what AI existential risk is?
Yeah.
I think if anyone wants to, to hear a bit about like how he, how he talks and how
he's engaged on things and he's, he talks like a politician because he's,
he's trying to, but he's also, he doesn't talk like a normal politician because
he's not been inundated with the, you know, his whole life, but he was on the
Joe Rogan experience for like three hours.
He was on Sam Harris's podcast.
I heard him on Freakonomics, which was a really good episode as well.
Yeah.
And I mean, it's just, he, he's down to earth and that's not like, that's not a
good, that's not a quality of why he should be president, but it makes him
fun to listen to.
And I guess by that, I mean that he's in touch.
Yeah.
I think being a good communicator is actually a really good quality for a
president to have.
Yeah.
I just meant like his relatableness is something that I think is a good quality,
but not necessarily one that is necessary for being a good president.
But, you know, I remember like when Mitt Romney was trying to, like he was one
of the, the poor folks that they wanted to vote for him and be like, oh yeah,
NASCAR, I have some friends who own some teams or, you know, or it's like, uh,
all right, cool.
Thanks.
That's, you know, you really get it.
Yeah.
You know, you spend more on lessons with your dressage horse and all
earned my entire life.
So like that, that level of like disconnect is super annoying, but it
doesn't necessarily invalidate him as a, as a good president.
Right.
Um, I mean, the fact that he's a religious nut job who wears magic
underwear might, but, uh, it, honestly, if he ran it, that's my thing.
And that's, I get where you're coming from taking this stance.
So with the, uh, with that bill who, that I can't remember what it's called.
Foster sister.
Foster sister.
But like, if Mitt Romney ran as a Democrat in 2020, I'd vote for him in a hot
second if he, if he won the primary, right?
I mean, it could be literally, it could be George Bush, or I guess, no,
because he ran twice already, right?
But whatever.
Um, it could be the first George Bush.
He only won once.
He's dead, but, uh, wait, is he George W, George, uh, HW Bush, the dad?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Oh, damn it.
When'd that happen?
Uh, a couple of years ago.
Oh, okay.
Or no, wait, yeah.
It was a couple of years ago because Trump wasn't invited and then went
anyway to his funeral.
It was fun.
Um, wow.
All right.
And it was cute.
Cause like he crashed a funeral.
George, George W.
Bush and, uh, um, I Clinton, Michelle, Michelle Obama, um, they have like
this cute little relationship and like apparently whenever they see each
other, he like sneaks her candy.
And so there's a video like panning over the audience of the funeral and he's
like handing her like a piece of candy from his pocket.
Um, so like, you know, little things.
Anyway, yes.
Yang cares about AI and technology and automation, but aren't cool.
He cares.
What's he going to do about it?
What's, what's his, what's his brilliant idea to help, to help solve this problem?
Uh, well, the three letter summary is UBI, uh, which is sounds like a
sexual transmitted disease.
Can you, can you explain what that is?
A universal basic income.
Oh, that sounds like way worse.
The socialist, you get out of here.
All right.
Well, never mind.
I can't vote for a damn comedy.
Well, um, his three big policies are that he supports UBI.
He has, he wants to have Medicare for all and he wants to have human-centered
capitalism.
So they all seem a bit socialist.
Yeah.
And he, in fact, he would be running socialist if he, if, if that was any more,
if that was not, if that was not less viable than being as fringe as he is running a
Democrat.
So I don't, I don't know if he would, because he is a capitalist, right?
He's an entrepreneur.
Well, he had said on the Rogan podcast that he's running Democrat cause it's
two-party system.
Right, right, right.
So I'm sure he would be running as whatever he could to get attention to UBI.
I mean, he knows he's not going to win as far as I can tell.
And his major goal at this point looks to be shifting the Overton window to
include discussion about UBI and the Overton window for people who are, I guess,
unfamiliar is a fancy term for what is in the realm of the politically acceptable
to talk about, to do, like, uh, hosting a communist revolution is not anything
that anyone in government is even willing to entertain right now.
UBI is kind of outside that window as well.
Yeah.
So the idea, and he, and he said something to that effect.
I mean, he does, he thinks that there's a chance he could win.
I mean, people have come from behind before and he's getting a lot of traction.
I mean, again, just being on Rogan's podcast means that I don't know what 10
million Americans heard him and, you know, got to at least get exposed to him.
So, you know, the more of that that goes on, the better.
I'm going to vote for him in the primaries, but oh, wait, I need to
register as a Democrat before I can wrote in the, wrote in the primaries.
Right.
I'm not sure Colorado recently changed how the primaries work.
Oh, that's right.
It's different this year.
All right.
Well, I'll double-track.
Yeah, I'll have to double-check as well.
But the, yeah, he's proposing a UBI, which is only $1,000 a month.
So I'm not sure, not quite livable, but would help a lot.
Yeah, it's like $12,000 a year for everybody, regardless of your income bracket.
For every 18-year-old or older citizen.
Right.
And anyone who isn't already accepting government aid.
Right.
If you, if you're making $1,200 a month on government aid, then, if they offer you
a thousand, then they can say, no, I'm going to keep what I've got.
And that's, that's an option.
But if you're making $800 a month on government aid, you can take the
thousand instead, but not in addition to.
So he, he did this on the Rogan podcast, which was fun.
You know, the, the math, every American that's 18 plus times $1,000 a month is
what, $3 trillion or something.
So he's like, no, it gets down to like 1.5 really quick.
And he, he, he burned through that and it's five minutes spiel.
I don't have full faith in his numbers.
I think they're not bad, but I mean, for example, Amazon pays zero in taxes.
Right.
For a company that pulls in ludicrous amount of money.
And yeah, he wants to capture some of that.
Uh, I don't know how realistic it is, but on the other hand, I also think it's
more important to be talking about the idea right now than to be trying to hammer
down every single number.
Like part of it was, uh, part of his numbers were once everyone's getting a
thousand dollars a month, there's going to be less people who have to show up
in the emergency room because they couldn't afford their $50 medication.
Right.
And so we were going to see substantial savings from that sort of thing.
And from other knock on effects of people having enough money to live.
And to buy stuff and to buy stuff.
Yeah.
And yeah, part of it was also the, the, uh, you know, if you give poor people
money, they put it back into the economy right away.
So that helps speed up the economy.
But again, that's more of a theoretical, we don't know exactly how much it'll
help.
And so putting a number estimate on it is kind of wishy-washy, right?
It's like, maybe you'll get that, maybe you'll get less, maybe you'll get more.
Who knows?
But yeah, he's got some interesting numbers.
Yeah.
He thinks that implementing this UBI, I think he's calling the free, the
freedom dividend.
Yes.
He said market tested better.
And it's much better too.
It sounds very patriotic.
Right.
No, it's my dividend for being a citizen of this country.
That's right.
He says that he believes this would permanently grow the economy by 12.56 to
13.10% or about 2.5 trillion by 2025.
And that it would increase the labor force by 4.5 to 4.7 million people.
Um, his math behind that is not on his website, but it's probably somewhere else.
It'd be interesting to check up on it.
I'm wondering what's in his book that I haven't read.
It might be in his book.
Yeah.
And we'll do a, I think we'll do a full length episode on UBI.
Probably coming up soon because we're talking about it now, but.
Yeah.
We had a really good question sent in.
Um, was it from the Reddit about UBI?
Yeah.
I think so or an email.
Um, want to cycle back to that.
Yeah.
We'll, we'll definitely hit that at some point.
Cause there's one up, I mean, it's something I'm interested in and I'm not an
economist, but frankly, it sounds good to me.
So, um,
He's also proposing what I like to call a income tax on robots, but which is more
commonly known as a VAT tax value added tax.
But in one specific case, he literally calls out, uh, the robotics, the robotic
trucking industry is going to be making saving about a hundred, 68
billion dollars a year.
If they replace all their truckers, let's tax a portion of that and give it back
to the truckers that are being displaced from their job.
Because even if you tax that at 20%, they're still saving well over a hundred
billion dollars a year and that money can go back into the truckers.
It's basically another way to fund the UBI.
Right.
He says a gig would have carbon taxes because it would, because it sucks to
have the climate go crazy on us.
And those carbon taxes, instead of just being a drain on everyone, which, uh,
can cause riots, as we saw in Paris, uh, he goes into the freedom dividend.
So the extra taxes that people are paying on carbon will be paid mostly by
the heavy users like industry and we'll go to back to everyone.
Which sounds kind of fair.
Yeah.
And that's, that's always what bugged me is if one company managed to get the,
be patent on all the self-driving cars somehow.
So not just trucks, but Ubers and all of those.
You know, there'll be a time maybe in 20 years where like owning a personal car
will be like a weird eccentric thing that people do or just old people do.
I can't wait to not have to own a car.
And, or to not have to, first of all, drive a car myself and secondly,
drive a car myself with other humans on the road with me.
We're so bad at it.
We suck at driving.
Why do we think this was a good idea?
It was, it was a quick idea to have, I guess.
But I mean, and there's, there's perks, but yeah, it's insane.
And we're going to look back and be like, that's so weird.
We love people drive cars.
And it's so weird that so many people die all the time.
And then at some point there'll be cars like that don't have steering wheels
because it's like, all right, there's, there's going to be no situation
where you're better at this than I am.
Ape, you just keep your hands off and you can sit in the back.
Be happy to not have to find a place to store this huge piece of machinery
for 99% of the time when I'm not using it.
That costs hundreds of dollars.
Well, yeah, you're paying insurance and stuff, $100 a month.
And yeah, so, you know, if I could order a lift and they're all over the place
because there's parking lots are now just for, I'm assuming, public vehicles,
then I just get into it and punch in where I'm going into my phone.
And it takes me there.
And it's probably crazy cheap because I'm not paying anyone to drive it
and insurance to be cheaper on that stuff too.
Then why would I pay to have my own car and manage all that stuff and fix it
and all that?
So for the insurance.
Yeah, there'd probably be places where it's still advantageous to own your
own car, like in rural areas where there isn't much service.
Sure.
And, you know, if you're, it's a dirt road or something.
I've got friends living on dirt roads and, you know, like, yeah,
that that'll be harder to do, whatever.
But in 20 years, who knows?
But I was saying is that if one person owned all of that, you know, we would
have 5% of the public out of jobs.
It's 3.5, I think is involved in driving at some capacity, right?
We've got all those people just out of income and then somebody, you know,
a trillionaire and it would be insane not to find a way to capitalize on some
of the stuff that they're making off of that, right?
Just because they're, you know, they're, it's my, it's my inner, what do you
call the like, a Glotarian?
Yeah, I guess you have to, at some point, figure out how to all the, the wealth
that is going to be created by the robots doing all the labor and
redistributed to the humans.
Agreed.
Yeah.
It sounds, it sounds straightforward.
Um, and a UBI is one of the better ways to do that.
In my opinion, it's got to get implemented at some point before we have full
automated, full automation, so we should probably get started on it.
That's the thing is we're looking, we're looking at like 11 years for some of
the, for what, 20% of jobs, right?
Which is not full automation, but at some point there's going to be almost no job
a human can do that's productive.
Right.
And at that point, what are we going to do?
Starve to death because the machines can do all the food growing.
It seems kind of dumb.
Yeah.
Get rid of a lot of these fake jobs that we currently have.
Oh my God.
Yeah.
Um, also poverty is a thing that exists that this would help alleviate
considerably.
Yeah.
And, and Harris had his, his thought provoking intuition pump of just like,
you know, the trillionaires hiding behind their razor wire walled compounds and
all the poor, hungry people just banging at the doors.
Cause it sounds like just to make sense to get ahead of that rather than just
wait for it to happen and see what we can do afterwards.
Right.
Cause that's, that's, that sounds like it never worked.
And before the trillionaires had to at least pay enough other humans to defend
their land and that pay would have to include enough to pay for those humans,
friends and family, right?
Cause otherwise I'm not going to defend someone just so that my brother can
starve and with fully automated, everything they can create guards that'll
don't need pay.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We'd be, we're, we're on track to get fucked here.
And Yang sees that and is trying to do something about it.
Right.
And no one else really is.
I mean, he has other non-tech related things that I like too.
He, there was one thing that he mentioned about, uh, immigration that I mean,
so he's, he's pro, you know, he's not pro open water.
I mean, he's pro knowing who's coming in and out of the country and stuff,
especially if everyone who lived, everyone who's a citizen gets $1,000 a month.
Right.
Um, but there was another thing that I liked that he'd said, Hey,
if you come here and go to college, uh, rather than like go home and, you know,
compete with us in the world market, we'll give you a green card.
Like just stay here and keep working.
We trained you up.
We want, we want to take advantage of that.
That sounds, I'm not a, I'm not an expert, but that sounds awesome.
At least as an intuition to me.
So, and I think I haven't heard anything that he said that's crazy that I don't
like everything that he, maybe probably said at least one thing.
That I dislike because everyone will.
I'm just saying on the, on the Rogan and the Sam Harris podcast.
So four ish, four and a half hours of content.
He didn't say anything.
I'm like, Oh man, that's a drag.
I wish you weren't on that.
Right.
Um, he also said that he would want to decriminalize, he would want to, like on
his first day in office, he'd want to pardon everybody who was put in jail for
a nonviolent drug crime.
Nice.
He says that it would be a very busy day, but he'd love to go to every
prison and high five everyone on their way out.
He's like, yeah, it'd be crazy busy, but it'd be the best day ever.
He also said he wants to decriminalize, decriminalize small amounts of opioids.
So people who are right now, I mean, it sucks if you're using opioids, uh,
especially just to escape from life, but you shouldn't be thrown into prison for it.
Oh yeah.
I think, yeah, non-violent, nonviolent drugs, right?
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Yeah, it would sure be nice if, uh, we could just finally get past that.
That'll be another thing that we look back on.
And that's another non-UBI, non-tech thing, just a little human centered thing.
Yeah.
That's what you're talking about.
And it's just, it's just weird.
And it's, it's surreal when you take like an outside view to look at this and
like, yeah, no, the current situation makes perfect sense.
We need to keep this under control.
Um, cause it's, I mean, we've, we've talked about drugs stuff in the past, but
like, you know, the fact that weed is illegal and alcohol isn't, and I don't
either, I don't, I don't smoke weed or drink all that much.
I, I've never, I've never owned a pipe and I've never bought pot.
So like, I'm not, I'm not defending this cause I love using it.
It's just like, I've seen people on pot and I've seen people drunk and I'm like,
why is this one okay?
Yeah.
Um, tradition.
Exactly.
But how fucking stupid, right?
So are you living in Denver County?
No.
Oh, okay.
Why?
Because you have until Tuesday, if you're in Denver County to get your vote in
your ballot in, that's for decriminalizing psychedelic mushrooms.
Oh yes.
I've heard about this.
Fingers crossed.
Oh, I haven't heard about this.
Oh yeah.
In Denver there, it's on our ballot right now that, uh, to decriminalize
psychedelic mushrooms, it would be the lowest priority among Colorado law
enforcement and no money could be spent on enforcing that.
Yeah, I totally agree with that.
They're one of the safest substances you can consume.
I mean, um,
it might make you vomit.
That's about it.
Yeah.
I mean, I, I, yeah, it also, I don't know, um, what it's going to look like with
people being in a really altered state, like being in public, having freakouts or
trying to drive or something like that.
So that might be interesting, but I feel like they, aren't they legal in Amsterdam?
I think pretty much everything's legal in Amsterdam.
Well, and I don't think this would, this would invalidate the laws against like
public intoxication, right?
Yeah.
Like right now you can't be drunk and driving in public either.
So it's like,
and you can't be like obnoxiously drunk in public.
Right.
Um, so this would be just the same thing.
Like if you're going to trip outside, trip quietly, politely, just like when,
when you're wandering around day drunk.
Yeah.
So, um, I don't suspect those numbers to go up all that much.
They might, but I mean, no one, no one, I've never taken mushrooms.
If it's anything like others psychedelics, no one's going to take these and be like,
I should start driving.
Like they're going to take this.
I'm like, I'm so glad I can't move right now because I was driving.
I would kill myself in a hot second.
There's probably going to be some bad things that happen.
But I think that the positive, I think the benefits of legalizing it and not having
people go to jail over a possession of something that's safer than aspirin.
Yeah.
All the horrors of the drug war are not worth it.
Yeah.
It's back to the whole regulation, uh, discussion.
I think the, the pot industry in Colorado has raised so much money over the last few
years that they're like, all right, the schools are taken care of.
Let's start looking at homeless shelters.
And it's not surprisingly not really.
Yeah, I could, I read something just about this.
I didn't say, well, cause the money is being funneled in creative ways.
Well, I mean, so it's earmarked for that, but I know that they're at least expanding
what they're planning on spending the increased tax revenue on, including
homeless shelters, but what is sitting around not being used yet?
Yeah.
The money can only be used for certain things and some schools are not really
seeing any benefit because of it, because of how the laws are written.
And maybe a couple of years.
Yeah.
I mean, when, when was pot legalized like three years ago?
So three or four, four, five years ago.
Oh, it would have been, it would have been Obama era.
So it just seems like forever ago or it varies.
My, my perception of time is weird lately.
I mean, it's legal now, so it's always been legal, right?
That's right.
Yeah.
I don't remember every time it ever, it ever wasn't.
It's amazing how quickly we adapt to things.
Right.
I don't have much else.
I kind of wanted to talk about the other two points in his like three big platforms,
uh, which was the Medicare and the human capitalism.
Yes.
Uh, the Medicare for all would be a public option or similar program, providing
healthcare to all Americans.
The idea behind that is it would shift the way doctors are compensated to promote
holistic and empathic care, which means, uh, doctors currently are incentivized to
kind of have a factory system in their offices where they just bring as many
patients in as possible, see them as quickly as possible.
Doctors work crazy hours.
They have a lot of responsibilities.
Uh, and a lot of patients fall through the cracks there.
So Andrew Yang, uh, you can find out more about this on his website too, but he
was talking about a system, uh, I think it was for like Inuits.
I might be confusing that there was a system that he really liked where they
were doing this holistic and empathic care where they're spending more time with
patients and, uh, getting psychologists involved in trying to really combine the
treating mental and physical illness, which tend to be strongly correlated.
So I like that.
And, uh, this would also create incentives for and invest in innovative
treatment methods and methodologies, which is not explained.
And I'd like to hear more about how he plans to do that, I guess.
All I know is that, well, I know two things, I guess, one of the only
things I know is that every other first world country on earth has a public
option system where everyone is just covered and they all have better
healthcare than us.
And I don't know why we haven't implemented that yet because our
healthcare system is completely fucked.
Yeah.
So this, this would do that.
And I would be very happy.
And the other thing I know is that when I was on Medicare for, uh, eight
months, it was the best medical care I've ever had in my life.
Yeah.
Primarily because I could just go to a doctor when I needed to go to a doctor.
And that made a huge difference.
Like nowadays I'm like, could go to see a doctor, but, uh, that's going to cost
me a bunch of money.
I have an appointment set two months from now anyway.
I'm just going to hold on until then.
And when I had Medicare, I was like, okay, this will cost me $3 cash.
I can go.
I, I, when I needed physical therapy, I actually got better because I could go
to physical therapy.
Every other time in my life when I've needed the physical therapy, I went to
one session, paid my $70 and then went home and did the rest of the stuff
myself forever, right?
And when I was on Medicare, they actually like walked me through a program where
like after two weeks, they're like, okay, now you can start doing this instead.
And oh my God, it made so much of a difference.
Yeah.
And I think, uh, it's Jess's point, oh, that she brought up about like a more
holistic healthcare approach too.
Um, doctor's jobs are going to be automated away too.
Not, not the, not necessarily the person that you go see to tell you what's
wrong with you, but the like,
the diagnostic process and then also, um, a lot of them are already like, I see
a psychiatrist, uh, via the web and a lot of doctors are switching to the, what
is it like telecommunication style, um, therapists and whatnot.
There's not very many procedures that like you do need to be in person to do.
And I think there's going to be fewer of them, the better technology we get for
like self-diagnostic tools.
Robotics surgery is becoming a thing.
Yeah, that's awesome.
Like doctor's jobs will, again, there'll be purpose for
probably trained humans, but I think less and it won't be as valuable a
profession when whatever the next version of Watson can, can tell you what's
wrong with you when you walk into the room.
So yeah, that'll be cool.
And what is, what is a human centric capitalism?
Um, there's a couple more things about the Medicare.
Oh, sorry.
Yeah.
Um, Yang says that Medicare for all would fix the problem of people going
bankrupt when they get sick or injured.
Oh God.
What is it?
Like 50, 50% of Americans can't afford a $500 expense that's unplanned.
I don't know what the percent is, but I think it's, I think it's something
along maybe 45% or something.
If it's anywhere near that high, then that's really upsetting.
And it's, it's, that's roughly the case where a lot of people roughly
wanted paycheck to paycheck.
Yeah.
And so the idea of like, Oh no, your car needs repairs.
That's a financial ruin from like, if not most people, like a, at least a
third, maybe 40% and even, even if you like, have a medical
procedure that's $5,000, right?
There's some people where that's ruinous too.
Not only do they not have anything close to $5,000 in the bank, but then
you have weeks of recovery.
You have all that time that you can't go to work, which means you aren't
making the money, which you don't have anyway.
Yeah, it's, it's bankruptcy time.
Yeah.
It would fix people's current shitty policies that don't afford them the
opportunity to receive proper care.
So that would be my life prior to this.
Yeah.
Well, a lot of, you know, preventative health care just doesn't get done
because people don't have the money or the time or the incentives to go see
doctors and that inflates health care costs down the road because they're
not getting things treated or, you know, receiving vaccines that could have
prevented them from receiving a certain illness, et cetera.
So it would let doctors stop working like factory workers.
And it would fix that issue where people are reliant on their employers
for their health care benefits.
That's the main reason I'm still working.
Because you need, because you need the, the insurance.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I can look at how much it costs to, to self-insure.
I'm like, there's no fucking way I could do this.
It is what keeps a lot of people enslaved to the working for the man and
not working for themselves.
Yeah.
And when I was looking to continue the policy that I had at my last job
on the non-employer coverage option, it was $570.16 a month.
Yeah.
So it was good coverage, but not, I think that's, and that's the case,
that's the case that the, the second highest expense behind like rent or
mortgage behind living is health insurance for the average American,
which is insane.
It's not even the cost of medicines, the cost of like trying to not lose
your home and your, your life, your, your life.
I know people who've gone through medically, medical induced
bankruptcy or whatever, where, yeah, double hernia.
All right, cool.
Well, I guess we can get by on one car, you know, whatever.
Assessors determine how many cars your family needs and if you
get to keep your house and stuff, right?
And just because you got sick.
It's ridiculous.
I go to the doctor maybe twice a year.
Sometimes not even that.
And I have to, if I were to pay for my own medical insurance,
be like $700 a month, just so that I can go bankrupt anyway,
because the medical insurance doesn't cover everything.
Yeah.
I don't see the point in it.
And yeah, it would give people the flexibility to find the jobs they
actually want and to, you know, go into business for themselves,
doing things that are more valuable possibly than the bullshit job they
may have to have.
And that's, that's one thing that he emphasizes.
He's, he keeps going back to in a lot of his, his dialogue is that this,
it's very entrepreneurial.
And he's like, look, this lets people more do what they want.
And if they want to start a business, you know, like, again, the $1,000 a month,
it's, you know, it's not enough to keep you afloat necessarily,
but it's enough to buffer if your business starts out small.
Yeah.
And so like, at least a few people.
What if you want to move, relocate, switch a job, actually develop your life
in some positive direction?
A lot of people end up stuck.
Yeah.
Or, you know, it would give people the opportunity to pursue creative,
like art and creative outlets.
Let people who are caretakers for family members who have elderly or ill family
members do that without like having to die or, or not being able to do it,
which is terrible.
And it would encourage people to volunteer more and participate in their communities
more where people end up not doing those things as much anymore,
because they just spend their lives working.
Yeah.
It's hard to see how there's downsides.
I'm sure there are, but we'll.
I think the cost mainly is the downside.
Yeah.
That sounds like an acceptable cost to me.
A kind of irrespective of the number.
There's a way to make this work.
We're a very wealthy country.
That like segues pretty well into the human capitalism.
I think you just to quickly counterpoint that, I think until you run the numbers,
you can't necessarily know that.
Well, given the rough estimate that I've heard of like 1.5 trillion for UBI.
As far as the impact that the Medicare for all would have on the health insurance industry
and what that would do to costs, I haven't, I don't have good numbers for that.
But you're right.
Yeah.
The costs could be impossible.
And somehow the situation we have now could be better than that.
So I find that unlikely, but that could that could well be the case.
You're right.
Okay.
You're sorry.
Oh, no, it's fine.
Yeah.
Human capitalism.
Yeah.
What is that?
Because I don't the term doesn't seem to mean anything to me on its face.
Gang says our current emphasis on corporate profits isn't working for the majority of Americans,
especially with the development of automation and AI looming.
So we need to move to a new form of capitalism, human capitalism,
that's geared towards maximizing human well-being and fulfillment.
Oh, okay.
So this is basically, he wants to fight the Malochian tendencies,
Malachian, of corporations to value money over people.
A couple of examples of that would be like an airline refusing to honor your ticket
because they can get more money from a customary repurchases last minute,
or a pharmaceutical company charging extortionary rates for life-saving drugs.
He wants to switch the measure of the economy from the GDP in the stock market to
measures ensuring human thriving.
Examples of some measures would be median income and standard of living,
health-adjusted life expectancy, mental health, childhood success rates,
social and economic mobility, absence of substance abuse, etc.
Suicide rates too.
Oh, was that on there too?
I, well, if it wasn't, it could be.
It should be, if it's not.
Yeah.
I think that was maybe tied in with the mental health.
Yeah, probably.
So I remember the thing about GDP is that if we have a trillion-error owning every car in the
country, our GDP will be great as a country, right?
Even if we have a bunch of people unemployed and a lot of people are killing themselves
because they can't afford to eat.
So GDP will soon become an obviously measure of the success metric of a country.
So.
Yeah, it's the whole what gets measured gets managed.
He also wants to reign in corporate excesses by appointing regulators,
paying them competitive wages so they stay in that role,
but then prohibiting them from going into the private industry afterward,
because regulators need to be focused on making the right decisions rather than just getting more
money.
An interesting comment that Congress and the president should be paid a lot more,
but also prohibited from moving into lobbying afterwards or, you know,
working for the industries that they regulated and passed laws for or against.
And I thought that was an interesting premise.
I didn't think about it very much, and I'm sure if I spent a few hours,
I could come up with things to say on it.
But on its face, I was like, that sounds reasonable.
Yeah, on its face, it sounds really sensible.
It just keeps you from working in your own self-interest rather than the interest of the
people that you're representing.
Yeah, which is supposed to be your job.
Yeah.
You know.
I think that's one of the things that, okay, there's so many things to dislike about Trump,
but one of the things that really gets me is that he seems to be using this mainly as a
way to enrich and promote himself.
Yeah, I mean, put that on the list, right?
Right, yeah.
I mean, it's, we could go on about it.
Right, I'm sorry.
No, no, no, you're right.
I should probably just come out.
No, no, leave that in.
It's just, it's one of those things that like, the reason I get quiet and kind of like,
yeah, because it's like, yeah, if that were the only thing, that would be great, right?
Yeah.
And it's like, so, you know, where do we, I mean, he takes $3 million trips every week to his
private golf course and like, he makes no compunctions about hiding the profits.
And, you know, sure, he gave up all his businesses, but he gave them all to his families and like,
to the Trump, what, brand and not, you know, they made Jimmy Carter sell his peanut farm,
right?
Yeah.
Oh.
Like, because he was gonna be biased president if he, you know, he'd be biased towards peanut
farmers if he had, if he had a stake in the industry, which is, which is ridiculous.
And let me rephrase that.
It's ridiculous to, to enforce it with Jimmy Carter and his peanut farm and not do it with Trump and,
and all of his, yeah.
So like, the, the, the idea of like, yeah, you can't have a private stake and stuff that
he'll be managing as president, that makes sense.
But, but to, to say that, that Jimmy Carter's the risk that he, that he would ruin the country
by incentivizing or by benefiting himself as a peanut farmer, and that Trump doesn't
run the risk of doing that is madness.
Yes.
Sorry, human centric or human capitalism.
Yeah.
There was one more thing.
The government should issue a new currency called the digital social credit.
Oh, this thing.
Yeah.
This was interesting.
This is a currency that it can be converted into dollars and is used to reward people
and organizations who drive social value.
Converted into dollars, the best I heard when I heard him talking about it with someone,
I don't remember who, was that like, maybe businesses would honor it.
You could get a, use it for credits or something.
Has he said that he can like, literally convert it into dollar currency directly?
That's what he says.
Interesting.
And he says this new currency would allow people to measure the amount of good that they've done,
and it would incentivize organizations to target human centric goals rather than
increasing profits.
That sounds really confusing.
Does that mean like an influencer like Jenna Marbles or PewDiePie would have all this social
capital that they could turn in for like Amazon reward points?
From the example that I heard given, it was something like if an old grandma is in her house
and she needs some help with putting up shelves or something, right?
And her kids are busy or they live far away.
They can't do it.
But the guy down the street, he's collecting this thousand dollars a month.
He's not really doing much of anything, just sort of helping people out now and there.
Here's the grandma needs some help.
So he comes over, spends an hour, puts up her shelves, and then gets some social credits for it.
So he just he takes a Instagram photo of himself putting up shelves at his neighbor's house and
like gets.
I don't know because I mean it's not as far as I could.
That's the part that sounds weird is I have no idea how you attract that and how that would
be not just regulated but even measured.
I like the idea of like getting incentivizing people to like help their neighbors and help
other people that need help with their spare time.
But I don't know much about this aside from the few things I've heard.
Yeah, my impression was more that it was organizations who they were looking at, you know,
those targets of increasing the standard of living and mental health issues.
So I think it's rewarding people who are actually targeting the goals that we want to see targeted.
Although, yeah, I don't know.
I'm not sure if where did you get the example of the grandma?
I think he that was the Freakonomics podcast interview.
But maybe I'm understanding this idea wrong.
I mean, the organization thing makes a lot of sense, but when you put it that way,
if you're giving an organization social credits and then allowing them to change those into money,
why not just give organizations money like we sort of already do?
Well, because they'd have to do something good to earn it.
Yeah, but I mean, we give like homeless shelters tax money.
Yeah, but we don't give Amazon bonus money just for being a big company.
But if they happen to build homeless shelters, we might give them extra extra points for it or
something, right?
Or we could give them money.
Yeah, or money.
I think it's converted into dollars, so it is basically money.
But the thing is that in this case, that I have to actually do something to earn that, right?
Yes, but I mean, that's the case either way.
We could be like, hey, any organization wants to build homeless shelters,
here's this $1,000, or here's a thousand social credits that you can turn into dollars.
I see.
We already do one of those.
I guess maybe if it would be like maybe a bonus tax break or something, I'm not really sure.
I think we don't understand this policy.
I definitely don't because I should read more about it.
I remember I was saying something too about there should be some metric to at least say that it
matters. How much social value does it add to the world to stay at home and raise your kids?
Right, right.
And it's actually a lot.
Not just because it's hard work and it is, but the fact that you're raising people who will
eventually join the job, join the workforce and add to the economy and stuff.
So there's an actual dollar amount that you're generating for the country when you stay at home
and raise kids.
That is a very labor-intensive job.
Yeah, and so like don't be wrong, it's not just labor intent. It is. It's crazy.
I'm just trying to figure out how we could automate raising kids to realize massive gains.
Matrix style pods.
Yeah, and when they turn 18, pull them out and be like, the real world is exactly like what you've
been exposed to. We didn't change anything at all, but you were in the pod where it was a lot cheaper
and faster to raise you than having a individual mother for every two to three kids.
Welcome to the real world, jackass.
I think it's not just that it's hard work, but I think the point that he made on the
Rogan podcast, and I'm equating that because I heard it most recently, but he might have made
some of the same points on Sam Harris' podcast, was that this, again, being the business-oriented
guy that he is, which I think is one of the things that makes him appealing. It doesn't
make him just like this bleeding heart, like isn't that hard because it is.
He's like, no, look, it actually is like producing a ton of value for the country.
And this is the kind of thing that when you pay for it, it costs an arm and a leg because
it's very hard and produces a lot of value. So why isn't it valued at all when people
sacrifice their lives to do it for free? So that's, I think, not just a reflection of the
difficulty of the task. The thing is, it is valued. It's not like those people starved to death.
It's just that the costs are passed on to the other people in their household rather than
an employer or the government. Right. Yeah. But wouldn't it be cool if you could raise kids and
not like be, you know, again, it's like, that's what people say in bad relationships, right?
I mean, don't get me wrong. It'd be really cool if you could raise kids for free.
It's just like being hamstrung by your employer for health insurance.
Right. And it's like, now you're hamstrung by your abusive spouse because they pay the bills
and you don't want your kids to die. Or like even in a less extreme example,
there's kind of the two-parent trap where you basically need both parents to work in order
to afford a house and everything. And then you have to outsource the care of your children to
a nanny or babysitter, which like both of you are working in order to afford. Whereas if there
was some kind of digital social currency for having someone that, you know, could stay home
and take care of their kid, I feel like that would be a shift in the right direction.
You'd be pretty cool. I don't know much else to add to that. I want to learn more about this digital
social currency part of this stuff, but I didn't read much about that yet. So.
Yeah, I've read a bit about it and I'm a bit confused by how it is going to work.
Yeah, I want to dig more into it as well.
He is polling high enough to enter the debates. So people ask me these questions so we can see
his answers. And one of the major things that drives whether you can get into a debate or not
is how many donors you have at under $200. I have given him $1 and maybe I'll give him more,
I don't know, but I gave him $1 so that my name is added to that list.
That's what it was. It wasn't poll numbers. It was the minimum donor number. So he has reached
that threshold. Yes. Yes. But yeah, for a buck, you can keep him on these, I don't know how these
metrics work, but I do like the idea. I'm not a politician. I don't know enough about this.
I'm not a political scientist, but it makes sense that there should be some barrier to where like,
you know, if I ran for president, it should be fair that no one take me seriously until I get
some actual support. So it makes sense. And I like that it's a minimum number of donors and
not a minimum dollar amount. That sounds like that was something that we first saw the trouble of
right away. I'm glad that's not a thing. Yeah. All right. So yeah, Andrew Yang, he is one of us
and I like him. I like him too. I think that I like that he's establishing measures of human
flourishing rather than the focus on finances. That's my favorite thing. And he's pushing the
correct policies, such as UBI and the Medicare, despite the fact that it's going to be incredibly
difficult. I appreciate that, you know, he's shifting the overton window towards we need to
talk about these things, even if he doesn't get elected, which I hope he does, but I'm just really
happy to see politicians that are insane. It is really cool. Yeah, like I said, whether or not he
gets elected, like he's now at the point where he'll be on TV talking about these things to the
country. And so this will be in the public awareness. Hopefully. Unfortunately, if he doesn't get
elected, we're talking about this again in 2024. By then, we're going to be coming up on way too
late, but at least the conversations will be started. So fingers crossed. We'll see how that
goes. At the very least, he can get on TV in 2031 and say, I told you so losers. The more people
that we can push this this info and idea into the better and he is doing that. He's like, hey, UBI
is a thing. Automation is coming. This is a good way to head it off. Even if I'm not elected,
know about this idea. You guys are all going to be coming back to it soon. Yeah, it's great.
And other politicians are going to have to respond to it. Yeah, exactly. All right,
let's go on to our less wrong posts. Sure. But before I forget, yes, I've got two
side topics to indulge both about cinema and television. We haven't seen him give me yet,
so you can't talk about it. That's fine. Okay. One's really fast. The Netflix show I've been
talking about the last few episodes, the Santa Clarita diet, isn't being picked up for season four.
I heard about that. I immediately thought about you because I was like, Stephen loves this show.
And I'm pretty sure it's popular. Apparently, it's not popular enough to pick up for season four,
but it was hilarious. I loved it and that's bummer that it won't be on because it was.
I'm sorry. Yeah, I mean, I'm not, I wasn't dying in love with it, but it was great and it would
have been more fun if it went on. But so Endgame did come out and I won't talk about it. I've heard
it's pretty darn good. It was pretty darn good. Really soon. That's my summary. I won't talk about
it here because I talked about it for two hours on the doof, doofcast. Congrats, dog. It was great.
Yeah. Awesome. That came out yesterday. So Friday the third, say the fourth.
Today is the fourth. Yeah. So Friday the third.
It was when that episode came out. Yep. Cool. So it's out. You can guys go check it out at
the wonderfuldoofmedia.com. I saw that it was out and I did not listen to it. Good.
The first 19 minutes of spoiler free. Okay. So if anyone-
Does it still have Stevens in it? Yes. Okay, cool. But I guess quick disclaimer,
my, well, two of them. One, I was recording on my computer's microphone because my
headset that I was using has great ear part but bad mic part for recording. It's great for phone
calls. So that's a drag. And also I was way chattier than I think I think I took it more
than a third of the airtime. Mainly, sorry, Matt. I cut you. I like I responded to a lot of Scott's
prompts and didn't give Matt a chance to and I felt bad like halfway through and I just
kind of kept doing it. So. Felt bad but not bad enough to stop. But bad enough to apologize.
Yes. It was great. And when we all, when I drag you guys to Endgame, we can all talk
about it and then you guys can listen to the whole episode. So. Yeah. All right. Cool. Yeah.
Please drag me to Endgame. Yes. I want to see it. I never have been to a movie by myself. I don't
watch TV by myself. It's just easy to be like, uh, deprioritize this thing and it's easy to do
if somebody else is there to be excited about it. I'm all over it. I have no trouble being
excited enough to get you there. Yeah. I accidentally saw a preview for Joker and now I
actually want to see it. Oh, really? So like I might actually go to see more than one movie this
year. I'm actually curious. Well, you're going to see more than one movie because you're going to
see Endgame and I dragged it to Captain Marvel already. So. Oh, that's true. I already forgot
about Captain Marvel. That's fair. You didn't like it. And. So I might see more than two movies
this year. That's right. I saw the trailer for Joker. I know this isn't a movie podcast, but
I, it looks great. Oh, it looks interesting because Joaquin Phoenix is a great actor and it
like it'll be interesting to see this guy's backstory. But I guess I never really cared
about the Joker's backstory. Part of his, part of my appeal to him like in Dark Knight was.
You don't know the backstory? And it doesn't matter. Yeah. Yeah. And that's like the fact
that he keeps giving this made up story about how he got his scars. Like that's perfect because he
is, he's not a person with a history. He's just this. He's like a chaotic element.
That's exactly it. Yeah. Yeah. He's a force of chaos. I would not consider whatever backstory
they come up with in Joker to be canon anyway. I'd be like, this is one apocryphal story
of how the Joker came to be. Cool. Yeah. The legend of the Joker. Yes, exactly.
What among many? Yeah, that's kind of cool. I kind of think of him like Jack Slash from Worm
in actually a lot of ways. Like I think Trump, or excuse me, I think that's important because
there's a power classification called Trump that's not really understood, but it like
interacts with other people's powers. Okay. And Jack Slash has that. His overt power is fairly
mundane, but I feel like Joker has a Trump classification. Yeah. Because like his weird
plans just keep working and he never gets hurt. And it's just, yeah. So he's the Trump-powered
person in the DCU. Cool. Okay. We have other stuff to talk about that's more in line with the show.
Well, more in line with the spirit of the show. We talk about too much of this for not to be
in line with the show anyway. That's true. That said, if you don't listen to the Doof Media episode
until you've seen the show or seen Endgame, or at least listen to the spoiler-free part.
Fine. And I also give this an admonition in the episode. But really, if you don't know what
happens in the movie yet, don't spoil it for yourself. It's so much fun. And the trailers
did a good job about not showing the core plot elements unlike every other fucking trailer
out there. I avoided all the trailers just in case. Yeah, I haven't seen any either. I watched
one after I saw the movie. Okay. Don't get it wrong. I managed to get into my seat without
having seen the poster for the movies. Nice. Yeah, it wasn't as hard.
Did they walk you blindfolded through the theater? I just looked down at the ground.
I've heard of my gaze and if I saw the poster, I just didn't focus on it. It was fun. This time
it was more fun than it was. This was more fun this year than it was last year where I was like
crazy on guard about it. This year, I let my technology do a lot of the work for me. I put on
Reddit filters. I put on filters on YouTube ads that they wouldn't even recommend videos
of the word Avengers or Captain America in the title. You know what I think would be a great
Facebook feature? To be able to tag your posts with this is a spoiler for this movie or this
episode or whatever. And then people can opt out of seeing those posts. And once they've seen the
episode, you know, toggle a switch where now they see the post so you can have conversations with
people. Here's the thing. I have been forced to only talk about like Game of Thrones and
Avengers movies with people in real life face to face. Because if I posted on Facebook,
someone could see it. Yeah, Facebook has the awkward thing where you can put a whole bunch of
periods to drop your text behind the scene more. Yeah. But it's awkward and clunky. I think I
forget which platform has this maybe discord. Tumblr has that feature too. The ability where
you'll just see like black boxes. Like you'll write the word spoilers, you know, click to
read it and you just yeah, read it. Yeah. Like Facebook could easily implement something like
that. And I think it would resolve a lot of disputes with friends. It's like after I finally saw
the season three episode three of Game of Thrones this season, I wanted to talk about it with people.
But like everyone had already talked about it that was going to and on Facebook rather and
everyone who didn't wasn't doing spoiler posting, right? I was like, I would have loved right now
to be able to toggle that switch and have all those see episode three posts pop up so I could go
through them and talk about them. Instead, I was forced to actually see people in the real world
and I hate that. Man. Actually, I kind of like that, but I just liked having to wait.
We could record the show remotely, but we don't because it's fun seeing people.
Exactly. Yeah. All right. So we have other Bayesian conspiracy things. The less wrong post.
First one was priors as math as mathematical objects. And I pulled out nothing in this post
because I didn't understand it. Great. I was just going to be like, all right, someone explain this
to me. Okay. Did any of us understand this post? The important thing that he's getting at and like
this is one of his, I think, least well communicated posts. And it's not just him
flexing how well like he understands all this stuff. It's, I don't know. I mean,
in there's, there's I think maybe necessary math for the point that he's making. But
my understanding is that the point that he's making is that like a prior probability isn't
just like your initial guess based on nothing. It's your running back to the earned example.
Yeah, there were three earns or there were three cases rather, one where the earn contains five
red balls and five white balls. The second one would be a random number generator is
deciding which balls are going to be red or white at a certain probability. And then case three was
a monkey throwing balls into the internet random. Right. So if you hand me an earn and ask me before
I draw a ball out what I think the color will be with what probability without telling me which
earn it is, I, I could, I guess I would say roughly 50% just because I have no idea. But
that's not really a prior. That's like a complete just guess. Right. And then if you told me which
earn it was, then I could say, okay, I'm guessing it's this. And then he, you know, he says I could
write a quick Python program that gives me the actual estimates. The first one had five red and
five white. So he was saying that if in the like first round of guessing, if you asked me to guess
whether the ball that gets pulled out is going to be red or white, regardless of any of those cases,
because they're all about 50, 50, you would say 50%. Then when you start pulling balls out, then
you have to update each time because if it were case one, for example, every red ball that gets
drawn makes it less likely that the future balls will be red because there's now fewer red balls
left in the year. And there's only five red and five white. And the next one is Laplace's law of
succession, which you can check out in Wikipedia. And then case three is return point five, because
the monkey threw balls in at random. So they're always going to random pulling out red balls.
So it goes with this long explanation of why if you had like a true probability estimate prior of
the background, it would encompass all like 10 to the 24 possibilities of the way the balls could
be ordered in the earn, right, the way that you pull them out. Like what are the odds of you pulling
out four red ones in a row? Well, that's going to be concentrated in this part of your gigantic
grid, right? But like with every other post of his, I feel like there was a point and I learned
something. And in this one, I wasn't sure what I was supposed to learn. I still don't know what it
means for a prior to be a mathematical object or, or what he was getting at with this particular
block of text. Yeah, I, I'm okay calling this one a wash. There's a good conversation in the
comments where a lot of people are just like, can you clarify this? You know, I feel like
you're ruining the word prior already has a good definition of why are you throwing that away?
Because it's too confusing for this. And I would say check out the comments and
just say this one was weird. We don't have to talk about it for that long. So, okay. I mean,
I'm okay with that. Do you have anything you want to add, Jess? No. That's fair. All right. So
what is the intuitive understanding of a prior? Like, because we can talk about that for a minute.
A prior is what I always thought is the, the belief you already come in having
or even the belief that you have after some updating, but like it's your new prior
information, right? So every time there's a test, you'd now have a posterior, which becomes
your new prior for any further tests. Yeah. And a lot of these, I'm sure it's his writing that I'm
because that's both the Bayesian stuff I read isn't like, you know, the results of like a diabetes
or breast cancer test or something. Like what are the odds that I think I have diabetes right now?
Like none. Very low. Like, then if you tell me, all right, well, the base rate of diabetes is
one in 50,000 or something. All right, well, I guess those are my odds then. Then you give me a
test and it's comes back positive. I'm like, all right, well, what's the odds of a, of a false
positive times that by the, by the, by the other factors like MIT and the demographics that typically
have diabetes or something. And it's like, you update based on those numbers, but like your
prior to start out is just like this kind of fuzzy, I don't know. And so it's in the hypothesis
testing chapter, but that's a rationality where Harry's running through his head thinking about,
okay, well, we'll call the odds of any wizard surviving their death, you know, like one in a
million. And, you know, after attempting a resurrection ritual, one in 10,000 or something,
but he's just like making these numbers up. That's because he has nothing to work with, right? So
he's setting high priors or like, I guess low numbers, but high, these estimates, just to like
have some numbers to envelope, you know, get an estimate on whether or not Voldemort's alive,
right? So that's the kind of thing you can do. But without, without information, you're just,
you're just completely spitballing. And that's completely acknowledged in the chapter too.
So yeah, but at least it gives you a way to start thinking about the problem.
Right. Because if you say, I have no idea, therefore, I can't, I can't think about it. I
can't even approach it. That's useless. I've heard someone say that anything worth thinking about
is worth thinking about with made up numbers. When, when you don't have real numbers available.
Yes. Yes. I like it. Perfect. All right. That's the point of this post.
Okay, then. So going on to one, which I found much more interesting. Lotteries, a waste of hope.
A waste. A waste of hope. But I could win.
Eliezer comes down firmly anti-lottery on this. And I am with him maybe because that's just how
I was raised. So I already got the emotional feeling that they're awful. But Eliezer says,
some lottery advocates have tried to defend lottery ticket buying as a rational purchase of
fantasy, paying a dollar for a day's worth of pleasant anticipation, imagining yourself a millionaire.
So this is the powerball lottery thing, right? Not your average, like, so a dollar
scratcher, I think you have like a one in four chance of winning your money back.
Which still you're exchanging money for, like. Yeah. First person to have a percent chance of
nothing. But those are way better odds. And I wanted to, I want $300 in a scratcher once. So
for all my, did you really? All my lottery investments, I'm ahead. So I'm done buying
lottery tickets because I've already, I've already won the lottery and that I've come out on tops.
Yeah. Yeah. If you have one in four chance of getting your money back, then basically every
time you buy one, you're spending 75 cents. Yeah. Okay. Just, just for the heck of it.
But what's, what's fun is I was making like $9 an hour at the job, at a job that sold
lottery tickets. I'd buy a couple of nights because I was crazy bored and I needed the,
maybe he just doesn't understand what it's like to be desperately poor and bored. But like,
and like, then there's, oh, maybe he does, but like, I'm just staring at him all the time and
like, all right, well, fuck it. And yeah, then I want $300 bucks. It's like, all right, cool.
I'm not buying any more. That's it. I won. I mean, I've heard people say lotteries are
taxed on people who are bad at math, but I've always understood the math of lotter, of the lottery.
And the, the few times I was actually really, really tempted to play the lottery, it's not
because I suddenly had like some kind of math stupidity come over me. It's because I was desperate.
I was like, I don't know what else I can do. At least this is something. Yeah. So it's,
it's a tax on the desperate, which is again, taking advantage of the most vulnerable.
I have been to casinos before and played slot machines. It was kind of,
it's kind of fun going to the casino. It's a neat environment. There's like good restaurants and
bars and like entertainment there. And if you go with friends, it can be kind of fun. So it's kind
of like, yeah, well, I was kind of, not if you're playing slots. I don't play slots, I'm not sure,
but yeah, if you're playing cards, they do. So it kind of like was, I'm using this money to
purchase this experience to like socialize with friends, be in this wacky environment where like,
they made this indoor representation of like the Taj Mahal or whatever the heck.
Still not like, I felt very uncomfortable there too, though. It was something that I would do
occasionally and be like, haha, that was the thing. But also casinos, yeah, are places where like,
you see some really desperate people that go there and just get addicted to pulling the slot
machine lever. I've seen those people and that's weird. They'll come in and they clearly like live
on that stool and there are like regulars. Yeah, if they live in town, they'll come in every day
and spend, you know, whatever, a few bucks or something. Yeah, I forget the name of it, but
it's like the pigeon experiment where they have the, if you pull the lever and it regularly gives
a pellet, then they'll just pull it when they're hungry. But if they randomize how many pellets
they'll get, then they'll just, yeah, they get addicted to it. They also develop weird superstitions,
the pigeons too. They'll think like, well, last time I got a pellet, I turned like in two left
circles or two counterclockwise circles, I'll do that every time. And you can train pigeons to
really weird shit by giving them pellets out of control thing or at random, they'll develop their
own weird things. Yeah, that's my thought with casinos is like, it's a weird place, like, you
know, to go have an expensive time if that's what you feel like doing. I think your odds of cards
are typically better than with slot. Well, they definitely are worth it than with slots, if you
know what you're doing. You can do penny slots. You can do penny slots. But I usually just go there.
I would spend like 20 bucks. Yeah. And it's way too to just go in and like, where else can you
smoke indoors? Another reason not to go to a casino. But I bought some cigars last time at a casino
that you could smoke at just because I felt like I was breaking the rules. So this is so eccentric
and weird. So it's that sort of experience. Yeah, I enjoy having weird experiences and I feel like
it was worth 20 bucks. Yeah. But we're not talking about casinos. We're talking about the lottery.
That's right. Well, that's why I'm having trouble understanding why lottery tickets kind of generate
that same feeling. I guess it's a very like muted version of that feeling of the pulling the lever.
It's like they said, like the commenters said or a commenter said anyway, some people are just paying
for a fantasy that they enjoy. Right. And he goes on that in the next post. But yeah, I think what
address I'm understanding you're bringing up casinos is like, because this has none of the fun
of a casino. This is not an experience. You buy it to go home and lose. You do that every day.
Yeah. So that is weird. Before we move on really quick, is there a number where if the lottery was
at a trillion dollars, where you'd buy tickets? There has to be, right? There is, yes. And I have
done it for a few times when the Powerball just went to the point where I was a net positive.
I did too. Fine. It would have been like 10 years ago. I bought a couple of tickets because it was
like $480 million or something. And it was like, it was some ridiculous number. And I was like,
all right, whatever the number is that's high enough for me to spend $2. And then I bought them.
And I didn't know how to check who won, like what the numbers were. Right. So I never checked.
And so it probably wasn't you. It probably wasn't me. I could sleep soundly knowing that I wouldn't
have won. Well, because if there's ever a jackpot winner and no one claims it for a few days, it
starts being on the news. They're like, somebody has won $200 billion but hasn't claimed it yet.
Who could this mystery person be? Yeah, it was funny though. All right. So back to our actual show.
Yeah. So he has a problem with this saying that it's buying a fantasy because he says,
you're occupying your valuable brain with a fantasy whose real probability is nearly zero,
which makes the lottery another kind of sink, a sink of emotional energy. It encourages people
to invest their dreams, their hopes for a better future into an infantismal probability. If not
for the lottery, maybe they would fantasize about going to technical school or opening their own
business or getting a promotion at work for a dollar a day, things that they might be able to
actually do, hopes that would make them want to become stronger. Their dreaming brains might in
the 20th visualization of the pleasant fantasy, notice a way to really do it. Isn't that what
dreams and brains are for? That's good writing. Yeah. But how can you compare that to the artificial
sweetened favor of limitless wealth? Yeah. And this is the post where he says the human brain
can't devalue the emotional force of the pleasant anticipation by a factor of 0.0001, whatever
it is. He doesn't actually come out and say it's so low that the activation, it should activate
less than one neuron in your brain to be equivalent, which I know I mentioned that a few episodes back
about thinking about God. And I swear I got that from the lottery post, but he doesn't say in here.
Maybe he says in a different one or maybe the next one, maybe a commenter said it. I know
I didn't come up with that myself. Yeah, that sounds really familiar. I'm going to give you 25%
chance that that's an original lineage that you just... No, no. I heard that somewhere. Yeah.
I thought when you said that, I thought it was from this post too. Yeah. So maybe, yeah,
I didn't read the comments though. But yeah, basically it's... All right. So do we have much
else to add? Because I've got a good leading question into the next one. Oh, now go for your
question. I mean, so for a dollar a day, because you can't go to technical school for a dollar a
day, but you can buy a lottery ticket. So what else can I do to give me the same... If hope makes
me a little less miserable every day, what else can I buy with a buck that would give me anything
of value? I mean, anything that's worth a buck, really? Well, let me... I guess if I already...
Well, the next post is called an improved lottery. Oh, you could buy this improved lottery ticket.
I see what you were trying to do. I'm sorry, I didn't catch that layup. Is that the correct
sports term? Catch the layup. I think the layup is supposed to go in the basket. I know the layup
is a two-person thing, then you've got to help each other out. It's something like that where
like one person throws and the other person dunks it or some shit. Oh, maybe it is. I think you're
right, because you lay them out. I don't know sports, man. God, we're such nerds. That said,
basketball is one of my favorite sports to watch. It's the one that's actually got some exciting
stuff going on almost all the time. And you can see the play object, the ball. Like hockey's fun,
they're moving a lot, but I often lose sight of the puck. Right. That said, speaking of casinos,
my favorite thing to watch, and I've mentioned this before, but there's a bar right next... Well,
I didn't mention this part. There's a bar right next to my house that we kind of just discovered.
And once in a while, they have cards up on the TV. And I love watching high stakes poker. If there
was a service that I could... There maybe isn't, so I shouldn't say anything because I'll probably
get it, so I'll point me to it. But if it was $10 a month that I could have the high stakes poker
channel and nothing else, I'd probably have that. Because I don't want to pay for a cable package
just to watch this once in a while. But it's really fun, and I can't find a good upside. Just
watch it. Really? They don't have it on YouTube? I found some YouTubes, but the ones that I could
find that were like... I like to just have it on the background for a few hours. And the only ones
I could find like that was some asshole talking over this thing. I could leave it on on mute
like they're doing the bars. It's like the video game reviews. Hey, guys. It's me, Evan, and today
I'm going to talk... Oh my God, stop. It was like he was doing a podcast talking about these people,
but it was like... That was my one experience watching a four-hour video. But anyway,
cards is fun to watch if you're me. I don't know why. That's as into sports as I get.
Okay. Well, that's like a cerebral sport. You're into the sports where you don't actually move
your body. That's right. The less motion, the better. You move your hands a bit. Chess. You know,
chess is right up there. Right. You don't even need a body to play chess nowadays. That's right.
There is chess boxing. What? I've heard about this. Is this like Wazoo's chess? No. Go to YouTube,
type in chess boxing. They play chess, they get up and hit each other, and they go back to playing
chess. Yeah. Three minutes of chess in three minutes of boxing because the boxing round is
three minutes. It's amazing. Yeah. And the winners, whoever checkmates the other person,
or knocks the other person out. Which is the best. Can I also do a sports tangent?
Yeah. One of my co-workers is trying to start a league for extreme taser ball.
Extreme taser ball? Which I looked up and yeah, it's a sport that involves this ridiculously
large ball. It looks like a big beach ball or something, and tasers. Do you tase each other?
Oh, you tase each other. Oh, my God. That sounds like a good time kind of. I would try it.
Yeah. I'm kind of scared, but I've also tended to try it just so I could tell people what sport
I play, and they can give me horrified looks. Don't those things hook into your skin?
No, you're thinking whatever, stun guns. Those shoot out little cords that you pull the trigger
and electrocutes you. Tasers just have the arc of electricity that you can hit somebody with.
You want to know something fun that I believe I learned from reading rationalist fiction?
What? It's the other way around. Stun guns are the things you hold in your hand that you zap
someone with personally, and the things that you shoot at people are called tasers. Even though
you don't, like, the stun gun is a personal weapon, right? It's a melee weapon. It doesn't shoot out,
but it's called a stun gun. The Tolerious. Okay, I got it backwards because it makes more
sense the other way, but I guess history had the other way. That's hilarious. And I think that's
true because I have a stun gun that I lost the Targer for in 2009, so it was $20, but I want to
buy another one because what's fun about them, then we'll finish the stuff. What's not fun about them
really? What's fun is they're super loud. Yeah, that noise is just frightening. So even if the
person isn't like, what am I saying? The noise itself is a deterrent. It's like, you know,
it's crazy crackling loud electricity that is uncomfortably loud from across the house. So you
pull this thing out, and you don't have to hit them to freak them out. I've never been hit by
a stun gun, but I imagine that I'm more scared of the sound than I actually would be by the
effect of being hit by it. You say that, but yeah. It depends how hard and where they get you,
but yeah, you get in the abdomen, it'll flex everything and you'll fall over, so. Oh, all
right. Well, never mind that. I don't know if the P yourself rate is at 100%, but it's not at 0%.
All right, what were we talking about? The new improved lottery. With no tasers. With no tasers.
So the new improved lottery ticket also only costs $1, but it pays out at random once every
five years on average at a random time. You don't know exactly when it's going to pay out,
just sometime in the next five years, it pays out. That adds to the hope factor.
That adds to the hope factor. And more importantly, it lets you fantasize about it all the time,
as opposed to just these predetermined moments on certain evenings, where you buy the ticket one
time, so this is not quite Eliezer's exact words. He was more eloquent. But Boss comes in,
demands something annoying. Instead of getting to work, turn on your phone and you stare, hoping
for that call. Because there is an Epsilon chance that at that exact moment, you, yes, you, could
be awarded the grand prize. Even if it doesn't happen this minute, there's no need to disappoint,
be disappointed. It could happen the next minute. And so you got that perpetual fantasy of like,
I could win right now. No, now, no, now. Yeah, you don't have to tune in at six or whenever
they draw the balls and check, yeah, so the hope lasts all day. At any moment, your phone could
buzz. Also says, you could go even further. The new improved lottery could even show a
constantly fluctuating probability distribution of the likelihood to win. So it's not always the
same likelihood at every second. And they could have the likelihood of particular numbers being
higher at certain times. So think of how much fun that would be. Right this moment, minute,
the chance to win occurring is nearly 10 times higher than usual. And look, the number 42 that
I selected for the mega ball has nearly twice the usual chance of winning. You could feed it to
display on people's cell phones, so they could just flip open the cell phone and see their chance
of winning. And they could stay glued to that screen all day. They would never need to dream
about anything else, which really puts into perspective kind of the whole they're selling
a dream to people, right? Yeah, it's a very pointed way to re rebuttal that point. Yeah,
like this is a fucked up horror world where no one's dreaming about anything else in their lives
except this tiny lottery chance. I also, when I read this, reread this, I kind of got the feeling
that holy shit, this is a lot like writing. Because when you write short stories, at least,
you write a short story, and then you send it off to a paying market. And then you wait,
you check your email every day. Maybe you check it two or three times a day, because you never know
when that email is going to come in saying, Hey, guess what? Your story wasn't quite right for us.
And, you know, there's that small chance that it'll say your story is great. We would like to
publish it and let all our readers see how awesome of a writer you are. And if that doesn't work,
then you take it and you go to the next magazine. And maybe they will give you that. So a lot of
writer's life is that you're paying for a lottery ticket by writing a story. So with, you know,
dozens of hours of labor. And then for months and months, you can live in that, you know, fantasy
and eventually get rejected. But still, months of fantasy time.
But do you have fun writing?
I do have fun writing.
So there's some value to that, too.
Yeah, yeah, there is.
Like unless, like, so like, unlike the casino, going to the gas station to buy a lottery ticket
isn't like a fun experience, like for a lot of people, right?
Right.
So at least, at least there's something else that you're getting out of it.
And I also think this is kind of like the effect that makes Twitter as popular as it is.
People could reply to you at any point or retweet your thing at any point.
You never know when something might go viral. It's just,
like this, this random payout thing is pretty huge.
And yeah, we are seeing a take off.
And this is before.
It's fairly ubiquitous to a lot of mobile games explicitly use that kind of psychology.
And as opposed to it came out before Twitter and yet that that function is built into the platform.
And I realize that kind of a lot of life is like this.
Like there's a lot of times where you don't know if what you're doing has
is going to result in what you want to happen, but you go and you do it anyway,
and you hope for the best.
I mean, there's no way we're going to get rid of that.
Yeah.
But living your life on those hopes is.
What if you have UBI and then you are writing and you're just releasing your works online
for free because you have that income?
I mean, like, you know, you send a text message to somebody like, do you want to go on a date?
The waiting for a reply, that minute of hope.
Like you're not going to get rid of every minute of like, you know,
that anticipating a hopeful response to your efforts.
I don't think I would want to get rid of anticipating a hopeful response to your efforts.
It's just the, I think the thing that is bad about lotteries is that it's basically zero.
Your chances of winning it is essentially zero.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Me too.
I wasn't making that point that I think it's a bad thing.
I was just saying that that level that we could do away with the bad parts,
the bad ways to feed that thing.
And there's three real parts that left in your life, right?
Oh, I see.
Yeah.
But there's, and there's a lot of life like that where you're like,
I don't know if the harvest is going to be good or bad this year,
but I'm going to go ahead and plant my crops anyway and hope for the best.
And like a lot of life is just doing what you can and hoping things work out.
And I kind of get the impression we're almost like built for this sort of world where you put
an effort and you don't have a guaranteed return and got a hope for it instead.
Yeah, we have inner pigeons.
There's, we do for sure, but I think that something like planting your crops
has a higher probability of getting some kind of return out of it than the zero,
essentially zero chance you have from the lottery.
The same thing with asking someone on a date online, maybe that's like a 50-50 chance
that they'll say yes.
And even sending a story in is like, you don't literally have like a basically zero chance
of getting published.
Right.
I mean, the lottery is definitely the extreme stimulus,
the super stimulus version of taking things that we're naturally wired for and just going
fucking wild with it to take advantage of the human wiring.
Yeah, and particularly like in the case of casinos or mobile games,
to take advantage of people who have addictive personalities.
Well, I think all of us have addictive personalities.
Yeah, but some people have it much worse than others.
That's true.
Yeah, many of us would get bored sitting at the slot machine pulling it out,
for four hours a day after work every day.
And most of us, that sounds like hell.
And yet they've got, there's a number of factors,
but probably one of them is that they've got nothing better to do.
So they sit there and just like sit there, keep hoping, you know.
Yeah, it tends to target like vulnerable populations.
Yeah.
I tend to think this is one of the reasons that video games are popular because
they have a guaranteed reward.
If you put in the effort, you get the thing and there's none of this like,
oh, maybe I'll put in a ton of effort and never get anything out of it.
And I mean, that's less the case nowadays with the games that have the random reward thing put in.
But for a lot of games before, before the more recent spate of,
what do they call it, casino games even?
There's like a loot, what's the word for it?
Loot lottery?
Yeah, yeah, loot lottery.
Gachapon?
Yeah, yeah.
Like Destiny.
So you'd have to coordinate like a 90 minute raid with, you know,
six or 10 people to get a 2% job rate for the cool piece of loot.
Yeah, tons of things like that, yeah.
But there was a time where like, if you go out and you grind mobs for X hours,
you get Y experience, which will eventually lead to you being better.
Many games are still like that.
Yeah.
And yeah, what makes them attractive is that like,
video games work that way and life doesn't.
Yes, exactly.
You can go out, work hard all day and do whatever you can.
And then your kid gets malaria and dies anyway.
Right.
So, yeah.
The controllable aspect of that is, you know, nice as well.
And save files.
When are we gonna get those for real life?
Yeah.
Eliezer ends with saying,
if you believe that the lottery is a surface,
it is clearly an enormously overpriced service,
charged to the poorest members of society,
and it is your solemn duty as a citizen to demand the new improved lottery instead.
What I love is that like, that's the closest he gets to saying like,
fuck you to the commentator who put that out there.
It's like, all right, if you believe that, here's the logical extension of your belief,
and now you're clearly an asshole.
Here's the horrorscape you want.
That's right.
We've only got like 10 minutes left, guys.
We've got to thank this week's patron.
We do got to do that.
And then we've got at least time for maybe at least one feedback.
All right, let's do one feedback.
All right.
So this week, or this episode, I say a week.
I think to save the confusion, we'd start doing this every week, but we'll see.
Maybe once we've all retired?
Deal.
Okay.
So this episode, we're thanking Michael Ruchenna.
Thank you so much for your support.
We really appreciate it.
I do the same mumbling every time.
And now I do the same apologizing for mumbling every time.
You rock.
Thanks, Michael.
Pretty soon you could apologize for apologizing.
That's right.
Yeah, Michael, you're awesome.
Everyone who listened, you're all awesome, and all of our supporters are awesome.
But Michael, especially this week.
Today is your day to be appreciated.
Heck yeah.
Yay.
Now you can play this to your friends so they can know how awesome you are.
And that you help bring this podcast to them.
So this came in from a Oren Millman on Patreon.
So they said, please validate us.
Said Jess in the REACH episode.
Just so you know, you're all really awesome.
Yeah.
Smiley face.
I know.
And on a more personal level, in the last days, I have quite, I have quit.
Wait.
Quite.
I've quite resolved.
That's right.
Perhaps he is British.
Perhaps they are British.
I defined a job in the clean meat industry.
Yeah.
I think that regularly listening to the podcast, as well as various audio stuff by
Enyosh, significantly strengthens my connection to the rationality and EA
communities and helps internalize their ideas.
Thus, you definitely deserve some credit for my decision.
So thank you.
That's awesome.
And I wrote back and said that means a lot.
And I'd make sure to share it with you guys.
And that's why I do the show.
Like thank you for telling us.
We're not going to, we're not going to, you know, I don't want to be like the person
that changes people's lives in big ways.
But a force, a force for good in that, you know, if somebody, my life was changed in
many ways by the smallest factors, I told somebody, the guy who got me into
computer industry that like, hey, I did this because of the thing you recommended.
He's like, holy shit.
And he was really made uncomfortable by that because he kind of said this off-hand
thing.
And I was like, yeah, you'd think for it.
And he's like, that is an uncomfortable line of responsibility.
And I'm like, that's life, dude.
Yeah.
You're going to be touching people's lives left and right.
I had someone tell me that they put off marriage because of the episode that we did.
Am I allowed to name that person?
Okay.
That is correct.
So, yes.
So Jess mentioned that they put off marriage because of my marriage option.
And that was like, okay, I'm, it's, it's a little scary to be like,
someone made that big of a decision because of something I said,
what if it was the wrong decision?
Now it's all my fault.
No, it was the right decision.
And you made a really excellent argument.
Oh, thank you.
Thank you.
But not good enough because you're coming to my wedding.
So, yes, I know.
But, you know, it's, it is kind of scary having people make decisions based on something you
said, because you don't want to be wrong.
And then they'll hate you forever or, or you'll just feel guilty.
But on the other hand, I mean, that's, that's why we do this, right?
So, yeah.
But I do want to say we always thank the patron for making us feel appreciated and awesome.
And it is true.
They always do.
Again, thank you for this week's patron and thank you to all our patrons.
But like just talking back with us on the subreddit always warms my heart a little bit
because I'm like, oh, people listen to this and they think about it.
And sometimes they even have come to tell us back, you know?
So feedback is also an appreciation of a sort.
It, it makes me feel like I'm part of a community and that what I have been doing is valued
in, in a way that, I mean, money also does.
They both do it in their own different ways.
You've said before that money is the unit of caring, but so is time.
Yeah, yeah.
And yeah.
I mean, I, most of my dialogue with post-podcast stuff is the people of real life who messaged
me who listened to the show.
And that's valuable to me.
It's interesting that, you know, it's, that's the point of a podcast, you know,
unless it's like a story that you're telling or whatever.
But that's the point of this podcast is conversational things.
And if you have conversations with us or with each other or with people in your lives, that's,
that's really great.
Yeah, it's kind of what I was thinking about when you're talking about
publishing stories.
And I just liked the idea of like, yeah, if we had UBI, then people could just publish
stories and put them online for free.
And then more people could read them.
And then it would be a much better experience for you as the author,
because people will be reading them and commenting, and it would be out there.
Okay.
We are unfortunately out of time.
So we're going to have to wrap this up and get back to the other feedbacks later on.
Sounds good.
Cool.
Because we do have a few more in here that we want to hit, but that'll be next week.
But now we're doing at least one every week, every episode.
Yes.
They don't build up as much at least.
That's right.
Cool.
Cool.
Alrighty.
Well, thank you, everyone.
Thank you guys for being here with me as well.
Thank you, everyone.
Looking at you too.
Yeah.
And we'll see you all in a couple of weeks.
Awesome.
Thank you, everybody.
