Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy.
My name is Katrina Stanson.
Hi, I'm Nini Oshbrotsky.
And I'm Stephen Zuber.
And Katrina, why don't you introduce our guest and our topic for today?
Our guest is Tim.
And he's here.
We're going to be talking about voting, so a very topical topic.
And Tim is especially the right person to talk about this because he has a master's
in economics from GMU, from George Mason University, and he especially focused on voting and voter
theory.
Public choice.
Oh, right.
It's called public choice, public choice economics.
Thank you for the correction, Tim.
Is public choice just a fancy term for voting?
No.
No?
Public choice economics of political decision making?
It's economic analysis of public policy, not just of what policy is or looks like or how
it affects the economy, but how it gets made.
What sorts of policies do get made and why incentives involve things like that?
So lately, I've noticed that it's been all the rage to say that it is not worth it to
vote.
Do.
Yes, go ahead.
So before we dive into that, I wanted to say I'm anticipating at least one listener saying
George Mason University, that's where Robin Hansen teaches, taking classes under Robin
Hansen.
I did not take any classes with Robin Hansen.
I've met him.
Oh, okay.
That counts.
I had two classes with Brian Kaplan, who is also somewhat community adjacent.
I've heard him, too, yeah.
Here outside of rationalism, Brian Kaplan is the more well-known name.
Oh, nice.
Brian Kaplan did the myth of the rational voter, didn't he?
That's right.
And he also has the Martial Revolution blog.
No, that is Tyler Kaplan and Alex Tocque.
I was with Tyler Kaplan and Brian Kaplan mixed up.
Yeah.
Sorry.
I'm just sorry to both of them, too.
So you did get to meet him in real life, though?
Yeah.
Is he nice?
He seems like a fairly nice guy and very, from what I've seen of him, like kind of shy
and unwilling to speak much.
He is not unwilling to speak.
No, okay.
Who does the food blog?
Tyler Kaplan blog scope.
Okay.
Now, that was my run-in with Tyler Kaplan is how Tim and I would decide what ethnic
restaurant to go to.
Katrina actually got to see Robin in action.
I did?
Yeah.
Do you remember when we saw friends to ball speak?
I do remember that.
Yeah.
Oh, you mean the questioner?
Yes.
Yeah.
Thank goodness.
Thank goodness there was somebody there to put that guy in his place.
He was just going off the rails talking about animal behavior and why you need to be kind
to each other.
I don't know.
The connections were very poor.
Friends of all is a very...
Famous primate researcher.
Yes.
Primate researcher.
He is extraordinarily knowledgeable about empathy in animals.
That does not give you enough information to say that we should be more empathetic in
public policy.
Which was what he was trying to claim?
Yes.
Actually, it seems strange to hear you disagree with him just now since you seem to like animals
quite a bit.
I do like animals quite a bit.
I just don't like logical stretches.
Yeah.
There's Daniel Dennett has a quote, but there's nothing that bugs me more than that argument
that was just not agreed with.
It's like, oh, I like where you're going with this, but I don't like how you got there.
Can we talk about this differently?
Yeah.
I totally feel him.
Absolutely.
And I felt that way during the Friends of All talk.
And I felt that way with all the people who wanted me to read Ishmael by Daniel Quinn.
What's wrong with you people?
This is so poorly argued.
What's Ishmael about?
Oh, it's mostly about how, gosh, I think his conclusion was we should all go back to subsistence
farming or something.
It was a strongly Malthusian novel.
And the conclusion, if any, I think is that population control would be necessary, especially
in Africa.
It's been a long time, but it did not take me long to decide that I did not like it
and that all the people who recommended it have poor taste in novels.
Population control is especially needed in Africa.
It seems like a somewhat self-serving argument.
This might be something worth Googling.
Let's not put words into anybody's mouths for things that I've read 15 or more years
ago.
Right.
And, yeah, instead, you know, it would be awesome.
Let's talk about voting.
Let's talk about the voting.
So yeah, back to the question I started out with that I've heard lately, it's all the
rage to say that it's not worth the time and effort to vote.
That strongly depends on your utility function.
What's the utility function?
So should we start just explaining decision theory?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
What does my utility function look like when I'm deciding if I want to vote or not?
Right.
So the artifice of economics and several other disciplines is that people are modeled as
individual agents.
They have utility functions, which means they have states of the world that make them happier
and try to attain those states.
Those utility functions can look like anything in actual practice.
They, at least in humans, have a rather specific structure.
Can I, as a quick aside, confirm something that I've suspected but never actually confirmed
before?
The term function in utility function, is that an artifact from calculus where a function
is like a graph, a long equation with a number of variables in it?
I mean, a line.
Does it look like a line?
Yes.
Like, do I have any?
Thank you.
So I might have an exponential utility function regarding, or a logarithmic one, regarding
Oreo consumption.
Right.
So a utility function along two dimensions will look like a line.
In fact, our utility functions are many, many more than two dimensions, but the idea is
we start with two dimensions, derive some conclusions, and try to generalize them.
So it is okay to think of it in terms of an equation?
Yes.
It absolutely is an equation.
They are usually f of x equals u, has utility to the something power, and what that power
will be raised to will be a function of risk preference.
If it's raised to power of one, risk neutral, power less than one, risk averse, or greater
than one, risk loving.
So it's a way to quantify what people want in a mathematical way?
Yes.
And it strongly relies on the concept of expected utility, utility being, again, states of the
world, make you happier, give you utlons, whatever, some measure of happiness.
Utils?
Utils, yes.
I like that better.
I do too.
Expected meaning that you obviously do not have perfect prediction of the future.
You have some estimate of probability states of the future, and you act according to those
probability states.
So expected value of a coin flip, for example, is if you assign head zero and tails one, the
expected value is 0.5.
So expected utility would be the expected value of your utility function, and give you
some extra set of actions.
So it kind of seems like you dodged the question, though, by saying it depends on what your
utility function is.
The arguments I've seen are along the lines of your individual vote has such a small chance
of making a difference that you're just as well off playing the lottery as you are going
to the voting booth, especially because the payoff for the lottery is much greater than
the payoff of getting one candidate that's only slightly different from another candidate.
Right.
So it's not a dodge.
People mostly, I think, do not vote to accept that.
There are reasons to vote that are instrumental.
Like, the candidate will give me this and I want this, or the candidate will give me my
friends this and I want my friends to have this.
There are reasons to vote that are non-instrumental.
Like, I got it and I voted sticker and it makes me feel happy.
It's instrumental in the sense of you are getting something that you want.
It is not instrumental in the sense of it has to do with public policy at all.
Lots of people, I think, vote for non-instrumental reasons.
We have an American culture, civic religion, whatever you want to call it that strongly
encourages voting since you have the duty to vote.
People take more pride out of it.
People vote for expressive reasons, like the same reason you chaired a football game.
One person sharing is not going to make your team more likely to win, but it's fun to cheer.
So that's another reason people might vote.
But are there reasons to vote?
If we ignore the more expressive reasons, what you would call the non-instrumental reasons
to vote, are there actual strong instrumental reasons to vote generally?
It is a function of the probability of your changing the election and the size of the
difference between the candidate's positions and the instrumental value for you.
So first, the probability is how we, you know, the expected thing.
You have to multiply by the probability of something happening.
Indeed, it is true the probability of anyone individual's vote deciding an election is
very small, especially a very large election.
Since we are talking about a winner-take-all system, the probability of being the deciding
vote is the only probability that matters, at least in the United States.
Because if you were outvoted by a million people, then there would be no policy changes
if you had voted.
So you have to have decided the election or the policy to have everything to multiply
the policy changes by, and then the policy changes themselves, they can't just be, it's
not just the value of your candidate's policies, it's the value of your candidate's policies
minus the alternative candidate's policies.
And if the differences between the candidates are very small, then that value is going to
be rather small.
If the differences between the candidates are large, then that could potentially be,
you know, a very, very large number.
I have a question.
It's about mail-in ballots.
So we've been talking about instrumental reasons to vote and non-instrumental reasons, and
it seems to me that non-instrumental reasons are probably pretty important in our voting
culture.
How do mail-in ballots impact that?
Because people can't see you voting if you're doing a mail-in ballot, and you can even lie
to your parents and wait.
And you can even lie to other people and tell them that you did vote when they asked you.
And you know, aside from the negative feelings associated with lying about it, you'll kind
of be in the same position as far as other people's signaling, as far as signaling goes.
Yeah.
It's a great question.
So if people were voting for mostly instrumental reasons, mail-in ballots lower the cost of
voting.
You don't have to go outside, stand in a cold line, you can just write some things that
are the mail.
But if people are voting for largely expressive reasons, then the mail-in ballot might actually
reduce votes.
There was a particular country, or maybe a county in a country, I think Sweden, where
they adopted a policy of just a big campaign to get mail-in ballots to every single household,
and voting went down.
Wow.
Yeah.
Because I vote much more now that I have my mail-in ballot.
Right.
I don't have to wait for the hour or two of my life.
But if people are voting for largely expressive reasons, you're not going in and getting sick
or anyway, probably no one's even going to ask you, but if they do, you can say, I don't
know.
But yeah, voting participation actually decreased slightly.
So people in that country don't think their vote makes a lot of difference then?
It probably doesn't.
So you were talking earlier about what the chances are of something of one person changing
a vote in a state that can make a big difference.
It's a swing state.
There's a much closer to 50-50.
A big difference is some heavy quotes around that.
So there are a whole lot of ways to model the probability of deciding an election.
Standard models, you will sometimes see economists give very, very low numbers for the probability
of being the size of a large election, like the US presidential election.
Those numbers can be, you could win the power ball dozens of times in a row before you ever
decide an election.
Andrew Gelman, I hope it's pronounced Gelman, has been doing some more empirical work and
modeling a bit differently, trying to take into account things like swing states, trying
to take into account the models that give those very low numbers are fairly primitive.
They sort of treat voters as if they're ointasses.
So Andrew Gelman's work has shown that for some states, a few swing states, if I remember,
I can only remember two, New Mexico and Colorado, I do not remember the others, that if you
live in one of those states and you do not have extra information from polls or something
like that on the day of the election, telling you that one candidate is utterly dominating
the other, if you have good reason to think it's pretty close in those states, it can
be as low as one in 10 million.
That's your chance of making a difference?
That is the chance of one vote deciding the US presidential election in one of the four
states.
That's actually pretty high.
One in 10 million?
Well, compared to in...
Compared to one in several billion, but then there are states like New York where I believe
there's a lot closer to one in a billion, and the power ball, I think, less I checked,
was a little lower than one in 300 million, so you could win it three and a half times.
See, if I had to kill two hours of my day for one in 10 million chance, I don't think
I would take it.
Right.
So it really strongly depends on what you think the policy difference between those
candidates are and whether or not you think they are large enough to justify it, and
it depends on where in the United States you live.
But yeah, to give you...
Just for comparison, there have been 56 US presidential elections in the country.
So one in 10 million is much higher than those other estimates, it is still not very high.
It is absolutely possible the policy differences could be large enough to make voting rational
in one of the states, probably not so much to New York.
But if you have the opportunity to get a whole bunch of people to vote, candidates obviously
put a great deal of effort into not only getting people to vote, but pleasing voters.
Right?
Yes.
So it matters to them to move large groups of people.
Yes, absolutely.
And so if you could spend the same time that you would have spent voting, encouraging successfully
encouraging 10 other people to vote, then you have done 10 times what you could do by
yourself.
Right?
So yes, encouraging other people to vote can be far, far, far more effective than voting
yourself conceivable.
Are we potentially doing something bad here by telling people that it's irrational to
vote?
I actually have.
Not that we're telling people that, but could that be a bad thing to tell people that it's
irrational to vote?
I want to interject that really quick.
So that one of the reason people might want to go out and vote rather than say mail it
in is that your employer has to be OK if you're taking the day off of work or taking the time
off of work.
A lot of people hate their jobs and they are excused for those hours to go vote, right?
I don't think they are.
Really?
Yeah.
I'm pretty positive.
They are.
Yes.
Oh, OK.
But they don't get the paid.
No.
No.
But you can't be fired for having taken the time off to vote.
I see.
That would be you would get your butt sued.
I do actually have a couple theoretical rational reasons to vote, but I wanted to get through
those in a little bit because we were talking just now, you said, that it'd be worth it
to if you could spend the time you would use voting to get even two or three other people
to vote.
That's much more worth it.
Isn't that kind of putting us in a red queen race, though, where everyone is best off using
all their time, getting everyone else to vote, and we're dumping mass amounts of resources,
wasting, basically, mass amounts of resources and time in something that we could not waste
those resources in if we just all agreed not to.
Yes.
OK.
Yes.
Voting is costly, it takes time, it takes lots of people to calculate votes, it takes.
Voting is expensive in the larger country, more expensive it is.
You can significantly reduce the cost of taxpayer expense by reducing the number of people who
vote.
Oh.
So, to go back to my question, would it be a good thing to encourage people not to vote,
or if we were in a position to actually make any kind of difference, or would that be an
absolutely terrible thing because we would potentially be getting more educated people
to vote less compared to potentially other demographics?
Who are you targeting in your don't vote campaign?
Well, let's say we are targeting fans of rationality and less wrong.
Or generally, stupid or amenable to, like, decision theory-based arguments, right?
So that won't appeal to the emotional order, but it might appeal to somebody who is thinking,
is it worth it to me to vote this year or not?
They might be, for whatever reason, hear this, they might be swayed, like, you know what,
okay, forget it.
So.
I want to give a round of applause to you guys.
Were you reading up on decision theory before this, or did you guys just come up with this
on the fly?
I was in a little homework, but how did that weigh in formally?
Oh, I was just wondering because the time of decision theory has something to say about
voting, which is very similar to what you just said.
Oh, sure.
I didn't read up on time of decision theory today, but I'm vaguely familiar with it.
Did you want to tackle this, or?
No, go ahead if you've got it.
Well, one of the things that Eliyzer works on is artificial intelligence.
And so he has a slightly different perspective on things, one of those being if you have
a single intelligence programmed artificially, you can replicate that intelligence many,
many times.
And so it's important to make an intelligence that is okay cooperating with itself.
For example, in Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality, there's one point where Harry
Potter is talking with Draco Malfoy, and they talk about Pansy Parkinson.
And Harry says, look, if two pansies were to run into each other, would they team up
and become more powerful and take over the school, or would they just backstab each other
and be awful and be even worse off?
And the answer in the story is Pansy Parkinson, obviously, would not cooperate with herself.
And so it's bad to have more agents like her.
But any ideology that depends on it not being spread because it's toxic, I think is going
to fail eventually.
So you want to have a decision theory that if everyone else were to adopt your decision
theory, the world would be better rather than worse.
Should we articulate the prisoner's dilemma for the sake of formalizing that argument?
I think we've done it already in the previous episode.
If we're talking about voting, it's probably closer to just externality or public goods.
So does everyone know what an externality is?
I do, but please tell us again.
In economics, if you have a two-party transaction, any effects they have on third parties that
have no say whatsoever on the transaction as an externality, they can be positive or negative.
So I buy a really nice shirt from some store, and someone sees my shirt and we're like,
oh, that's nice.
They weren't part of the transaction, but we got to see the nice shirt.
Or if I drive my car, it's carbon in the atmosphere and contributes to climate change, that negative
externality because I bought the car, I bought the gas, no one, the people in Africa being
affected by climate change, definitely didn't have anything to say about that transaction.
So that would be negative externality.
And voting can have either a positive or negative externality because you go and vote your decision
very incrementally, just like pollution, very incrementally to a very small degree affects
a large number of other people.
So if you vote well, you can have a strong positive externality on the world.
If you vote minor positive externality.
The expected, right, just like the expected utility, the expected effect is very small.
But the thing with externalities is they add up.
So externalities are not necessarily going to take all of that.
Okay.
The plot thickens.
Go on.
So if you are informed and you know a whole lot about public policy and so on, and you
vote, you might have, you might incur positive externalities.
Of course, the other thing is whether or not you even can have people at different values
if we vote for two different things, is it because one of us is more informed on policy
than the other, or is it because I really like Doryos and you really like Numenos?
I don't know.
I still think that that externality thing is trying to count the same effect twice because
you still have almost no chance of making a difference.
And therefore the actual externality of your vote in most cases is zero.
The, yes, it is very close to zero, but then the same is true of driving your car.
If you drive down the street, the amount you contribute to climate change is so negligible
as to be completely not worth your time.
And so the way it factors into your personal decision making, just like the instrumental
value of the difference between candidates are lower, the probability of deciding the
election is very low, just like that.
The way that externality factors in your decision making is smaller and smaller.
The lower effect it has on you, the less you will take into account in your decision making,
and the more it is spread across the entire world, the less it's going to be put on you
and taking into account the probability of deciding elections, put on you even less.
So if people like to vote for reasons that are expressive, non-instrumental, so on, and
people are not good at voting, the conclusion is that for a large number of people, their
voting is a negative externality on the rest of us, that they don't take into account in
their decision making.
Well, I will.
That's the thing about externalities, if it's something that you do not take into account,
right?
Yeah.
Less than would be societally optimal.
I do think it would be, in this case, important to go back to the timeless decision theory,
though, because in the case of timeless decision theory, when you make a choice, you are literally
making the choice, the same choice for everyone who has a decision theory that is identical
to yours, and in a way, making the same choice for everyone who has a decision theory very
similar to yours.
So when I choose not to vote, then everyone who is sufficiently like me also chooses not
to vote, and that is a problem, because that means that people who are like me won't vote
and won't be represented.
Whereas if I choose to vote, then I can be assured that everyone else who is sufficiently
like me, and has thought of these things, will also vote because they have come to the
same conclusion.
Yes.
But it might not be a good thing if you are a lousy voter.
Well, if you are a lousy voter.
That's the voter server.
And you make, and you have a decision theory that says, I'm going to vote no matter what,
and everyone like you votes no matter what, then negative externality is all around.
I'm sure if you are a very well-informed and good voter, then you would want a decision
theory that encourages you and other people to vote.
So the thing with the negative externalities, you don't take that into account, and so you
get too much of it.
The same is true of positive externalities.
You don't take into account so you can get too little of it.
So a timeless decision theoretic agent would hopefully have a decision theory that says,
I will vote on things where I am very well-informed.
I will not vote on things where I am not well-informed.
Now the other thing with this whole probability of a vote deciding election being very low
is that voters don't have very much incentive to get informed.
And if you want to read more on that, you can read Carpegne and Heater's What Americans
Know About Politics and Why It Matters.
If you want to just be a guest of absolute horror of how ignorant your fellow citizens
are about even the basics of anything in our government, that's the book for you.
So the answer is everyone who's listening to this podcast should vote, but encourage
everyone who isn't listening to the podcast to not vote.
That's, yeah.
I don't know.
Do we have a lot of reactionary listeners, because...
I don't know, actually.
We don't know who our listeners are.
No, we haven't ever done any poll or anything.
Well, they don't believe in democracy anyway.
That's true.
I'd be going against their intrinsic values.
Okay, well then I was going to say, you were talking earlier about other possible reasons
to vote, even if you aren't necessarily well-informed, I think.
Did you say that earlier?
I did.
I mean, there's other reasons to vote.
One might be you feel good, you're cheering, rah, rah, rah.
You have a significant other who is irrational and, for some reason, really thinks that you
should vote.
That's a little bit of a mea culpa right there.
I apologized.
And...
How do you feel about the bowling hack?
I don't know about the bowling hack.
I don't know if that's actually what it's called.
That's how I remember it.
The hack being the best thing to do is to find someone who you like enough to bowl with,
but who you know is going to vote the opposite of you on just about everything.
And instead of going to the polls, both of you go bowling.
So that way, your vote will have been nullified for your positions, but his vote against you
would have been nullified.
The net effect would be no difference to the actual voting results.
But the two of you have a wonderful time bowling and maybe build some bridges between the political
divide.
You should.
Yeah.
That's great.
You should go bowling, but you also...
Or you could just not show up to vote and have a party.
And it doesn't matter what people...
If people have different opinions on what candidates or policies they want to back.
Because the chances of either of you making a difference are so vanishingly small that
there is really no need to do that.
I actually have an acquaintance who hates Donald Trump and says that in this election,
he will vote for Donald Trump just to prove to everyone how little his vote matters.
So that sounds like the biggest waste of time.
He can prove his point.
I can tell people to read Andrew Goleman's paper.
I don't like the idea of the party so much because most of the people will be like you.
I like the idea of finding one other person who's opposite of you.
Yeah, you don't want to go to my party, that's fine.
Oh no, I'd love to go to your party.
Are you having a party?
Sure, maybe.
So let's go to Katrina's No One Votes Party.
It doesn't matter anymore.
I think the Buller Act...
There seems to be some benefits to say since we all know Katrina's going to vote for Trump
and I don't want Trump to win, I'll cancel Katrina's vote by voting for Bernie Sanders,
right?
Yeah.
So I think that's...
Well, by voting for the Democratic candidate.
Right.
So that's as realistic as me voting for Trump.
Right.
So, oh wait.
Bum bum bum.
We need this Trump bone effect right there.
But Bernie Sanders winning the nomination is as low probability as you voted for Trump.
Yeah, so it's always significantly high.
You think it's high?
Pretty close, it's currently giving 3%.
Yeah, I would have signed something like a 1 in a million chance to vote for Trump.
But the idea is that if for whatever reason you can't convince this person to go out and
bowl with you and make it with a friend, at the very least you can nullify one vote for
a party that you don't like, right?
But I'm not sure.
Is that a complete waste of time or is there any merit to that?
It should have exactly the same effect as not voting at all.
So...
I guess you're right.
If that's the only purpose of doing the vote, then yeah, it's probably a waste of time.
So yeah.
If you're really worried about being that one guy who you could have cast a vote and
it would have made the difference and you don't want to be the guy who fucks everything
up for everyone, you just find one guy from the opposite side to go bowl with you and
it's all good.
Or if you're that kind of thinking of what if I'm the one in a billion and you should
just spend all your...
I'm surprised you don't spend all your time with the gas station buying a lot of your
tickets.
So although you would have to be absolutely certain that that one guy would have voted
if you hadn't had intervened with the bowling.
Right.
Yeah.
So there's another...
I was reading...
There was an essay by Peter Singer that I read years ago and I wouldn't found again
today so I could find the right quote.
And in Australia compulsory voting is the law of the land where everyone has to vote
without good reason and they get like 95% turnout.
People are pissed about that too.
Yeah, a lot of people don't like it.
Peter Singer does argue a favor of it, but he argues a favor of a lot of things.
I think just to be contrarian on his website, there's a lot of essays that I think he just
writes just to be thought-provoking.
This might not be one-on-one.
So what's his argument for?
His argument for it sounds sort of the ontological, right, where if everyone follows the line
of reasoning that, well, it's a waste of time to go stand in line and vote or even just
take the three minutes it takes to fill out the mail and ballot and drop it in the mailbox
next time I'm there, that time could be spent somewhere else and the odds about making a
difference are so small, it's just not worth it.
But the problem with that is then it would, let's see, quote, yet if many people follow
this line of reasoning and do not vote, a minority of the population can determine the country's
future, leaving a discontented majority.
And that seems to make sense in the fact that, say, if only 5% of the population cares about
voting, well, they're going to decide everything, right?
Right.
I think this goes back to the legitimacy of government that, you know, before there was
democracy, how did you decide if a government was legitimate or not?
Well, it's the government that God chose.
God decided that this government is legitimate, so who are you to argue with God?
And once we kind of did away with that whole notion of God chooses the government, there
has to be some other societally accepted excuse for why this group of people gets to make the
laws and control all of our lives.
Well, if they really don't care and they're really uninformed, then they shouldn't be
voting because of the negative externalities of voting.
Basically, yes, but also no, because if a country has high voter turnout, that gives
the system legitimacy.
And if you like the country you're in right now, well, because it is psychologically,
people think if the vast majority of people have voted, then this is the will of the people.
So they're less likely to, what, revolt?
Yes.
It's basically an argument for if you like your society and you want it to stay stable,
you try to increase voter turnout.
If you want the society to become destabilized and maybe spark some sort of revolution or
a populist uprising that gets like a Trump, for example, into office, you want to reduce
voter turnout as much as possible so people will have less space in the system.
Hmm.
Seems like a very dubious empirical plan to me.
It could be, but I think it would be a great reason for the neo-reactionaries to try to
discourage voting as much as possible.
Because when almost no one is voting, how can you say, I have the will of the people
behind me and that is why I have the right to pass these laws?
Well, oh, that gives us several topics.
First, two comments on paper's quote.
One, there's an equilibrium.
The fewer people...
You said finger.
It was Peter Stinger.
Oh, I thought you said Stephen Stinger.
Peter Stinger.
Peter Stinger.
He's sort of a literary teller.
Yeah.
Wait a minute.
Yeah.
Sing it.
Okay.
Well, one, there's an equilibrium.
The fewer people vote, it increases the probability of deciding the election, increases the instrumental
value of deciding...
Right.
So...
Economics.
The second, though, this idea of a popular mandate or rule of thumb, is everyone familiar
with Error's Impossibility Theorem?
No.
I'm not either.
No.
Okay.
Kenneth Arrow in 1967 wrote a paper proving that no voting system could satisfy a list
of several desirable qualities.
Error's Impossibility Theorem states that there's no voting system that can fulfill
a few very desirable axioms.
Those axioms being one, non-dictatorship.
One person doesn't just get to override one or even however many people's votes are saved,
what they say in the matter.
No topics, policies, bills, laws, whatever are off the table.
Everything is allowed to be voted on.
It's really nice.
It's called Unrestricted Domain.
In the United States, we don't quite have this, the Bill of Rights.
I mean, we can't overturn any bill we want in the Bill of Rights, but it requires a supermajority.
So we have taken some topics off the table effectively.
Monotonicity, which is the idea that if a candidate gets more popular with anyone or
any group of voters, that should not hurt their chances of winning.
Some voting systems actually have this flaw that if one candidate rises in popularity,
it causes them to lose.
I don't remember the exact ones, but lots of voting systems have ranked preferences,
and that causes some of these oddities.
Oh, because ranked preference usually results in the candidate that is least hated, not
the candidate that is most liked.
The independence of irrelevant alternatives.
So just for example, you're talking with your friends and say, oh, should we eat?
Indian and Italian, and everyone, everyone says, let's go eat Indian.
And then someone else says, well, wait, wait, should we go eat at this vegan restaurant
instead?
And then you say, I don't want to eat there.
Let's all go eat Italian.
You can introduce alternatives, you can introduce candidates, and it can cause the most favorite
candidate to lose popularity, even though everyone still preferred that most favorite
candidate to the introduced candidate.
And there are some other desirable system, desirable properties you might want.
I don't think they're strictly part of the impossibility theorem, but for instance, if
you are going to allow people to rank their preferences, it's going to be useful to rank
the intensity of people's preferences.
If you just have a board account, for instance, it allows you, if there's five candidates,
one gets five points, one gets four points, one gets three points.
But if your candidates are, I don't know, Trump, Romney, Bernie Sanders, Hillary Clinton,
and Hitler, giving Hitler one point does not quite capture just how much people really
want to avoid that all through.
And so you can get weird preference orderings.
The end result of this impossibility theorem is that, at least theoretically, this will
of the people or the democratic mandate or so on is not possible.
There is no such thing.
Oh, rationality, basic rationality.
If you prefer A to B to C, then you cannot prefer C to A, right?
But you want some voting systems, you cannot satisfy that requirement.
Like if you have majority rule with runoff, depending on the order that you do the runoff,
just like football tournament, you can prefer A to B to C to A.
But for government legitimacy, isn't the important part not necessarily that they fulfill these
things, but just that society accepts this as a method of making a legitimate government?
Sure.
Maybe you could get society to accept any kind of method.
Well, yeah.
Originally, it used to be the Skyfairy said it's okay.
Right.
So maybe it's not really required to have significant amount of people voting.
Maybe society will accept, well, for instance, I saw a proposal that was we will pick a random
lottery of people, 1,000 people, 10,000, whatever.
They all have to vote, and they all get $1,000 for doing so.
And it will be random, and so we don't have any issues with just having certain sub-segments
of the population being the only ones who vote.
They will be paid, and that will get rid of all those problems of over-ignorance and
so on.
I would really like that.
But that's only 1,000 or 10,000 people would people accept that as legitimate?
I don't know.
The cost would go a lot down.
The cost would go down significantly, yes.
Depends on how statistically literate people are, I guess, and also if they trust the system
to actually be truly random.
Right.
That's another thing.
That was the first thought that I had.
I'm like, oh, yeah, random.
Yes.
So, but I mean, I think what you can get people to accept as far as what you were mentioning,
Enya, is that we are used to Hitler, so we can just jump straight to another verbally.
North Korea is a thing, right?
Yes, it is.
So, I mean, many people that live there reputedly are okay with the way things are set up.
Well, I mean, that's the way neo-reactionaries would like it.
I personally like our current system, which is why I'm trying to lend it more legitimacy.
Those people are ignorant, just like our voting populace.
Actually, they don't actually want it to be like North Korea.
I think they believe that if you institute a monarchy, you can get something more like
Singapore.
I guess I meant that by those people, people who live in North Korea are kept very ignorant.
They have low education.
They don't have adequate information to make decisions.
That's quite true.
And a lot of people in the USA, which is the country in which we are right now, they either
don't have adequate information or don't have adequate reasons to acquire that information.
Well, I mean, significant reasons not to acquire that information.
Yeah, there's big information.
Because the leaders, you know, it makes you an enemy of the state here at USA.
You mean, I thought we were so long on North Korea.
I said that there's a there's a comparison there.
So I guess what I'm trying to get at is we want people to be well educated.
And if people are well educated, well, maybe they would accept other voting systems that
might work a little bit more towards having better policy outcomes.
OK, maybe I think that any any situation, as you mentioned before, where we are trying
to withhold information from people in order to increase the legitimacy of the government
is probably not sustainable, right?
Right. Yeah.
For the record, I do not advocate withholding information from anybody.
I think that people who are very ignorant or very biased vote poorly.
That is the negative extremality.
That's not good.
So I am strongly against compulsory voting because compulsory voting does not solve the
problem of getting people to actually investigate learning issues, learn basic social
science or anything like that.
I have a question.
I brought up earlier the myth of the rational voter.
Yes.
So I've heard a lot of people recently, a number of people talking about how people
vote in their own self interest.
And I was made aware that maybe that is not the case.
Could you talk about why people vote?
Right.
Or how people vote?
How people vote.
So the myth of the rational voter is a book by Brian Kaplan.
A little backstory about public choice.
Public choice started with this insight that voters do not have much reason to get much
knowledge, but special interest groups do.
And so public choice is kind of writing for a long time on this idea that special interest
capture policy voters do nothing about it.
You know, you means are an organized interest, but unemployed people are not.
For example, Donald Whitman, I believe in the nineties, wrote a book called the
myth of democratic failure, where he argued that our political institutions are actually
efficient, do capture voter preferences very well and do get us good public policy.
So some of the things that the public choice theorists have been criticizing were, for
example, the party system bundles issues and lets you maybe hide some issues from
voter.
You know, if you have one issue voters, you can give them that one issue and then
give whatever you want to whatever lobbyists are capturing your votes.
The party system actually could increase accountability, right?
You have it maybe not anymore, but at least in the nineties, when everyone's
right, I think you could say that you knew what the Republicans were for, what the
Democrats were for.
If you voted for that candidate, you pretty much knew what you were getting.
It also turns out to be the case that most voters, political beliefs, values and so on
are serial, serially aligned.
So what does that mean?
Well, even things that may seem unrelated, like, for instance, wanting to spend more
money to send people to college and gun control, I don't see a connection between
those two, but most Americans do.
Or if they don't see a connection between those two, it doesn't matter because their
beliefs on them are serialized, serially aligned anyway.
And so the parties mostly are just collating what people want and you can just, you know,
symbolize information.
That's just one example of Donald Whitman's arguments.
He has several chapters, very interesting book.
Ryan Kaplan's response was the myth of the rational voter.
Oh, well, sorry, I should go back.
Donald Whitman's central argument is if you have these voters who are ignorant, that
doesn't mean they're biased.
If you have rational expectations, you will have some people who are, well, let's see,
I'll joke about rational expectations.
You shoot, you know, 10 bullets on the left side of the dartboard and 10 bullets on the
right side and oh, wow, I got all 20 right in the center because it's, because it's an
average of repreferences, but an average of repreferences.
Funny old joke, that's my precious self esteem.
So if you have a whole bunch of people who are wrong about a policy one way and a whole
bunch of people who are wrong about the other way, they cancel it out, be informed voters,
then we decide to vote and you get a good policy.
So Brian Kaplan's argument was voters aren't just ignorant, they're biased.
The myth of the rational voter, he calls it rational irrationality.
Since that term might be confusing to all the rationalists out there, maybe rational
bias now still doesn't work.
Does it mean it could?
And it's not this.
It's this idea that people, people get some kind of utility for having beliefs that are
kind of dumb makes a lot of sense.
Yeah, I, I saw a pen and teller bit where, and, you know, he does some half-assed thing
with, he's like, here's the card and shuffles it really half-assedly back in the deck.
And he's like, do you believe that card shuffled well into the deck?
Some guy in the audience and I says, yeah, it's like, I have 50 quid in my dressing room.
I, I'm willing to go get it and bet you.
Do you still want to tell me that that card isn't, no, as soon as you impose
a cost for believing the crazy thing you don't believe like that happened?
And if voters have these biases, then things are actually a lot worse, a lot worse than
you could get in the sort of rational ignorance world where people are just ignorant.
They don't care if special interests are capturing things because, well, so what Katrina
brought up was that voters do not necessarily vote their self-interest.
It's a robust, robust finding of decades of political science research.
Everyone knows voters vote their pocket books except for political scientists who know pretty
damn well if they don't.
Older people are not more in favor of social security payments.
Younger people are more in favor.
Men are more in favor of abortion rights with women.
People who have children have no different opinions on busing than people who do not
have children take an issue.
There, there are, there are some issues where people do seem to vote their self-interest like
smokers are really opposed to anti-smoking laws.
But the cost for them is different.
Well, yeah, the cost for them is immediate obvious, significant.
Most people, it seems, vote based on ideology.
And ideology tends to be, you know, a set of values.
I think most people are actually fairly civic minded when they vote.
I think most people actually are trying to vote for what they think would be best for
everyone in the country.
So if people are voting their self-interest and are quite rational, that can get you better
policy, right?
If people are voting their self-interest but are irrational, that might not get you better
policy, right?
You might, oh, I'm going to vote what's best for me.
Oops, accidentally voted what's best for everybody and screwed me over, right?
Conceivably might not get you better policy.
So I have a question then about voting your ideology in a two-party system.
Let's say, for example, that Bernie Sanders does not get the nomination and runs as a
third-party candidate or even doesn't run as a third-party candidate.
There's still, you know, the Greens and the Libertarians out there, which a lot of people
are like, I will not vote for Trump and I will not vote for Hillary.
Yes.
What's the implications of voting for a third party?
Is it throwing away your vote?
Is there some use to it?
Is it kind of like voting for the other guy?
We should pause this and finish talking about the irrationality thing.
Because that is a kind of topic.
Oh, is it?
Okay, no, go ahead.
I'll put that up till later.
So, yeah, just to quickly finish the irrationality bit.
If people are ignorant, not biased, but altruistically minded, that can get you good policy
per Donald Whitman's argument.
And for Brian Kaplan, if people are both not self-interested and not rational,
worst of both worlds.
Everyone is trying to help everyone else, but they are wrong about what will help everyone else.
And...
Is that the world we live in?
Altruistically votive student.
I think it is.
I kind of agree.
I mean, Michael Humer put it this way, if there's a large consensus of experts who agree
on a certain topic and you disagree with them, but you cannot even explain their best arguments
for that topic back to them, you are probably wrong.
And the central finding of Brian Kaplan's book is that the public's
opinions about economics significantly diverges from the economist's opinions about economics.
And so you might say, well, economists are all just voting their self-interest,
or just arguing this out of their self-interest.
He controls for income, it doesn't.
But every economist I've heard say that is also of the neoliberal school.
Is there...
So that is the other one.
Well, maybe it's just ideological.
An economist survives.
He controls for ideology as well as results get stronger because the actual,
the typical economist is a moderate liberal, and they were moderated somewhat in their
beliefs for learning economics.
So even controlling for ideology, it seems like the problem is even worse than what's already
previously believed to be.
So that might be an even stronger argument for definitely not compulsory voting.
Right.
Jason Brennan has a book with someone.
He's a political philosopher, his book, I don't remember her name,
but they trade chapters arguing for and against compulsory voting.
And the title of one of his chapters is, Should We Force the Drunk to Drive?
So the, I think one way to respond to that is, should we allow the drugs to drive,
which is kind of what we do now, right?
Well, there...
In our current voting system, we allow people who are very poorly educated,
and maybe they're altruistic and irrational.
We encourage them to vote.
Yes, we do.
Right.
So that's what I was going to get back with.
You wanted to know if we should allow them to vote.
Well, I, earlier, I was telling the idea of, before we got on the air,
I was talking about the idea of compulsory voting, what they do in Australia.
And that was the line that came up from that chapter,
Should We Force the Drunk to Drive?
But all we do now is we don't force them, we just strongly encourage them to.
Right.
Yeah.
So I mean, I guess, how is that really that much better?
Or is it just not, and it's like, well, this sucks, this sucks too,
but that's not an argument in favor of this also.
Well, you can also kind of imagine how it sounds like to someone else.
They're like, oh, all these economists are telling us only economists should vote.
Right.
I mean, well, I mean, so that's persuasive to me, right?
Only the people who know what they're talking about should vote.
So I'm not, I'm not.
And as he was saying, the pocketbook is usually people's last concern.
Right.
So of course, there are problems with these sorts of oligarchical or technocratic systems as well,
which is, you know, if you like, it is possible in the systems.
And I think probably likely that, that self-interest motive probably increases
the narrower the voting pool.
So things change.
It's also one of the arguments that the new reactionaries make,
that the royalty or, you know, whoever happens to be installed as the rulers
have very strong self-interest in making sure society stays stable and continues.
Much more so than the average guy on the street who owns nothing.
It doesn't matter.
It doesn't care if the whole system burns down or not,
because what has he got to lose?
I think that seems kind of hitter-ness.
I have a question.
How do prediction markets play into this?
So prediction market is a market where you can buy shares of whether or not a future event will
happen.
So for example, who's going to win the presidency in the upcoming election?
You set out a bunch of shares for Trump and a bunch of shares for Clinton,
and people buy and sell those shares.
And the price of those shares then corresponds to the market-predicted
probability that the event will recur.
So I mentioned predict-wise earlier.
I'm going to call for not going into that a little more carefully.
Predict-wise is a prediction market website.
And it's just that people can buy and sell shares of a future event.
But not presidential outcomes, as it turns out in the United States.
Depends on how much you're willing to break the law.
The US does have some anti-gambling laws.
That's why the previous leader in this one stopped accepting money from US citizens.
But it keeps happening.
More websites are popping up.
You can find several.
And if you want to flaunt the law or just nebulously sort of.
I guess the question is great.
So that changes incentives in prediction when your money is behind it, right?
Yes.
Versus the uselessness of making a vote, right?
There's a quote by somebody, might be Daniel Gilbert, that betting,
or I guess betting in a prediction market, is a way to call yourself on your bullshit.
So whereas you might just say, no, no, I'm pretty sure this is going to happen.
But then the second, like you said in the Penn and Teller example,
that you're asked to put your money down on it, you're like, oh, no, I'm not that confident.
Despite how confident I said I was a second ago, I'm certainly not confident enough to bet $5.
Yeah.
So yes.
So for example, right now predict-wise gives Hillary Clinton around 97% chance of taking the
Democratic nomination and Democratic Party a 67% chance of the election.
If in fact the true probability is lower than that, you can make yourself a little money
because you don't have to wait until the election is done.
You can sell your shares when the price changes, right?
So if you just are really sure that the Clinton Trump race is going to be super close,
then go make some bets, go prove to the world that you're right.
Is predict-wise taking money from American?
I'm not sure, actually.
Okay.
Because I would be interested in.
I'd like to draw an anecdote.
In one of Stephen Hawking's earlier books, he mentions how he originally bedded a friend
against the existence of black walls because he thought they didn't exist.
So he bet that they did exist because he said then that way,
if they did exist, at least I'm on the bed.
So this makes you want to go bet or to go put money down on predict-wise for Trump.
To be fair, Stephen Hawking usually bets his actual opinions.
Right, but I like just a joke.
If society is going to collapse, at least you get a thousand bucks out of it.
Yeah, but Stephen's right.
You can actually use a prediction market as insurance against some desired outcomes.
I don't think many people use them for that purpose, but it is if Trump winning is worth
negative $1,000, do you go out?
That's the money on Trump, right?
But if enough people do that, doesn't it lose its value as a prediction market?
Probably not.
Because when you introduce more money into these markets, it increases the liquidity.
So some other people are like,
let the probability change.
For now, the probability is wrong.
I'm going to go take their money.
So it tends to increase interest in the market, increase money in the market.
Would you have an entire episode about prediction markets at some point?
Because I love prediction markets.
Yes, they are great.
And Robin Hansen is a system of government based on prediction markets.
Yeah, he calls it futarky.
Futarky.
Futarky.
As long as we're bringing Robin Hansen into the mix, didn't he not get in some hot water?
Well, a little bit.
It wasn't one of his prediction market things strut down because they had an option to bet
on when the next terrorist attack will take place.
Yes, and there were some silly frenzy over
over whether that would financially encourage people to do a terrorist attack.
But the cap on spending in that market was $100.
He's already really wanting to do it.
It's like, oh man, you know what?
That $100 is really going to put me over the edge to set off that bomb.
It was very silly.
There are people who worry that prediction markets could increase the incentives.
But basically, the more money there is in the market,
the less you can push the market in your favor by introducing money to it.
So if you really don't want people to do that,
you should really encourage prediction markets.
I wasn't agreeing with criticism of Hansen's thing.
I was just bringing up that it was a thing that happened.
Yeah, that was funny.
Sad.
What was Best Buy's competitor, Micro Center?
No, Micro Center's still around.
Circuit City.
Circuit City, yes.
Best Buy actually used prediction markets to protect the success of Blu-ray over HDDVs.
Really?
Yes, and now Circuit City is out of business.
Oh, yeah.
Well, I don't like either of them.
But it's cool to use prediction markets.
Are we ready to change?
No.
Do you want to ask the question again?
Sure.
The question was, in a two-party system,
what is the rationality or the impact of voting a third party?
Are you just throwing your vote away or basically voting for the guy you hate more
by voting for a third party, or is there any good reason to do that?
So in the United States system, I think I've never seen a voting system that is not subject
to tactical voting, tactical voting, meaning we do not vote your highest preference in the
hopes of helping someone else win.
So lots of people, for example, their highest preference is Bernie Sanders or Gary Johnson,
but they will switch their votes over to the Democrat or Republican because they feel like
he's throwing their vote away.
There is a law called duberg's law, which says that any first pass the post system,
like the United States, strongly tends to a two-party system for exactly this reason,
tactical voting.
So voting for a third party is a rejection of tactical voting.
Is it throwing your vote away?
Well, since I think your vote doesn't do much to begin with,
I think do whatever makes you feel good.
But does a popular third party candidate running that can change the outcome, yeah?
Everyone thinks so.
I heard the reason that Bill Clinton won was because Ross Perot was in the race.
That is the theory.
But in point of fact, people, they pulled Ross Perot voters and they would have voted
in the valuable parts for Clinton and Bush.
Yeah.
And if you go to Bush versus Gore, a lot of people say, well,
Nader cost Gore the election.
But it turns out we pulled those people that most of them said they wouldn't have voted for Gore
anyway.
They were excited about Nader.
They didn't actually care about voting.
They never cared about a candidate.
So which is probably mostly what you get when you have a popular third party candidate.
So it seems plausible that that could happen.
Introducing a third party candidate could siphon votes away from one candidate,
lead another to winning.
Of the two best examples we have of it in recent history, it seems not to be the case.
I say go vote for third party.
Have fun.
But your third party candidate won't win anyway.
It's more a signaling thing.
I've heard that the main two parties that are more closely aligned with the third parties,
if they see a third party gaining a lot of popularity, will try to shift their views
slightly towards them to pull in those voters the next election.
Can you actually make your preferred party lean slightly more your way by voting for a third party?
I don't know.
There are competing models of voting.
I think the one most people are familiar with is the median voter theorem,
which says that candidates trend towards the median voter because the further away you get.
So if you say it's just a two issue thing, and like I said before in the United States,
it kind of is.
Say it's just a two issue election.
You know, I've left and right.
And if you both start 25% between left and center, 25% between right and center,
then you can scoop up some of the votes that the other person has by moving a little bit
closer to the center.
And this process continues until those parties are spouting the exact same thing.
So that's the median voter model.
And in that model, the answer is no.
If you move closer to one of those third parties, then you are losing some votes
that are just, you know, a little bit further away from the tail of the right.
And so on.
So you trend back to the median.
There are stochastic voting models.
They're a little weird.
They treat voting as if it's called a trembling hand.
Basically, voters make mistakes.
Oops, I flipped the switch for the wrong guy.
So it doesn't actually seem like a very good model.
It doesn't actually have to be that one.
You could just model it as, say, politicians make mistakes in calculating what voters want.
It can give you the same results.
Or voters make mistakes in calculating what politicians are giving them.
In those models, you actually do get something a lot closer to the social welfare function
if you want to believe that such thing exists.
And so if there is a strong market for far left beliefs,
then that will be reflected accurately in political outcomes.
What is the social welfare function?
That's a utility function for the greater betterment of social welfare?
Aggregated utility function across.
Across an entire population.
Yeah.
Okay.
It's an economic artist.
It's useful for some analysis.
Probably such a thing doesn't really exist because people aren't actually utility maximizers.
Well, people are biased.
I don't think anyone here will disagree with that.
So I don't know which of those models actually predicts things better.
That is a constant battle in journals.
And I simply cannot give you a good answer.
But one thing we can say about first pass to post voting
is that even if a third party does become large enough to become viable,
they'll simply become the new second party.
And we will be once again stuck in a two party system.
Yes.
Okay.
That is Duverger's law.
It is not absolute.
There are countries that have first pass to post systems that more than one party.
No.
Just a few.
Okay.
We can put it as a link for the listeners,
but I have a grass someone measured.
They measured what they call effective parties.
The United States actually has less than two effective parties.
I don't remember how they measured it exactly,
but there are a few countries,
but the trend is very obviously strongly towards two parties.
But I think South Korea is one.
I can't remember.
There are a few.
Huh.
Okay.
You had a question earlier.
I thought your question was about what's the best way to run things
or the best way to change things up.
I think that we talked about that.
I think that we already covered that when we were talking about
arrows and possibility theorem,
and then maybe even Robin Hansen's rule by prediction markets idea.
Or voting lottery.
Or voting lottery.
Yeah.
So we've gone over a lot of that stuff.
I think.
Would you prefer a single,
like a single divisible vote system or a randomized lottery?
Or what would you like if you had your druthers?
You're a pretty educated guy.
Rule by Kim.
Hard to argue with that one.
That's not true.
What is it really?
We all know we just have to find the right vocabulary.
I am not smart or informed enough to answer that question.
I have some things that I would prefer to what we have now,
but I'm not sure that I prefer them very strongly.
Like I like the idea of a voting lottery.
I like the idea of voting systems that rank candidates
because those tend to trend towards the least unpopular candidate.
So if you have very divisive candidates,
those voting systems tend towards the least divisive candidate.
So those have some very nice aspects.
But the range of voting possibilities is so large.
I want to keep things democratic, but how democratic?
I mean, if we can incentivize people to actually learn something about policy
and be educated, informed, expressing their opinions honestly,
like I said, I don't think any voting system is immune to tactical voting,
but some are worse than others.
So you're not of the opinion that first passed the post is the worst?
No.
No.
What's the worst voting system you can think of?
Rule by Kim Jong-un.
That's not a voting system though.
It's one person, one vote.
They are a democratic republic of North Korea.
Didn't you see the country name?
If it's a voting system, all votes are made by one person.
Some of them have some pretty bad properties.
I really like the idea of monotonicity.
If candidate gets more popular, they shouldn't lose.
So I'm not a big fan of the, you know,
range of preference.
Essential.
No, the-
Run-offs?
Yeah, run-offs.
Yeah, run-off systems.
But I do not have a strong answer for you.
I think honestly, the biggest problems we have are voter irrationality.
And I mean, I think that's probably the biggest problem.
Well, then in that case, which voting system is the most entertaining?
Rule by Kim Jong-un.
See, I think that one's really boring.
It's always Kim Jong-un.
Like, I grew up in a very political family,
and every four years it's like the Super Bowl of politics.
But have you seen the advertisements that they make about
they're going to blow up America?
They're faffling and crazy and funny if they weren't so terrifying and sad.
The things that Tim finds most interesting are different than other people.
He has a special taste.
I am not a big fan of American political theater.
I never listen to political speeches.
I never watch debates.
The way candidates talk makes my skin crawl.
I found I can get around some of that by finding transcripts online
and having my computer read it out.
The monotone chops up language.
And that way you lose the emphasis and the voice and the power.
And you can just get the message and then you find out it's just what everyone else is saying.
I used to actually enjoy listening to political speeches, and then I met Tim.
He ruined it for me.
Yeah, it's probably about time for us to wrap up.
This has been great.
Thank you so much for lending me your expertise and economic wisdom,
public choice wisdom.
Sorry, I got it wrong.
Thank you for having me.
And if I said anything that was wrong, it's Brian Catlin's fault.
Is there anything you want to say before we go,
or anything that you want to plug or promote?
No, sorry, I've got nothing.
I did not come prepared to answer that question.
Okay, if that changes, let us know with everything out there.
Yeah, we'll put in links.
I was hoping we'd be able to solve the problem of how to fix the voting system.
Today?
Yeah, today.
Yeah, just right here right now.
That's what we're trying to do is we try to find the problem
and then solve it within, you know, under 90 minutes.
When does that work?
Not once yet, but so far.
I didn't realize that was the goal of this podcast.
That's the goal of life.
Wow, you got big goals, man.
Solve all the problems.
First step is to become God.
I think Plato equated democracy with anarchy,
and then Franklin said, yeah, it's the worst,
but it's better than all the other ones out there, right?
Yeah.
I heard that attributed to Churchill.
Yeah, I heard it.
How about Lincoln or Mahatma Gandhi?
That man's name?
Albert Einstein.
Use the Force, Harry by Gandalf.
You can't believe everything you read on me.
Well, thank you for listening,
and we will talk to you soon.
Bye.
Thanks.
Later.
