Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Emi Hashbrotsky, I'm Steven Zuber, I'm Jay Sticky.
And today we are going old school talking about beliefs and how to overcome biases and such.
Feels like we should talk about that more often.
Yeah, I'm looking forward to this because we got a whole new thing going on, not a whole new thing.
An old school thing, I don't know.
A new old thing.
Yes.
Shall we just jump right into the less wrong posts then?
Yeah, first less wrong post was rationality and the English language.
And you know what, I'll save my comment until afterwards.
Okay.
Um, this was about how somebody had told Eliezu that his writing reminded them of politics in the English language by George Orwell, which he was honored by because he then goes on to say why he really loved Orwell's writing and why it's rationalist.
Yeah.
It's trying to serve the same purpose that rationalist writing is of pointing out where there are biases, but in this case he was talking about the way that you use the written word can be used to manipulate.
Orwell was very much about how you can manipulate language to manipulate people.
I mean, ultimately, I've always considered humans to be, the main thing that makes a difference is that we run on language where I don't think any of the other animals do.
And like if we didn't have language, would we even be human?
Maybe not.
I kind of don't think we would because that's like where all your consciousness comes from, right?
Is this stream of thought of inspecting yourself through the filter of language?
Yeah, I don't think we'd be recognizably human.
I imagine like if we just didn't talk and that we had other ways to communicate gestures or something, you know, if we still managed to somehow be social animals, it'd be so different.
Our inner lives would be changed.
Some people report to me because I've asked about this back when I was way more into like philosophy of consciousness that they just think in worthless concepts.
I don't think they do that.
And it says that too.
I don't believe you.
I believe, like, I have, you know, intuitions.
I don't think that way.
Yeah, I have a very hard time actually.
Like, I mean,
because how do you crystallize a thought?
Like I have lots of things that come up as like wordless intuitions or nudges or, you know, and a lot of things happen automatically that don't get assigned to work because there's doesn't need to be or there's no time.
I feel like I don't understand the stuff going in on in my head unless I translated into words.
That's exactly it.
Yeah.
Like, I don't know if you guys have read Peter Watts blind site, but I get the feeling that both the aliens and the vampires in that novel are basically that they're as intelligent as humans, but they don't have a like language self reflective center and that is why they are not conscious.
Right.
And so I think that's like they can still use language, but they don't think in language and that that is why they're like P zombies.
We're not like dbt for.
Yeah.
We've got a lot of meditation where there's like they talk about the person saying words and the person hearing the voice saying the words, which is really weird when you start thinking about it.
But that's like the process is going on in our head.
That's what makes us conscious probably.
Yeah.
The both the speaker and the listener.
So we have gotten off topic or off track.
We're still on topic.
You're right.
We are keeping an eye on the ball here.
People don't sweat it.
Yeah.
But the the thing that I don't think this is as I was making this point, but you know, by way of of Orwell's writing, he says that if you wish to imprison people for years without a trial trial, you must think of some other way to say it, then I'm going to imprison Mr.
Jennings for years without trial.
You must muddy the listeners thinking prevent clear images from outraging conscience.
You say unreliable elements were subjected to an alternative justice process, which he was talking about use the use of the passive voice.
And then I don't remember having read this sequence before because this is awesome.
But this is absolutely fantastic.
He says this sentence, writers are told to avoid the usage of the passage voice.
And then like, and he's like, and then if you're like me, that sentence kind of makes you scream on the inside a little and told by whom.
Yeah.
And then like, yeah.
And if you're not a writer, or like aren't sure why that sentence is so wrong.
You're there's like as a writer, if you're writing fiction or even nonfiction, I think articles like you're told to use the active voice, which is not writers are told to but it's like, I am telling you writer or whatever.
That's one of the biggest tells between a amateur writer and someone who's been doing it for a while is how often they slip into passive voice.
Yeah.
But then, and this kind of blew my mind because I hadn't ever thought about it this way.
But it's like, journal articles are often written in passive voice.
Pardon me, some scientists write their journal articles in passive voice.
And I was like, reading as many like journal articles as I have, I never really picked up on why they were doing that.
It just feels like this is the format.
And I was like, oh, that's the format of science because they want to leave the data and it sounds so much less professional to say the I gave each college student a bottle of 20 Prygenitivarix and told them to take one every night until they were gone.
It sounds more authoritative to say the subjects were administered Prygenitivarivox.
Yeah.
He's the main point is that passive voice removes the actor leaving only the acted upon and that just sounds so much more authoritative.
I really want to just the state of nature just happens.
I want to rewrite or maybe like train an AI to just like find another place.
But like, I want to see a journal article now written in like active voice where I feel like it would just sound really fun.
And then I told the subjects to spin around three times and Joe, because he's an idiot, only turned around two times.
And I was like, this ties nicely into the like the difference between like learning from something and experiencing something.
Right.
And I like this line that I'm glad was pulled out by whoever put the notes together.
I'm assuming in Yesh where it says nonfiction, nonfiction conveys sorry, nonfiction conveys knowledge fiction conveys experience.
And that is like the takeaway.
The fun thing is that you can get both like you can you can learn from fiction.
You can learn real things, but it's told in a story that lets you experience the knowledge or the process itself.
In a way, it's like, like all books are teaching you something because you're experiencing things from the perspective of the characters.
I know he wrote in one of the authors posts, maybe maybe it was a comment on a Reddit instead.
I think it was an author's note though.
I also wrote that that was part of the reason he wrote HPMOR was that so people would have the experience of using rationality rather than just, you know, reading about how it could be done.
Yeah.
Right.
The that's my favorite genre of book.
Also, the like, but basically rat fic, but like the thing where it teaches you something like it's a it's not only I'm enjoying the shit out of watching this assassin try to sneak around this diplomats house to kill him with a magic sword.
But it's like, you're also learning diplomacy as like the assassin is learning diplomacy.
And like that's the author's purpose of writing the book to not just because I wanted to tell a fun story about an assassin, but also I want to teach people about this cool thing.
Yeah, I think that the inception and creation of method of rationality is one of like my favorite just things that have happened that had so many purposes to it and I think it hit all of them.
And the fact that there was that the like term rationalist fiction that was coined now and now it can be a genre that people can sort of aim at is like my favorite thing that has happened in literature in my lifetime.
Basically, if I look back at all of my favorite books and I have done this and like I did a critical analysis of all my childhood favorite books because I do that for fun sometimes.
They're all rat fic for kids or or or not for adults but watching people figure out problems is fun.
Yeah.
And when you get to experience figuring out the problem with them, it's extra fun.
That's what I really liked about the BBC's take on Sherlock as opposed to like the Robert Downey Jr. movie.
Yeah.
Great, both great actors, both great approaches, but like what I liked about the BBC one was that you get the clues and you get to try and solve it with him.
Rather than just like at the end, Sherlock tells you that this smelled like this and that guy's the mud on his pant leg indicated that it's like, well, I didn't, I didn't see that going through.
It's a totally different genre, I think, where basically you're watching a superhero show if you're watching the Downey Holmes because you just see somebody who's smart and uses smartness like a superpower where they're just, I will apply smartness.
And he whips it all out at the end.
You know, like you see him at some point like taste the the the gravel on like this exploded grave or something, but you don't know what it tastes like.
You don't get the information.
In the BBC version, it puts text across the screen when he's looking at like the woman's wedding ring.
It shows you what he's looking at and then like a bunch of.
Exactly.
The inside is clean indicating that she takes it off a bunch and like little things like that.
So you get the data too.
I heard it got worse as it went along though.
It did.
Okay.
Stop at the end of season two.
That is where I actually stopped.
Yeah.
Because they started season three and I was like, this, this doesn't feel as good.
It ended well on season two.
Yeah.
That's like, I love Batman, but like there's things about Batman that are just ridiculous.
One of them is the slow.
He's actually the world's greatest detective.
And that was like his original title and they pushed that a lot more.
Now he's more like rich guy that just buys mech suits.
But it would always be this like ridiculous plot armor thing that they would like pull out at the end where it wasn't like I deduced that because I like
I wrote a computer program that analyzed your thing and just like, you know, it's just like it's it's bullshit.
He's just they're just fully like it's not anything you could reproduce.
Because I knew this about you.
I knew that you were going to use this attack, which is why I'm wearing this special attack repellent.
I recording we want more in a couple of days.
And I love after like the, uh, like the coup at Hogwarts, Draco becomes like, he's just obsessed with like acting like a Sherlock game detective.
And so he brings in like all the stack of books.
And it's like, well, wait, John O'Ranger read all of those in two weeks.
And he's like, well, no, all we know is that you check them out.
Actually, all we observed is that the ledger says that you check them out.
And then later on, it's like, how'd you come to discover this, Malphoy?
I deduced it from evidence.
He's just having like, he's just saying the words, but it gets an answer.
He's just having a good time with it.
Or at least I'm having a good time with him having his whatever kind of time he's having with it.
So it's kind of like when they were also pretending to be like, well, I don't know how much Draco was pretending, but they were pretending to be like evil generals.
And like, didn't Harry have like a lawn chair that was like sprayed with black spray paint and covered in glitter?
I don't know if it was a lawn chair, but it was definitely a chair that he heavily modified.
And he had like a hood over his head and he was talking like...
Yeah, he would make people quote things from the Jabberwock as part of their pass codes.
I deduced something in general, Malphoy.
He's like, especially imagining an 11-year-old kid with like a Halloween cloak.
Doing his best Palpatine.
Yeah, that was too much to think of Palpatine.
Anyway, do we have more to say about...
All of that's relevant because the experience of enjoying fiction, you get to learn stuff and experience at the same time.
See, it all comes back home.
I'm really good now at like driving segues straight back to the topic pretending like it was on purpose.
Because we're 60% segues and we want more.
So he brings this along to why the writing is important.
Again, because the passive voice sounds authoritative, it's not like someone did something else to people.
It just like happened, you know?
And when things just happen, it feels inevitable. It feels like a force of nature.
It's not like something that someone specifically did for a goal.
So people are much more likely to accept it.
And he says in this quote that I pulled,
a writer knows that readers will not stop for a minute to think.
Which actually is the thing that comes up quite a bit with you and Brian when you talk about the...
We want more podcast.
When you're like, yeah, when I first read this, I just kept reading and going through it.
Like I didn't stop after every couple chapters and think and record for a number of hours.
That is not the usual process of consuming fiction or consuming anything.
So that's why I like reading critical analysis for fun.
Like I wasn't joking about that because I do that with everything.
I mean, if there's something I'm really into, I'm just like, next chapter, next chapter, more, give me more.
And you see this.
That's why I was like, oh my God, it's 3 a.m. and I got to work in four hours.
Yeah, but then like, but there's stuff even hidden in there,
even though you're enjoying the hell out of it, but you're skimming over so much of it.
And when you go back and like, you figure out why you liked it.
It's so satisfying.
It's and yeah, there's, there's a whole, you know what?
That's critical reading theorem.
I'm not going to get into that.
I was just going to say there's a medium is the message and maybe let's not launch into.
But as he was saying to complete the quote,
a writer knows the reader will not stop for a minute to think a fictional experience is a continuous stream of first impressions.
He continues on.
I truncated this a bit to make the claim that often steel manning leads to losing track of the first impression.
What the audience sees or, or feels, which is to say that like people will go back and analyze what someone has said and be like, well, I mean, maybe he meant this and it is technically true in this sense and all these other things.
And maybe all that is true.
And we see this especially, in my opinion, a lot during Trump's speeches.
I was going to say in politics generally.
Yeah, where like Trump says something and afterwards you're like, well, you know, technically he didn't say that that neo-Nazis are great and he loves white supremacists, right?
When someone says, do you denounce them?
Sure. Yeah, sure.
Why not?
That's not the, that's not the first impression when you're just listening to the stream of consciousness that comes out of his mouth.
What you feel is him saying, whatever, sure, whatever, like it's, you know, like this, the white nationalism is not a big deal to him as opposed to yes, he's agreeing that he denounces them.
And that is kind of the whole purpose of using these sort of manipulative language to cloak the actual impression that is conveyed behind the sort of technical legitimacy.
No, in particular, though, there were, well, I just lost my, uh, okay, earlier you're saying that like passive voice creates a distant feeling of authoritativeness.
And in particular, Eliezer was talking about Orwell's writing because it was authoritarianism that he was trying to, like, he was trying to point out all of the tactics that the authoritarian or the totalitarian governments were using by using
extremely simple language. And Orwell was trying to prove that if you, like if you took Trump's rambling and actually like truncated each one to like a basic summary of what he had just said in simple language rather than all the meandering, you'd be like, wait a minute.
My funny thing on Trump is like, you know, whatever a week or two ago, it's hard to say because how many, how many 50 new cycles that was, but like, he said something along, someone asked him, like, what, you know, QAnon and, you know, as a big fan of yours, what do you have to say about that?
And he's like, well, I don't know who they are, but I hear they like me. So whatever, like, on the one hand, that's a very trans, like to someone who believes in dog whistling, that's a very transparent dog whistle that like, oh, yes, I support all this and stuff.
I never want to rule out the fact that he literally is just that stupid and out of touch. Like that to me is a much more plausible explanation.
Oh, it's entirely what I thought, like, I think that it's a common interpretation, though, that he's, you know, like a fox.
Well, or that he's, you know, he's aware of everything and that he's playing, you know, a convoluted language game. I don't think he's playing a game. I think he's just rampaging through the field, not knowing what sport he's in, right?
I think a lot of people don't know who QAnon is or what they're about.
But the president should.
At this point.
Maybe they're like a weird fringe cult.
But they're weird, like, so here's another one.
The reason they...
He was endorsed by David Duke, the head of the KKK.
He's like, I've never met the guy, I don't know who he is.
Like, you...
Didn't he, like, really denounce him just the next day?
I don't remember.
He really should have done it the same day, though.
Well, but...
It wasn't in politics with the capital P before he was elected.
That's true.
He was in politics to get viewers.
And once he got in politics, he didn't...
Like, suddenly start reading up on anything of note there.
He just continued along.
But, like, if you don't know who the KKK are, it's like, you're not going to excuse for being out of touch.
Like, your dad was in the KKK.
Like, this is...
What's his dad in the KKK?
Yeah.
Holy shit.
He was arrested and everything.
Trump's dad?
Yeah.
Oh my god.
So, like, you don't get to pretend like you've never heard of it.
And he also said he didn't know the flu could kill people, even though the 19...
The Spanish flu killed his grandfather.
So, like, this substantiates my running hypothesis that he really is just that dumb.
Like, this isn't a clever language game.
It looks like dementia to me.
It does to me, but without even armchair diagnosing him, I can at least say confidently that he
seems stupid as hell.
Anyway.
We're getting away.
We're getting away.
Politics, again.
But there's a MindKiller podcast for that.
Sorry to our Trump supporters.
If you want to have your MindKill with politics, that podcast is also available.
That's right.
Check out the MindKillers.
But this ties to...
And this is why it all kind of came up, is that meaning doesn't excuse impact.
It doesn't matter what you meant.
It matters what people took from it.
And so...
Which anyone who's skilled at communicating will know.
Right.
And so, like...
Well, and so this is...
This post is in the context of, like, writing deliberately.
But even if you're just saying things in front of a TV, like, it doesn't exactly matter what
you meant, because if everyone takes the wrong thing from it, well, then you said the wrong
thing.
You didn't convey the message you're trying to convey.
I do think that's part of his genius.
But his words don't mean anything.
You don't even have to look at what the words are.
But the impact always is what he wants to be.
He stumbled upon a good strategy by a complete accident, like, just by being dumb.
People think that he's so dumb that he must be up to something.
No one's possibly that dumb.
He's so smart.
It's a fifth-dimensional chess.
Eliezer ends the post with,
And can we, like, switch it and be, like, democratic processes should develop AI?
Right.
It's all you have to do to be, like, if you simplify it, does it, like, still make sense
and, like, make you want to applaud or do you go, like, wait, what?
Hold up a minute.
Which is really why I just stopped for a second.
I was like, right.
Like, wait, what does that even mean?
How does a democratic process create an AI?
By voting for, like...
There was a great episode of the Orville like this.
They come across, like, basically a parallel Earth, but everything runs on 100% direct democracy.
Literally everything.
And so, like, and they're all, like, so...
Like, can you...
Yeah, so he violates a statue in a joking way and it's posted to social media
and everyone's voting for him to go to prison.
And, like, just everyone on their app or on their touchscreen TV, whatever,
they see the news clip and they just click the red X or the green check mark.
That's how justice is decided in this culture.
Just for a sec, could you tell me, like, were there other hilarious things in this book
that were, like, controlled by a democratic process?
This was Seth MacFarlane's Star Trek TV show called The Orville.
Okay.
Yeah, yeah, no.
The book is a modern-day detective story that I was plugging earlier.
Ton of French is in the woods.
Yeah.
Yeah, no, that's different.
No, I was saying the world you were just describing,
where you were saying everything is run on a democratic process.
It was a single 45-minute episode.
Oh, okay, so that was the only...
What?
The Incidents of the Dang, because I was trying to...
I was, like, I mean, if there's, like, a whole book about this.
That would be fun.
I don't know if it was everything, like, coffee prices and stuff,
but it was at least every matter of legal stuff.
Yeah?
And so, like, your legal defense was going on an apology tour.
Right.
It wasn't explaining that you were actually, you know, innocent.
It's creepy because that's kind of how, like,
a lot of things you're done on Twitter.
Yep.
That is why Twitter is the worst thing in the world.
canceled. Yeah, Twitter being able to basically cast tweets as votes as to
whether you're canceled or uncancelled. Twitter is a good example of this
democracy thing, except for the fact that you don't need a majority vote to win on
Twitter, whereas you would. I mean, you have to be able to sway the you only
need 60 angry people to. Yeah, but I mean, they have to be able to sway the
opinions of all the other people that they. Or it's good to shut up. Yeah. But
that's a good point. They have to, they have to at least not shut up everyone
else or not. They have to succeed and not. Like it has to be too embarrassing to
like this person. Yeah. You know, if someone said or like, I don't know, some
actor said something racist and then like, and even if you don't think that he
said something racist, if all of your friends do, you can't defend him. You
can't watch his movies or whatever. Which will get into our topic later on. And
speaking of how Twitter is the worst, this brings us to our next post, human
evil and muddled thinking. You're so good at segues now. I can't think of a better
segue. It's like that was on purpose. I got to say this, this post is not like
one of the famous posts that people talk about a lot. And after having reread it,
I don't know why not. I keep thinking that about a bunch of the sequences we're
reading though, where I'm like, why isn't this one more popular? And I'm like, oh,
I guess I did that thing of reading them all really fast. Okay. I think this one,
combined with the one just before it as a setup, really should probably be one of
the foundational ones. And I'm kind of surprised it's not. I don't even remember
either. Were they even included in AI and Zombies?
They were. That's how I listened to them on the drive over.
It's annoying because my podcaster doesn't let me search for episode titles. I have to
just scroll through them because it's not in order as it is on the sequences. I just have to
find them. These two happen to be next to each other in the book, but it was still
scrolling through 300 posts or whatever. But yeah. Anyway, human evil and muddled
thinking intertwine like conjugates strands of DNA. Nice.
And then Orwell, political speech and writing are largely in defense of the
indefensible. If you simplify English, you are freed from the worst follies of orthodoxy. You
cannot speak any of the necessary dialects when you make stupid remarks. Its stupidity
will be obvious even to yourself. And that's kind of pointing out that if you take everything
that was said in the last post about how these passive voice and other tricks are used to
hide the actual evil of things, if you can strip all that sort of, you know, muddling of words
out, it becomes obvious what is actually being done, that Mr. Johnson is being thrown in jail
forever without due process, without a trial. It says thus political language has to consist
largely of euphemism, question begging, and sheer cloudy vagueness. So that's like the three
categories of things that you have to strip out specifically. And Eliezer says right after this
quote, this is the heart of overcoming bias. That you cannot speak any of the necessary dialects
and when, and when you make a stupid remark, its stupidity will be obvious even to yourself.
And that was like, that should be on a t-shirt. It should really. Yeah. And on the back of the
t-shirt, this is the heart of overcoming bias. And also at the time, overcoming biases and italics,
Les Rong was still hosted on the overcoming bias blog. So that is why, you know, he nowadays,
this would be translated as this is the heart of Les Rong. Well, an overcoming bias is also
like a verb. Yeah. And so it works both ways. But I mean, it's capitalized on italics. Yes. Yeah.
But I'm thinking next time, if like somebody's like, what's rationality, I'm going to be like,
like, what do you guys do? Like, we make our stupidity obvious even to ourselves. Yeah.
It's a good tagline. It is. Like, I feel like I should, we should make business cards that say
that. Like, pass them out. We make stupidity obvious even to ourselves. Like next time,
we're having a meetup somewhere. Like, who are you guys? What are you doing? Pass out the business
cards. Nice. Even to ourselves modifiers, like the most important part, because we make stupidity
obvious is the punchline of every group that hates another group, right? Yeah. We point out how dumb
you are. But it's like, no, no, we point out how dumb we are. And we strive to do better.
So he says evil sneaks hidden through the unlit shadows of the mind. For perpetrators of evil
to avoid its natural opposition, the revulsion must remain latent. Clarity must be avoided at any cost.
I feel like you chose today's topic, like, with the intention of reading it after reading these
two posts. I did not. It ties in so perfectly. It does. It was the most amazing coincidence,
and I'm so happy. So many things seem to be falling into place this episode. Yeah. It's almost
like we should try to pick topics in the future that way. Right. That's a lot of work, though.
That sounds like planning. So I'm curious if Tyler Coleman's updated on this, or if this is like,
if there's a steel man of it. But apparently, according to the post, Tyler Cohen apparently
feels that overcoming bias is just as biased as bias. I've viewed Robin's blog as exemplifying
bias and indeed showing that bias can be very useful. Yeah. I don't, I mean, he points out his
incredulity with that statement in the post, but I still don't quite know what that means.
Like, I know what it means, but I don't quite know how someone can say that without, like, you know,
I guess, like, sometimes bias can be useful. Like, the whole point of religion is to tie groups
together in pursuit and, you know, in attacking a common enemy. That does totally tie into a lot
of bias, but it's very useful because they're talking. That's what we are going to get into.
About what when bias can be useful. But I also hear similar things about like, people say that
about logic or science. They're like, well, logic and rationality are constructs of Western
imperialism. And science was done almost exclusively by rich white guys. Yes. And it's like, okay,
sure. But how fast does a bowling ball drop when you drop it off a building? That's racist.
How dare you? Like, wouldn't it be a remarkable fact of nature that if you're a black trans woman,
it fell at five meters per second per second when you dropped a bowling ball? If we live in
that universe where depending on who you were changed what happened, that would be insane. Dude,
we would have to start paying people to become black trans women so that we could get things
into orbit cheaper. I was going to say space travel would be so much cheaper.
Like, anyway, I didn't mean to like, I'm not picking on a group. I'm just saying that like,
I'm picking the opposite of Isaac Newton, right? I'm being upset about this because there is evidence
that late transitioning trans women have like average 130 IQ. And like, science shows this,
but social justice means we can't talk about it. Because everybody's equal. Yes. I've heard that
from people that there's no difference between how many like, what's Chelsea Manning like?
No. God damn it. I'm trying to think of anyway, like, basically, if you think of who we're like,
I don't know, what's like the primary profession, you see a lot of trans women and
it's probably engineering programming. I would say that, but I also have a very skewed group
selection bias thing. So like, most of the people that I know are programmers. The Lesterhorn
community is very largely over represents educated white men, but also LGBT specifically
trans women. It's like three to four times the rate of trans women as the general population,
right? I think more, more than that. I'm not really sure. I'd have to see this, you know,
the latest SSC numbers, but I mean, even three to four times more is a lot. It suggests to me
that we're not trans exclusive. But you know, if you're coming on, I'm still annoyed with the charge
that that's the case, but that's not what we're talking about. Is that a charge? Absolutely.
That rationalism? Or that rationalists in general? Yeah. Oh, no, we're equated with like,
the alt right, if it's the SJWs, or if it's the conservatives the other way around, like,
you know how like, people have to paint their political enemies as like, as evil as possible?
Yeah. Okay. And all being in the same bucket. So like, endorsing all of the same thing, you know,
like the, why do you care about gun control and abortion? Right. Like, so if Dave Rubin doesn't
like social justice warriors, and some rationalists don't like social justice warriors, well,
then they're both obviously opposed and thus on the exact same side. Right. And so they all have
to endorse all of each other's opinions, because it's like, people don't realize there's different
reasons people can hate you. Or really confused by my politics and a lot of other rational,
where they're like, you know, they assume that if you're a Democrat, then you don't like,
that you hate guns and, yeah, or pro abortion and anti capitalist. And it's like, well, no,
I like, have different opinions about each of these things. Like, I don't just pick, you know,
an affiliation, and then that decides my opinions about everything. And like, really? That's weird.
Do you see the meme of the Virgin centrist versus the Chad centrist?
No, I did not. You know, the political compass, the Virgin centrist has all their beliefs, like,
overlapped right near the center. The Chad centrist has all their beliefs in a big old ring
around the entire thing. So they average out in the center. But there, I guess on the Chad centrist.
It's perfect. We really, we're moving quickly into crony beliefs. We are. Okay.
I'll go. Do you want to do this one? I'll actually ask if we could take a tea break
before we move on to the main subject. Yeah, we'll do that before we move on to the main
subject, but we'll push through this. Maybe overcoming bias doesn't look quite exciting
enough if it's framed as a struggle against mere accidental mistakes. Maybe it's harder to get
excited if there isn't some clear evil to oppose. So let's be absolutely clear where there is human
evil in the world, where there is cruelty and torture and deliberate murder. There are biases
and shrouding it. And I mean, bullet point there, that's fucking tight. This is a really well written,
like, sort of manifesto of rationality. Well, and yeah, exactly of clear thinking and the virtues
of it, where people have clear sight oppose these biases that concealed evil fights back.
The truth does have enemies. If overcoming bias were a newsletter in the old Soviet Union,
every poster and commenter of overcoming bias would have been shipped off to labor camps.
In all human history, every great leap forward has been driven by a new clarity of thought.
Except for a few natural catastrophes, every great woe has been driven by stupidity.
Our last enemy is ourselves, and this is a war, and we are soldiers.
High-fiving us if you can't hear. I even heard that in the voice of Lawrence Fishburne from
Matrix. Oh, nice. Yeah, this is a war, and we are soldiers. I wonder how much we have to pay him to
like do a reading of this. Too much. That's a good point. Unless he's listening right now, Lawrence
Fishburne. Or anyone who sounds like Lawrence Fishburne can do a good impression. We'll settle
for that. You know what? The first time we have a celebrity-endorsed rationality, we're going to
blow up. I don't know how you think. I'm just like, would it be fucking hilarious if, I don't know,
when if Paltrow or something was just like, oh, I'm like, you know, instead of like,
I'm doing numerology or whatever thing celebrities talk up to over about, it's like,
I got into this, you know, overcoming bias thing. I would rather do without when if Paltrow's
endorsement, but- It's going to be some random- She would be like a big convert, though, you know,
it'd be like- Oh, if she converted, sure. If she said that's why I made- If she used to torture
the Christians, now somebody becomes one. You know what? I want to register this prediction somehow,
because like, it has to be like, some random celebrity is going to say something about like,
the lesser-owned community, and suddenly we'll be on the map. I want it to be Keanu Reeves.
It would be awesome who is Keanu Reeves. He's like, this was the secret to my immortality.
Nice. Alright, so you added a brackets here. I do have a question for us. Go for it.
So I love that idea that evil hides in stupidity and in bias, and the more we can
shine light on things, the more we just root out all evil. But my question is like, how true is this?
I think that- I don't know if he's saying all evil resides there. Well, maybe-
He kind of says most evil seems to reside there, from what I can tell. And I think it's true.
A lot of his argument is that you have to hide evil because otherwise,
the vast majority of people would reject it. They would be like, no, I'm not okay with Mr.
Johnson being held in prison forever without a trial. And I just- I don't know if that's
true anymore after like, seeing Guantanamo Bay. But you have to see some like, obscurity and muddy
thinking to make that the case, you know? So like, the muddy thinking is that everyone in Guantanamo
deserves it because they're dangerous. And waterboarding isn't really torture. It's just an
interrogation technique, right? Like- And Jews aren't really human.
Right. Well, that's pushing it a little like- That obscurity is a little more obvious.
I think a lot of people, like, a lot of Germans would not have let Hitler come to power if they
didn't have those crony beliefs. And of course, we're gonna get into that of, yeah, it's those
damn Jews. You know, like, and they probably all like, well, I know Jewish people, they're not like
monsters, you know? But like, but they were willing to accept that belief because it,
I guess, I'm kind of just getting into the next thing now. It's served a purpose.
Yeah, but like the- It's beneficial to them. The examples of like, modern evils, you know,
like the, the ice internment camps and stuff. Like, people who are big fans of them because
they hate, you know, they hate the people in them. Even they won't come out. They don't come
right out and say, most often, they're like, I hate Mexican people. That's why I like that.
They're in print that they're in these terrible prisons. Races will never say that they're racist.
And they don't think they're racist. They used to. Like in the 50s,
racists were actually like, yeah, you know, white people are just better when it was acceptable.
Right. And it's not acceptable now, but they still like, they'll be like, well, I'm not really
racist. I believe in like scientific determinism or whatever the hell it's called. And they'll,
and they'll say like, you know, I just want to protect our, our heritage or our culture. They,
they couch it in all this muddy thinking, right? But if we're able to point a big spotlight at it
and, you know, actually address it directly, it would come out and being the same, you know,
1950s bullshit, right? And society is less tolerant of that now.
I just, I think that there, there are actual legit people out there that I would call evil,
but they're people who really only care about themselves and don't care who they hurt.
And, you know, I think one of them is our president, which is how we have proof that these
sorts of people exist. But, but if you like, but he only has support because he gives plausible
deniability and couches everything. And like we were talking about with the muddy thing,
with the muddy language and vagueness, right? If he came right out and said, you know, like
during the debate, when he didn't want to denounce the proud boys, he had said what,
stand back and stand ready or something. Stand back and stand by. Right. And so like, if that's,
that's not him saying, you guys are the best, keep your guns polished, right? That's the,
that's the level where like, he's able to muddy the thinking by not engaging it directly. And
everyone else then is now given cover to say, Oh no, he didn't really say that he supports them.
In fact, stand back kind of sounds like he's telling them to, you know, take it easy. So it
allows people to play this game. So you think if, if more of the world, if the sanity waterline was
raised and more of the world was not, if people knew about their own like, if he wouldn't be in
power, I guess. Yeah. Okay. Even the people who agree with some of his policies wouldn't put up with
it. Yeah, I think that that's the main thing. And that, that actually is where I'm really glad
that the next, that our big post ends up or our topic for today on raising the sanity waterline,
because that is apparently the solution, I think, right? Yeah. It's just a matter of building a
community and hopefully the community encompasses everybody of people who are okay, changing their
minds and thinking critically about their own beliefs and biases, right?
It does sound like the perfect time for rationality. If you think about what he was talking about with
Orwell and other writers and whenever, you know, whenever shit starts to happen to the human race,
and right now we've got this like, Trump presidency possibly like going into, well,
see what happens with COVID, but well, and COVID and yeah. And also a lot of things are on fire,
although that's only affecting those of us with constant forest fires as part of our weather
pattern now, but every climate change is affecting everybody. I don't know if those two have to do
with each other though. That was a tangent. No, it's all good. Well, it was I was trying to make
a point and then I kind of got lost in the weeds of my point. But should we should we wrap up the
posts then? Yeah, I think we we got to mention that next time we're doing double think, choosing to
be biased. Why I'm looking is that that is what it says I double checked. Yeah, it's a combination of
blogging and booking. All right. Well, I hate it. It's hard to say. And planning fallacy. And we're
doing three because of why I'm looking is very short and almost nothing. Perfect. It's like
vlogging. Yeah. At least vlogging. I now I know what it says, blocking. It just sounds like the
misspelled booking or looking. Some things don't work very well as Portmante's and we just shouldn't.
Or maybe we should because they like vlogging is a hilarious word.
Portman doing things is tight. I still thought it was really like, or I continue to think it's
really funny that like, when the president was using Twitter and like the fact that Twitter became
politically relevant and like important political people had to say the word Twitter
and talk about the fact that like now policy is being done via tweet. This is the weirdest future.
Yeah, that was the thing is like, that's how the world learned that the president has COVID
because in a tweet after midnight, I've got I've got COVID. There was that one. I mean,
I don't want to do that voice. It's my version actually from BBC Sherlock's Moriarty.
When in the finale of the second season, when they're on the rooftop, and he's like,
it must be true because I read it in the newspaper. I love newspapers. Like that's my like,
you know, sheeple voice and impersonation when I'm trying to be tongue in cheek about it.
Cool. Also that actor fucking nailed that character. Oh, he's so good. Everybody did a great
job. Yeah. Our main topic for today is an article on melting asphalt.com called crony beliefs.
And I'm betting a lot of people have heard of this, but I'd heard of it for a long time,
but I've never gotten around to reading it until it was assigned reading and I fucking loved it.
At the top, he also links to now inactive podcast that reads, I think it did like 18
cool essays, one of which is meditations on Molek that's like an hour and a half.
So I got to listen to this on the drive home yesterday and it was fun. But I'm like,
what I like about this too is I'm going to share this with a friend who texts me once every two
or three weeks asking like, how do you deal with this kind of crazy person? I think this is actually
good foundation for why is this person crazy? And I'm using that term broadly because we're
going to explain what that means throughout it. But the, it opens up with talking about how like,
in our head, everything makes sense. Our beliefs don't feel, you know, like they're incongruent or
that they're, that they're out there. It just feels like the way things are. We all know that
because we're all rationalists already. But then you consider the beliefs of other people.
It's an epistemic shit show out there. And when believe this stuff, like no, seriously, how? And
that's the point of the, that's the, that's the exploration here, like, or the, the, the points
of exploration here. Like it's, it is not sufficient to say because they're stupid. That's not a good
answer. And it's a, that's a lazy response. It is worth or they're evil. Yeah. Or they're evil.
But like you just picture something like astrology, like they're not, you know, it's easy to say
they're stupid because they believe in that, but it's like, no, but that, that, that paints
way too broad a rush. You know, you can find otherwise smart people who believe in astrology.
So like, what are they selectively stupid? Also evil isn't a thing that exists. That always bugs
me. Like we're, when we took a break, we're just talking about SJWs, but like, nobody does things
because of evil. Like in their head, they're not like, man, wouldn't it be evil if I did this evil
thing? Like, I could score more points with my evil God. You know what? I really want to do
this thing to help this, but I got to do, I got to not do that for the sake of evil. You know,
that's why. So I've evolved more from methods or from not methods of rationality as such a
boring character or like Palpatine. Like any villain that is just evil, like a Disney villain,
even Disney villains, they generally have like, tried to make them more like three dimensionalized
characters rather than classic Disney where it was just like, I am an evil witch and I will
put that cast a spell on you. I love being evil.
You're poison apple because you're pretty and I'm evil.
I mean, not to say that doesn't sound fun. I did have a story that I wrote in middle school or
like a kind of ongoing, I don't want to reboot this, but it was just like, it would be really fun
to write from the perspective of like, I was like, it's the henchmen of like the evil character
and your like typical hero versus villain thing. And the henchmen also is evil and enjoys being
evil, but it was just like, the sort of actually like, let's put on our dark cloaks and laugh now.
And like, it's like, it would actually be really fun to live in a world where like, it's that kind
of slapstick silly, I don't know, this is sort of how I felt about worm different in a different
way too. We're like, it is kind of fun, you know, being being the bad guy, it'd be nice and relaxing
if like reality was that nicely, they still don't think that the bad guy, right. Anyway, so the
there's still some controversy about whether she's the bad guy. Taylor did nothing wrong. Exactly.
I don't think anyone thinks that she was the bad guy. They wonder if she did bad things.
I don't think you get to save the world. Let's say she's the bad guy. I don't think you get to
save the world. She knew she was doing bad things. She thinks they were justified. And
some of the readers think they were not justified. Right. And I and actually like that maybe that
was the point of the book. Assume it was intentional by the author. I have not read it, but I people
could make the case that maybe the world could have been saved in a different way with a not
evil person, right? Not really, actually. It was it was a necessary evil. Okay, like, like,
like in this game. Yeah, like, like, like, I don't think this game was necessary evil.
You have to genocide the aliens. Actually, I only brought that up because when I read the book,
um, they probably still do this, but what's the author's name card? Orson Scott card had like,
at the end, there was a bunch of discussion questions. And I remember being like,
I've never read like a fiction book where at the end, the author's like, and here's some discussion
questions that like, you could bring up if you're talking about the book with your friends or if
it happens to be like read in school, I was just like, that's cool. And one of them was like,
was this justified? And I was just like, why is it? I mean, I was, you know, kid,
and I was just totally on Ender's side because like, I related to Ender a lot. Yeah. And it seemed,
you know, it was used. He didn't know he was genociding aliens. He also like all of his things
he was thinking of made internal sense where it was just sort of like, I'm trying to protect myself
by doing x, y, and z. And yeah, because the adults had actually manipulated him like,
and because the adults made it very clear they would never protect him. Yeah. And he was on his
own. Yeah, it was, it was a really good book. And I was just floundering on Taylor and Wyrm because
I do think there was literally no other way to save this. Like so it was a lot of fun. It was
great, great setup. Okay. And then so it forced you to think like, okay, is it all right to do
bad things with a greater good? Yeah. And that's a whole like, you know, going back to crony loose
here. Yes. So get back onto the topic then. Where even if you know you're doing bad that
like most people who are doing bad things, like can't know they're doing bad things,
but think they're justified. It's like, again, there's, there's not, because this person's
stupid, they believe this or because they're evil. It's like, it feels internally justified.
I do like that. He kind of brings attention to the fact that most people when they say,
how can anyone believe this stuff? They, they aren't actually asking. They're just, that's
applause lights for those. I know, right? Yeah. That's why he says, no, seriously, how? Yeah.
People are dumb and suck. And, you know,
so the essay opens up with like an analogy that isn't perfect, but I think the author says,
I think it gets us 70% of the way there. And it's a way to think of, imagine that your beliefs are
like employees at your company, right? And for the most part, you hire them because they do a good
job. And that is to say they're accurate, they pay rent in our, in our lingo. Their employees,
they get paid, they pay rent. Exactly. And, and yet you live in a society with a corrupt city
council and they, if you're, if you don't hire people who work for the, you know, that aren't,
you know, the cousin or nephew or whatever city council member is, well, they don't give
your company permits and you eventually get, you know, just beaten down by something. Exactly.
You get beaten down into oblivion. So you need to hire some crony employees for this nepotistic,
terrible society you're in, just to stay afloat in the world that you exist in.
Every company needs one employer that's like a cousin to the mayor or assistant to someone on
sister on someone city council or something. Exactly. They're the director of something.
Yeah. And so that, the, the analogy here is that the, the cronies that you have to hire,
these are the beliefs that you have for basically, I was going to say not good reasons, but there
actually are, that, that, that is a good reason, right? It is, it is for survival. He says like
every belief has a job to do. And for the merit based beliefs, like the merit based employees,
it's a job is to help you survive and to have more reproductive success. Yeah. And any, that's
the bottom line of the organism and any belief that inaccurately models the, models the world
and leads you astray would generally be let go like an employee that isn't doing their job.
Yeah. I would want to call those like instrumental beliefs where whether it's a good or bad belief
it like it's, it's helping you achieve a goal. Yeah. I found the word or the two they had merit
beliefs and crony beliefs. Yeah. Yeah. I kept finding the word merit belief to sound too much
like, I don't know. That's like my one nitpick with this essay. You don't like the term merit
belief? I prefer the like instrumental because it sounds like a good belief merit. I don't know.
Well, crony beliefs are also served the instrumental purpose of keeping you afloat in
society, right? Yeah. Yeah. He says the crony employees earned their keep not by doing good
work, but by keeping the mayor off the company's back. So they do have the purpose and it is
valuable to the, to the company. Yeah. He said, what was it right here? Right. That they're hired
not for actually modding the, modeling the world, but these beliefs are hired for social and political
kickbacks. And he quotes Stephen Pinker saying, people are embraced or condemned according to
their beliefs. So one function of the mind may be to hold beliefs that bring the belief holder,
the greatest number of allies, protectors or disciples, rather than beliefs that are most
likely true. And yeah, he says that both beliefs contribute to the bottom line survival and
reproduction. They just do it in different ways. Merit beliefs help us by navigating the world.
Chronic beliefs help us by making us look good. Yeah. Can I actually read the definitions that
they put here? Where they were saying that the two different reward systems they're talking about,
there's a meritocracy where we monitor beliefs for accuracy out of fear that will stumble by acting
on a false belief. And then cronyism was the reward system where we don't care about accuracy
so much as whether our beliefs make the right impressions on others. And yeah, I pointed out
that like, it's a political social. And then I think the author kind of was like, but basically
just like only social. I mean, that's what that means. Like, it seems like the main reason that
we have these kinds of crony beliefs are to specifically navigate social interactions.
And he points out that a brain that doesn't adopt any crony beliefs would quickly be disadvantaged
relative to playing brains that are more willing to play ball, much like that company that doesn't
to drop to any crony employees will find itself out of business in five years, just because of
all the all the pushback from the political politics. And it's like, this is an exercise for
the reader as they go through the whole thing. But you try and identify like what sort of beliefs
do you have that fit this bucket? And luckily you have you had, it's easier, I think, to look back
and identify ones that you had in the past, yeah, that ones that you have currently, and if you
find any that you have currently like, hey, now you know what to work on. And like this might be,
I mean, so easy because, well, it's, it's a hard to not think of politically charged examples,
because most of your crony beliefs will be politically charged, right? That's why you have
them. They're, they're not to serve as an accurate map of the territory, but as a
signal to your tribe that yes, I'm in your group. So I'm trying to think of one that
isn't like too inflammatory. I mean, I could say my, I had a motivated belief that my company
that I was working for was a good company because I liked everything else about this job. And I knew
that like, if I agreed that this is a bad company to work for, then I would have to face the fact
that probably this isn't a good job for me. A lot of, yeah, a lot of companies try to instill
that in their employees too. And it always annoys me. But it really felt like a true belief until
they started until they like did three things as a company that I was like, this speaks to a
pattern that they don't, they're not actually like behaving the way that they keep saying that
they do. And that everybody keeps saying, oh yeah, this is such a good company. They, you know,
they support their employees. Yeah, no company during the onboarding Kool-Aid drinking process
will say, by the way, we suck, right? It's all about how great you are. They put on a really good
show of it. And I super believed it too, until like, I feel you until I started like getting
evidence to the contrary. And then I like realized I was like, wait, I have never actually questioned
this whole like they were, you know, I have to look at this and be like, I don't know if it's
because my parents are just kind of contrarians and hate the system in general, or if it's because
I read so much cyberpunk as a kid or something. But I have a intense distrust of any sorts of
corporations. I consider them dragons. And whenever they're trying to win my loyalty over, I'm like,
fuck right off. I know what you're doing. I know you don't care about me. Yeah, you're here for
the bottom line, which is profit. And you're only doing this because whatever it is you're doing
helps increase that profit. So yeah, I'm sorry, kind of my luck, monster.
He he points out that because this is a less wrong reader. When we say politics is the mind
killer, it's because these social rewards completely dominate the pragmatic rewards
rewards. And thus we have no incentive to get at the truth. Yeah, we're basically really
and your social rewards for believing your company was a good company, we're pretty high.
Yeah. And yeah, if you were the one person walking around the floor saying this place
sucks, and can you believe it to make money, like you would you would be a pariah there, right?
It would also I realized it was going to kick the legs out of a bunch of my other beliefs too.
Like, that was like there was this framework of, well, I don't know, I don't want to get too like,
deep into this story. But it's interesting that I can kind of look at things like that.
There was a similar one where like, I had a belief that I had a good relationship with my parents
and like a good childhood. And like, that was supporting so many other like stories that I
had about myself that I like, after a while, I find myself defending that belief. And you can
and I could actually go back and think about like, when I, you know, believed in religion,
it felt that way. And it's hard to remember after the fact, I think a lot of people who are atheists
can't remember what it felt like when they were a true believer, like, how real it felt.
It can be hard. There are a few memories I still have, like, when I was a kid, and I was hiding
under the covers and like, praying for God to protect me from Satan, who was just outside the
covers and maybe under my bed really helped. I was like, sweet, God's keeping him away now.
Which I mean, it's super immature, because like I said, I was a really young kid, but that really
felt like, oh, sweet, I got, I got, I got this and it's helping me. Yeah, I think when you
I don't know, I just, I remember especially when like new atheism was a thing and a lot of people
were talking about like, how could anybody believe this? It was stupid. I always know it was stupid
or like, it's a really easy belief to, and I'm just like, or I even remember newly, like,
de-converted people like, no, it's not like, you just don't remember. It's really hard to see when
you have fake beliefs or like, crony or merit beliefs, I guess. And then like, realize that,
okay, now I have to change this belief and then realize all the mental architecture that has
to be restructured. It's like, that's so much work. Yeah, it's better to practice on small
things that aren't of like, huge actual life consequence. You know, like, I'm trying, they're
all political examples, like, it's a, it's a, it's a popular conception that like,
all right, well, let's just go ahead and get canceled. That like the, the police violence
problem is like exclusively against the black population of the United States. That is a
popular belief. And if it's not exclusive, it is overwhelmingly so, or it's like 95% or something,
right? It turns out cops are dicks to a lot of people. But acknowledging that in the circle
where it's like, no, no, we're here to protect the black population from the cops, that, that
not just loses these social standing, but like, ostracizes you, right? And so the bummer is that
like, if you're trying to actually solve the problem of like, you know, cops are out there
kind of being a lot more aggressive than they need to be in a lot of situations,
irrespective of who they're pointing the gun at. It's a, or like,
that's a really typical identity politics thing. This reminds me of when, when I was like,
super into feminism, and one of my like, evidence to the kind of like, you know,
there's like a word for this. Anyway, um, I remember a bunch of people going like, well,
oh, what about the men boohoo? What about the men? And they're always like,
there's always some guy that'll come into a conversation about like sex trafficking,
you'll be like, men are sex traffic too. And they'll be like, well, we're talking about women here.
I remember being like, yeah, wait, what? Like, you know, like men, men get raped too. Well,
like, but we're talking about women who get raped that we're trying to get resources for women,
because it's the much bigger problem. I'm like, but it's still like, men do get raped. Wait a
minute. Wait, I thought we were like on the side of good here. Yeah, I think people like,
I forget what the baseline guess was when I saw this, this number, but it was people assume that,
you know, men being raped is like under 5% when it's closer to 30%. Yeah. And so it's like, yeah,
one, if, if I told you, like, 0.5%, that's still people that were raped that need resources and
shouldn't be like dismissed because, well, you have, you know, social privilege now,
so it doesn't, it probably didn't hurt you as bad. Like, I saw people bend over backwards like that.
And that is a great symptom of a crony belief where you're, where you're bending over backwards
to defend it. And it's to be defended. We'll have to, we'll have to keep digging through this,
because I want to, a lot of this, a lot of our seeming tendons will become much clearer when
we start talking about the specifics here. So like the, the, the other contention of the
post article, whatever you want to call it as a, is that social incentives are the root of all of
our biggest thinking errors. I think that's probably true. I mean, yeah, at least when I first
heard that I was trying to think of counter examples, and actually I couldn't think of any,
like, I think that that's correct. Yeah. I mean, other than like just bad information, which it's,
it's, it's, it's not a crony belief that it's not trying to protect anything. Yeah. But like,
of, of, it is still a thinking error, you know, if you have bad data, right? Cause you're thinking
on wrong information, but you're not incentivized to defend that wrong information. So yeah, I,
I can totally buy into that if you say basically all of our biggest thinking errors are the root
of them is social incentives or specifically the having crony beliefs here. Yeah. And this is
actually another, another important point this comes up. It's important to remember that merit
beliefs aren't necessarily true, nor are crony beliefs necessarily false. What distinguishes
the two concepts is how we're rewarded for them via effective actions or via social impressions.
The best we can say is that merit beliefs are more likely to be true. Right. There's probably a
bunch of crony beliefs that are actually true. And maybe they were arrived at for good reason.
But the point of crony beliefs is that you believe them because of the social pressures,
not necessarily because they improve your life and your decisions. He gives a great example,
which I want to get to at the end, because as, as it was coming up, but like I said,
I was driving listening to this, a smile was creeping across my face. And then I was like,
but wait. And then the next thing is like, yeah, but wait, you're probably thinking this. And it's
like, oh, I fucking was thinking that. Oh my God. I nailed it. Yeah. It was awesome. So we'll get
there. That big reveal. Stay tuned. The other important subtlety is that give a given belief
can serve both pragmatic and social purposes at the same time. So like, it's just like,
you know, your crony nephew of the mayor hire can also be a good employee. You know,
and a good crony belief that you didn't hire him originally because he was a good employee,
but you're like, oh, let's keep him around. I'm trying to think of one that serves kind of both
of that, you know, what about it's not really a belief. I'm trying to pick one that isn't the one
that he gives at the end of the post. What about the belief that Trump is a terrible president?
That's a, yeah, it's probably, you know what, that's probably a really good example.
And like, because people were saying that on November 5th of, wait, when is November 8th?
They're saying that November 9th, 2019 or 2016, right? Like the day that he won, they were like,
he's a terrible president. It's like, well, we don't actually know that yet. It's a really
safe bet. I'm not going to lose money challenging. He's the whole choice of president. Yeah. And
like, you're like, yeah, like he hasn't, it might, I actually had this moment of like,
what if he does a good job? I had the same thing. That would be super weird now.
He said that he would like donate his presidential salaried charity, which
to his merit, he actually has been doing. $400,000 a year has been going to various,
I think a lot of like veteran charities and that sort of thing. That said, he's siphoning more money
out of going to his golf courses more than any other president in the history of the world.
But it's kind of like a Hitler supporting like dog. Was it like dog shelters? Sure.
And he was a strict vegetarian. Yeah. I think that might be an apocryphal
rumor about him. I don't know if he's a vegetarian thing. Yeah. We'll have to double check. But
in any case, it doesn't matter if he was a vegetarian or a vegan or not. Doesn't play on
Hitler at all. But the, like just the, anyway, whether or not Trump's a bad president in social
circles that I run in saying that he is is socially beneficial to me.
It's how you establish camaraderie. I actually started seeing a couple's therapist and
one of the things that like Phoenix and I were like, oh, and we're with transgender.
And like, and he's like, oh, no, no, like, I'm totally cool with that. You know, like,
fuck Trump, right? And we're just like, what? What does that have to do with anything?
Trump literally came out pro transgender. I mean, like, I get all the leaps of like,
yeah, like, I'm on your guy's side where I was just like, yeah, I'm an insider. And I was just
like, oh, okay. That's true. It's something he said in 2016. His actions don't reflect.
No. But I mean, like, just, I don't know, it's funny that like, it's sort of like a little catch
phrase now. It would have been really great if like, it's one of those things you could rewind
time by 10 seconds. And like, you could just make this joke where you and Phoenix look at each
other and be like, I think we're going to see another therapist just to blow their mind. Like,
wait, I pissed off two trans people by saying Trump sucked. And just to watch their mind be
completely blown. And like, just kidding. Sorry. Yeah. Anyway, so one of the things is like,
in our social circles, we basically can't say when Trump does get things right,
was every now and then he does. And every now and then I'm like, I still have the suspicion
like, is he just, is he just trying to completely discredit republicanism forever? Is that a secret
master plan? But, but it's not. But like, you can't bring but he might do it anyway, because
then people like, what are you, some kind of fucking MAGA, Trump or like, no, no, I hate your
soldiers, you need all of your soldiers to fight the enemy. Yeah. Yeah, pointing out that he has
actually as far as I know, been donating his money to charity, donating a salary to charity,
that is that is shooting my soldiers in the back. And it makes it sound like it makes you sound
like a Trump supporter. I'm not. But it this happens, assuming it's true, which I think it is.
So assuming that it's true, that that is a, that's just a fact of the world, right?
Anyway, so how do we identify crony beliefs real quick in, in, in relation to what we were just
talking about, he also points out that it's important to remember that we have many different
audiences to posture and perform in front of, right. These include friends, family, neighbors,
classmates, coworkers, people at church, other parents at kids preschool, etc. So a belief that
helps us with one audience might hurt us with another. This reminds me of Jordan Peterson
saying different things, depending on which audience he's talking to. Oh, really?
To just do it in front of a microphone is just, I mean, that just sounds so
intellectually dishonest. But you're describing Jordan Peterson when you use those words.
No, I think it's just an extreme example of this thing. But like, I guess the IDW people,
like I see that a lot where it's sort of, they have a more moderate viewpoint.
And then like when they're talking to the like, Jordan Peterson's case, like if he's talking
to incels, then he'll be a lot more about like traditional family values. And like,
women actually are much happier if they work in the home. And we should really like,
think about their happiness, not just what's politically correct. And then when he's talking
to like, I don't know, different audience, like the media says something much, much gentler than
that. It just takes me like just a vacuous person who wants to get airtime at that point.
Like, but like, but he's talking, he's saying the things that the different people want to hear
and sort of morphing the severity of his beliefs or like, different components of them,
depending on who he's presenting them to. I just wonder if he actually believes it,
either one, right? Like, or is he just saying what people want to hear, which it's hard to
distinguish from the outside. Yeah, I'm not in his head. So I don't know. But the impression I've
got is that like, yeah, he does have this belief set. Right on. And he just thinks that these
ones are like, I mean, I don't talk about some of my like, less like social justice, I have like
some social justice friends that I just don't like talk about, you know, things like, like saying
that Trump is giving to charity. Or the thing about like, there's this weird thing where there's
a certain category of trans women have much higher IQ than average, what's going on there,
even like, that would be like, if you say that black people are like much physically superior as
specific sports, like, it's like positive racism, or Asians are good at math. It's still racism,
that's generalizations, people are all just as good as each other. That's one that I always find
weird. Is that something people say? It's sort of like, it's, you can't talk about IQ in SJW
circles, because IQ doesn't isn't real, because it's unfair. Okay. I mean, I admit it's unfair.
Like, I agree that it's unfair. But I mean, like, people saying that like,
their people are just born with different IQs as being like, well, you're saying some people are
better than other people. And I'm like, I did not attach a value judgment to it. But I think
some people are born taller than others. And they're like, well, you're saying some people
are better than others. Yeah, it's a lot like that. Yeah, that's that's that's not what I say that
like people are willing to be like, okay, well, like, on average, there are more black basketball
players. And like, maybe it has something to do with like having a physiology that's good for
basketball. But like for things like IQ, it's like, even if there seems to be like, it makes sense why
borderers have the culture and like the that they didn't prioritize IQ, because they were like,
were in a war zone. And what made sense was to prioritize like, aggression, aggression, and
physical strength and loyalty. And you know, but like, I mean, that's sort of getting more into
Stephen, lead us back onto topic. Yeah, segue master. Give us a segue. I will just grab the
wheel and yank us back on the road and just say that. So when you're identifying crony beliefs,
like the other thing to keep in mind is that like, it's not labeled in your head as crony,
right? Yes. Otherwise, like, so you've got, and he doesn't mention this in the post, but you've got
you're your PR representative that Robert Hansen talks about in the the elephant in the brain,
right? That person, you're kind of like, you're kind of like the person doesn't make the hiring
decisions, you're just sitting there in your office, and then you've got your HR reps that
comes in and reports how things are going. HR rep isn't going to say, by the way, Robert, you know,
the mayor's son sucks at his job. He's going to say, Yep, numbers look good. And it's great.
Thanks. So, but crony beliefs are designed to mimic ordinary merit beliefs, like, you know,
the mayor's son in this analogy still has to show up and clock in every day. Otherwise, you would,
it'd be way too obvious he's not doing his job. So he needs to come in and pretend like he's
working, right? Even if he's just playing Gallagher the whole day, as long as he's looking at his
computer. So, and he says that, yes, something has to be aware that their crony beliefs or
else we wouldn't be able to give them the coddling they need to survive. Exactly. That's the other
side of the coin is that it's not labeled bullshit, but there's something there where you, where you,
where you treat it differently. And there's a reason why. So party right knows that it's
different. I remember, sorry, I'm just following up on that. Go ahead. Do you remember?
In one of like this, the video game company is like a startup company I was working for,
like, I think they actually bring this up as an example in this essay or something similar. But
it was like, okay, we're going to like do employee evaluations. And my boss being like, oh, man,
we, we got to get the, the crony, like the, the person who was like the CEO's friend or whatever,
like, oh, we got to like train him to look good for the HR. And like, but like not in a, it wasn't,
if pressed, I think he wouldn't have said, because he's bad at his job, it would have been, but
well, because, you know, he's kind of new here. And we're still all kind of trying to figure out
like our culture and, you know, like we want us to all look good together as a tea, like it wouldn't
come out. The dragon is permeable to flower. We need to make sure the city, it looks like he's
doing his job. So they don't squint at him too hard. It immediately reminded me of that interaction
with Draco and Harry. Right. Yeah. He's like, obviously you, some part of you knows the truth,
because you have to come up with the arguments beforehand. Yeah, that the, I think the parable
of the dragon comes from Carl Sagan's, the demon haunted world. And I think Harry does pull that
straight. He does use the dragon analogy, right? Yeah. I knew that there's a less wrong post that
talked about it, but I can remember if Harry used it or not. But yeah, so, so he says the trick is
to look for differences in how they're treated. Exactly. So how do we treat chronic beliefs
versus merit beliefs? The dragon thing's actually really good analogy here, where it's like, what
was it? Like, what if I throw, the thing was I have an invisible dragon and then, okay, well,
can I touch it? Well, no, it's also like permeable to human flesh. Well, can I like throw some flower
to see if it makes the outline of a dragon? It's like, well, no, it's gluten intolerant.
Where like, can I measure the respiration? Well, it doesn't actually, you know, breathe,
you know, like all that stuff. They're making advanced excuses, because they know the kinds
of bullshit they'll have to explain away. Yeah, you have to be able to defend it.
Wasn't there a list of the other? They're what I think. We're not quite there yet. Before we get
to the list. Yeah. I think the thing he points out that was really helpful to me was that
merit beliefs lead to attitudes at like the fear of being wrong, or even an eagerness to be criticized
and corrected. It does seem like opposites, fear of being wrong and an eagerness to be corrected.
Well, because you actually don't want to be wrong. You want to be corrected if you are wrong.
Oh, okay. That didn't make sense to me. Oh, fear of being. Oh, okay. Yeah, yeah.
Fear of my belief being false sounds like a little different if you read it the other way.
It's like, oh, no, I can't believe, you know, if there's a height disparity between races or
something. That would be scary to believe. So I don't want to believe that. Right. No.
Okay. Yeah. That's a bad wording then, I think, right there. But yeah, an eagerness to be criticized
is a much easier way to put it. Yeah. Or corrected. A meritocracy experiences no
anguish at letting go of a misbelief and adopting a better one. Even it's opposite. In fact, it's a
pleasure. And he gives us a great example. If I believe that my daughter's soccer game starts at
six, but my neighbor informs me it's at five. I won't begrudge his correction. I'll be downright
grateful. It's perfect. That actually runs me over thinking about being corrected with grammar.
Yeah, that's what I was thinking of too. It's like, yeah, I don't want to sound stupid. Thank you.
I don't want you to make me look stupid in public. Right. That's the way people get
all mad about being corrected. I look plenty stupid in public just by saying things. I at
least want to use the right words. So crony beliefs mostly don't care about whether they're
making accurate predictions. We have little need to seek out criticism for them. We should
expect our brains to take an overall protective or defensive stance towards our crony beliefs.
And you make excuses when the rest of your staff is like, what the fuck is Robert still doing?
And why is he getting paid so much? Robert is the example he chooses for a reason that he gives
in the article, but I didn't would stop pulling out in the notes. That's the name of the crony
belief on this imaginary company that we're talking about where beliefs are employees.
Can we call them Roberts? Yeah. Now we don't have to just the purposes of this episode, but
it's not going to translate into the wider world. What crony beliefs calling them Roberts?
I was just jokingly saying like, you know, if you like God damn it, Robert kind of like,
I was like, God damn it, Murphy. Robert is the name of the protagonist in in the woods that
taught a French book. I won't shut up about anyway. So like you if you're finding yourself
needing to defend the belief and being worried about criticism coming for it, that's that's a
good red flag of a crony belief. So then he then this is the I like this part a lot. I when I was
in the car listening to it, I played this part twice. Here then is a short list of features
that crony beliefs will tend to have relative to good faith merit beliefs. And we can take turns
on these, but I'll grab the first one. Abstract and impractical merit beliefs have value only in
so far as we're able to make use of them for choosing actions. We need some skin in the game
to use. Fuck, I had the guy's name. He had that book called skin in the game.
I'm losing point to David Youssef right now. It's a common saying, though, even before that book.
Yeah, but that was his name. Or that was the name of one of the books. Nassim Talib. Nassim Talib.
I always forget his name too. All right, well, yeah. All right, so Nassim, I think that that's
why it's in quotes, though, he puts skin in the game. Anyway, if a belief isn't actionable,
or the actions we might take on them based on the belief, like voting, don't provide material
benefit one way or the other, then it's more likely to be a crony belief. He put voting in
quotes, not me. Yes. Do you want to take next? Sure. Benefit of the doubt. When we have social
incentives to believe something, we stack the deck in its favor. Or to use another metaphor,
we put our thumbs on the scale as we weigh the evidence. Blind faith, religious, political,
or otherwise, is simply benefit of the doubt taken to its logical extreme. Conspicuousness.
The whole point of a crony belief is to reap social and political rewards.
But in order to get these rewards, we need to advertise the belief in question.
So the greater our urge to talk about a belief, to wear it like a badge, the more likely it is
to be a crony. Beliefs as attire. The more the more conspicuous, yeah, it's called conspicuous,
but I guess the brighter the attire for this belief, the more crony, the more like it increases
the croniness likelihood, right? The more the more you want to post about this belief on social
media, the more likely it is to be a crony. Love it. And you've got overconfidence related
to the above. Crony beliefs will typically provide more social value, the more confident we seem in
them. If Acme, the fake company here, hires the mayor's nephew, but it seems constantly on the
verge of firing him, the mayor isn't going to be happy. Overconfidence also acts as a form of
protection for beliefs that can't survive on their own without, within the meritocracy. And
this is the kind of thing where you see people, again, not merely defending the idea that like,
and I hate the IQ example, just because it seems like it's overplayed in the whatever intellectual
dark web, but, but running with it, it's like, I realized as I was talking about it, like,
it's great though. Like, but so it's one thing to say that one of these days we'll get canceled.
Keep trying. It's one that I don't like, like the thing is, it doesn't make me happy if it's true,
you know, like, it's like, yeah, it is unfair. That sucks. But either way. So it's one thing to say,
like, without evidence, or, and I'm not saying there is evidence, but if there was in face
evidence that like, no, no, there's no difference in IQ across any populations on the earth. Everyone
randomly distributed across the planet as that has roughly the same IQ. It's one thing to say
that it's another thing entirely to be way overconfident and say there's no such thing as IQ.
Right. IQ tests don't measure anything.
Right. I guess that's more abstract and impractical than it is overconfident, but still. All right,
Jason, want to grab the last one? Because this one's perfect.
Yeah. And here's the one you can use to test yourself and should reluctance to bet.
Betting on a belief is just as good as acting on it. Both mechanisms create incentives for accuracy.
If we're reluctant to bet on a belief, then it's often because some parts of our sake,
you know, the belief is unlikely to be true. Hence the challenge put up or shut up.
This is why there's a rationalist virtue to bet, or at least,
it doesn't even have to be about the money. Like, no one's looking to make, I mean,
some prediction markets or whatever. But like, if, if I bet, I think it was David,
that more children, more not children, but young people will come out to vote in 2020.
And I forget what margin I gave on that and what percentages of more I said.
But like, it was like 10 bucks. Like, it's not, it's not money that I'm going to miss or be happy
that I won, right? It's just a matter of me being confident enough to put my money up,
you know, put up a shot up here, right? I wonder if that's, I mean, obviously,
there's good social reasons to have norms against gambling. Gambling can really ruin
things for a lot of people. But I wonder if that's one of the reasons that, like, that norm,
people tend to always extend it to these sorts of low stakes bets on beliefs. They're like,
no, I don't, I don't gamble. I'm like, is that, is that just a social adaptation to protect
chronic beliefs in general? I think it's socially bad to ever bet.
If you won't play, you know, nickel poker with your friends, it's like, unless you're,
you know, a recovering gambling addict, it seems like you're, you're just doing it because you,
you want to never have to be in the position where you might be challenged, you know, to put
a nickel down on whatever it is you believe, right? You can also bet nothing, but like,
I do first of all recommend that everybody who hasn't tried it before take, like,
a week with your significant other or a friend and just like, start putting like five bucks on,
like, oh, I bet like so and so hasn't unloaded the dishwasher yet. Like, bet me five bucks.
Like, you will immediately, if you haven't tried this before, realize how much like over,
how much overconfidence you have in things. Plus imagine how much cleaner your house will be if
you start betting over each other to like, that this isn't done or that this isn't clean,
to the person will be incentivized to clean it before you get home or something.
But even like, it's like, it works, it works especially if you do use money, or if you use
something of value, that's the whole point of like, I realize I don't actually want to lose this thing.
But I've even done like the version where it's like, I bet you like a high five or something.
My wife and I bet cheek kisses. Because I'm secretly super cute.
That's adorable.
I'm not sure that counts though, because you both want the cheek kisses.
Exactly.
Oh my god.
That's like, I can't even deal with you dude.
That's so sweet. I just got a cavity.
All right. The biggest hallmark of a crony of epistemic cronyism is in this, God,
I love this whole fucking post. I can't believe this went so far.
So many years that it being on our radar.
Melting asphalt in general is like, when I was leaving in it, like, oh, what topic are you
doing? I was like, this thing on melting asphalt. And they're like, what's that? And I was like,
this thing that I keep remembering is really good, but then forgetting exists and I want to
read more of it.
Do we know the author's name? Is that somebody's name I'd recommend?
Oh, it's Kevin Simler who wrote this post, right?
Yeah, I think so.
The name definitely rings a bell.
Yeah, Kevin Simler.
I love to just Google the name to figure out why I know who that person is.
Anyway, so the biggest hallmark of epistemic cronyisms, I bet some of our listeners have
already guessed it, is exhibiting strong emotions. And when we feel proud of a belief,
anguish over changing our minds or anger at being challenged or criticized,
that is not how one treats a merit belief, right?
Imagine being pissed or scared that you're, you know, or angry that your neighbor told you
that your daughter's soccer game was at five and being defensive of like, no, it's really at six.
And it's like, no, no, like that, that, that is such an easy, I mean, it's obviously also a
low stakes belief. Well, actually high stakes, if you missed your game, you'd be disappointed,
you know?
Can anyone?
Yeah, that was like, that's the thing I kept trying to think of a word for it.
Maybe red flags is a good word, that feeling of pride, anguish, or
pride of the belief, anguish over changing your mind, anger at being challenged.
That was that red flag that I would get when I would like start to be like,
like the whole feminist like shitting on men thing where it was like feminism is good.
There was that like, but that's not good.
Where it's this little like, like sort of flashing alarm in some corner of your mind.
Yeah.
But like the rest of, and then it, but it's really hard to see.
And it's like, you're really sort of incentivized to just let your eyes roll off it.
Like, yeah, but I, I, I know that feminism is good.
That's just probably a few people on Facebook that, that are saying this one dumb thing,
but like the rest of the, you know, nobody else would ever say that.
I'm defending it.
That's the problem because I'm feeling strong emotions.
Yeah.
Cause then like, do you feel, do you feel a reluctance to say to people, Hey, you know,
this is just a few, a thing, just a few crazy people believe, right?
Because if you say that out loud, do you feel like you're going to get attacked by the group?
If you identify as part of the group and then like,
that's, I mean, that was, that was one of my problems when a group I was in said
some crazy things like that.
I was like, ha, ha, that's pretty crazy.
No one actually believes that.
And then the whole group turned on me.
I was like, Oh, whoops.
I had seen like people talking to shit about men, like who were men.
Like I suppose it was, you know, like white cis men, you know, right?
As like the joke in, uh,
That's the worst kind of cards against humanity or something.
And then everybody laughs even like the white, like the person who threw the card,
some of his like white cis friends, ha, ha, ha.
Yeah. Like it's like, you know, Hitler, ha, ha, ha, white men.
And you're like, you don't get that little red flag there.
Yeah. I have a red flag that goes off whenever anyone makes a shitty generalization about an
entire group.
I don't care if it's, you know, even groups that it's like, if you're, you know, if it's, uh,
like Republican, and I like Republicans don't get wrong, but I'm just picking people on the
other sides of aisles that I'm on, you know, if someone says all Republicans suck,
I'm like, I know nice Republicans suck a dick.
You guys, you guys are being mean.
That's the worst part because I actually do know some friends who are Republicans and
are my friends.
And in a group, if someone says something about all Republicans, I'm like,
no, not, not there's some good ones.
And they're like, oh, so you're, now you're not all menning us, you know, and you get jumped
out for shit.
I'm like, just don't say that about all Republicans.
I don't want you shitting on my good friend.
This is why I don't talk at people because they get involved in those terrible traps.
There was a Republican in my, in my Grimsman party at my wedding.
How dare you, right?
How dare I have a diverse group of friends.
That was like one of the things that ended up breaking.
Like after I had enough red flags was when like people started saying,
well, they should know that by all men, we don't mean all men.
Yeah, yeah.
It's like, what would you mean?
What are you talking about?
This is the same kind of bullshit where people like will defend Trump statements,
right?
And it's like, all right, what would you say if you meant all men?
Would you use the words all men?
Like that's what I would use.
What are you fucking kidding me?
No, like seriously, or like, or even if they say,
like we obviously didn't mean you're one moderate Republican friend who, yeah.
You should know that.
But that's the thing is like, they'll even have like the ones where they say literally
all men.
It's like, oh, I didn't mean literally all men.
It's like, those are the words you used.
We're getting off on too late.
So as you can tell, our beliefs that, you know, about the, our beliefs about how bad
crony beliefs are is a crony belief.
You're right.
Obviously getting emotional about this.
Right.
That is a red flag.
I don't know.
It doesn't mean that like emotions have no place like.
No, emotions have a place.
In a, in a, in a, in being a human with experiences and beliefs, but when you're,
when you're analyzing your beliefs and trying to decide what is true,
it shouldn't have an emotional component to it.
It might be scary to acknowledge that something that you once believed is false,
right?
Or that, you know, a belief that you feel like is important, but that's the point.
That is what a crony belief feels like to, to challenge.
It feels like grieving actually.
Like when I had to like basically be like, I'm not a feminist anymore.
Like it felt like I really wanted to believe that there was like this group of people that
did want to do good things for this group of people and also weren't like willing to be
hassles to the other groups of people.
I think there was in the past.
Maybe I'm wrong.
They're probably, I don't know.
Well, and you can still say you're a feminist, just like not those feminists.
Like that's the thing is that's why I also don't like ist words, right?
Like I, that, that, because that's the problem.
People assume that you fall into this entire blanket statement of the first person they
met on this, right?
So like some, some nice person, you know, their first encounter with the, with the
so-called rationalist community is some 14 year old dipshit on Reddit.
And they're like, oh, that's rationalists.
And it's like, well, you know, no, first of all, but second, like, so that's the problem
of like uniting under a banner.
I see this, it's hard to coordinate a group without that.
And yet like, if you, so, you know, Jay, you say it's bummer that you're not a feminist.
I bet you believe everything you want feminists to believe.
Yeah, I actually, when any of us said that used to believe that, I was like, yeah,
basically, like I'm like a nineties feminist, I guess, or I don't know.
Like they're definitely with the different waves of feminism and they changed, uh,
be like official party lines.
And I think that the official party line has changed, uh, to like sort of the regressive one.
That is my impression as well.
Yeah.
And this is, this just falls back on.
There's terfs too, which is super weird.
That, that I think is a good example of like, if someone says, you know,
what's wrong with feminism?
And it's like, well, here's a bad branch.
Like, oh yeah, we all agree that that's a bad branch.
No, terfs aren't real feminists.
Well, that's what the F stands for in their thing.
But they, they, they would disagree, right?
Yeah.
No, they'd be like, no, we're the only real feminists.
Exactly.
And, and again, they're wrong.
They're, and they're, they're, I was going to say mistaken, but that almost sounds too nice.
But they're, they're wrong.
I'm a mistake theorist.
I mean, I think they are mistaken.
Yeah.
But like they're, they're just as convicted about the well-being of women as you are.
They just happen to disagree on a very important, you know, subcomponent of that.
Presumably.
I'm not really sure.
I'm not, I don't read any of their, anyone's official literature, but-
J.K. Rowling like said that, apparently said something terfy.
And that was like, but like she, I think she genuinely believes the trans women are just
men in drag who like lurk in bathrooms, trying to like get into female spaces.
Or maybe, maybe that there's a risk that that could happen.
Right.
That's what terfs think.
She's scared of the men who will do that.
And she thinks there's a lot of them.
And that's the problem.
So she's got bad data.
And if, if someone can get, you know, like-
That's the mistake there.
Exactly.
So, and I, I don't know.
Like that's the thing.
If you watch 90s comedies, trans women were an acceptable target.
Like there's Ace Ventura movies where he like made out with a trans woman.
And then the entire third act.
Yeah.
It was like him vomiting and screaming.
And like that was, they even, they made fun of that and family guy again,
where they had like the same thing happen,
but they just made him vomit for like two whole minutes.
Oh, right.
Cause family guy.
You know, I actually, that was the one where quagmire's dad was trans, right?
And it was Brian that was vomiting the whole time.
Yes.
I think so.
And I referred to the same episode.
I think that was-
He was like dating someone who's trans.
I think I think it was quagmire's dad.
And so what I liked about it is like, this was like,
I think in like 2009 or 10 before like this was, you know,
the, the popular consciousness of like, uh, trans rights and issues didn't really like
hit the radar to like 2013, right?
And so it was ahead of the curve on that.
And everybody who was being mean about quagmire's dad was obviously the dick in that episode.
So like, I actually thought that that was-
I remember like the, the Brian did do that,
but like the point was that Brian was the dick.
Exactly.
Family guy does a lot of satire in a way that's really hard to tell is satire,
which I find it a bit annoying.
Like, because like, they also would like have Peter be like,
oh, law, that's why I can't drive.
Ha, ha, ha.
And the thing is that it's supposed to be a satire of bad like sitcoms,
but like they just sort of would play the thing straight.
I think they got better later on at like winking at the camera where it's like,
we are doing a satire here.
I think, I think the main difference though is that like Peter isn't the hero
that we're supposed to all be behind, right?
Everybody's supposed to be like, what a douche.
Yeah, exactly.
And so like with Ace Ventura, he wasn't like a hero, but we're all rooting for him.
And so then when he does the terrible, you know,
bullshit in the third act of the Ace Ventura movie.
Oh no, we were totally split.
Like they actually like strip this character down to basically like-
To expose the penis.
Yeah.
And then, and then like it's supposed to be this moment of like,
she's evil and also a man.
Right.
Yeah.
But that's the point is like-
Like it wasn't, oh, she like stole the dolphin.
Okay.
I don't remember the part of this movie that well.
She could steal the dolphin out of her bag.
But that wasn't the, look, she stole a dolphin.
It was a, she's a man, throwing jail.
The movie was weird.
That said, the depiction of how he's delivering the package at the beginning of the movie is 100% accurate.
The thing about the movie is that it's like really funny.
It's just super transphobic at the end.
Is that the-
God damn it.
But it used to be acceptable to like, again, trans women were funny.
It's an acceptable target.
Haha.
Was that the first or second Ace Ventura where he's climbing out of that fake rhinoceros?
That was the second one.
I had such, okay, I remember being a child and having to leave the movie theater.
Like the only time I've ever had to walk out of a movie because I used to have such bad
secondhand embarrassment that I could not watch.
And I actually loved Jim Carrey, but I couldn't watch a lot of his movies.
Like Dumb and Dumber, I was just hanging out with Charlie the other day.
I was telling Harry that like, I don't remember how he got on that topic, but I was like,
oh, I like, I actually have never seen the end of Dumb and Dumber because I can't,
like, couldn't sit through the part where they reveal that they like,
were just idiots and had been fucking things up the whole time.
Yeah.
And I was like, and the funny thing is that like,
Jim Carrey's character probably didn't even give a shit.
Like, he probably wasn't even embarrassed, whatever, to be like,
no, he didn't.
He was too stupid.
I was like, that's the part of the movie.
And I was like, I know, but I knew it.
Yeah.
Quick Jim Carrey tangent to bring us not even closer to the topic, but relevant.
He was on last night's SNL.
He played Joe Biden in the presidential debate.
Oh, man, I want to see that.
When he was on SNL 10 years ago, maybe 15 years ago now,
it was one of the funniest SNLs they've had in ages.
How was the last nights?
I haven't seen the whole episode.
I saw clips, the parts I saw were fine.
Like for the most part, like their scripted parts that they do like second, you know,
the routine bits, like the weekend update and even like the opening, the cold open,
those are usually pretty good.
It's like the, it's like totally a coin toss,
whether like the random skits that make it in that week, whether those are good.
Okay.
So just a typical SNL then.
Exactly.
What he came on when he was younger, you could tell that like he was still all in the comedy
and he had contributed a lot to every single skit because they were all just better than average.
Nice.
I'll have to find that one.
So back to strong emotions.
Yes, sorry.
Which we were having.
Actually, I wanted to say that on, because you were saying that,
not to say emotions are bad.
And I was like, well, actually the fact that like this emotions are,
are those red flags telling you like something's wrong?
Like they're actually sort of emotions are rational in the sense that
I feel angry for some reason.
What's going on there?
Like is my belief that, all right.
So we'll, let's take the one that he gives then I'll,
I've got another candidate for crony belief that I want to talk about.
Okay.
All right.
So I loved this.
This is the part where in the car, I was just like,
I could feel the grin creeping across my face.
How do you pronounce the title here?
The little subheading.
There's a subheading.
Oh, sorry.
I think I'm looking at a different part in the notes.
Oh, Jacuz.
It is French for I accuse.
Is that the part that you were about to say?
I don't even see it on mine.
Are you just going through the notes?
Yeah.
Oh, God.
I was giving the notes because the essay, I don't know.
I'm just lowering it.
I didn't want to pronounce this.
I don't know how to pronounce French words.
I was like, I'm going to fuck this up.
Jacuz.
I've heard that one on TV.
Oh, really?
I'm sure.
Yeah.
Okay.
I'm more, you know what?
Never mind.
Keep going.
All right.
I'm most familiar with it in the context of a chess match
where you could.
Is that a chess thing?
Well, I mean, you could use it as a chess thing,
like saying someone has broke the rules.
We're tangenting.
Yeah, we are.
Sorry.
Stephen, fingers back.
I charge the two of you and everyone listening
that you are harboring a crony belief about climate change.
I don't care whether you subscribe to a scientific consensus
or that you think it's all hoax,
or even whether you hold some nuanced position,
unless you're radically uncertain,
your belief is a crony.
And this is the part where I'm just like,
I was grinning because I saw where he was coming with it
and I was like, oh, wait, oh, man.
And anyway, I'm not accusing your belief of being false.
I'm just accusing it of being a crony.
What makes a crony belief is how we're rewarded for it.
The problem with beliefs about climate change
is that we have no way to act on them,
by which I mean that there are no actions
we can take whose payoffs for us as individuals
depend on whether or not our beliefs are true or false.
And so there's a couple of caveats.
Like one, he says, all right,
if you live on the Florida coast and you move,
you clearly are an actual believer in climate change
if you're moving because you're avoiding the future floods.
But that and aside from hedge fund investors.
I want to say, if you lived in Florida 10 years ago
and moved, then that was, because now it's already happening.
But then of course you picture people that's like,
well, hold on, I bought a hybrid car.
Well, no, no, I used recyclable straws or something.
And it's like, yeah, those aren't for you.
Those are loud signals to your friends and neighbors
that you care about climate change.
When you bust out the metal straw, yeah.
It's not because you're saving the environment.
Right.
It's because you think you're saving the environment
and you want to signal that to everyone else.
That's the things you actually might believe that you are, right?
Straws, as it turns out, are not a problem.
Like they're not good.
You know, you don't want to throw two billion of them away.
I think there's a really marginal good that you are doing,
but like it's just not the main incentive for buying.
I think you probably use more energy cleaning a metal straw
than you would by using a disposable plastic one.
Be really surprised if it didn't waste slightly
in like a helpful direction.
Probably not like in that.
What I'm saying is it's not the most useful thing
you could be doing.
It's the fashiest, most visible thing you could be doing.
It's like buying a hybrid.
You know, it uses a little less gas,
but like the gas from a consumer vehicle
is not what's ruining the planet, right?
Not from your car.
It's from these gigantic barges
that are burning three gallons of a foot.
I'm making up numbers,
but like it's the ones that are putting plumes
into the sky that you can see for miles.
Those are the ones that are putting out more gas
in an hour than your car will in its lifetime.
Well, if we were to overhaul
the entire car fleet in the world,
then it would make like a good bit of difference.
I think 12, 17% or something.
I was guessing something more like three.
But also, in either case,
that's not neither of those are negligible numbers,
but that's not your car.
The creation of the batteries
with the rare earth minerals that it takes
to mine those things out at net.
Some people are saying they're maybe only slightly better
than carbon neutral when compared to a regular car
that they more or less are the same right now
until we find a less energy intensive way
of extracting those rare earth elements
to make the batteries and shit.
Like manufacturing.
At least batteries are renewable to an extent.
Okay.
Yeah, that's the perk of like a Tesla.
I have no idea how hard it is to get the battery
out of the components out of the ground,
but if you drive a Tesla for your whole life,
I'm betting you come out carbon positive on that, right?
You get the battery once that lasts for 200,000 miles
or whatever.
That said,
I heard most reusable bags are actually
worse than using the discardable plastic bags
because it takes so much more energy to use them.
I think that's true.
Or to make them.
Yeah.
Yeah.
In the vast majority of cases,
they will be lost or thrown out
before it makes up for how many paper plastic bags
they're in place.
There's a good Skeptoid episode,
I think on both plastic straws and on reusable bags.
Because like there are some...
Metal straws take a lot of energy to make.
And there are some stores that like ban plastic bags.
You have to bring your own.
And it's...
Like this is the...
I remember this in elementary school.
The three R's, reduce, reuse, recycle.
Right, right, right.
Recycle is one of the three.
If you can reduce the amount of crap that you're throwing away
and reuse the amount of crap that you use.
Like I use grocery bags.
I save them because I use all of them.
I use them for trash bags every single day.
I heard someone say that they are in that order for a reason.
Oh, I like that.
The best thing you can do is reduce.
The second best thing you can do is reuse.
It was a well-designed slogan.
It's at least the easiest way to do it too, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, there's a bunch...
Anyway, point is, I love the example here that he gave
about climate change.
Because I was like, well, hold on,
but I think I'm actually right.
And I put money on it.
He's like, that's not the point.
The point is your belief about climate change is a...
It's not...
It's a social signal.
Right.
It's not...
I mean, and you can do little things.
But like, me buying energy-efficient light bulbs
is not going to save the planet.
Sorry, Al Gore.
Like, we need large overhauls to solve this problem.
And I had another candidate for chronic belief
on it run by the two of you.
But it will make your house cooler and cost less to keep it...
There are good reasons for doing it.
Totally.
I really love LED lights.
Like, the fact that I can have my light shining forever
and it doesn't make my room hot is nice.
Phoenix programmed our hue lights to have blue spectrum
in the day and dim and have a red spectrum at night.
So it doesn't interfere, like, with our circadian rhythm.
We have flux on all our devices
and all of our lights are timed like that.
I want you to send me a link to whatever light bulbs you have
because I need them for the bedroom.
You need the API, too.
Phoenix could show you how to do that or probably just send it.
And some of them, too, have apps that you can put on your phone anyway.
So I'll look into that.
Yeah, you can manually do it in order to...
They have the API just available and you can do what you want with it.
Sounds fun.
All right, I've got a belief in my head
that I'm worried it's a crony.
Okay.
It doesn't mean it's false.
Right.
I think death is bad.
I mean it.
This, I think, is a great example.
And I'm broadcasting it with a very expensive signal of cryonics.
It doesn't mean I'm wrong.
But this is something that I feel passionate about.
And I was talking...
In fact, this comes up all the time with Brian.
We want more because he thinks that deathism isn't a thing, which is fine.
But my...
I have a book for him.
You mean half of all books?
No, I specifically have a book that I bought that was an atheist.
A new atheist wrote it.
And it was something about better ways to think about death or something like that.
Or happier ways to...
And I remember reading it and it was just all deathist propaganda.
But the point was it was supposed to be for making people who had recently, I guess,
deconverted or dealing with the fact that, okay, you're an atheist.
And now you've given up believing that there's heaven.
And we'll press it on him.
Well, the thing is, I imagine he would respond.
He would say, sure, they're saying how to deal with death.
They're not saying that if you offered them immortality, they'd say no.
I actually think that...
Unless that's in the book.
Well, it was all the arguments that you hear about overpopulation.
And death is actually good.
Was it a sequence where they were talking about if everybody got hit in the head with hammers,
people would be coming up with reasons like, oh, well, it makes you more like...
It makes you tougher.
Yeah, like mentally tough.
It gives you good moral fortitude to be hit in the hammer with the head every day.
In fact, and it's like, okay, well...
Anyone who wants to avoid getting hit in the hammer must be a bad person.
They're just hedonists.
And it's like, well, just suddenly he stopped being hit in the head with the hammer.
Everyone did it once.
Would people pay money to like, no, please hit me in the head with the hammer every day?
No.
But they don't ever think about that.
So yeah, I guess I came up with the death one because I was trying to think of...
I went through my head like, all right, what beliefs do I have that have emotional salience,
that this one happened to be on my mind?
And I'm like, oh, that's fucking obvious.
Or even that you want to prevent.
Because there's very little anyone can do in their life to change the outcome of dying.
I mean, the only thing we really have is trying to extend our lives until we get to escape velocity.
But many people do that anyway.
I guess, no, I guess quite a few don't.
I know several who don't.
And also, signing up for cryonics.
Those are like the two possible things.
Trying to invent science to either working in the field yourself for donating money to
life extension foundations, participating in clinical trials.
There's a lot of stuff you can do.
But I like that example, Stephen, because when they were having...
When they were doing the list earlier of signs that a belief is a current belief,
one of them was like, noticing that you want to project it.
And I was kind of having a hard time with that one where I was imagining,
okay, Robert, the shitty employee, does that mean you walk around going,
Robert's great.
Because I was like, that's not really my experience with that.
It's like if you hear anyone else saying Robert's a shit employee, you'll be like,
no, he's not that bad.
Or no, he's all right.
But even like, but wanting to project it, I was like, I wouldn't imagine it.
But that example, though, is you do want to tell people death is bad.
And here's why.
It's the same reason religious people want to proselytize.
Because like, I have this belief, I think it's great.
And I also want other people to like, I want to share it,
not just because I want to project that I have it.
And I'm so cool, but I want other people to also have this belief.
I think like the six o'clock news test could help with this.
There's, there's this thing where you basically don't, no one has to watch the news.
Like, basically almost nothing that you see in the news has any impact on your life.
You can't change anything you're doing with what you know about what's in the news.
And anything that's like really super important,
you're going to find out anyway from friends or family or something, right?
And, and that's one of the arguments to like, not watch the news.
All it does is make you have more anxiety, makes your life worse.
I do cut down on my news watching a lot because of that.
Yeah.
And so like, it does skew negative.
Yeah.
And it gets more clicks if it's outrageous.
And if a belief is like that, if you could completely eliminate it,
like you could eliminate the six o'clock news and it wouldn't affect your life in any way,
then maybe it's a crony belief.
And if you completely eliminated the thought death is bad from your beliefs,
would that change anything about your, the way you live your life?
Yeah.
And you give some examples later on, like, like your,
your answer to the trolley problem is a crony belief, right?
Right.
Like, I like his example, I have free will.
Right.
What you think about that doesn't change anything.
You actually think it does?
Well, no, I was gonna, I was talking about the trolley problem where I was like,
I actually like sort of am kept up nights metaphorically,
maybe literally thinking about like, would I do the right thing if the trolley problem
were actually presented to me?
I haven't had that kind of experience really where I've had to like,
can you imagine like actually being in the moment, you don't know what you would do, right?
It's like the whole.
I absolutely don't know what I would do if it was strangers.
It only gets hard for me if it's like something that I love involved.
It reminds me of the like question of would you like jump in front of a car to save a child?
And you're like, I want to be the kind of person that would jump in front of a car to save a child.
I don't know if I would.
Is this child related to me?
Yeah.
I mean, like that's the thing is, you know, the answer to the trolley problem is yes,
if there's two people on one track and one on the other, you turn it.
So it hits the one person because that's half of the number that'd be killed the other way.
If it's my wife on one track and 150 people on the other one,
I turn it so it hits the other 150 people, right?
I think it is because it's not a good moral thing to do.
And yet, and I would start having trouble sleeping.
But this is where I'm being the cronyism, right?
The point is like, luckily, I don't hang out a lot.
I don't remember the last time I even saw a trolley, right?
So I guess the real question is, if you were tied to the track,
would you want your wife to flip the switch to hit you or to hit the 150 people?
See, I'm going to go ahead and just like skip the question because like,
That's my question.
What kind of person would I want to be married to?
Well, I would be the same kind of person.
Yes, I would want to be and, you know,
she would also want me not probably to kill 150 people to save her, right?
But like, again, like, just as far as this goes,
I haven't seen a trolley in maybe 20 years.
You know, they have them in Berkeley.
Well, I haven't been to Berkeley.
So it's not in 28 years.
Four columns used to have a little tram that would go through downtown,
but it hasn't been very forever.
If you visit the rationalist home, maybe don't bring Rachel, just in case.
Or just don't let her lay down and take a nap on the tracks.
Just be careful.
They're everywhere.
So like, it's one of those things about like...
Cut off both your hands so you have a pre-commitment to never flip switches.
And I get that the intuition pump of the trolley problem
isn't for literally standing at a trolley switch.
It's for other circumstances where you could save many or sacrifice one to save many.
But that, you know, again, I strongly anticipate that I will go through my entire life
never running into a situation like that.
So, because luckily I'm not like a, you know,
a hospital administrator or something, right?
If I had to make hard decisions like this,
I'd be spending more time thinking about them.
Apparently one of the jobs that has like the highest incidence of burnout
and like PTSD is being an airline traffic controller,
where you are making trolley problem decisions all the time.
Or like there's the possibility of one having to happen at any moment.
Maybe this is the reason that the example is about police mistreatment wear in my head.
Because that's actually one of the examples he gives about a crony belief.
Belief is about identity groups.
Like whether men and women have statistically different aptitudes
or whether certain races are mistreated by the police.
Those, again, those beliefs, I think this is one of the lynchpins that make it confusing.
Crony beliefs aren't necessarily false.
Robert could be a great employee.
The point is, is like you have this belief and you shot it loud and proud
because it's an important belief to you.
I think the one about men and women is particularly resonant to me
because I do believe that they have statistically different aptitudes and aggregates.
That's a really well like phrase.
Different statistically different aptitudes.
Like very carefully actually just walking around saying anything.
But it also doesn't matter in my life because I don't deal with, you know,
an aggregate population of men and women.
I have individual people that I know who may happen to be a man or a woman,
but it has no impacts like what their attributes are.
Yeah, like luckily, since I'm not dealing with the statistical aggregate of humanity,
I don't have to care.
I know like I know what they're good at.
Something or not.
And I know like 50 people.
So like my circle is small enough that these these giant impacts don't really matter.
I was going to mention bubble effects too.
Yeah.
Well, everybody has a weird like bubble effect circle thing going on.
No one has a perfectly statistically average social group.
Yeah, which is actually like kind of funny.
I remember.
I know I've heard that's why a lot of people don't like ever talking
about things like statistical averages among groups
because it can't impact anything you do in your real day to day life.
Hmm.
Even if you're, you know, someone hiring for a major company,
you're never going to see a statistically significant portion of the population.
Yeah.
You still have to evaluate every person on their own merits.
Something I thought was cool.
Derek Sivers, whose blog I really like.
One of his like beliefs like that he professes or his like philosophies,
I guess is.
So I just assume that men and women are exactly the same.
And I make a point of assuming that men and women are exactly the same because
and I know that they're not, but I know that my tendency to believe that they're
like way more disparate than they actually are is really strong.
So I think trying to norm that belief will push me more towards the correct belief
about how men and women will behave.
And in any individual interaction, you're better off going with either basically identical.
Yeah.
I remember having a conversation with somebody once that said there are no differences between men
and women.
I used to believe that.
Well, that was what I had said.
I was like, wait, so you're saying that, and it was a woman who said this,
you're saying that if you went into, you know, to the doctor with stomach cramps and they checked
you for like, well, you had to pay for a testicular cancer screening and you don't have testicles,
wouldn't you be pissed?
Or like a vignage went in and they went into stomach cramps and they tested him for pregnancy,
wouldn't that be a waste of money?
Would you pay that bill?
Right.
So like at the face of it, that's a stupid thing to say.
I think what people say like mean when they're saying that and the thing that I used to believe
is that they have the same aptitudes or the same like basically personalities.
And like, you know, like, all women are as good as math, as good as math.
Okay.
Well, it's like that's the thing about like not dealing with statistical aggregates of people
is like all the women programmers I know are women programmers, right?
So like, I'm not all the women I know are just as good as math, if not better than these men I know.
Right.
Like, so that that's the thing, like my my circles are so small and not representative that
I guess I like that.
I don't even know if there's as good as that's actually the like, apparently women perform
just as well in math, like up until a certain point in their careers.
And then they mostly either like teach math or do something else semi related to math,
like business, because they're more interested in people, whereas men are have more interests in
things, which we're like, even like stereotypes that people have are actually like a lot more
complicated. Even if they are true, it's like they're true, but for a different reason that
yeah, anyway, that's so basically what we're saying is all these beliefs that we have just been
going on at length about our crony beliefs, because they don't really affect our lives.
And we are signaling who we want as our allies right now, right?
Or solidarity with our groups or our hate of the group, that sort of stuff, right?
Yeah, it is ally signaling. That's just of course, the same way to put it,
but like signaling serves a purpose to survival.
I was actually thinking about like, I've never like put a political bumper sticker on my car.
And I was like, no, that's not true. I got a Bernie one. And I was like,
okay, that was definitely a signaling thing, right? And then I was like, well,
yeah, but then I think I had like told myself when I put it on the car, well,
maybe other people will see it and then like be more likely to also vote for Bernie.
So it's also a bit instrumental. And I think the
Have you ever been persuaded by seeing a sticker or a yard sign for a candidate?
I actually like, I think you're just screaming to your neighbors who you're voting for.
I actually was convinced a few times, like, but in like minor elections, I would first of all
be reminded that those existed. And then second, it's like, sometimes I'd be like,
who the hell is like, vote for whoever is that and look them up and be like,
Oh, actually, like this person's policies are pretty good. I don't really have.
I could see like, if you literally lived in a small town where every single person on their
lawn had a name, then you would feel a lot of pressure to also vote for that name.
But like, if you're in a city when there's just the huge smattering of every,
every opinion, it won't.
But if someone sees my like, my pink Chevy spark with the Bernie thing and like,
maybe, you know, if they hadn't felt super political before, but it's like,
you know, somebody who's an in crowd, like, I definitely drive around and we're and see all
these houses that like have rainbow flags in the windows and like that sign that has like,
the rainbow text that's like, I believe in science and black lives matter.
I saw one of those yesterday.
Yeah. And like, I think if I saw a house that had all the signaling of like,
this person seems like the kind of like my grand people and like also saw like vote for whoever,
I would be like, for school board. And I was like, I don't know about school board.
But oh yeah, that person who had like all the cool shit, like this person, I'll check that name.
Right. Or like, if your car broke down on that street and one one sign or one yard has that
that rainbow sign, the one has a Confederate flag hanging, I'm going to knock on this door first.
Um, they're going to see who has the flag with the just all black
flag with mascara and stuff. I want the spider webs. I'm like, whoever's living in that house
must be the cool. There's a person on my block who has a ton of like dragon sculptures,
like like these big gargoyles out front of their house. And I was just like,
I have no idea the space that it is, but like, I want to be friends with them.
You're like, they're voting for Voldemort, not even on the ticket.
Meteor 2020. Yeah.
All right. So we've been going super long. Let's get to the end punch here.
Yeah. I want to finish this up because this is where when I was listening, I said,
aha, I actually challenged this and he kind of gets around to the solution, but I did.
So anyway, conventional wisdom holds that the more accurate beliefs is critical or the way to more
accurate beliefs is critical thinking less wrong as an example. The problem with this
approach is that it addresses the symptom irrationality without addressing the root cause
social incentives. And that's, that's where I was in the car and I said, I, I, I said in my head
out loud, out loud in my head, I said, aha, challenge. You challenge that? Yes. Why? Because
part of rationality is the balm that subsumes all that is good and makes everything better.
It includes and it doesn't, it doesn't exclude actual solutions like fixing social incentives.
Oh, okay. Well, okay. So that's literally what he was getting to in his next paragraph.
Right. Yeah. But the thing is, he says, we should do this. I'm like, we already are.
Some of us, yeah. Well, but that's, that, that is, that is part of the point of rationality.
It isn't to be the rational person in your house and the only one on your block.
It is to raise the sanity waterline of those around you and to have a community.
It's a belief you want to spread because you like it genuinely.
Yeah, that helps too. But like, because you like it, because well,
because you think it'll make a better world if more people believe this thing.
Yeah. I want to, I want to read like what he said,
because I thought it was really well put and he said that if you imagine some clueless but
well-meaning executive noticing that Robert and a handful of other workers aren't getting fired
despite shoddy work, not realizing their cronies, the exact naturally suspects the problem is not
enough meritocracy. And then he goes through all the programs he implements to make things more
meritocratic so that shoddy shitty employees get canned. Meanwhile, everyone else is panicking like,
oh, no, Robert's going to get canned. And so he said, if our executive understood the full picture,
he might instead direct his efforts outside the company at the political ecosystem that
allows strong, strong arming and corruption to fester. If he could fix net Neppetsville city
politics, he'd be quashing the problem at its root and ACME's meritocracy could then begin to heal
naturally. So that's he saying, that's the problem. If you give some of the tools to purge their
crony beliefs by giving them the sequences, for example, without a community, without fixing
the ecosystem in which they're embedded, it's a prescription for trouble. They'll either one,
let go of their crony beliefs and lose out socially, or two, suffer more cognitive dissonance in an
effort to protect the crony beliefs from their now sharper critical faculties. The better and
much more difficult solution is to attack epistemic cronyism at the root, i.e. in the way others judge
us for our beliefs. If we could arrange for our peers to judge us solely for the accuracy of our
beliefs, then we'd have no incentives to believe anything but the truth, which is I think kind of
what we do as a community. The whole point he was driving at is that we need better community,
better social pressures. Totally. And yeah, like I said, he got there to the point, but I just liked
where when he said the first thing, I was like, you are wrong, sir, we already do that.
You were two steps ahead of him. I was saying when this was written, but when was this written?
I was thinking it was written around the same time as the sequences. I think it was after,
because he says he references the sequences when people stopped including dates on the internet.
It's gotta be evergreen content. I was literally still putting up the page,
the actual page to find the date on it and he didn't. Maybe it's at the bottom.
Or maybe they just didn't include it. Nope. Great. No. Oh, wait, there it is.
Originally published November 2nd, 2016. Okay. So the community had been a thing for a while.
Oh, yeah. Anyway, the next thing was I lost. I've already moved my notes. Sorry, you go ahead.
In other words, we do need to teach rationality and critical thinking skills,
not just to ourselves, but to everyone at once. Yeah.
That trick is to see this as a multilateral rather than a unilateral solution,
which reminded me of Brian. If we raise epistemic standards within an entire population,
then we'll all be cajoled into thinking more clearly, making better arguments,
weighing evidence more even handily, etc. Lest we be seen as stupid, careless, or biased.
The beauty of less wrong then is that it's not just a textbook, it's a community,
a group of people who have agreed either tacitly or explicitly to judge each other for the accuracy
of their beliefs, or at least for behaving in ways that correlate with accuracy. And so it's
the norms of the community that incentivize us to think and communicate as rationally as we do.
And right here, I would normally try to drop in some sort of call for action like,
hey, start a less wrong group in your local city. It'll make your life great.
It's not that hard. Here's how you can do it. But now we're in the middle of Corona. So no one
can do that online communities. They aren't, but they're the only placeholder we have while the
world. They're gonna get better because of that. And I'm looking forward to that because I hate
sketch the worst. I hate Zoom. I hate all of them. Is there a good one? Hangouts is all right-ish.
There's no good one because latency is the problem. You will need to be either have zero latency or
see people IRL. And I mean, that's not the only problem. There's also just, it's better to be
in physical proximity to people. There's a lot of other things you can get that you can't get just
through video and chat, but latency is a huge problem. It is. It is. But if you're hearing this
and you're like, God, this all sounds great, but I don't have a community, online is a substitute
that we can all live with for now because we have no other choice. So check out the Bayesian
conspiracy discord. Check out the University of Bays. There are online community, and of course,
like less wrong is a tech community, but it's not, you're not talking with people in real life.
It's like a subreddit basically. No, they are in real life, just not in real time.
There's rational communities on most of the major social media platforms and other places
where you can talk to people. Yeah, I forgot that Facebook is a thing. There's probably a
less wrong Facebook group. There is. I believe you, but it's not worth it to me. Brain debugging
discussion because they never were able to rename it. I like how this wraps up. He says,
all of which brings us to a strange and, at least my mind, unsettling conclusion.
Earlier argued that other people are the cause of all our epistemic problems.
Now I find myself arguing that they're also our best solution. It's not unsettling. I mean,
I don't think it's unsettling. It's not paradoxical. It's not even, it's not contradictory. It's just
yep. We need a good community. People are the problem and people are the solution.
Everyone needs community and having good community is good. So, yeah, I love it. So,
yeah, that's it for this post. I know I've been going for a while. It was a really good one.
I think so. There are some things we didn't touch on. So, again, I recommend people to read these
and the less wrong posts. The less wrong posts are super short. This one is a little bit longer,
but still totally worth reading or less wrong sequences. Yeah.
Less wrong posts also tend to be, well, I have how many, like I have 12 of them open right now and
they vary in length, but there's a lot of short ones. If you don't have to, like the time,
you, I love the fact that they actually tell you on less wrong about how long each article
takes to read. Oh, yeah, they do that now. That's cool. It's like, yeah, here's this article. It's
about this thing. It's in this category. It'll take you about nine minutes to read. Why doesn't
everybody do that? It's so good. I've seen it on more and more websites recently. Yeah. See,
things are getting better. All right. So, did we address the feedback at the top of the notes here
about shooting? We did not do any feedbacks yet. We've been going for quite a while on this episode.
Do we want to? I want to head these really quick. They'll only take a second. So,
I, let's see. I think I found the thing about guns because I asked our guest about that when
we got the email. So the question was basically that our number that was cited in the episode was
ridiculously under. I was skimming through everything I talked to about the- Wait, are you
going to read the thing? You go ahead and read it while I search. The comment that he makes about
our number? Yeah. Oh, okay. Because I asked our guest on that episode about that. I'm not sure if
it's fair to- Well, I'm going to disagree with this thing. I guess might as well read it. Read it.
Okay. It's going to be really unsatisfying if you don't know what we're disagreeing with.
Yes. Jared, in an email, in the follow up to Oregon episode says,
Hello, Conspirators. I come from Stockton, California where shootings were fairly common
place. Sorry, Jared. I look for my hometown every few days at, it's a website, gunviolencearchive.org.
slash mass shootings. I thought you might enjoy this after a guest estimated one mass shooting
per week. Ha. Keep up the great show. And if you go to the website, it shows a long list of mass
shootings. There's multiple every weeks at that one town. Yeah, Stockton. But like, I dispute that
definition of mass shootings, the problem. It's like, everything they have at that website is
where multiple people were shot in a single incident. And that doesn't surprise me for places
that are high in crime. But I don't consider that mass shooting when someone says mass shooting,
the typical thing everyone thinks of is someone walking into a large crowd at school shooting,
or someone walking into a crowd with the objective of indiscriminately killing as many
strangers as possible, not like crime and drug deals gone wrong and rival gangs shooting at each
other. And so I wouldn't call those mass shootings. I would just call those like shitty things that
happen a lot. I do think there's an important distinction there between this is a terror event
that you could get caught in. Like if you're trying to evaluate how dangerous an area is,
if it's all gang violence, you're unlikely to get caught up. And if you're not part of any of that,
if it's like, this area has a bunch of indiscriminate shooters, I don't know. I think you can't
actually like, like when Gray estimated one mass shooting per week, I was like, that is ridiculously
high. Mass shooting to me does not count as a mass shooting if it doesn't make it to the next.
They're saying even that was quite... They were saying it's extremely low. The writer was.
Yeah, I couldn't find Gray's response. I don't know where I asked him, but apparently it wasn't
in discord down in the time you look everywhere. But I'm with you. Like I think... He lives at my
house now, so I could just ask him. Yeah, but if you do define a mass shooting as anything where
more than two people are hit by bullets in a single incident, then yeah, there'd be a ton more.
Different definitions in this case. Yeah, and you know, it's one of those things that I don't
know what's worth splitting hairs about. Like I can't remember exactly what context it came up in.
Like we're talking about guns, but like I don't know what the specific thing regarding mass shootings
was. It was whether gun laws, having stricter gun laws would reduce mass shootings. And if you
define it the way we think of mass shootings as these terror events, then no, they wouldn't.
If you define it as these random crimes on corners, then maybe they would.
If they would prevent more guns getting into criminals hands. I realized that I'm
doing the thing of... There was even a, wasn't there a sequence about this? I'm reading this as
Jared, I don't know if he want to take his name out or not, and I don't know if that's a...
I think he came in an email, so... He him person, but it sounds like, like they were just coming
and saying, this number seems really low, haha. And I realized that I'm like, oh, this person is
in favor of, and they're trying to argue in favor of, they're being stricter gun laws, and then we
should have Kravak going to argue. And then I'm like, wait a minute, there wasn't an argument.
They were just, I think, yeah, that was one of the sequences where earlier, as you said,
a fact, and someone was like, do you mean that you're for this thing happening? And he's like,
no, I just said a fact about it. Right. Yeah. But I would be annoyed if someone were to say,
we could reduce mass shootings by having stricter gun laws. And then they pointed at this, when they
knew that everyone in the audience is thinking about like school shootings. That's a classic
Martin Bailey switch, right? Yeah. All right. So I think that's it for that one. I just do what
you're saying, and shootings suck, and should go down. Maybe if Gray come back on and address that,
if anybody cares, Gray will want to. We can ask Gray what the response is to that. But I wanted
just to bring that up and move past it, because we don't have time to dig in too much. But there's
another quick one I want to get to here. This one came in just yesterday, actually. First, let me
say I really enjoy the podcast. Thank you. It is like hanging out with interesting friends every two
weeks. But I disagree with the position that global climate change is not the cause of the wild
fires. They say that it's definitely true that bad forest management provides more fuel, but
higher temperatures and higher winds make the fire spread faster, makes them harder to put out,
and the higher CO2 content might actually result in denser growth, more stuff to burn.
That seems like a stretch. Really? That was my impression. I am not an environmental scientist.
There might be something to that. Maybe things would be slightly less bad without climate change.
How long have we had higher CO2 concentrations? How much higher are they? How long does it take
a tree to grow? That's part of my thinking on it. The other thing is that the bad forest management
would lead to a bigger problem a lot faster than the currently slow but terrible gradual
increase of CO2 levels and climate change. We can get David Spearman on and then set these
two against each other, and then we can just coordinate a bunch of arguments between different
people. From everything I have ever read on the subject, climate change certainly is happening,
and it is due to all the carbon we're putting into the atmosphere, but it is having a
very small effect on the wildfires. The wildfires are mostly due to bad management and
disrupting the natural ecosystem of that coast. Like our personal vehicles contribute to climate
change, but they're not a real metric or they're not a real impact on it, right?
Technically, it increases CO2 output, but it's not an actual factor.
I think all the cars in the aggregate have a...
I was pointing just you and me.
Oh, just you and me?
Yeah, just the person's car.
Right, right.
Yes, this is causing a marginal effect. No, we should not be aiming all of our resources at
this though because it's so marginal.
Right.
It's a weird argument because I do think we should be aiming some resources at climate
change and fighting climate change, but it's not going to solve the forest fire problem.
That is a different problem, so it annoys me that that is used as an argument.
If you find sources that we can share, we'll put those in the show notes.
No way.
All right.
Or we could orchestrate some fights.
Fights are more fun.
A little column A, a little column B.
Okay.
And then I needed to get to this part. This is the main reason I wanted to do feedback this
episode. As long as I'm at the keyboard, I have a suggestion for a topic for the next episode.
I don't think we're going to do the whole episode, but I'm going to mention this
every time we get an episode this month, so I guess twice.
Could you possibly discuss the upcoming election?
As rationalists, it seems like we ought to do everything we can to prevent the re-election
of the most anti-rationalist president imaginable, one whose re-election objectively has a very
high likelihood of bad consequences for almost everyone.
I think I can think of no better use of time than that.
I agree.
Everyone should get out.
That's all I want to bring this up for is everyone get your asses out and vote.
I agree he's the most anti-rationalist president ever.
I'm not sure that's the best use of all our energies, but maybe.
If we... I don't know what our energy output... I don't know the difference between doing a whole
episode on it versus doing a plug to say, by the way, don't sit this vote out like you did last term,
actually vote this year or vote this election.
I felt silly last term. It feels like 5,000 years ago when...
Did you not vote last time?
No, I did.
Oh, okay.
But we had an episode on about don't waste your time voting.
Okay.
Remember?
I remember that one.
I remember that one. I still think it's kind of a legit episode.
And yet people came out in record low numbers and we got Donald Trump.
So like the thing is, and that was my case during that episode,
like the people who are inclined to seed the reasoning of that argument
are the kind of people we want voting more because we don't want...
And granted, they're a small population, especially the subset of that population
listens to this podcast, but like we don't want to convince smart people
that you shouldn't waste your time voting because then only dumb people are voting.
And voting still is a thing.
I think it's legitimate to say don't waste your time voting.
If it's more than a half hour, I have my ballot mailed to me.
I already know who I'm voting for.
So it's going to take me all of five, 10 minutes to fill it out and mail it back.
I think it's a legitimate use of five or 10 minutes.
I don't think I'd be wanting to spend hundreds of hours in a month
like really working towards one person's elections.
I'm not sure that would be worth the energy.
Or even spending a full day standing in line.
Really good.
I feel like doing like a year of activism
would be worth more probably than casting your one individual vote.
Unless that wasn't what you were saying.
No, I think the total impact would probably be a little bit more
than casting my one individual vote.
But I think both are pretty close to negligible.
Like the amount of energy put into these campaign efforts,
in my opinion, is ludicrous.
The key is just to spend 30 minutes writing a script
and then buy a bunch of phone numbers from the dark web
and just text every phone number vote for this person.
If someone does that, I will vote against that person.
That's low effort.
Fuck that.
That's low effort and it hits a lot of people.
Yeah, so I...
You're literally advocating for defecting right now.
Defects.
You are advocating for everybody clogging everyone's phones with trash.
The audience can't see me joking about that.
I was saying that'd be the solution to not wasting a lot of time
and having high impact.
No, you don't want anyone to do that because everyone does it.
I'm just saying that's the solution.
Okay, all right.
It doesn't solve that problem.
I'm just saying that's how you would.
And you're just so visibly upset at the idea of getting all this spam text.
I get an idea of how many more resources will be wasted by society
for net zero impact.
I get five or six texts a week from strangers.
I know, it's ridiculous.
I'm always nice to the people because I know it's usually humans on the other side.
I just ignore it.
That's a completely fair response.
I'll say, are you prepared to vote?
How are you going to understand it?
I said, we're set.
Thumbs up.
Thanks for your activism.
That's basically my canned reply.
I got a call from one of those people trying to convince me to come vote
and I said the script for them and they were really happy.
Oh, that was the other thing that I guess I forgot I wanted to respond to.
You're right.
I had this weird impression growing up that mail-in voting was a thing across the country
because it's super easy, barely an inconvenience, and makes sense across the board.
And it turns out Colorado is one of three states that does it by default.
So since I've lived here my whole life, that's how I've always voted.
Voting has always been, I don't want to say super easy,
barely an inconvenience again, but there it is.
Yes, you do.
So I always assumed that was the amount of effort it took.
Some people are like, oh, you shouldn't waste all this time.
I'm like, it takes five minutes.
You know who you want to vote for.
And yet that's just my weird case because I live in one of the three states that does it correctly.
But yeah, get your asses out and vote.
Especially if you live in Colorado or one of those other states, the mail-in votes.
Yeah.
Anyway, that's all I wanted to say.
Thank you for writing in.
I don't want to read names of people who write in emails because
sometimes they don't want to be broadcast.
So anyway, you rock.
Thanks for writing that stuff in.
I figure if it's just the first name that's common enough, it doesn't matter that much.
Steve, you have a great first name.
It's one of the best first names.
Well, it's second to Steven, but it's right up there with Steve Rogers and,
I don't know, yeah, Captain America's first name.
So well done.
And Captain America advocating for political activism.
I hats off.
I did a little Ant-Man salute like he does.
What happened in America?
He did a little salute.
Steve shares his first name with Captain America, and he's advocating for a better America.
Okay, okay.
All righty.
I think you're literally, I'm fine.
It's a stretch.
That's fair.
You're like, when does Cap talk about voting?
Yeah.
All right, fair.
And that's how you know we've gone too long.
So thank you for listening, everybody.
We'll be back in a fortnight with an episode that we haven't decided on the topic of yet.
But first we have to thank a patron.
Oh, thank God.
Because this patron has helped bring you this crazy rambly episode,
the old school episode that I certainly enjoyed doing.
This patron is, this patron is Anton Kulikov.
Thank you very much for your support and for helping keeping everything going here.
Thanks, Anton.
Inyash put it best, but you rock.
Yeah, that was a very good suggestion of post.
And thank you for reminding me that Melting Ass Fault, the blog,
does in fact exist and has good content on it.
Was that that one?
That was that one.
That was my suggestion though.
Anton didn't write in about it.
Anton's just next on the list.
Yeah.
Anton's just an excellent person who is helping support us.
I see.
That's right.
You can probably cut that part out then.
Anton's probably one of the best people in the U.S., at least in terms of top 1%,
because we get less than 1% of the U.S. funding us, right?
We have no idea if they live in the U.S. or not.
Damn it.
We have less than 1% of the world funding us though.
So he's in the top 1% of the world in terms of how well they support the Bayesian conspiracy.
That's what I was going to say.
Perfect.
I always fumble over this part where it's like, it's really, I don't know,
I just, I guess I just feel sort of like, oh man, there's a reminder that people listen to this show
and they're giving us money and, aw, that's great.
What do I even, thanks, thank you.
We bought new microphones stands that aren't falling apart and have managed to stay upright
and balanced and work and store properly with your guys' generous support.
That's right.
And they look really sleek.
Oh look, I just got a text from Trina telling me to vote no one, Proposition 155,
I know from the election.
Do you know what Proposition 155 is?
It's the abortion one.
Uh, what would no vote mean in this case?
Your pro-abortion.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
I saw this, I saw this big, big, whatever you call it, display of like, probably 100 little
crosses by making little graves and like a bunch of signs saying vote yes on this thing
and then a picture of babies and it was a picture of babies that are clearly like three months old
at the womb wearing cute little, you know, like it's not a picture of a,
I, one time, I, one time I photoshopped a picture.
I don't know about you, but I came out of the womb wearing my onesie.
I was adorable.
I think I said it to you guys, but one time I got mad and I like took a picture of one
and I photoshopped a fetus, like a, like very early stage development, the human and put
like a fedora on its head because it was just like, it was one of those like the heartbeat
starts at 18 weeks.
And I was like, here's what an 18 week old looks like.
It looks like a lizard, an eyeless lizard.
It's adorable.
Perfect.
All right.
We'll be back in a couple of weeks and thanks for listening, everybody.
Thanks.
Bye.
Oh, hold up a minute.
We've got a quick addendum.
All right.
So we are here because, uh, because you requested links.
And so I went and looked for links and upon looking for links, I found out that I was
wrong and I have become less wrong now.
But I need to tell that to everybody else as well.
So that, uh, Hey, that's the name of the show.
It is.
Yeah.
So, uh, like a pitch meeting that that's the name of the thing.
We are recording this after a hectic workday.
I'm having an above average hectic day as well.
And anyway, we're here to issue an important correction because being less wrong is tight
and we like to announce when that happens.
So, okay.
So in short, uh, this is regarding the forest fires and the effective climate change on
forest fires and, uh, I had been presented with the argument, which I felt was, uh,
you know, entirely, uh, reasonable that the most important thing driving forest fires
is the presence of fuel, just the, you know, broad dry wood on the ground, uh, that burns
up and that that used to be taken care of through natural processes.
And over the past roughly century or so has really been building up due to, um, land use
management and specifically our constant suppression of any and all natural fires
so that the, uh, Tinder just kept building and building and building rather than, um,
rather than burning up as it regularly would.
Uh, and that climate change itself is not really a big driving force because, uh, it's
recent ish compared to the hundred years of Tinder buildup and also because it just,
you know, it doesn't impact on the presence of fuel, which is what the fires is all about,
how much fuel is out there.
Um, and I discovered upon the researching that this is not entirely correct.
Uh, the, the misuse of land management and suppression of fires leading to lots of buildup
of fuel is in fact a thing that has happened and is a big part of this.
But the, uh, what I, the side that I hadn't been presented with and didn't think of on my own
was that, uh, the quality of the fuel also matters.
There is much more wood out there than there ever would have been due to, you know,
these things that we've done, but, uh, when the climate was not as hot and as dry,
the wood, some of the wood wasn't, you know, completely dried out.
It was, there was some mixture of the wetter stuff, things that, uh, weren't quite so flammable.
And as the years have gotten, yeah, as the years have gotten hotter and drier, uh, the wood that
is out there, which is the main problem is also a lot more combustible because it is more dry.
And it makes for fires that are bigger, hotter, last longer and are harder to put out.
So that's, uh, climate change has certainly contributed.
Um, how, how much of it is, you know, the drying out of the wood that's there, as opposed to
there being more wood is hard to say, but every single source I found said that the climate change
drying out is definitely, uh, a part as well.
And there were, you know, there were disagreements as to how big of a, how big of the deal the
climate change is, whether it is a large driving factor or a smaller contributing factor.
But it's definitely also important.
Well, that's good to know.
And it's good to get everything, uh, you know, updated properly, which is great.
And it has, you know, we're not, we're not going to sit here and stick to our, uh,
you know, stick to our guns and something that's wrong.
If we come across information that contradicts what we thought we knew, we change our minds.
Absolutely.
And, you know, especially, uh, the, the hotter, drier climate also makes it much harder to fight
the fires. So they go on longer than they would have, uh, otherwise, just because it's a lot
harder for us to put them out too.
Oh yeah.
Well, you know, if we make it through the next century, I'm optimistic that things will,
I mean, you know, it's, uh, I mean, all right, so here you can tell we're tired and distracted,
or at least I am, but the, uh, on the plus side, having had the entire western half of the United
States be on fire means that the fire season next year probably won't be so bad.
We can certainly hope so. Yeah.
I can't see how possibly could be. We've burned everything.
I don't know if we have burned everything. Like I'm actually not sure how much of a
percentage of what's available this year is burning out. If it's only like two, three percent,
this could go on for a while, but, uh, if it's like a significant fraction, then yeah,
it should definitely make the next few years not as bad.
Well, I was maybe being optimistic. I didn't actually look at like maps of how much was covered
versus like the area that is actually flammable, et cetera. Right.
Yeah. We were totally fucked and, you know, spending our summers inside hiding for smoke
will just be a thing from the rest of our lives until the smoke, until the fires eventually
consume our homes. Or until we create dry wood eating nanites that we can release into the wild,
and they will just render it down into something wet and not flammable.
Fire eating nanites. Nothing has ever gone wrong in the world by releasing nanites that
consume things into the wild. Sounds perfect. Is that all we had for this?
Yeah, that's it. Just a quick update and I have to get back to work because I'm going to be working
for quite a while still tonight. Damn. Well, crush it and sorry for, uh, pulling, having to
pull you away to do this. We, anyway, no, no, everyone have fun. Y'all learned something.
We all changed our minds and everybody, uh, remember the name of the game is less wrong.
Have fun. Heck yeah.
Yeah.
