Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brodsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, and our third
seat is empty.
Damn it!
What happened to Jace?
Jace is, uh...
Dead?
Abducted?
In a different dimension.
Let's go with a different dimension because I just watched Into the Spiderverse yesterday.
Excellent.
Yeah.
And by dead, you know, Jace would never be really dead.
It would be like one of those coming back to haunt us afterwards, sort of dead.
I'm not gonna run out of that joke, I feel like it didn't land.
Oh, okay, sorry.
No, no, I'm not shaming it, it's just, I'm stuck on Into the Spiderverse now.
She's saving, uh, Denver in an alternate universe, um, or they're saving Denver in
an alternate universe.
He's saving Denver.
Jace, I'm sorry.
I am scrambled today.
Okay.
If anyone hasn't noticed in the first 10 seconds, but I'll get it together.
I feel like that's my excuse all the time, and I just need to figure out what my problem
is.
Not enough drugs?
Yeah, that's probably it.
Um, which actually is kind of the focus of today's episode.
How to get one shit together.
Okay.
That's a weird way, that's a bad frame.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, no, no, that's not how I would have put it, but that's one way of
putting it.
Me either.
Uh, bad segues are one of my pastimes.
Aw, bad segues are tight.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
All right.
So, I, I was going to get all the way off my back about those bad segues.
Oh, let me get off that thing.
Oh my God, this, this cannot become a fancast of that.
All right.
So we're talking about the pitch meetings on YouTube.
Check those out.
They're wonderful.
So the thing about the pitch meetings, I love them.
There's basically, there's a bunch of like jokes about movies, uh, that the silly stuff
that happens in movies that wouldn't happen in real life.
And then there's 10, I think somewhere between eight and 12 recurring jokes that appear in
every single episode.
I think it's four or five, but I'll take your word for it.
In any case.
Yeah.
Sorry.
Yeah.
I feel like a total dork for just like repeating things.
I like remember being in high school and like loading money, Python at each other.
And like, we thought we were also smart because we had all these money, Python stuff memorized
and nobody else got it.
And so that was how we were the in-crowd, but like looking back on it, I was like, oh my
God, we were just playing the same in-crowd game.
And so I don't want to be like that, but also it's, it's super fun.
But now we're self-aware of it.
So it's less cringy.
I think it's hilarious.
And I love that I've made super easy, barely an inconvenience, a catchphrase at work.
Like with my team, this is something that there was a thing I did, what, I guess time
is weird and squishy now.
It was put them in a couple of weeks ago and it was going to be all big, the complicated
thing.
And like, actually, no, because Django 2.2, the framework we're using is this cool advanced
feature on it.
It's literally two lines.
And while it's the Python framework.
Is it named after the guy who got unchained and then killed people in the Interdino movement?
I don't think so.
Damn it.
But Python is named after Monty Python and like the source documentation has lots of references
to the Monty Python.
Oh, neat.
Okay.
It all comes full circle.
Not named after the snake.
But I was like, oh no, check this out because Django can do this.
It's actually super easy.
And then my, the guy is showing this, he was like, barely an inconvenience.
I was like, exactly.
So it's a little, little in-jokes.
But I mean, it's like, it feels like family guy where they just reference other things
that are funny as opposed to being funny.
And that's a good way to sum up family guy.
But I have so much fun doing it, you know, there's, there's a certain pleasure to it.
When Brian and I did the Doof and Chill for like the Meet the New Doof members on our
first month on the network for that podcast, at the end Scott was like, I don't like this
question because I don't believe in guilty pleasures, but like, what's your like guilty
go-to TV show?
And I was like, I totally agree with your assessment.
There's no such thing.
If you're having fun, who cares?
Yeah.
I don't believe that, yeah, what is it?
People say that I love bad movies or whatever because they're so bad, they're good.
Like I just, I don't understand that mindset.
Either I like a movie or I don't.
And I think I honestly really like Rocky Horror Picture Show.
I think it's a good movie and I understand how like it's campy and it has low production
value and all those other things that might make it bad, but like it makes me feel things
or it did when I saw it, you know, when I was younger and now I have the memories of those.
And like, when people watch the room because it's so bad, it's hilarious, I watch it and
I'm like, this is just bad, man.
I'm never going to see that movie.
It's just bad.
Yeah.
No, fuck that.
I've seen the, I've seen the famous couple clips that are in every joke thing about anything
and then that makes me wonder like, do they actually think Rocky Horror is bad?
Do they, now I'm like feeling all insecure because like I actually like Rocky Horror and
like if we watch it together, are they, are they like the person who's laughing at my
kid's jokes because my kid is a retard instead of because the jokes are funny or that the
kid is cute?
Or let's say to indulge the kid.
Well, yeah, okay.
But no, that's the difference between laughing to indulge the kid as opposed to laughing
because the kid's being stupid and you're laughing at how dumb the kid is.
Are they, are they like...
Is it mean spirited or is it appreciative, I guess?
Yeah, I don't know.
And at the end of the day, I wouldn't worry about it.
No.
I like the things I like and I enjoy them and I give that to everybody, right?
I'm not going to, I'm not going to say someone, they're having fun the wrong way.
They're having wrong fun, but you know, I just, I don't understand it.
Yeah.
Well, I refuse to like accept any judgment anyone throws at me.
I like watching Family Guy and American Dad.
Well, it's my current guilty pleasure show.
It's been years and years since we watched it and they released a couple more seasons
of, it stopped airing a couple of years ago, Cutthroat Kitchen, this cooking show with
Alton Brown.
It's hilarious.
I won't summarize it, but we watched like the first 10, 11 seasons, I don't know, six
years ago and then they put out a couple more on Hulu.
And so now we're rewatching the first several seasons and it's been long enough that we
have forgotten them.
So like I'm rewatching a cooking show that's, that's like, I mean, what, what could be more
of a quote guilty pleasure than that, but I don't give a shit, judge me, try.
Yeah.
Do you, do you realize we haven't even introduced the show's topic and we're already like 10
minutes off topic?
Well, let's see.
I guess it can't be off topic if you never introduced the topic.
But before we reveal what the secret mystery topic of today is, we are doing the sequence
posts because that is what we do.
So starting with science as a tire.
Cool.
And with a summary, not a summary, a quick mention to X-Men.
And this is like always a timeless reference for any geeks, but the X-Men movie had just
came out recently.
So this was something that like anyone in the general American culture would have gotten
even if they weren't a geek.
So do you remember the opening to the 2001 X-Men with Patrick Stewart's voice over like
that neuron little flying sequence with the credits?
No.
It's just like mutation.
It's the, it's the core of evolution.
I forget what it was, but it was, it was, it was exactly this thing that he's talking
about.
Cool.
And it was, it was memorable at the time that you wrote this and it's timeless like
he said.
So.
Yeah.
So as everyone is familiar, you know, you can have a mutation and that gives you superpowers
and one of those potential superpowers is Storm's ability to control lightning.
The quote that I remembered from this post before even having to reread it was, if one
generation of mutation could cause a human being to be able to generate and throw lightning
from the fingertips, that would outright falsify the theory of evolution.
Yes.
And like it's, it's one of those, the.
It's followed by the line.
It would be worse than finding rabbit fossils in the Precambrian.
Yes.
And that was one of Stephen Jay Gould's like comebacks from like, how would you falsify
evolution?
This is obviously, you know, one of those bullshit theories and he just mumbles in the
microphone or you're like kind of grumbles on the microphone and he's like, fossilized
rabbits in the Precambrian.
And it's like, yes.
Like that.
I did Richard Dawkins impression of his voice.
I didn't actually see Stephen Jay Gould do it.
I'm not even 100% positive.
What was it?
Gould?
What did I say?
Oh, it may have been Gould, but the voice you did, I thought I heard Sagan in there.
Oh, I wish.
Okay.
No, yeah.
In any case, I forget if it was Gould or whoever he is, whoever Dawkins is quoting,
but I remember that quote third hand.
So that's why the rapids thing was also timely because this was in the era of new atheism
books and all that stuff.
So.
Yeah.
So yeah, he points out that X-Men comics, these terms like evolution, mutation and genetic
code purely to place themselves in what they conceive to be the literary genre of science,
which is something we mentioned last episode too.
And Eliezer says, the part that scares me is wondering how many people, especially in
the media, understand science only as a literary genre.
Yeah.
He says that probably an actual majority of the people who believe in evolution use the
phrase because of evolution, because they want to be a part of the scientific in-crowd
belief as a tire, like wearing a lab coat.
Exactly.
And this is whenever I see those like, I fucking love science Facebook groups or whatever
this is exactly what I think of.
Yeah.
And I remember conversations with people like in college and high school who would say things
like this and they would argue, you know, basically the same people that were like in
the era that I was in, like just coming out of like how much fun it is to argue with religious
people and they would, you know, throw evolution talking points out, but they, they didn't understand
what they were arguing in defense of.
And it doesn't make them, they happened to be right, but they were, they were really
just arguing for their side and they weren't arguing, they were, I mean, they were arguing
for the truth.
It's, it's hard to, like, what do you call it if somebody is, doesn't really know what
they're talking about, but is arguing for the right thing and using the right words.
It's false knowledge.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Lucky is another great word for it.
I saw the best troll in the world recently.
I think it was, I posted on our discord, someone says, whenever he talks, whenever he has
meetings with philosophers over zoom, he uses a fake background.
That's a picture of his current background so that the philosophers will have true justified
beliefs that happen to be false or that happen to be not real information or anything based
on information that isn't real.
Yeah.
Cause yeah, only, only a philosopher would care and that's just perfect trolling.
The epistemic status of that person's background is, is, is shakily founded.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So anyways, um, yes, the, the belief is a tire thing.
I, this is more of like a setup for other things, but it's, it's an important point
that a lot of people, I don't know, just care about looking like they're in the right group
rather than really knowing stuff.
Yeah.
And I mean, as a, from a purely consequentialist point of view, it's like, great, as long
as you're doing the right thing, you know, like, as long, as long as part of your, your
belief as a tire means voting for the right things or, uh, I don't know, advocating
the correct policies.
I disagree entirely.
Cause then they're like, like we just said, they're lucky, right?
Like I, I also fucking love science and I really hope that the people who fucking love
science really do fucking love science so that, um, they can incorporate actual evidence
and changing, you know, changing knowledge into their worldviews.
But I get the feeling the vast majority of them happen to fucking love science because
it supports their current view.
And if the science were to shift, they would be like, Oh, well fuck those scientists.
They're all making me angry and shit and, um, and just not followed those things anymore.
And I would much rather someone have an actual true belief desire for true beliefs and, um,
let them take that, then like, let them,
I said, you're saying I would rather have that too.
But if I don't get that, then at least have them rather, I'd rather have, uh, I'd rather
have soldiers on my side, even if they don't know why that's the right side to be on.
Right.
Now, now don't get me wrong.
That's, that's a bad way to look at the world that I wish the world wasn't that way.
But, uh, in this torture analogy, since our votes are soldiers, uh, or since our votes
are bullets, other than be shooting the right way, like I would love for them to, for my,
for my people to know what they're doing and why and, and have the right motivations and
the more the merrier.
But if it's not going to everybody and like some of them are going to just do it just
to impress their, their friends or something like, great, cool, I'll take what I can get.
No, I would rather have people voting against me, but who at least think that they're voting
for the right reasons and actually be concerned about the truth because those are people that
I am confident, uh, would switch over to the right side.
If you could show them the truth, like with evidence and with, um, argumentation.
And like that is something that reality doesn't, um, budge on.
If there is a correct side, it is there to be found.
And eventually either I'll go to their side or they'll come to my side, but the side will
be right.
Whereas the people who happen to be right and are recruiting signs for their side as,
as soldiers, that's great.
But if it turns out that they're wrong, you know, you, you aren't going to convince them.
They, they will not stick to the truth.
They just want you to vote their way.
Like, I think if you're not going with something empirical, like, um, you know, provable positions
to decide how you vote, what are you deciding by?
Are you deciding how to vote because of who your in group is or who has, you know, the
sexiest celebrity endorsements or who has the greatest force of guns on their side?
Because those are all things that I don't want to be the focal point of the battlefield.
I don't want to fight over who has the sexiest celebrities or who has the most guns or who
can most marshal, you know, hatred or passion on their side.
I want the fight to be over who can prove the truth of the matter.
I do too.
Don't get me wrong.
I'm just saying I'll take what I can get right now.
In an ideal world, that sounds perfect, but it's, it's kind of like, I mean,
It's short term thinking.
Uh, I'm, I am for term thinking right now.
Okay.
Yeah.
This, I, stretching again, the analogy more, we're at war now with who, uh, the, the,
the wrong, uh, the, the people advocating for wrong ideas.
Will we still be at war in 50 years?
I sure hope not.
But like right now we need, we need, we need feet on the battlefield.
See, I think we've been at war for at least a hundred years, maybe longer.
And so I'd much rather have, uh, the weapons on our side that will have the correct side
winning 50 years from now, as opposed to just winning right now in the short term and assuming
this will not come up again.
Well, we'll, we'll, we'll keep indoctrinating them while they, while they keep fighting.
All right.
That's not that that's where we're getting away from the post.
We are.
Sorry.
No, no, you're good.
It's a good.
It's a good.
It's a good.
It's a good.
Mind killed again.
No, no, it's fine.
Um, as your goes on to say, I encounter people who are quite often willing to entertain the
notion of dumber than human artificial intelligence or even mildly smarter than human artificial
intelligence.
Introduce the notion of strongly superhuman artificial intelligence and will suddenly
decide it's pseudoscience.
And it's not that they think that they have a theory of intelligence, which lets them
put a calculated theoretical upper bound on the power of optimization process of an optimization
process.
Rather, they strongly associate superhuman AI to the literary genre of apocalyptic literature,
where an AI running a small corporation associates the literary genre of wired magazine.
Um, which is now you see the flaw inherent in your system, right?
If you have people associating with, uh, what they believe to be, you know, science and
lab coats and the attire of science, then if someone makes the argument, Hey, uh, this
AI thing, I, we don't know what the upper limit of an optimization process is, but we think
it might be much smarter than humans.
And now suddenly they're not on your side because they're like, Oh, that's, that's just
apocalyptic fiction.
That's not real science.
So I don't fucking love apocalyptic fiction.
Yes.
And I, I, I, I fully own the flaw of my thinking.
Like I said, it's, this isn't like what I advocate.
This is where I think we are now.
Like if Bill Gates wanted to give a billion dollars towards safe AI research and he wanted
to do it to signal to all of his friends how smart he, like how smart he was, or because
like, Hey, look, I'm very forward thinking or something.
I don't, you know, I don't care why he's doing it.
I care that, Hey, good things are happening.
Like right now he's, he's on the track to cure, like to solve the malaria problem on
earth, right?
If, if he does that, I don't care if he's doing it just to, you know, for the social
esteem, you know, I don't, I don't care if he's doing it because he lost a bet.
Like if he does it, awesome.
But do you think that's why he's doing it?
I think he's doing it because he cares.
Right.
Yeah.
He actually is convinced by both compassion and the science.
Right.
Which is why it's fortunate that we have people who are actually convinced by science.
Whereas if all he wanted to do was look good to his followers, he would fund like more
pre K education or something.
Have you ever met like an aesthetic vegetarian?
What is an aesthetic?
Like someone who doesn't eat meat because it's icky.
Oh, like just the idea of like, oh, just ripping into an animal with my teeth just
feels gross.
I think so.
So like, I feel like a vegetarian is on the right side of, of the moral fence on
where, on what to eat.
And if they're, if they're, if they're not eating meat for what to me don't sound
like good reasons, like I don't really care.
I think you're doing the right thing.
Granted, I eat meat.
I'm a hypocrite.
Um, I was vegetarian for years and fell off the wagon and never found it again.
So if the aesthetic vegetarian at some point got over their grossness of meat
and was like, Oh, this is pretty good.
And started eating meat.
How would you feel about that?
I would, we lost a troop.
Really?
I mean, what else would I feel?
Well, because you eat meat.
Right.
I'm, I'm not, I'm a hypocrite that much.
Right.
I suck.
I'm not saying you suck.
I'm just saying you don't care that much.
I, I don't.
Um, but I kind of hear more about the extinction of the human species, I assume.
Yeah.
Okay.
So the, I'm also, I act, I act just as much in favor of that.
Like verbalized preference that I do about my meat eating thing though.
I do basically fuck all to save the, save the world.
Like I would be nice to do more.
You help spread the word.
I help spread the word.
I don't need a little money.
You should probably kind of keep it on the download that you're a hypocrite though.
While spreading the word.
Well, I remember my parents telling me not to smoke.
They've both been smoking and still smoke for 40 years.
I don't know how old they are.
Um, so like they're right.
They're like, don't smoke.
It's bad for you.
Yeah.
The fact that they're saying that, you know, whilst holding a cigarette,
doesn't make their statement wrong.
Okay.
It, it just, it means that they, uh, they have an addiction.
Yeah.
And it means that they, they don't seem to believe what they're saying enough to
actually do anything about it.
Granted, eating meat and not doing, not, not doing enough to Mary isn't an addiction.
Um, it's, it's, it's, there's a week, how you define enough, you know?
There's a, there's a, there's a weakness of analogy there, but like, what have I
done in my advocacy for like animal, uh, what I'm saying is, if Bill Gates did
not care about science and believing things that were true, do you think he
ever would have gone the route of donating money to AI safety?
Probably not.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Uh, yeah.
I know.
I, and I hear what you're saying.
And on a quick aside, I eat way less meat than I did 10 years ago.
Well, actually no, 10 years ago I was a vegetarian 15 years ago.
Okay.
Um, and I, I make an effort to buy like well sourced things that I do eat.
Cool.
Um, so I don't know, like I'm, I'm doing, it's one of the, like, I also don't
believe in like ethical black and whites.
Like if you're, I don't know, if you're donating to charity, for example, you
should be doing what will McCaskill and Steven Pink or Steven, um, wait, I'm
Jesus, he wrote animal liberation.
All animals are equal.
Uh, believe that Steven Pinker.
No, uh, Peter Singer.
Yes, you're right.
Yeah.
Well, who was Steven Pinker?
He wrote the rise and fall or the, the better angels of our nature.
Right.
Okay.
Um, no, it's, we're good.
Uh, like Peter Singer and Will McCaskill both live at, uh, like the
comfortable poverty level.
I think Will McCaskill in, I know he's like the youngest tenured professor, I
think at Oxford.
So whatever you have to make to live in Oxford, I think he lives on the
equivalent of like 36,000 pounds a year and then he donates the rest.
And like, that's great.
Should we, if we buy what he says, which I do, we should all be doing the same thing.
Um, what I do instead is donate a tiny fraction and realize that I'm doing much
better than I would be otherwise and better than most people.
So like it's not necessarily about doing everything all the way, um, pushing it
over to the window.
Yeah.
And, you know, so like, if you're concerned about animal, uh, well-being
and you like eating meat, maybe do one day a week, we don't eat meat.
And you're in this, maybe we'll transfer into today's topic.
Like it, it's, this isn't again, like a kind of thing where I can point to the
sequence where I got this lesson, but like, actually I kind of can, except it
was just Scott, like Xander post.
I think there was a sequence post that was of the, I don't remember where the
exact term was, but it was the don't let perfect be the enemy of the good.
Perfect.
Yeah.
So, all right, maybe that wasn't an internalized that realizing it, but you
can do better without having to shame yourself for not doing perfectly.
And while we're on the note of the sequences, I'll keep pushing through this one.
Okay.
Um, basically, we've kind of hit this one.
Like the, the people who dismiss super AI, but not standard AI aren't speaking
from within a model of cognition.
They don't realize they need a model.
They don't realize that science is about models.
Yeah.
They're, they're just hearing this and they've got it in their head as,
I love that line.
That's really damning.
Yeah.
And I don't realize they need a model.
Yeah.
Um, it's, it's damning only within like the social sphere who has the vernacular
to like get why that's a, a sick burn.
Um, to the rest of them, it's like, I don't know what the fuck you're talking about.
What do you mean models?
I got a transit at home.
And I think, I think that's like, I mean, the namesake of less wrong.
That's kind of the whole point of the, the Bayesian rationality movement, right?
Just to make our models be less wrong over time.
Right.
Cause more accurate models are better in every way for anything you want to do.
And that's, yeah, man, that sounds like a great like way to end the, like core part
of our episode is like the goal is to be less wrong.
So what, what do you do to do that?
And it's like, yeah, you make incremental steps and it doesn't, it's not about perfection.
It's, it's the, the goal is perfection, but the, the path there is to,
be a little more accurate whenever you can.
So anyway.
All right.
Our next post is fake causality.
And it starts out talking about floggestone.
Have we talked about the floggestone thing before?
You know, this is going to be episode one, like 11 or something or 110.
That puts us at like four years almost.
Okay.
I, my answer is that's my longwood way of saying I have no idea.
Probably.
I think we have, but if we haven't, I'll give a quick recap for people who aren't familiar.
I could have sworn there was an earlier sequence about this, but maybe not.
Floggestone was the medieval alchemical equivalent of the Greek elemental fire.
It is how they explained what fire is.
The examples given in the post are that when you burn wood, it turns to ash
because the hot, orangey, burny stuff is floggestone leaving the wood.
And the ash that remains is, you know, the original true material of what would be
once the floggestone is removed.
And if you started burning something in a sealed container, eventually it would
stop burning because the air became saturated with floggestone and couldn't
hold anymore, so it couldn't leave the wood anymore, that kind of thing.
And he points out that floggestone was a fake explanation.
It didn't actually explain anything at all.
The question is, you know, what is the hot, glowy thing that happens when, when
you burn something, and the answer is, oh, that's floggestone.
Like, oh, oh, yeah, OK, that's, it's, it's within stuff.
And then it gets released and goes to other stuff and like, oh, all right.
But, but it doesn't actually explain anything at all because your, your, your
answer is basically a sequence of syllables that points at the thing you were
asking about in the first place.
It doesn't give you any, any ability to predict things, any ability to extend
this knowledge into other areas.
It's, it's less of a model and more of like a sticker you put on that part of
your map.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And it's like, how do you do that?
Magic.
That's not an explanation.
Because I do it.
Floggestone.
Oh, yeah.
It's into the right mind.
You look at that answer and you're like, that's not a fucking answer.
So unfortunately, and this is something as, as a relevant aside, anyone should,
who's has the least bit of like inclination to do so, read any book on like
the history of science.
I recommend, um, I'm blanking on the author's name.
It's a brief history of nearly everything.
And it's just a summary of how we came to know what we know, the history of
play tectonics, the history of how we know the oral, the earth is round, um, how
we know the core is made of molten iron.
Like all these things are stuff that I believe, but I don't, I haven't directly
observed play tectonics.
A friend of mine was in an earthquake a few weeks ago, but like, who knows what's
causing that could have been one of those, uh, angry gods.
Yeah.
One of those flogging, flogged on things, who knows, right?
Um, so I'm using flogged on its placeholder.
I realized that's not what it was used for in the past, but the takeaway
from it that's really mind blowing is like all the stuff that we were taught
elementary school about like the basic fact of the universe are really, really
new discoveries in history of our species.
Like people in living memory or there's people still alive right now that
had to be convinced play tectonics exists in the original version of Carl
Sagan's cosmos.
Um, it talked about how we don't know what killed the dinosaurs.
Oh, really?
When they re-released it in like 1990, something, um, they updated it a bit
because it was in the mid to late 80s that the, that the understanding, the
understood fact of the meteorite impact knocking them out was widely accepted.
Oh, shit.
Like this sounds like a thing that we've known for hundreds of years.
Right.
Oh yeah.
Astrid meteorite killed the dinosaurs.
Like we've all always known that, but we have not all always known that.
Your parents weren't taught that in school.
Well, I'd be damned.
Isn't that crazy?
That is crazy.
Yeah.
So like it, that, that sort of reflection.
And then you look back on, Oh, our, you know, so you hear about the dumb things
people were doing 300 years ago.
You wonder how could they possibly have been so dumb?
It's like, cause no one had the faintest idea what was going on for the longest time.
And even now, I mean, we've got a great idea.
I hate to be like one of those people like, Oh, we universe is still so unknown.
It's such a mystery.
There's plenty of cool mysteries out there to find and there's lots of unknowns.
We have a much stronger idea now than a we've ever had in the past.
And we've got a pretty good fucking idea.
Like the standard model of physics is not going to be completely thrown.
It's not going to be completely wrong.
Right.
It's going to be adjusted.
Right.
Might be superseded by like a deeper knowledge, but it's still going to be a
damn good approximation.
Like Newtonian mechanics is still a wonderful approximation of physics for
anything on the human scale.
Right.
And, you know, if you're doing chemistry, you're totally fine working with
like the Bohr model, but like atoms are not little ping pong balls.
And it when you're a theoretical physicist, it's a whole different landscape.
But if you're to this, you know, if you're wondering what will happen when
you're pouring a little oil on the pasta noodles that you're cooking to make it
stop boiling or something, you don't need to be a theoretical physicist
thinking about the wave function of what's happening at the quantum scale of it.
It's like, you just need to know, Oh yeah, oil dissipates the surface
tension and does something else.
I'm not a clearly don't cook either.
So I don't know what you're talking about.
What is this oil that you speak of?
Can you pour a little vegetable oil on boiling water to keep it from like
going completely nuts and boiling over?
I have no idea because I do not cook.
But like I said, I literally have no idea what you're talking about right now.
Well, that's this is an empirical question.
I'll get back to you guys in a couple of weeks.
Okay.
All right.
But the point he makes is that Flogiston was widely accepted for a very long time
because fake explanations don't feel fake and that's what makes them dangerous.
And I don't know if any of our listeners used to be religious.
I was as a child and it like, it just felt like a fact of the universe
that the supernatural beings exist.
None of it ever felt fake at the time because you don't, you don't realize.
Yeah, I've used this analogy before that like when I was a kid, I believed in the
like my parents are vaguely religious to the point that couldn't even tell you
what flavor of Christianity they are if they have one.
Um, like, so I believed in the vague facts of the Bible, just like I kind of believed
that Japan existed, like I'd never been there.
I'd seen it on a map, but I'd seen pictures of Jesus.
Like, so it's like, oh yeah, I'll take your word for it.
And it just falls into the same truth bucket in my head as everything else.
I don't know what age I started putting together a probably bullshit bucket
and a definitely bullshit bucket or a definitely probably bullshit bucket.
But like everything just kind of went, everything as a kid just went to that
same like belief, you know, add this to the things of things, you know, yeah.
I used to think that men had one less rib than women.
And yeah, it because that's, that's not a fake explanation.
That's just a fake belief, but a fake explanation is kind of the same way.
Yeah, like a fake explanation is like, it's, it's a, it seems like it's an answer,
but it's not really.
Right.
And that when you realize that when you realize that you can't make a new
prediction off of this explanation, it doesn't tell you anything.
It, it, it's, it's an answer to a multiple choice question on a test.
It's a lot like a password, but it's in, in many case, or I guess in the case
of, in the case of fakes explanations, it's actually worse than a password
because it's actually wrong.
Yeah.
And the problem is that sometimes it feels like it's knowledge because you
don't most, most of the time, many people are running around.
They don't realize that they need some working cohesive model of how
things are supposed to fit together.
Well, I mean, Flogiston makes the fire hot.
That's knowledge, right?
It feels like knowledge.
I've, I could, cause I can, I can say that as a sentence.
And if you ask me, what does Flogiston do?
I could say it makes stuff hot.
Right.
So it feels like knowledge.
Um, but when, when I ask you, all right, well, when I finished burning
this pile of wood, well, it way more or less than it did when it, before I
started burning it, based, based on your Flogiston theory, what do you anticipate?
That depends on whether Flogiston has positive or negative weight, I guess.
Well, you're, you're the Flogiston expert.
You tell me, right?
Uh, I would have to guess that it would weigh less cause everything has weight,
right?
Well, it's, it's Flogiston going in or out.
You know, it's the other question.
Flogiston's going out because the ash is what would be, what would
would be like without Flogiston in it.
Okay.
So the ash would weigh less than the wood.
All right.
Well, so then like, I mean, so like, I mean, which I'm actually not sure if
ash does weigh less than wood or not.
It, I think typically weighs less, depending on what you burn, I would,
I think weighs less cause you're releasing hydrocarbons when you're
burning it, but like you're getting, you're leaving some of the other stuff.
I forget what wood's made of.
I'm not, it's been a while since I've taken a science class.
I mean, I could see wood weighing less just because a lot of it is blown out.
Typically, you know, as cinders and ash and stuff that get carried out, but,
and all the water in it will evaporate when it's being burned.
Yeah, that's true.
Any water that's left in it, but generally isn't, um, oxidization, the
process of adding oxygen to, to something.
Exactly.
So like, I think if you burn a magnesium strip, it'll weigh more afterwards.
Um, so like, Flodgestone theory wouldn't predict that.
Right.
Flodgestone is stuff leaving the system, not entering it.
Yeah.
Um, it doesn't explain why when you cover a candle, it goes out.
Like if you put lit on a candle with like a candle in the jar.
It did explain it because the air became saturated.
Flodgestone couldn't hold anymore.
Hmm.
It's not something you would have predicted beforehand, but since they knew
that's what happened, they fit the, yeah, they fit the explanation to fit the
model, um, which is science backwards, which gets you fucked up.
Yeah, that's near the end of the, uh, the post says, thanks to hindsight bias.
It's not enough to check how well your theory predicts facts you already know.
You have to predict for tomorrow, not yesterday.
I like that.
That's a good takeaway quote too.
So many of these are good bumper stickers.
Or, you know, maybe not bumper stickers, because that's not going to
entertain anyone on the road, but a lot of these are just great little, uh, sound
bites.
I think you have to predict for tomorrow, not yesterday.
I mean, sounds like an, like a, not a total, a tautology, but like, it's not
how most people run around all the time.
Right.
They say, I totally would have seen, I totally saw that coming.
Yeah.
Not, could you tell me that yesterday?
Yeah.
Right.
No, no, no, no, not, can you tell me tomorrow what will happen?
Cause if you ask, could you've told me that yesterday?
It would have said, yeah, of course I would have told you that yesterday.
Right.
Right.
Yeah.
I'd set it backwards.
Yeah.
The real question is, can you tell me what's going to happen tomorrow?
Cool.
All right.
So those were our two posts for today and boy, did we get off on
attention, but hey, it was fun.
That's why we're here.
Exactly.
If we, if we stayed on topic and didn't like ramble a bit, these episodes would
be 90 or 60 minutes long.
And some people would be like, Oh, thank God, please, please give us shorter
episodes for a bi-weekly podcast, we can ramble a bit.
That's true.
And it's more fun for us, which is also important because we were the ones that
have to come back and do this every couple of weeks.
Yeah.
If this wasn't fun, we wouldn't be doing it.
Yeah.
But speaking of fun things, look forward to in the next fortnight.
We are doing three posts.
Brace yourselves, not two, three, because they fit together real well.
We're doing semantic stop signs and the famous mysterious answers to
mysterious questions and the fertility of emergence, which I'm looking forward to.
Those are, those are all great.
This is all part of, I think the map and territory sequence, which is the one
that I remember reading first and having just, this was like all the, like the,
this is so cool moment for me.
And then, like afterwards, you're still reading and learning, but this was the,
uh, this was the really big, this was the first Iron Man movie.
Yeah.
You know, it's like, Oh, this is awesome.
And then you're getting more awesome, but like, this is the first ride up.
Yeah.
Yeah.
This is the, the zero to one change.
Yes.
As who, was that teal or muskets had died?
I think that was musk, right?
The difference going from zero to one is drastic.
More difference than the, from going one to two.
Hmm.
That's a good, good quote, but I couldn't give it, couldn't give you the
attribution.
Okay.
Alrighty.
So onto our actual, uh, topic.
Let's see if we can segue this in.
So that, that is one, this isn't a rationality technique, but that is one thing
because I, all right, today's topic that we've, that we've been putting off
our ages and we'll probably touch again when Jason's joins us next week or for
next episode, I want to say next week, how do the methods of rationality
improve your day-to-day life?
Yes.
And I'm, so this is a not rationalist technique, but one thing that I do to
improve my day-to-day life is not Carol.
People have to say or judge my stuff.
So if they can judge me for rewatching Cutthroat Kitchen, y'all can shove it.
Yeah.
That's right.
I want to say real quick that this one, um, we're doing this topic because
Pointless One is donating at 69 a month.
Seriously?
Nice.
Oh, nice.
But holy crap.
That's also a lot of money per month.
That is a lot.
Thank you so much for your, I, uh, I know that's on the list, um, of our patrons
that we think, but I, I, uh, somehow forgot the, the number there and that is,
uh, substantial and remarkable.
So, and they requested an episode on rational practices for everyday living.
So tell you how we're going to do that.
I think you get to pick at least two more and join us for an episode whenever you
want.
So also because they, uh, hated, we want more.
What was the rationale there?
Oh, that's right.
Um, they wanted to support, uh, I, I remembered getting this email now.
I forget what their exact phrasing was.
They wanted to support the enterprise of this sort of stuff, but without
supporting that shitty podcast, um, I happened to disagree with their assessment of it.
Pointless one, if you're listening to this, which hope you are, we want more in
my super biased opinion, we'll take Enush's less biased opinion, but still biased
probably, um, it's gotten a lot better.
The first several episodes were rough.
Brian and I didn't have a rapport.
We didn't have, uh, the, like, I don't know if you've listened to any of the, uh,
the podcasts that Matt and Scott do for the doof media network.
Um, I recommend them try them out, but they have, they've been, they've known each
other since if not high school college and they, they, they can go way back.
They, they've, they've, they have a, an ability to just ping pong.
I, you know, Hey, throwing this out there, you catch and do something, throw it back.
And it took me and Brian a while to get there, but we've gotten good at that now.
Like, I think we've got a good flow.
And more importantly, I think for the enjoyment of the audience, Brian's
enjoying the book a lot more now.
And it's not just like now it's been since like chapter 15 or something.
You know, it, it took a while.
Um, but the downside is that people who come to it, they're going to listen and
like, Oh, I don't want to listen to someone hate this book for the next year.
So I'm going to turn this off.
I didn't think he's hated it that much in the beginning.
He was, he was hard on like, you know, this kid sucks.
This is all unrealistic kids don't act that way.
Um, the standard kind of like things that if you're not already in
love with the character, you'll point out that suck.
Um, if that's your take on it.
However, his take is, is different now.
I think he, he very much appreciates lots of stuff that's going on.
So what I'm getting at is try it, jump into one of the, uh, Stanford
prison experiment ones are wrapping up that arc now.
I think that they've been going great.
So, and if you, uh, like it, shoot me a note.
And if you don't shoot me a note, sounds good.
Yeah.
So yeah, we're doing, uh, I guess an episode on things that we, ways that
rationality practices in just our regular day-to-day lives, the way to say
help us really wish Jason was here too.
But maybe we can get some, some from him next time.
And I think we'll probably do like a section on this next episode too.
Just cause there's no way that Jason's stuff to contribute.
So I think if anything, they probably do this in a more methodical way than
you and I do.
And I think you do it more than I do.
So I'm, I'm going to do my best to play, play with this, but I don't, I don't
have a list of things, but I'll see what comes up.
Well, you said, so one of them was not giving a shit about what people think
as much.
Yeah, but that's not, that wasn't like, you know, in the sequences or anything
as far as I know.
I mean, it totally was.
I mean, at one point when he, uh, did the clown suit metaphor.
Oh, sure.
But I mean, this is, it struck me.
I'm not, I'm not going against the crowd and not, I'm not challenging the
crowd because I'm not afraid of doing so.
Like that's more of the sequence inspiration stuff, right?
Yeah.
Like I'm just, just this is nicely summarizing some tweets somewhere that
was like, if someone likes something, like, let's not shit on it.
Cause like life sucks.
The world sucks.
And like, let's not, let's not shit on people's things that they, like the
one, like the things that they find to enjoy.
So I found a way to just internalize that.
And I, and like, so I don't, I don't give shit.
You know, someone is just crazy about, uh, football or something.
Like, go nuts.
That's awesome.
Good for you.
Like I, I couldn't care less about football, but I'm not going to be like, oh,
you like football.
That's so, blah, blah.
Um, and I don't think anyone ever says that to me.
If they don't like, you know, stuff that I'm doing, um, certainly I'll take that,
that criticism to heart if it's something that I can improve on or something.
You know, if it's a project I'm working on, like, you know, the reason that Brian
and I record the episodes and put them out is like people listen to them.
And like that makes it a community experience.
Like it's, it's kind of like writing a web serial, like methods of rationality
where like sometimes what you're working on adjusts as the audience feedback loop.
Uh, you know, informs the author.
I do think that's one of the things I disagree with Brian about.
I don't think that, um, Eliezer was influenced by audience feedback very much.
Me either.
I was thinking more of a ward while it's a wild bow finished, uh, his, I'm not sure
if it's the longest it was his most recent one.
It was the sequel to worm one point, something 1.6 million words, I think.
And, uh, like he, he, after he finishes the story, he writes like, uh, an
afterward, like basically kind of like an autopsy of like, Hey, here's
what happened when I was writing this book.
And he mentioned like there were things that he thought would land better.
And so he pivoted on some things because he's very involved in the community.
And that's, that's just a bad idea.
I think it's part of his writing process.
Like it's, it's, it's explicitly part of the challenge he sets for himself.
And so I, I'm curious what an unfiltered wild bow work would be like.
Um, well, it'd probably be like what worm was, or at the very least the
first half of warm because it took a while to, for it to get noticed.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's interesting.
I remember, uh, somebody wrote this skating review, somebody, um, and I
disagreed with like everything that it said, uh, apparently you didn't
disagree with the part where he said he changed the story for the whims of the
audience.
Well, so if he quoted, he quote mind from wild bows afterward and he pulled
out the wrong parts.
He also said something about like how there was enough world building or
something.
I'm like, but the world was built in the first part of the book.
Like I hate reading book seven of a, of a series and they still introduce
things like I haven't heard of it before.
It's like, dude, I've been here.
There was that joke in like one of the pitch meetings for end game and it's
like, wait, are we going to like show Captain Marvel introducing, you know,
introducing to the team and show what she can do.
And it's like, well, uh, no, what do you mean?
It's like, we had the thing in like the after credit, the after part of the last
movie and shadow movie, like, what are we going to do here?
It's like, what about people haven't seen the ones before this one and look at
each other and like, ha, good one.
Yeah, this is the world's most expensive TV series.
We don't care if someone's missed the last episodes.
Like, so I don't want like a whole rebuilding of everything.
And part of that, I think that part of that was intentional.
Like the city they were in wasn't named because it was a recovering
apocalypse city and everything felt transient.
Like it wasn't permanent because everyone was just trying to shove things
back the way they used to be.
It was never going to, that was, that was part of that was intentional.
Anyway, I'm not going to derail on that, that whole thing.
Alrighty.
So, um, did you want to hit ups up with another one or how exactly are we doing this?
I can go ahead with one of mine.
Yeah, go nuts.
Okay.
So I have a thing that you don't see very often because of the nature of it.
Uh, I have internalized the virtue of silence, which I believe is actually
a Scott Alexander post, not, uh, one of the original Elia Zardkowski posts,
but you know, it is still in the sphere of rationality.
And, um, this is the virtue of when something is really stupid and should
not be spread anymore, a lot of people's first reaction is to be like, look how
stupid this is.
And God, that's a lot of Twitter.
That's some YouTube out there is basically people saying like, look at these
stupid people, look how stupid they are, or look at this dumb thing.
And no, no, don't spread that.
That is a giant mistake.
If, if something is better off not shared with the rest of the world, the only
thing you can really do is not share it.
Uh, if you say, Hey everyone, don't share this thing, you're drawing attention to it.
By pointing a spotlight at it and saying, look how dumb this is, you're just
amplifying it.
Yeah.
And charitably through that framing, you're not spreading how, you know, you're
not spreading this misinformation.
I guess you're, you're, you're spreading knowledge of it, but you're not
spreading like this bad idea at face value.
Um, you're, you're, you're spreading it through a lens of saying, isn't this
bullshit, everyone now laugh and retweet and don't forget to like and subscribe.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Like I will, if I see someone else, um, saying something that's
misinformation like that, I will correct them, but like, I wouldn't share some
misinformation and correct it like that.
The, the analogy that I make is, um, if you've ever seen young kids that are
still learning language, sometimes they will say a curse word on accident.
Um, this is a great analogy.
I already know where it's going.
Okay.
Yeah.
And if everyone freaks out and was like, no, no, no, don't say that.
You can't say that.
The kid right away is like, has that word seared into their brain and will be
unable to resist saying it sometimes because like it suddenly has strong
emotional valence and it elicits a reaction.
So all, all they have to do is just be sitting there at the dinner table at
four years old, eating their applesauce or whatever and be like, shit.
And everyone's like, no, no, no, no, no, no, shit, shit, shit.
And even if they're taught that it's bad, I mean, they're going to, this is now a
thing that they know that they, you know, it's naughty to say, right?
Whereas if they accidentally say shit when they mean to say ship and you just,
you know, flow with it, like, you know what they said, or maybe like you correct
them because if when they mispronounce elephant, you're like, no, it's
elephant and within the mispronounce ship, you're like, no, it's ship.
And if you don't make a big deal about it, they don't even notice.
Like it just goes by and often can be the same thing.
Like if a kid hurts themselves, like falls down, knocks his head on something.
If the parent runs up, it's like, oh my God, are you okay?
The kid starts crying like, oh, fuck, I fucked myself up.
But if you just kind of look and see how they react without your reaction, if
there's like, and then keep going back to playing, it probably wasn't that big a
deal and you don't need to make it a big deal.
It's the same kind of thing.
Don't don't draw attention to things because that suddenly makes them really
a really big deal when it doesn't need to be and does the opposite of what you want.
And this is exactly why I am not on Twitter because I have looked at Twitter.
And as far as I can tell, the only thing it's good for is amplifying things
that should be silenced entirely.
I think there are correct ways to use Twitter.
I don't use it, but like, I know that like I'll see I'm on subreddit.
I'll post pictures of some tweets and some of them are really funny.
And I think that's the way to do it.
You find you follow.
I mean, this is my own advocacy.
If I were to get back on Twitter, I would follow comedians and a handful
of scientists and a handful of people of interest.
And that's it.
I wouldn't follow the news.
I wouldn't follow the president to see what shit's coming out today.
I wouldn't.
I would not use it as a rage machine.
The downside is, is like, it's really sometimes nice.
Some people just love that rage machine.
And there's a lot of comedians and scientists you can't follow because
they'll fall into the internet of beefs thing, too.
Yeah, I think and it depends.
Like some of these are just like, you know, I can't think of an example
right off, but like, you know, just a one line joke.
I think Andrew Sulk, Anthony Sulk.
I forget the guy's first name, but his Twitter handle, I still remember
it is the incredible Sulk.
He writes for Family Guy and he just writes jokes.
And there are a lot of jokes that back in the day, back in my day of Twitter,
it was 144, 140 characters, 144, 144, 144 characters.
There are a lot of great jokes.
You can get out 144 characters and like, and there's nothing else to it.
It's just he read it and you're like, this is fucking hilarious.
And then you get to move on.
Yeah.
I know at least I think what Matt Freeman does, who has been on the show
a few times, check out his episodes.
He at some point in the last couple of years, just like went through and purged.
I'm hooked on that word except listening to the mind killers podcast.
Thanks, David.
He's went through and whenever something made him angry, he would just purge
and then follow that person and he's now now Twitter is a positive experience.
Awesome.
And like, that's I think that's the way and this isn't, you know, life advice.
This isn't Steven's life advice corner, but because even I'll get on the hate
train once every few times a week, probably.
Wow.
Like not well, let me, let me, I will watch the hate train go by a few times a week.
I don't get on.
I'm not I don't participate in any of these, but I I'm on a hand that's very different.
Oh, yeah.
That's why I clarified, like I, but I mean, I'm still on
r slash keep track r slash enough Trump's jam.
Just keep track of the Trump thing.
It's yeah, like here's the litany of crimes that have gone on.
You know, like, so for example, they're reducing the sentence on Michael Flynn
at the direction of the Department of Justice, which usually doesn't get involved in this
after Flynn confessed under oath to have lied to Congress.
And it's like, it's one of these insane fucking obvious
travesties of miscarriages of justice.
And yet, like, I'm aware of it and I'm annoyed that I know it.
But like part of me wants to be in the loop.
But I think the real reason is it's like sometimes watching the hate train
go by makes you feel alive.
Right.
I guess.
So some people, I've got a problem.
But, you know, I don't let it bring my day down and I do that on purpose.
The overwhelming majority of subreddits I'm on are things like humans being
bros and like r slash on, which is just cute animals and cats learning to cat.
And, you know, adorable little things to put a smile on my face.
Made me smile is one of them, right?
So like I pepper in the nasty shit.
And if I don't feel like it, I'll skim past it and I'll find the next cute picture
or cat, you know, like some some days you just don't have the energy for it.
And I do want to say before we move on that this isn't always a thing
just for like social media outrage stuff, even though I do also think
that this is a great time to apply this to your everyday life.
But like the original post was about stuff that might actually be bad to spread
either for culture or even for you personally.
And the temptation is just to be like putting it out there and commenting on it.
And oftentimes the best thing to do is stay completely silent and let it go away.
And you'll never know when someone is doing that if they're doing it correctly.
So it is one of those virtues that if it's being practiced, you don't see it.
What was that great line?
It was in that episode of Futurama where Bender meets God.
Sometimes we do things right.
People won't know if you've done anything at all.
Oh, yeah. Yeah.
Anyway, that was a fun episode.
Yeah. Yeah.
All of my most most of my I think applications of rationality to real life
are kind of more like the meta level.
Most of them are like very general things.
So it's a more general thing that can crop up in day to day life.
I think the most like salient thing that jumps to mind, people get hung up
on thinking about how hard something will be and then they don't try it.
They think about this and they're like, oh, no, I could never do that.
And then they just don't.
And it will sure you sure you can't if you if you don't even look at it.
Like I I think I've I might have mentioned this on this podcast.
It's hard to say.
I have a friend I went to high school with who we weren't that close.
So I don't know if there's something he always wanted to do.
I imagine it was he was always very funny.
But at some point after high school, I think he must have said to himself,
I want to write for S I want to write for SNL or for some comedy show.
Like I want to be a comedy writer.
And he has itchings and IMDB for helping write episodes of Brooklyn Nine-Nine.
Awesome.
Like he I don't know what it took to get there.
I'm sure it's hard, but I doubt it's as hard as most.
Well, I mean, it's it's got to be hard because there's not a million writers
to do this, right?
But the point is he didn't stop at thinking I sure would like to do that,
but I'll bet it's too hard.
He said, I'd like to do this.
I wonder what it takes to get there.
And then he's like, I think I could do that.
And that, I think, is more often in the case than people think.
People give up before even looking at how hard a problem would actually be.
They look at it, assume that it would be very hard.
Sometimes they're probably right, but it's probably less hard than they thought.
There can be a lot of instances where, you know, something looks overwhelmingly
hard to do, and you don't have to look at the whole project at once.
You're like, if I knew someone who had done this thing that I would like to get done,
what is the first step they would have taken along the path to finish this thing?
And if you can look at that first step and then evaluate,
could I do that first step, then maybe you can do the thing, right?
That's the advice I've had somewhere, something like half a dozen people
reach out because I mentioned that I got into programming on this podcast.
And maybe I'll put together like a useful post that we can just put somewhere.
Because like, because my advice isn't very like, here's the 10 things you need to do.
There's a million posts like that.
I wouldn't I haven't read any of them.
I bet most of them are garbage.
Like the main thing that took for me, because I can only speak to my experience
and what I can kind of extrapolate from others.
But like the the main thing that happened to me was I looked at the
like I had considered doing this before and I was like, that's got to be too hard.
There's no way I'm smart enough.
Everyone who's been doing this, I've used this analogy a hundred times.
It's I had this just mental image of people who were like programmers for a living.
They were just like they've been coding their own games since before they could walk.
And there's just this like this black box of arcane knowledge
that I just I I'm 20 years past the boat or past the is that what it's called past the boat?
There's a sure. Yeah, the boat left 20 years ago.
Yeah, like like I'm way too late to try and get on this and I'm just not smart enough.
And then like, but I mean, that that's where I was for at least a couple of years.
Granted, luckily, I was already like in the trying to be in the habit of like
trying to do stuff at that point.
And so I had a friend, another friend of the podcast,
Zeke Iran has been on a couple of times, sent me a book called Automate the Boring Stuff.
It's online for free.
It's a Python tutorial and I didn't get very far in it before I realized I was like,
oh, like I can read this like that you're not writing machine code.
It's not like it's not hard.
Oh, I mean, doing doing hard doing the hard stuff is hard.
But like just learning how to do it is actually easy.
Like you can if you if you pick up a language like any modernish language,
you can just look at it and see what it's doing.
And you don't have to be a programmer to see to recognize, OK,
it's going through this five times and it's going to, you know, add one each time.
It's going to print up to five like that.
Did I ever tell you how I learned the basics of programming?
No. Oh, my God.
So my first computer was the Commodore Pet.
And it was one of these things that apparently does have a hard drive.
It's on tapes cassette tapes, literally.
But it doesn't have like an inbuilt hard drive and you couldn't buy any of the
programs. But along with the Commodore Pet,
I got a book called one hundred and one games for your Commodore Pet,
which was the thing is you literally write the programs you want it to run.
And so this was just, I don't know, like 300 pages of code
printed on the words printed on the page.
And it was like typing these things exactly as you see them on the page
after you're done hit run and the game will play.
And so, you know, the first several, I just kind of typed in things,
didn't know what the hell was going on, like one zero space,
G O T O space, two zero, right?
But I started noticing after a while a trend like, oh, this, this acts.
This is a variable.
They're storing data there and this iterates it.
And like I couldn't get all of it just by
putting things in by hand and making the connections myself.
But after a while, I got the basics.
And then I picked up a programming book to like teach me the actual syntax
and the things that I needed to know.
It was amazing, just like typing in code by hand and looking at it
with my bare eyes.
Just for a while, I put things together.
That is one actionable piece of advice I could give is to actually
write code rather than just watch people do it on YouTube.
When you're watching it, it feels like you're learning it, but you're not.
Pause videos, write it out and tweak with it.
Like if they're going to do something and, you know,
they're going to put in parameter 400, put in 410, see what happens.
The really amazing thing is like, to me, it was almost like writing
in a language I don't understand.
I was literally just transcribing characters on a page to the screen.
But after a while, I started noticing trends.
You were the Chinese room.
And then before you knew it, you knew a little Chinese.
And the thing is like they still used English words.
So GOTO was go to.
And I noticed that like the number afterwards
corresponded to all the numbers in front of the lines that I was typing.
So I could put things together.
Programming has gotten a lot easier and a lot more fun since then.
Yeah.
You no longer have to type out your games before you can play them.
That's right.
And what's cool about that is I'm not sure I doubt that your Commodore
pet could play very complicated games.
But like once you figured out what you were doing, you're like,
Oh, I can give myself more hit points.
Oh, yeah.
I set that up, but I set that online 16.
Like, all right, cool.
I'm going to put a hundred thousand there.
Oh, wait, no, shit, 256 bits.
I'm going to put 250 there.
But we're exceeding eight bits.
But yeah.
The meta lesson of like, if there's something you want to do and it seems
impossible, at least do yourself the favor of spending an hour on the internet
looking what it takes to get that thing done.
I don't know what it takes to, I mean, so I did this, you know, with a career
that didn't pan out because I didn't like it.
I wanted to know what it was like to be a private investigator.
That'd be a lot of fun.
That'd be like Sherlock.
I like that a lot.
Turns out it's not.
And I was like, you know, for a while, I'm like, Oh, I can never do that.
But then I, it was just a matter of, and you don't have to, you know,
quit your job and go all in to try something out.
Right.
That's the cool thing about programming, too, is like, do this for an hour.
Do this for a couple hours a week and see if you fucking hate it.
You know, maybe you do and it's not, it's not your thing.
Like with the, it's just, it's about seeing how hard it is to actually get started.
And I think you will find yourself surprised more often than not at how
easy something, not easy necessarily, but how a lot, how much less daunting it is.
When you see, here's the path to get there.
And you're like, Oh, it's not a million steps.
It's 30.
And I've got 10 of those under my belt.
I don't even know that.
And of course, if you want to write for Brooklyn Nine-Nine, you probably
won't be able to, right?
Just because I doubt, I doubt the show will go on long enough for you to break
into the industry and start writing for that particular show.
But if you want to write for a comedy show, if you want to be, if, you know,
be a chef with your own restaurant, if you want to, I don't know, insert a thing.
Name something.
We'll see if we can, like you.
Oh, me personally?
Oh, I don't know.
If I want to be an actor in a Hollywood movie.
That sounds impossible, right?
That's actually great.
I wish I'd thought of that one.
Like I, I think of it that I'm like, Oh yeah, no, whatever.
I don't look like Chris Hemsworth, but, and yet you look at, you watch movies,
not everyone's Chris Hemsworth, right?
You can pull off Tom Holland.
Great.
Thank you.
Yeah.
I appreciate it.
An old, a slightly older Tom Holland, maybe.
I don't know, man.
You look really young.
He looks 22.
I look 25.
Okay.
Do I look 25 yet?
That's slightly older.
Come on.
My voice is deeper.
How old is he really?
I think he was in his early 20s when he did Spider-Man Homecoming.
Okay.
Cause I was going to say in Spider-Man Homecoming, he actually looked kind of
like a teenager, I thought he was the first, which was this century to look
like a, look like a child.
Yeah.
And if it perfectly, yeah.
Um, like, don't go wrong.
I liked the top of McGuire, Spider-Man.
I even liked the Andrew Garfield ones.
I never saw those.
They, they were fine.
Okay.
Um, that's the best I can say for them.
There were parts that I really liked.
Um, they, they weren't good, but they were, they were more like the MCU movies
than the Spider-Man, the top, the Top of McGuire ones, but Top of McGuire ones
were like written before those movies came out.
And they were much more like, let's make a comic book, a movie, not, let's write
an amazing story with comic book characters.
Right.
But that said, they're still great.
Yeah.
Um, anyway, yeah.
So like, I think about this and like, do I want to be an actor?
And then like, I think my, my immediate impression when you said it was like, I
could never do that.
And yet like, I didn't even think about it.
Well, that was my knee jerk reaction after just, just going out about this lesson.
And so you, you, you've, you pushed back against that, that reaction and say, okay,
well, hold on, what does it actually take?
Should I, you know, do I go to improv classes and get, you know, my anxiety of,
of acting it out of the way?
Um, do I go, do I move straight to Hollywood and live in a van and start
auditioning?
Like, I have no idea, but the problem, the point is that there's steps to do.
And you can look, look at what they are.
I bet you start as extra as in shows and, uh, you know, start getting some lines.
There's a 10 commercials, commercials, maybe.
Yeah.
Um, there's an SNL actress.
I don't know if you call him actress performer, uh, cast member.
Okay.
Um, I forget her name.
I think she might be new this year or last year, but I've seen her in the
background of older episodes for years.
Now she's getting talking bits and some segments.
Like it's just a matter of being present and granted she had to be on the show
first, but maybe that's another thing you have to accept.
Like, Hey, you're going to be in this industry for five years before you ever
say anything in front of the camera.
Who knows?
I'm not, I'm making all these numbers up, but like the point is any one of you
guys can go out and be an actor.
If you want to, right?
Just it, this sounds like I'm getting, you know, thanks for coming to my TED
talk and this will be $50 for that, that life speech, but I, I'm serious.
I think people stop at like, I could never do that.
I've heard people, I hear this all the time and it's like, why couldn't you?
And sometimes there's a good reason more often than not, there's not.
And like, there's more often than not, the reason is I think it's too hard.
And it's like, well, why do you think that?
It just sounds hard.
That's like, that's, that's not a good reason.
I mean, technically it is hard.
Oh yeah.
It sounds exactly as hard as it is.
And if you're not willing to do stuff, that's hard.
Maybe this isn't for you.
Yes.
There will be work involved, but I think it's less hard than it sounds like.
Okay.
Like, I don't think I could be an astronaut, but why do I think that?
Like, maybe if I dedicate the rest of my life to it, I could be.
This would be the kind of thing I would have to dedicate the rest of my life to.
I can't half-ass my way to space.
Do they still require them to be in the military?
I don't think so.
Okay.
Um, no, because one of the Backstreet Boys, uh, he wasn't really an astronaut.
He went into space, which is different.
What's the difference?
Well, and I don't know if he actually made it to space.
I know he went into low, I know, I know that he went through astronaut training
and everything.
Okay.
I think that he was going to go to space.
I'll have to double check this.
I only know this because he was on, uh, TV shows, just watching.
I forget what it was called, but he was hosting like a space camp.
And Rachel explained to me why it was perfect that this guy was hosting it
because he's not, he was training to be an astronaut.
Okay.
I think his sponsorship got polled before he went to space or something.
Like an astronaut actually has responsibilities.
They have to make the shuttle work and do things once they're up in space.
And like, you know, be an actual person that other people's lives are on or lie on.
I didn't know that we were at the point where it was cheap enough to
send people to space who were basically useless.
You know, there's space tourism.
Already?
Yeah.
What?
Yeah.
I mean, it takes millions of dollars, but yeah, I didn't know about this.
I thought that right now, everyone who went to space had a critical function.
No, not everyone.
Oh my God.
That is remarkable.
All right.
New life goals, save up and go to space.
Actually, you know what?
Fuck that.
I'm going to wait till it's really easy to get to space.
So you don't have to pay however much it is?
Well, yeah, I'm not going to say the rest of my life to piss it all away when I'm
75 years old to, you know, spend 10 minutes in space.
Also, I have a big fan of adopting like a, let's wait till this, all the bugs
are worked out kind of thing.
Granted, if a passenger plane to space blew up, I think they'd stop doing space tourism.
So I bet that hasn't happened yet.
I'm sure I would have heard about it.
Yeah.
But like, I've, I've, I've joked before, maybe not on the show that like, I'm not
going to be on the first ship to Mars.
I have a friend who wants to be.
And I'm like, yeah, I'll be on the second ship, maybe the third.
Do I know this friend?
Yeah.
He was on my groomsman.
The same guy who I mentioned the, the car.
It doesn't matter.
Okay.
All right.
My friend Brandon.
Yeah.
You know, whatever.
Yeah.
And maybe I'm not sure if he still feels that way.
Also, if he wants to be one of the first people to Mars.
Yeah.
Good for him.
I hope, I mean, if we get a, I think that he said if they're taking volunteers,
he would sign up and I'm like, I'll sign up for a voyage too.
I'll let you guys be the pioneers because I'll let you guys work all the bugs out.
I'm also not going to buy the first, you know, new version of technology,
whatever it is, right?
Even when, even when the stakes are way lower, I don't want to waste my, I'm
not going to waste my money.
I'm not going to risk my life on the cool new thing.
I will say just looked it up.
Space Adventures is the only company that has actually sent paying passengers to
space.
So it's still pretty damn rare.
The first three participants paid an excess of $20 million each for their 10
day visit to the international space station.
That sounds like a really good deal.
If you have 20 million dollars to spare, I was going to roll my eyes and I
thought it was going to be a quick trip to low earth orbit before they circled
back down and they got like a minute of weightlessness.
10 days in the ISS.
Virgin Galactic says it can do the thing where it takes you, like you said,
the low earth orbit for a little while for $250,000.
But again, who cares?
Whereas 10 days in the ISS, that's like legit shit.
That almost brought tears to my eyes.
That is remarkable.
I didn't know we were there yet.
Good for us humans.
All right.
God, that's awesome.
Cool.
Well, that's exciting.
Hell yeah.
So here, here, here's a great example.
We need $20 million.
Well, but like that's the thing is like, how do I go to spare?
And granted, get $20 million is now the harder step in this process.
But I mean, it might be easier to become an actual astronaut.
Right.
But that's really cool.
So sometimes things are a lot easier than I thought.
And I didn't know all you had to do to get spaces, right?
A big check.
That is cool.
All right.
So, um, I also have a more meta thing as opposed to like a single individual technique.
Uh, but I do this on a, not a daily basis, but it's a common thing in my life.
Um, set the stage.
The fundamental question of rationality is what do I know and how do I know it?
And that makes you a bit more secure in your beliefs at first, at least the ones
that you thoroughly investigate and that, um, and that pass your test and aren't
jettisoned with the other ones that turn out to be bullshit or not well supported.
Uh, but the longer you go on in the rationality scene, the more often you find places
where you weren't quite right and you have to adjust your beliefs or some places
where you were like just flat out completely wrong.
And that, I mean, that's good because you're always updating your beliefs.
You're getting a more accurate model and you're learning how to interpret the
world more correctly.
But, uh, the more you see this happening, or at least in my case, the more I have
come to accept that I could be very wrong on things that I am very sure about.
So I am much more live and let live and let people do what they want, uh, as
long as it isn't directly hurting someone else.
So to give the most recent example in our last episode when Jace was like, yeah,
I'm going to do the polyphasic sleep thing now.
I was like, well, that sounds like a terrible idea because everything I've
ever read about it has been about, uh, how it was absolutely the coolest idea ever.
And then someone tried to do it and then it ruined their life for the entire
time they were on it, plus another month or two of recovery afterwards.
Right.
Um, so when Jace mentioned on the podcast, I quickly threw out the disclaimer,
like, Hey, I, everything I've heard about it is that it's a bad idea and it
ruins lives, but go ahead.
You know, maybe you found the right way to do it.
Ruins months, not lives, but yeah, ruins your life for a series of months.
Yeah.
Uh, but maybe you have found the way to do it right this time because that's
what we're all shooting for, right?
How to make the world better.
And you have to try something new to do that.
If every time someone came up with a new idea, you'd be like, no,
that's, that's not going to work.
We've done this before.
Then nothing new would ever get tried.
So I'm like, yeah, you know, give it a shot.
Uh, just as long as you're not hurting really other people when, uh,
on the mind killers, when someone said, God, what do you think about?
I think it was Wes had asked, what do you think about Georgia basically
just completely opening up?
And I was like, well, might suck, but let them try it.
Either a lot of people are going to die and they're going to regret it.
Or, uh, that's not going to happen and we will get some more data.
Either way, we'll learn more and they're the ones that want to take this risk.
So let people take risks if they want to take risks.
Yeah, that's more complicated, complicated because that is hurting other people.
Like, I mean, so if the restaurant you work for is now open and they say
you can come back to work and you're like, I don't want to die.
No, thank you.
Well, then you lose your unemployment.
So it's like, come back to, and I remember seeing like, I think it was
restaurant in Texas, forbidding their employees to our masks.
Forbidding them to wear masks?
Don't wear masks or don't come in.
And because it scares customers or something, apparently.
Now, I think only dumb customers would be, you know, turned off by that.
And the smart ones would be, thank you for not breathing on my food.
Maybe they have a very dumb demographic that they serve though.
And that must be what's going on there.
So, you know, the market will speak to the wisdom of that move, you know,
in a couple of months with how that works out for them.
But like, the Georgia thing is more complicated.
But, you know, as far as personal experimentation, go nuts.
It's the same thing with Midgeish and David that we had on the show.
And like, you know, his, what I consider crazy magic stuff.
I'm like, it sounds like nuts to me, man.
But you're doing your life how you want to do it.
And maybe you'll find some crazy new brain hack that the rest of us can all implement.
So go for it.
Yeah.
And, you know, I'd be more inclined to talk him out of it if like, he's like, oh,
yeah, and I've got this, this guru and only, he only charges me 10 grand a year.
Like, if that was the case, I'd be like, dude, I think you're being, I think
you're being huxed it, huxed it, shiced it.
I don't know whatever you call it.
Both, probably.
Hussled, that's what I was looking for.
I would say the same thing.
But like, if he kept going for it, I'd be like, oh, it's your money.
Oh, I know.
But I would have made an effort to talk him out of it, at least to do some more
homework or something, right?
And like that said, this isn't like an endorsement to try every stupid thing.
No.
But it is an understanding that like some things that are folk wisdoms are
taken by folk wisdom to be stupid are in fact not.
And it's like, we need to do an episode on Eleazar's book, Inadequate
Equilibria at some point, because he opens up with that anecdote, I guess
you can call it, that data point that his then wife had, has whatever, seasonal
effect of disorder, really bad.
And to the point where they were like trying to find a second place to live
during these winter months, because apparently the Bay Area wasn't even
sunny enough in the winter.
Um, and he's, I loved his thinking because he's just like, okay, look,
it's because there's less daylight.
There's a, it's, it's a matter of light, right?
Fuck this.
And I think he spent 500 bucks on light on light strings and just put them all
up around the apartment and alleviated some of her symptoms.
And so it's like, well, if it was that obvious, why wouldn't have anyone tried
that?
And then he goes on, that's, that's more the thrust of the book.
That's why I opened to that analogy.
But like, if someone suggested that to you and you're like, oh, I'm sure that
would be a thing if that was already going to work.
Like, well, maybe not.
Maybe try your own thing, especially I'm also, I'm, I'm way more enthusiastic
about endorsing that sentiment as a whole when the cost of entry is low.
Like I wouldn't say, oh yeah, you know, it only costs, you know, uh, the price
of a small condo, um, I, especially depending on what it is, right?
Because anyone with a sick, um, relative or something, or if you've got, there
was a great episode, in fact, we talked about it with Brian Dunning on his
first interview on the show or his first time he was on the show was much
of an interview.
Um, I don't know, like some costs are much bigger than others.
Like, um, I guess what I always go back to is people have a right to be wrong.
I very strongly believe that anyone has the right to be wrong because you can't.
It's not that easy to tell when someone is wrong, but, um, and also people have
the right to use up their own bodies, how they see fit.
And I mean, there's some complications in there.
Like if you have children or dependence, uh, on that are dependent on you.
But for the most part, like I figured this was going to affect Jace's health,
both mental and physical health in a bad way.
But, you know, I said that and Jace wanted to continue.
And I was like, all right, you know, it's your body.
It's your health.
You can do what you want with it.
I didn't change.
I kind of want to push back on both of those.
Okay.
Um, only in some circumstances, like you have the right to be wrong.
Can you expand on that at least before I start hitting at something that isn't
there?
Cause like I, if someone's wrong, I want to correct them and have them be right.
Well, yes.
Uh, but I, I don't want to, um, correct them through force.
I would like to correct them through.
There's, I mean, yes, I agree with that.
You also feel that way, but there's a lot of people out there who, uh, don't, and
we'll say that, uh, I don't care what you think about this.
You have to behave in the way that I think is correct.
Uh, okay.
Yes, you were just saying like, and I, and I also, I guess I'll defend somebody's
right to say something stupid.
Um, they have the right to, to go to Nazi rallies without masks, uh, tomorrow.
If you got planned for your Sunday afternoon, um, go nuts, but they don't
have the right to hurt people of, um, different, well, they don't have the right
to hurt anyone period, but they have the right to think that other races are
inferior, even though I wish they wouldn't.
And I hope that we can persuade them otherwise.
This is not a thing where, uh, there should be force, legal force used to correct
their opinions.
Okay.
So when you say they have the right to be wrong, you mean that we shouldn't
force them into doing the right thing.
And also for like the, the high minded reason that, and that's probably what
you're getting at is that like, we might be wrong.
Exactly.
It's not like we're wrong about racism, but we could be wrong.
Like imagine if they outlawed, um, polyamory.
Or imagine if they outlawed LSD.
Right.
Um, speaking of high minded, uh, like, so, I mean, they, they could outlaw
something that like actually would help people.
I, you know, uh, examples abound.
Um, the other, the other one about even, even like if LSD actually is long term,
uh, bad for your mental or physical health, uh, I mean, we have, we have alcohol
and nicotine as legal drugs.
And I think people who indulge in nicotine, uh, well, or alcohol for that
matter are wrong to do so, even though I am the person who does drink.
I know that that's a bad idea, but I have the right to be wrong about that.
Cause I'm not hurting other people.
Like as long as I don't get behind a wheel or something.
Yeah.
And like the, the other part about like the, the right to wreck your own body,
like I, so the example I was thinking of was from, I forget the number, episode
number, but the Skeptoid episode, uh, I think you can only listen to it now.
If you pay, I think to support the show, cause he had to switch to a semi
paid model, the last 50 are available for everybody all the time.
But the transcript for the episode on Skeptoid.com is despicable.
Vulture scumbags.
It's in the first 50, I think episodes.
And it was just a response to somebody writing in talking about how, and we
talked about this with our episode on Brian, which is free.
If you want to go listen to it, um, somebody wrote in saying like, Hey,
my dad or somebody has ALS and he is dumping in tens of thousands of
dollars into what I know to be a sham treatment.
And it's something like, you know, electrodes and water that he puts his
feet in or some bullshit that'll never cure his ALS.
And he's like, it's, you know, it's his money to do what he wants with it.
I'm not so much worried about him squandering an inheritance or anything.
And I'm playing this from memory.
It was more a concern of like, he could be putting this towards something that
might actually help.
And instead he's giving all his money to this snake oil salesman.
So what the hell do I do?
And in that one, I like, I would push back hard.
I luckily don't have any family with severe health issues that they're treating
with magic, but if I did, I would like to think I'd be very adamant.
And I don't know what, you know, at what point my adamantness would have to
just stop and be resigned, you know, at some point you have to give up.
But like, I'm not going to just like look at it and be like, Oh, well, good
luck to you.
Um,
Well, I think that that is actually one of those really good examples of the
right to be wrong because he is wrong about that.
It is a terrible waste of money and it is supporting con artists, which is awful.
But I think he has a right to be wrong about that and spend his money, how
he sees fit, because I would also like the right to buy Madaphnil if I think
that it will help me for something.
I want to be able to make what other people think are mistakes.
If I think they're not mistakes, whether it be in Madaphnil or LSD or some
new experimental treatment that everyone else is like, this is bullshit.
Don't do this.
And I would be like, I don't know about that.
I think maybe I do want to try the baby food that has fish oil in it or
whatever it is that is not approved.
Yeah, I think the difference is like, if, if I had really good reason to
believe that what you were doing was killing you and you just didn't know
them, or maybe you would hurt them, but disregard me.
That's, that's what I'm saying.
You're right to be wrong.
Doesn't mean that I shouldn't try and make you less wrong.
No, no, no, no, absolutely.
I, if depending on how much you care for me, I would expect you to.
But also it shouldn't be illegal to do those things.
Okay.
So you're talking more about like force of making people.
Okay, gotcha.
Like it's different than, I don't know, watching your, your parents waste
all of their money on some bullshit pyramid scheme.
Right.
You know, like you might go, I mean, I don't know what I would do if my parents
were like, Hey, we've got this great investment opportunity with whatever
some, whatever fruit juice, pyramid scheme, whatever it is.
I'd be like, no, no, fuck you guys, stop, stop, keep your day jobs.
Like I, but I, I can see.
But what if someone was pushing that hard against you investing a thousand
dollars into Bitcoin back when it was 10 bucks a coin?
Um, like, so, but now I'm seeing the distinction you're talking about.
It's one thing to say, like, uh, yes, you should do your best to inform the
people that you care about and everyone else on the best information available.
Um, it's another thing entirely to make buying it Bitcoin illegal.
Right.
Right.
So I see, I ultimately, you have the right to be wrong about Bitcoin's future.
The legal right.
Yes.
Okay.
Now, now I get what you're saying as far as some point, your family will be like,
okay, fine, I'm sorry.
I, there's nothing I can do when, when you say I have the right to waste my
money on maybe not even Bitcoin.
Maybe it's, you know, like what dogecoin, but if in 2006 I had spent $1,000
in Bitcoin, then who'd be laughing, you know, three years ago when I sold.
Um, but if you put a thousand dollars into Bitcoin, when is that $12,000?
Then yes, then I would want, then that's the thing is I'd want my, my savvy
minded friends to be like, no, no, Steven, it's peaking, bubbles poppin.
This, this don't buy now in the fucked.
Um, yeah, but would I want a legal moratorium against making a bad investment?
No.
Yeah.
Okay.
So the legal right to be, to be wrong and the.
And so that's where my, my, you know, belief in the right to be wrong really
extends into the whole allowing, you know, being semi supportive and allowing
other people to do these experimental things.
It's just, whereas before I would be kind of freaking out and being like, Oh God,
don't do that, don't do that.
And now I'm like, well, you know the risks and I wish you well.
I hope it goes for the best.
Even if I am worried that it won't.
I got dragged into a sales mitt or a pitch meeting for a, um, I forget what
they were even selling.
It was some, it was some pyramid scheme.
And the first red flag was that someone on Facebook reached out to me who hadn't
seen since high school and I would have been in my early mid twenties and they
were like, Hey, Steven, uh, some friends and I are working on this really
interesting thing.
I think you should come check this out.
We've got a thing like on Saturday at eight and I'm like, this sounds like I'm
going to be sacrificing a ritual, but I got nothing going on Saturday.
I'll come take a look.
And it, they were really dodgy about answering questions beforehand because
they've been coached to not to answer questions beforehand because I Google
the company, see the word pyramid scheme on the finished Google search.
And, um, and I'm, I mean, I'm filling in the gaps here, but I'm assuming that's
why they're so dodgy about it.
I get there, I watch it.
I read the pamphlet they give me on the back of the pamphlet.
It says that one in 200 people make their money back because it was like $2,000 to
get in and it was in the really small print, but it was in the, it was in the
documentation they give you.
And I showed her that and I was like, there's like 40 people here.
The odds of any of you guys getting your money back is not great.
Um, you're not going to be like the guy in the video.
We had to watch you as a jet ski or a boat or whatever it was, right?
Like you guys are not getting there.
And in fact, I'll bet you a thousand dollars that you're not going to get there.
I would love that bet.
Um, you know, if, if in a year you own a jet ski that you're not making
payments on for money, you may doing this, I give you a thousand dollars.
I really should have done that, but I never thousand dollars to gamble back then.
Um, so what am I getting at here?
Nothing.
It just ties into, I mean, no, well, that's what I did when I left.
I had said, I don't think this will work.
This sounds like a pyramid scheme.
So no, I'm not buying it on you.
I'm sorry, but also I encourage you to get out like, you know, I do your own thing.
I hope it works out, but here look, they don't think it'll work or they're being
forthcoming with how unlikely it is to work for you.
You know, the, the person that they brought in who got you into it, who's now
trying to get us all into it is the top of this pipeline, the top of this pyramid
for you guys.
Um, they're probably not making money on this yet and there's like 40 people here.
You guys are not getting this together.
Speaking of trying to bet your friend $1,000, is that on your list at all?
Uh, betting on stuff.
The willingness to, uh, bet on beliefs.
Yeah.
Um, no, but it should be.
I also don't make as many formal bets as is popularized in the community.
I think I've made one and I'll have to pay out.
I think we'll have the numbers in eight.
I don't know.
I made it with David Spearman about, I think more you that'll vote this election
than voted in the last election.
Okay.
I forget what number I said it was, but, and I think
I, and I think I bet like $220 bucks, like whatever, but I mean, this isn't one
of the ones I was going to burn one of my things talking about.
But yeah, that's, that's one thing we can put out there together, which is, um,
I actually bet very, very rarely.
Uh, it's just not a thing I do very often, both because, I don't know, for a
number of reasons, but the mindset of like, cause a lot of people just have a
hard rule against gambling, don't do it.
It's bad.
And that's actually a good hard rule to have one shouldn't gamble, but I don't
think wagering on beliefs is really gambling.
I think it's more of a way to calibrate how sure you are about the world and,
um, making it actually matter.
And I think have just the mindset of thinking, am I willing to bet on this?
And if I was, how, you know, how much am I willing to bet?
How sure am I on this sort of thing?
What odds would I accept is very valuable to have, even if you don't actually
make the bets.
And those can be really valuable.
Even if, yeah, exactly.
Even if you never put a dollar down.
Um, you know, I, I could imagine, uh, well, I'll leave a political example out
because I was going to just invent it, but I've got a great example from, I
can't, I can never find a link to it because I saw this 10 or 15 years ago,
but it was like, Penn Gillette talking with somebody like during one of his
shows or talking about talking to somebody during one of his shows.
And it was like a card trick and he's like, how much do you want to bet that
your cards on the top of the deck?
And the guy was, or no, excuse me.
The guy was, it was like, Hey, how much do you think your cards in the deck?
And he's like, absolutely.
And he's like, how much do you want to bet that it is?
And the guy's like, now I'm less sure.
And it was either that or like, I'll bet you a hundred bucks.
It's not or something.
And it was like, okay, yeah, never mind.
Um, like, I thought that I was confident, but the second I was asked to actually
put any skin in the game, I'm out, right?
And then when you, when you can go into that mindset, you realize that you're
not that confident at all.
And it helps keep you calibrated, um, even if you're not losing money.
So, you know, as far as the, the one wager I have on the, the discords,
like all witness or bets, barrel witness or whatever, um, it's small potatoes.
If I lose 10 bucks, I lose 10 bucks.
I'm, you know, I'm not going to bet, uh, a large sum, um, certainly because I
wasn't really as confident as I was with my friend at the, you know,
pyramid scheme thing.
That'd have been awesome.
If I made a thousand, the downside though, of course, is that then
she would have lost a lot of money and now she goes to a thousand.
Exactly.
Now I'm, now I'm knocking on her door every, you know, give me my thousand bucks.
I'll send my goons.
Um, so I wonder what the market rate is for good goons.
Um, that's, that's an aside question.
We were talking about the Harley Quinn show, which is worth watching.
Um, very fun show.
There's, uh, it was on my favorites.
I came across this great gem and it was like the most inspiring 10 minutes of
podcasts I'd heard in a while.
Um, and I sent it to you guys, I sent you guys a message about it.
It's episode 200 of Sam Harris's podcast, which has gotten surprisingly better
since, uh, the lockdown and cause now he's just doing like pretty much laid
back conversations with guests.
It's a lot less of like the dumb shit he was doing six months ago.
Um, anyway, episode 200 creatures of habit.
It's a conversation with James Clear and it's at some point in the last 35
minutes of the podcast, maybe, I mean, the whole thing's worth listening to
cause it's just about like what are habits with people?
How do they work?
Where do they come from?
That sort of cool stuff.
Um, but if you want the bit that was really inspiring, I found, uh, one online
or link that I'll put on the podcast, uh, on the, in the notes and the, the, the
short summary of it, and I'll find as much as I can from this to read from
cause it's really, really cool.
Basically in, uh, 2003, the British cycling team, uh, they hadn't won in, I
want to say decades, um, in any like national or read, I dunno, at some point,
Olympics, whatever one is the team sucked and they're like, we want to do better.
The one fact that really factoid that really stuck out from, to me, from
what the link you sent me was that there was a, uh, bicycle equipment
manufacturer who would not sell to them because they were worried if anyone
saw the British team using their products, that it would, uh, lower, you
know, the brand in the eyes of the public.
That's awesome.
And that wasn't in the podcast description or the, the summary that
he gave in the podcast.
Um, yeah.
So they were notoriously bad at the point where some people didn't want
to sell to them.
Yeah.
So you got to suck pretty hard.
And so the question is like, all right, well, how do we do better?
What are the, what are the grades doing that we're not?
And like, obviously they're looking at like what the grades are doing.
And they're like, well, we feel like we're doing all those things.
And so this is the generalizable lesson is that they tried to find, well,
rather they brought in, uh, let me see if I can find them.
It doesn't matter.
They brought in a, uh, a new performance director.
There it is.
Uh, Dave Brailsford.
Um, and this guy was like, look, it's not about shooting to the top.
It's about finding marginal improvements wherever we can.
And when I say wherever we can, I mean places you guys aren't even thinking
to look, um, let's bring a variety of pillows on tour.
And you guys, uh, you sleep with, you know, one pillow a night and decide, and
you guys, whichever one you find works the best.
We're going to use that brand of pillow for you.
You're going to get the best sleep you can before this.
We're going to try, um, uh, let me find some of the examples of things that they
did because like a lot of them are outside the box.
Like they painted the inside of the trucks that they transport the bikes in
white so they could spot dirt and grime that you would otherwise miss in a gray
truck.
Um, because when you're talking about a high performance bicycle, even little
bits of dirt and grime in the gears make a difference.
Yeah.
Like, yeah, he was talking about literally like just anywhere, any little place
we can eke out a 1% improvement, uh, in that one, that one sub area is worth doing.
And, and that's the thrust of the, I think that's the title of the essay.
Like, what is it?
Um, this coach improved every tiny thing by 1% and here's what happened.
God, that's click baby.
Yes.
But, um, the, the 1% improvements, uh, motif is common throughout the, uh,
James Clear's work.
Um, so like, yeah, keeping the bikes clean, um, trying different bike seats, that
stuff, that's, that's, that's easy, you know, low hanging fruit, right?
So like, let's find the, the small hard to find fruit.
And it's things like, uh, they hired a surgeon to teach the riders the best way
to wash their hands, to reduce their chances of catching a cold before, uh,
competitions, like that, that's outside the box thinking, right?
Um, they determined the type and pillow and mattress that led to the best night
sleep for each rider.
They, uh, I mentioned they painted the thing.
Um, there were a handful of other examples, but like the point is, is that, uh, in
just five years after Brailsford took over, the British cycling team dominated
the road and track cycling events at the 2008 Olympic games in Beijing, where
they've won and a sounding 60% of gold medals.
Um, four years later, the Olympic games came to London and the Brits raised the
bar, as they said, nine Olympic records and seven world records.
Like in this, again, this wasn't done through, um, finding the best super
mutant that they could throw on a bike and have him just be, you know, the top dog.
It's like, no, no, we can find all these little marginal improvements.
And so the thing is finding those, and if you're not a cyclist and you don't have
all these ideas to look for now, finding these in your day to day life is, is the
challenge, but it's something that you can totally do.
And it's the thing is that like, I think a lot of people, if you're anything
like me, which probably most people have their stuff together, stuff together
better than I do, um, obvious things like, uh, eat better, eat a little bit better.
It doesn't have to be like jump straight to a insert complicated diet.
Um, I don't eat like complete dog shit, but I, I, you know, I could do better.
It's just a little bit of exercise now and then it's amazing how sedentary modern
day humans are.
Yeah.
Like I, if I didn't put an effort into it, I think I could go literal years
between needing to, uh, stress some of my muscles to their maximum potential.
I remember last time I've done, I mean, maximum potential, I, does that
just mean that's doing as many reps as you can for your arms, fatigue or?
No, I mean, that just means like having to flex it as hard as I can possibly
flex it for one thing of anything.
I see.
Like how much effort does it take to get out of a chair or to, uh, walk
across the room or click a mouse?
Like literally I am never using that muscle to the strongest point that
that muscle can be used for years at a time.
Unless you make yourself do it.
Yeah, exactly.
Okay.
Yeah.
That's what you're saying.
Yeah.
I mean, so I work out every day because I recognize that it makes me feel better.
Um, let's see, two or three weeks ago, might've been three or four.
Again, time squishy in these weird times.
Um, I started doing yoga every day and some of them are like, I, I'm not, I
don't have the best, uh, I, I complained about my body before.
My body doesn't like some of them.
So I don't do those ones.
I'm not going to fuck myself up, but the rest I do.
And it's like, it's amazing how like you can hit a small muscle group that
you didn't even know you had.
And you're like, Oh man, that feels cool.
Um, like a little, I don't know.
So I'm, I'm, and it's something I don't mind spending half an hour a day
doing cause we're not doing anything else anyway.
So, um, you know, I don't know, like I, I might've brought this up years
ago on the podcast and this is like the most superficial example, but this,
I remember raising this concern and this is kind of the answer.
So like the concern was, I remembered when I got an Xbox 360, my previous
system before that, the regular Xbox had the, uh, red, yellow and white
cables for video and audio.
And my Xbox 360 came with red, yellow and white.
And then like the green and blue ones.
And I was like, Oh, that's where the HD comes from.
It was those extra two cables cause I didn't know what it was.
And then I'm playing like, uh, Skyrim and, uh, Call of Duty with my co-workers.
And at some point one of my co-workers business and he's like,
why don't you have an HDMI cable?
And I'm like, I thought that's what these were.
He's like, no.
And, and for 20 bucks, I radically increased my ability to enjoy what I was
playing on these things.
And so this kind of, I remember at the time and even like years later, looking
back, I'm like, what else am I $20 away from like a big life improvement?
Granted, playing video games, that's a, you know, very fringe thing, but
just something I was enjoying doing.
And like being able to see your opponents in Call of Duty, when they're not,
you know, uh, Lego pixels in the distance, that helps you win.
And if you're, if you're having fun winning and you can do that better for
20 bucks and like also just improve the quality of whatever you're consuming.
Again, I realized that's a super low stakes example, but, but it, but it's
illustrative of the fact that like, I might be 10 bucks away from a big
improvement in all kinds of areas of my life.
Who knows?
So like, it kind of put me in this little bit of like latent background
nervousness of like, what else am I not optimizing on that I could do really,
really easily.
And it, it, it made me, uh, kind of keep a lookout for those things.
The problem is if you don't know that there's something that can be improved
on, you don't know what to look for.
Right.
So like, you don't know what areas to look into.
Like you wouldn't have known about the, it's my thing.
If you're coworker didn't say something.
Right.
So sometimes it's just like, I, one, one technique that I have tried to
generalize is anytime I'm annoyed by something, like, I'm like, God, I wish
this, this worked better or whatever it is.
I, I'm trying to think of an example, um, uh, again, well, this is again,
the dumbest, lowest stakes example, but it's the first one that came to mind.
There are better examples of this.
I'm sure, uh, the Apple TV remote is a swipe touchscreen thing because
fuck Apple, it can't be buttons.
And we would constantly overshoot what we're trying to hit, especially when
we're trying to type in something in the search bar.
Luckily it knows how much it sucks.
And there's a voice, there's a voice search button, but sometimes you're
scrolling down to a video and you go three past it because the swipe is too big.
And I'm like, this is so fucking annoying.
And so like, I, I had a little flag that goes up whenever I think this is so annoying.
And I was like, okay, what am I annoyed at?
The swipe sucks.
And I'm like, well, hold on, I just jump in the settings, jump the swipe
power down to like medium and it jumps less far.
Like, so that didn't cost me any money.
It took me five seconds.
So if, if you're looking for an actionable piece of advice, I
realized this is so like all my examples are really low ball.
Um,
but that's how, that's how you build up quality of life improvements.
Lots of little things.
Yeah.
And I mean, even like this, this can apply to like boring examples of things at work.
Um, but like, oh, I mean, at my work, I'm sure, you know, other people's work
have more interesting applications of this stuff.
But like my, a lot of, a lot of parts of my job involve like deliberate
optimization.
If you're doing things the slow way, uh, it, it drags things down.
Um, so, you know, but that, that's, that's, that's more like being paid to do it
and less like doing it to increase, uh, quality of life.
Like you said, um, I don't know, uh, I remember at some point, like
whenever light bulb goes out, I started buying like the, like higher, um, like
radiant bulbs or something.
They're the same waters.
They take the same amount of energy to power, but they're like, they're, they're
more, they feel more like more natural light.
And I like those a lot more.
It keeps my mood elevated.
Um, you know, like, I don't know.
So again, these are all really low ball examples, but that maybe that's also kind
of part of the point.
These are all fractions of a percent of improvement, but they lead up to a
better day and that leads up to better weeks and leads to a happier Steven.
Right.
And if that's your goal, um, if your goal is happier, Steven, I'm kidding.
If your goal is a happier you, then that, that look for little things
that you can do to improve your life.
Right.
What if your goal is a more rational you?
I mean, that's a, not the topic, but yes, it's kind of like rational practices
for everyday living, right?
Well, but presumably it's like, do you want your life to be better by it?
Or do you want to just be more rational?
Now, granted, we think those are one in the same.
Right.
That's, that's why, that's why the question, right?
If you can make your life, if you can improve how you're, what your rationality
is like, the improvements will come with that.
Yeah, that was a terrible sentence.
No, it, if you can improve the amount of rationality skill that you have, that'll
improve your life in the long run.
That's the, that's the hypothesis anyway, right?
That's, that's, that's the claim.
Yeah.
In fact, this is also, this episode is partly inspired by our response to an
email we got from somebody who was asking, like, does this actually do anything?
And there's a note in here from Jason, the notes section of our secret
crib notes for these episodes that there's nothing of substance that we can
respond to that it just says, I'd like to address this because it was
definitely responsible for improving my life, my life outcomes.
So we will have to have a footnote on this next episode.
But I do think like life, how it can improve life is a slightly separate
topic of like, what are rational practices that you can do though?
Yeah, because like rational practices you can do.
In fact, this is another one that also improves your life.
But like, I mean, so half the things that I do that improve my life just come
from like the easier part of rationality, like basically like skepticism.
So like being less sold on bullshit, having, having a better
bolster detector is one big thing.
Having clear, having the ability to form clearer positions slash beliefs in your head.
And you get a big one.
I know I've said this before is just having a, a range of probabilities
and your beliefs rather than, you know, I believe this is true or this is false.
Right.
Yeah.
Recognizing that beliefs are confidence intervals and aren't on off switches.
So you don't even have to sit, I've never sat down with a pen and paper
and done a Bayesian calculation before.
I've seen them, I could see the math.
I could, I could plug in chug numbers if I wanted to.
I've never bothered.
The, now that, that's probably not a badge of pride for someone who does a podcast like this.
But the, the takeaway of it is that like the, it's more of a, a framework for
how to view your, to inform your view of the world.
My, my, my beliefs and things aren't binary.
They are confidences.
And that's also just true.
That, does that, does that make sense?
It does.
Yeah, I think, yeah, I think like one of the best rationalist practices you can have,
the one I would recommend more than anything else is to actually be concerned
about if what you believe is true and, and you know, really take that seriously.
Not just like, I want to be right, but I, I want to know what is true, even if that
would prove that what I think is wrong.
You can't do better if you're not right, or rather if you're not, if you're not
getting less wrong, it sounds like that was a really apropos name for this website.
But like, if your goal is to improve something, again, at the British
cycling team to take that easy analogy, if all they wanted, if they thought that
all they had to do was practice more, they wouldn't have been ripping gold
metals away from everybody else.
Right.
Yeah.
It, because it wasn't just about that.
There were other areas to improve on.
And if all they thought was like, we're not, we're just not writing enough, then
like they, they still wouldn't have won.
It's, it's a wide variety of things.
Yeah.
And like, you know, part of the, the low hanging fruit is like getting enough.
And this is, you know, not, not the hard, uh, symbolic logic stuff that you'd
have to pass a test on in college, but like the, the basics of a, a logical
argument and, and while being able to throw down a fallacy flag on someone
else's argument is like an easy go to for an online argument.
If you're not doing it that way, but in a way to a better yourself and realize
like, oh wait, sorry, that was, or, you know, to yourself, you're putting
together an argument and you're thinking, oh no, wait, that was, uh,
that was a slippery slope.
Let me make sure is the slope actually that slippery.
Oh no, wait, that was, that was, uh, um, an ad hominem.
I'm, I'm attacking the person.
I'm not attacking the actual argument or, you know, the hypocrisy thing that,
that's an ad hominem.
You know, again, if you're going to throw down the, the badge with the word on it.
Right.
Um, and there, there are like similar, there's a similar vernacular that again,
you can use to pass as a, you can use as a password on a multiple choice test,
or you can use to perform your life better like planning fallacy.
Um, I tend to be on time for things because I give myself extra time to do
stuff.
Um, it's funny when that doesn't work out, but in my experience, that's mainly
when there are more unknowns in what you're planning.
And that's just the name of the game.
And I gotta say, as someone who is on the receiving end of your punctuality,
because we, um, record in the Brotsky international studios that you have to
drive to, I appreciate it so fricking much.
It is amazing to have someone that like, you'd know, reliably is pretty much
always going to be, uh, at the agree upon place and time.
If you've agreed on a place in time,
the key is to never count on good traffic, but that's just for punctuality.
But I mean, like, and also we should mention this is the first time we're
recording in Brotsky international studios in a couple of months.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's been a while.
It's really nice to be able to like record in person again.
Yeah, we got, I mean, whatever the apocalypse is still happening, but we got
sick of, uh, not seeing each other's faces.
So we're, you know, we're safe distance.
We're both isolating in our real lives.
It doesn't matter.
The exact, that's the thing I was going to say, like, I don't trust some people,
like the people at my work that, uh, I went for one day back into the office
and there were two people that just didn't wear masks.
Don't think they even brought masks.
Uh, I don't trust those fuckers.
And this is why in general I don't trust most people, but like, I trust you to
be responsible for the most part.
And like, you can't completely isolate yourself forever.
If you have a circle of people that you can trust, I feel okay with, um, being
with them because, you know, if you have some non-social distancing with a
couple dozen people, that's not the problem.
The big problem is being in large groups with lots of strangers, like concerts
or sporting events or whatever, where these things spread like crazy.
Or just even the office.
Or even the office, yeah, with people that you can't trust because I don't know,
maybe those people, if they're not wearing masks in the office, how do I know
they're not going out to clubs and concerts and shit?
Well, mainly those places are closed right now, but the point taken, there
was a, there was a thing I saw, I think there's a subreddit.
This is one of those hate ones that I just found and I'll probably leave
eventually, but it's called leopards ate my face.
And it's mainly like people who are fucked, people who are bitten the butt by
like things that they seem like they're advocating for, but then like, oh, I
never thought this would happen to me.
I never thought lovers would eat my face.
And it was like, Hey, everyone.
It was like a cut of a Facebook post where they whited out the person's name.
Hey, everyone.
I just needed to put out there that I tested positive for COVID.
So, um, this is for everyone who came to my barbecue this weekend.
I'm really sorry.
You guys should all be extra careful and get looked at and probably try
in distance.
And it's like, yes, never thought lovers would eat my face.
Um, so yeah, like I had a friend over for a movie last night.
We, uh, you know, we didn't share a glass or anything.
So I'm not, I'm not overly concerned about that, but also he's been at
home for the last six fucking weeks.
Yeah.
Um, I mean, I'm concerned every time I go out to the store, I don't want to get
on this because it is one of those hate trains, but I'm already there.
So I'll jump off and the train, the train in a second.
But I'm at Costco this, what, uh, earlier this week.
And they've got a sign on the door.
Well, yes, this is the afterwear mask and they've limited the number of people
that can come in at a time.
That said, it felt crowded.
I'm not sure if they still have this and there was no line.
It was much less crowded than other times I've been in Costco.
Oh, good.
Well, when I was in there, a couple people, because he can't enter without a mask,
which is tight.
Apparently the only people walking around making people actually fucking wear them.
I passed a number, I never saw a number of people with it sitting around
there, sitting on their, sitting on their, around their neck.
And I'm watching these people just like, I'm doing mouth breathing and just
like sitting there.
I, I, I'm like, and I never, I didn't talk to anybody.
I do the same thing whenever I go to Costco.
I wear headphones and sunglasses the whole time.
So like, I'm, I'm kind of in my own bubble, but I'm just like, dude, this
isn't for you.
We're not trying to tell you what to do.
You're trying to, like, I mean, I'm, I'm passing old people in here.
Also, I passed an old lady wearing it, not covering her nose.
Well, then she's just, she's just doing it wrong.
I don't think she's doing it stupid.
Like this guy was just like, I'm done following the rules.
Oh, you think she just didn't know that's how masks work?
Maybe.
Come on.
If you can drive yourself to a Costco, you know that the mask is supposed to
cover the breathing holes.
Ah, some people are really dumb.
Maybe she's, maybe she's thinking, I'll just breathe through my mouth while I
got this on or something.
I don't know.
Right.
Uh, I, I guess maybe I'm putting too high of a prior on the fact that like,
she's old and in the demographic that could get very, very sick.
You'd think she'd want to be extra careful.
Maybe she wants to die.
Maybe she's like, I am over with this.
Please, Jesus, take me now.
Then just run to the courthouse.
People are having all those fucking, you know, bring your guns to work day and,
and scaring all the, the elected officials.
Just go there and ask to lick some doorknobs.
Like, I don't know.
Um, yeah, I, anyway.
All right.
So got a couple of listener feedbacks to hit.
Right on.
Cool.
So Velcro posted in the discord, not sure if this is the right place, which
first of all, let me stop it right there and say, there is no wrong place.
Like I, for example, saw this feedback and I copied it.
So, uh, that was obviously the right place in retrospect.
On the other hand, all the wrong places are, we won't see them, right?
So there are plenty of, there are a lot more wrong places than right places.
Well, I mean, that's part of the thing about discord is you can't see
everything on the discord.
Unless you're there all the time.
And I know I'm not there all the time.
I know you guys aren't there all the time.
So it's hard to say it, like the discord will get noticed.
The discord will get a lot of other people talking with you.
So the discord is great for that.
And the discord is by its nature temporary.
It scrolls away after a while.
And so you can say things that you probably wouldn't feel comfortable saying
like on a subreddit where it's there for posterity, right?
On the other hand, you know, it won't necessarily be seen and discord
and subreddit is just so different.
So I don't know if it's the right place.
It's certainly a place and it was seen.
So sure, why not?
I like the discord.
I spend more time there than on the subreddit, but I realized that the
subreddit is like a, in theory, better place for feedback type of things.
Yeah.
If you want to guarantee, we'll see something, uh, email us at, uh,
Bayesian conspiracy podcast at gmail.com or is it the Bayesian conspiracy
at gmail.com?
I'll double check.
Okay.
Um, but Velcro's actual comment is Bayesian conspiracy podcast at gmail.com.
Oh, nice.
If you want to guarantee, we'll see something.
I've got it on my phone.
Um, if you want to guarantee, we'll see something, email it to us and there's
a hundred percent chance we'll see it.
If you are okay with us missing it, just post it randomly in discord.
If you want to guarantee that someone will probably look at it, then tag one of the
hosts, don't tag us a ton because I'll start ignoring them, but I get tagged very
seldom and so I see everything I'm tagged in.
Um, I think it could even tag at conspirators.
So like our, our, our, uh, role and we all get pained.
So.
And if you post it on the subreddit, I will definitely see it at some point.
Perfect.
This is about the question about the teacher that, uh, turned the metal plate
around just before the students got in and ask why the opposite side from the
heat source was hot.
Anyways, the Velcro's actual comment was, I think the unfairness of the physics
teacher's question was that it was not a physics question.
It was a critical thinking question or a problem solving question disguised as a
physics question.
If you had asked the question in a philosophy class or a creative writing
class, you probably would have gotten the right answer from a student.
I think that's a fun prompt, like a fun challenge to it anyway.
I like where they're coming from that it does seem like an unfair place
cause they're used, the students are used to being posed the questions they can
answer.
Um, granted this one was in theory answerable, but not with the tools they
were given.
This was a new challenge and it's like, I'm going to throw a curveball at you.
Haha.
You didn't know that word was in Latin or something, you know, whatever, some,
some trick.
Um, it's interesting because they were the only ones that would like be
equipped to answer it so wrongly.
Like if they'd answer, if they'd ask that in philosophy or creative writing, you
wouldn't get a bunch of bullshit wrong answers.
Yeah.
And so in fact, someone might say that makes no fucking sense, but because all
the physicists in this, in this parable have been taught that they had the tools
to answer these questions, they tried to apply their tools and they, they weren't
applying the ultimate tool of like, does this phenomenon even make sense with
what, with what you're trying to do to it?
Which is exactly the lesson I was trying to be imparted.
Yeah.
And also, um, that's what the story being phrased the way it was, it's much more
memorable and made the point.
Eliezer was trying to make.
So even if it was unfair of the physics teacher, it made for a good sequence post.
Yeah.
And I think the key of it was, um, this was the guessing the teacher's password
or false knowledge or one of those.
Yeah.
Um, so like, if it was not in a physics class, they wouldn't have tried to use
their passwords to answer it.
Like a, in a philosophy class, they wouldn't have said, well, maybe because of
heat conduction, right?
So yeah, that puts more, you know, brings more to the light, the fact that it
is about guessing the teacher's password rather than true knowledge.
Yeah.
Because, you know, they were using the passwords appropriate for the classroom
they were in.
Like if this happened in real life and you got a zero for the day and the
impact of your GPA and your chances to get into college or something, then yeah,
I'd call it unfair.
That's bullshit.
I came here to learn physics, not to be tricked.
Um, I could, I could see that being a legitimate defense in an actual case in a
real school, uh, as far as a parable, I think it's great.
Um, McDamn writes also regarding sea lining, there's a workaround to all of it.
Start by showing you've put in work into figuring it out on your own and that
you're stuck.
Uh, and yes, it's usually us that have to do the rational discussion for both
sides, if the other side is unwilling and if you still want to engage them.
This is actually pretty good advice.
If you do want to engage someone, which a lot of times I just don't anymore.
But, uh, if you do, that is one thing that will help.
I don't know how often I would say at least half the time.
There's times when people are not arguing in good faith and they just don't
want to, um, they just don't want to talk about it at all.
Even if you have put in effort and shown that you're trying to do this, um, and
you'll still get hit with the sea lining thing.
But other times, yeah, if you have actually really put in the work to be like,
really this, how, please help me understand.
And people can see that, then they will, uh, sometimes they will respond to you.
And I guess how often that is depends on the particular community you are in.
Yeah.
I think it's definitely community based.
Like I, I think some communities are more or less susceptible to sea lining.
Um, somewhere we're going to be more or less tolerant of it.
And like there's, I think the other side of the coin is this is an informal fallacy,
um, proof by verbosity.
And so like, if you're to twist that, the, the, the problem is like, you
throw out, you know, you're in a debate, you throw out 30 points.
And then it's like, all right, well, I can't respond to all 30.
And it's like, aha, you, you addressed points one, two and three, but not points,
you know, four through 20, four through 30.
So obviously I win.
Um, that's the informal fallacy.
The, the downside is like, if you were to like, I don't know, if you wrote
just a comment, uh, if you sent us an email and you think we're wrong about
something and you wrote a 16,000 word essay, but all of your research and like,
then it ended with like, and so can you guys answer?
Here's my research above.
I can't guarantee I'll finish reading it.
So there's a succinctness sweet point in there.
You can say, I've looked into this a lot and I, I'm not trying to like give you
guidance on just how to email me, but like, um, yes.
If you had said, Hey, I've looked into this and I'm being sincere.
Here's some places I've looked, but you know, I agree.
I think that's a great way to put it.
I could just imagine my first place to go is like someone technically doing that,
but still trying to like munchkin it.
So they just come in again with this gigantic deluge of like, here's all the
stuff I've looked at and like they just bore you to death and I don't know.
But obviously that defeats the point and that's not what they're getting at.
I'm imagining the troll you wasn't going to put in that much effort.
I think you underestimate some trolls.
Okay.
But well, I mean, that's fair.
Maybe I'm overestimating trolls.
Um, yeah, but that's also not, that's, that's me trying to poke holes and
something that makes perfect sense and it's a very reasonable thing.
If I came, um, uh, yeah, like the polyphasic sleep thing, um, when, when
Jace brought it to our attention and my, my, my immediate thought was like, I'm
pretty sure people need more sleep than that.
Otherwise we'd be doing this all the time, right?
Like we wouldn't just be discovering this and you're like, I've heard about that.
It sounds like it's a bad idea and it hasn't worked out.
And, and Jace was like, I've heard both of those things.
The stuff that I've done, I am following a, a good guideline or a good rubric
for this or something.
It's a little different than what you guys are doing.
So it makes sense to give it a shot and it's like, cool, great.
You got it.
Um, so like if for whatever reason, they were trying to persuade us of it and
they brought us something that anticipated both of those objections and
then, Hey, we're, we're in a good spot.
Right.
Um, yeah.
So yeah, those, uh, come just, I wanted to share by the sea line.
That works.
I do have two, three kind of PSA sort of things before we wrap up.
Sounds like fun.
All right.
First one is, uh, I got this directly from the Savage Love podcast run by
Dan Savage, America's best sex advice columnist.
Um, first sex advice columnist, admire cause sex advice columnist.
There's only the one.
Dan Savage is also a dope name too.
Yeah.
And this is real name.
Yeah.
I tell you, sorry, side note.
Yeah.
Co-worker of mine has a friend named Bruce Carnage.
And I'm like, what is he like a fucking supervillain?
And I figure what this guy does, but like that sounds like a professional
wrestler slash like fighter for hire slash, uh, bodybuilder.
Right.
Um, I, but anyway, dope name, Dan Savage.
It's hard.
It's a, yeah, carries more oomph than Steven Zuber.
Yeah, I don't know.
Depends how you dress it up.
Literally.
Savage isn't in my name.
So, well, okay.
Yeah, there's that.
Yeah.
He just lucked out.
Anyway, so that's my contribution.
We, most of the country has been pretty much isolated for the past six weeks, uh,
varying levels of isolation, but there's certainly been a lot less sleeping around
going on, um, even among people who are normally like, you know, have multiple
partners point being, um, many STIs spread in the pre, um, in the period where they
can't be tested for and they don't have any symptoms, uh, kind of like COVID-19 is
often, uh, spread in the, during the asymptomatic phase.
Um, but now that we've all been isolated for six weeks, just about every STI that
is easily treatable, uh, will be, um, will show up on tests after you've had it
for three weeks.
And if you haven't been having sex with, uh, people unprotected that you don't
know that you have now had more than enough time to be in that window where it
can be tested for, uh, if everybody without like long-term monogamous
partners goes and gets tested now, we can probably find and, uh, then treat a
whole bunch of things, which obviously will not completely eliminate STIs
cause that'll never happen, but could put a serious dent in it for, uh, a decent
amount of time because now we can hopefully catch a lot of them in one go.
So, uh, that is a thing that is recommended to any sexually active folks out
there.
I was about to say sexually active young people, but you know what?
Old people have sex too.
Well, people have a lot of sex and, uh, STDs are rampant in, um, like nursing
homes and stuff.
Yes.
So, but you probably haven't been isolating for your nursing home.
No, no.
Yeah.
So it doesn't apply to this particular case, but yeah.
Um, it's just a, uh, fact that many of us would rather not think about that people
are having sex in nursing homes.
Um, your, your grandma's getting laid probably and they don't have, they often
don't have condos at these places.
So it's weird as it might be, maybe drop a, you know, big box off for the front
desk and say, can you distribute these please?
Um, what a wonderful tangent.
Yep.
So I, I, this is a, in the spirit of our last episode of, uh, asking maybe this
will be a nice Socratic grilling.
Can't you treat like chlamydia with like two pills?
Yes.
Why doesn't, why don't, why don't they just give those pills to literally
everybody over the age of 13 in the country?
Cause they're expensive, I guess.
I don't know.
I mean, I assume at least part of it would be the religious backlash.
Um, but that's a good question.
I've never thought about that.
It sounds like we could just literally eliminate chlamydia then.
Well, that's a good thing to look into.
I mean, I'm not going to fund this, this, this.
And also wouldn't literally eliminate chlamydia because it would come back
into the country through other sources.
Well, yeah, when I, when I thought of eliminate, I just thought doing this
globally, but then, you know, how do you get 14 billion pills into the mouths
everybody on the planet?
Yeah.
Um, there's a logistics problem.
Right.
But yeah, I mean, you could certainly curb it.
Uh, and it's just an antibiotic or something.
Right.
Mm hmm.
Uh, is this the kind of antibiotic that works more multiple times?
What do you mean, multiple times?
Like if you get chlamydia in when you're 19 and you get it again in your 25.
Yeah, it's not like a one time.
Oh, I don't know.
Maybe by the time you get it again, things will have a change a little bit,
but yeah, it's not like you use it one time and it never works again.
Hmm.
Cause yeah, that does sound like the kind of thing that if maybe if you're
really sexually active, you just take this every year and keep yourself
chlamydia free.
Well, I guess you'd be chlamydia free for at least a couple of weeks because
if you're sexually active and doing it the right way, you're getting tested
every six months anyway.
And you aren't, you know, sleeping with new partners without protection
immediately among upon meeting them.
Gosh, I really hope I don't have to actually say these words, but just to put,
you know, make it very clear there's, there's protocols people take to protect
their own health and the health of the community.
But, uh, you know, sometimes things slip through and this, this would be one
way to help cut down a lot of those.
This puts me in mind of, um, some, one of the, like the cool thing that
Sam Harris has been doing on his podcast lately is just like more laid
back conversations and then on the titles that have dates and he's done a
handful of Paul Bloom and one of the more recent ones they were just talking
about, you know, everyone's talking about the state of the world right now.
And Paul was wondering like out loud if, uh, like in the future, if people
would be more cautious about this sort of thing, like, will hookups be more of
a thing than they were, or will they be less of a thing forever?
Cause they're definitely less of a thing now than they were six months ago.
Yeah.
Um, will this, will this stick around like this, this level of kind
of caution around people, um, I, it's an interesting thing to think about.
And I wonder if that would impact, you know, this, this particular kind
of thing about STIs, like if people are going to just be less inclined to hook
up with people, you know, might not be afraid of COVID, but now their mind
is alerted to germs, you know.
At this point, it's only been a few weeks.
I don't think it'll make that big a difference, but depending on how long
it goes on and how severe it is, yeah, it could potentially.
Speaking of which, uh, we have talked a bunch about COVID-19 over at this
other podcast that I'm involved in called the mind killers.
It's a me and two people from the discord.
And basically we talk about like politics and stuff that we shouldn't talk
about generally, which is why we call it the mind killers.
But, uh, if you've been listening to this feed, the last four episodes have
been on this feed over the last eight weeks and the, it is no longer on this
feed, it is on its own separate feed.
So just a quick PSA, if that was anything you were interested in, you
will never hear it here again.
You have to, uh, to subscribe at that feed to get any more of that.
Cool.
I got one too.
I was going to, I'll grab this last one.
Okay.
Anyone who's familiar with Enya's audio rendition of Harry Potter and
Methods of Rationality, which hopefully is all of you, if you haven't, if
there's some possible universe where you're hearing this and haven't heard
of that book, uh, Harry Potter and Methods of Rationality was a, I think
it's the most popular Harry Potter fan fiction on the net.
It certainly was at the time of its writing.
That's true.
I'm not sure if it still is because it's been a number of years, but I mean,
it is at least one of the most popular still.
Yeah.
And at the time of its writing, it was the most popular.
And I think that was gauged by like the number of reviews on fanfiction.net or
something.
It was the standard metric used.
Yeah.
Read that book.
It was great.
I think I'll all of it.
Um, Enya, I should the, it wasn't just an audio book.
I, it was a full on audio production involving a hundred plus voice actors and,
uh, music, some of it original music from people who listen to the book.
Yeah, it was awesome.
It was great.
So anyway, um, I've been doing a podcast.
Oh, well, let me take this in another order.
Um, last year or year and a half ago or so, you published a book called
What Lies Dreaming.
Yes.
Maybe it was two years ago.
Time is again, weird.
It was, I think, July of last year.
Okay.
So at some point before you retired the methods of rationality feed, you did the
first three chapters in audio book form.
Then at some point after that, but before I started my podcast on that feed called
We Want More, which is a, um, I've talked about it before.
Everyone's probably familiar, but, uh, I will say that I like that.
If you guys have tried that, it wasn't your, um, your cup of tea.
It's worth giving another shot.
Just jump into a more, more recent episode.
We should say real quick that we want more as a, like a reaction slash analysis
podcast of, uh, Harry Potter and Methods rationality.
I was going to summarize it long form, but yeah, thank you.
I mean, I was going to and then didn't cause I thought it would take too long,
but you're, you're, I didn't know you could do it this simply.
So yeah, great.
Um, so yeah, it's, it's, uh, another podcast I'm doing comes out on Mondays and
the co-host is not in the rationalist community.
And so like as such, isn't like predisposed to already love it.
And part of me, that's, that's the big value of it, that at the end of this
story, we'll get to talk about like, Hey, did you learn anything that you
like are glad that you learned?
Or did, you know, did you, and also did you have fun?
Like this accomplish its goals?
Yeah.
Um, have you changed your views on things?
I mean, I'm sure he, I know he's heard of rationalists because he's a friend of mine.
Like I wonder what he thought of us before and how, if at all, that'll have
changed after he's read this.
Me too.
Um, and just, you know, more importantly, like we'll, or well, not more importantly,
but, uh, additionally, I'm wondering, you know, will he walk away with, I, I
learned something cool from this book.
I think I'm going to, you know, apply that to my life.
Like if that happens, Hey, mission accomplished, we now have a data point
that this book can reach people outside the sphere, which is cool.
Um, anyway, if people have tried that podcast and stopped listening to it
because he didn't like the discussion, uh, give another shot, we've gotten a
lot better at it.
And Brian hates the book a little less now because it's, it's developed
and went to more of its own thing.
And hate is strong, but I got some of that feedback early on, but I mean, he's
been enthusiastic and enjoying the last dozen episodes.
I don't think he ever hated it.
I know I said this earlier, but do you think he hated it at one point?
No, I think hate is too strong, but I know that he was accused of hating it.
Yeah.
Well, because no one could listen to him talk about the Sanford prison
experiment arc and say, he hates this.
Yeah.
Um, anyway, he comes, he comes at it with a, like, I've gotten a new insight
into how people with different neuro architectures and hours think by listening
to him and like contrasting his reactions to things, to my own, and then
trying to think like, wow, how, how does your brain work that you come to
such different conclusions and like not in a, like, how does your brain work
man kind of way, but like an actual, huh, how does that work?
And like, I feel I have a easier time of understanding people who aren't
like me after having listened to this stuff.
That's a very valuable endorsement.
I think that sounds great.
Um, yeah.
I mean, it's not that I agree with them, but I
understand them a little more.
Right.
It helps that he's articulate and, and, you know, spells himself out.
So I think I enjoyed a lot and it's, it's, it's a fun project for me.
But if you also want, uh, well, the transition to the whole point of this
is that it's not just a sales pitch.
Um, what lies dreaming was, um, that there was an audio book project
started by some, uh, some, some listeners, fans, friends, whatever,
people on our discord, God, whatever came out wrong.
I, it's, it's hard to call them fans.
I guess they're fans though.
It would have to be, it feels weird to have fans.
Like I'm not a person with fans.
I'll, I'll, I'll say it then.
So fans, fans have been in Josh's book and of his work.
We're like, we want to listen to this.
Man, are you going to do audio book with this?
And you're like, I did the first three chapters.
It's a lot of work.
I don't think I'm going to do it.
And they're like, well, we will.
And you're like, all right, I, you know, but on the not unreasonable
chance of that, your enthusiasm waivers and you, and you tuck out on this
cause it is a lot more work than it sounds like, um, I'll make the commitment
that if you guys get halfway through and it looks like it's still going,
I'll start airing them on my, on the method of rationality feed.
Well, between that promise and when they got halfway through it, I had been
on the feed for like, what, three, four months.
You started at the beginning of the year, right?
Yeah.
So five months now.
Geez.
Yeah.
Five or six.
Cause we're on like episode 28, so 28 weeks.
Um, so yeah, we, we are, or anyway, uh, we, we want more comes out on Mondays
and the audio book of what lies dreaming will be coming out on Fridays in the same
feed.
So do check that out.
Yeah.
I hope you guys all enjoy it and, um, eventually we'll be in one big audio
book, but for now coming out one chapter per week.
And the specter of Scott daily just appeared before me to remind you that
this is not a doof media affiliated audio book.
Although I don't think that, uh, I was going to like say something about how I'm
sure he'd love it, but we, you know, I, there's, we're not going to get on his
reading list anytime soon.
Yeah.
Um, but yes, uh, anyway, check it out.
It'll be a lot of fun.
Yeah.
Look forward to that on the methods of rationality feed tool.
And before we go, we must thank a patron as we always do, because the patrons
are what keep us going.
Okay.
We'd like to thank pointless ones.
The person who brought you this episode by their special request.
That's right.
Yeah.
And it's, it's one of those things like, and I know I fell under every time I,
we think the patron, but like, uh, financial support means a lot.
And the, it's, it's not just about, uh, oh, look, we get, we get a check or something.
Like they, much of it goes back into keeping our equipment up, up to par.
I know that, uh, in the last few months, you bought a solid state drive for your
computer, because that's the one we record on.
And for annoying technical reasons, it would occasionally lag on the standard
memory and it, we would lose data.
It would suck.
Um, do we get, I've never gotten an orphan file, I think when opening yours,
where like it has like little bits that it knows are missing and it tells you about
it, it saves everything and nothing gets lost.
Um, ever since we got that one.
Yeah.
So, uh, that came right out of the vision conspiracy's budget and it was
thanks to listeners like you.
So thanks a lot, man.
And it also provides us with a lot of, or I gendered pointless one.
I said, thanks, thanks, man.
But I meant it like in the, I'm looking at my dude, my dude glasses I've got.
I've had someone occasionally like tell me that man is a gender term.
And I'm like, I mean, in some context, yes.
Obviously man is the noun for a, a male of the human species, but like lots of
time when I say man, I don't mean man.
I mean like man, but I, but I totally get how it's much less ambiguous or it's
much more non-ambiguously what it's, it's much more obviously gendered than dude.
So I'll say, thanks dude.
I like, I've, I've literally said, oh man, because I'm, I mean, like,
odd G's, like, oh shucks, you know, like, oh man.
And, and I do not mean it even the slightly gendered way there.
That's fair.
That's the spaying.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Pointless one.
Thanks for everything.
And thanks to everyone else who listens and does stuff.
You can email us at patient conspiracy podcast at gmail.com.
I mentioned earlier that is where we are guaranteed to see what you say.
If you are just wanting to join the conversation in the episode description of
every episode, um, both on the website and in your, in your iTunes or in your
podcast player of choices feed is a link to the discord.
I've had a couple of people message asking how to get on and the links in every
episode and it's on the website, but that's, that's a place where I don't know
any people, a couple hundred people are on there and several dozen actives who are
on there all the time.
So there's always conversation on there.
Um, and if you want to talk to us, you can ping us on there or we're occasionally
floating around, especially in the last few weeks.
Um, there's also the subreddit.
There is the subreddit, which yeah, I check at least every week.
Cool.
So yeah, thank you everyone.
Thank you.
Pointless one for your support.
It really does keep us going.
Yeah.
Obviously, uh, if, if you're, if you're noticing at all any financial strain
during the hardship right now, or ever basically, um, totally cut this from your,
your cut, cut supporting this show from your, your budget.
Yeah.
There's people that are out of work and making no money.
Yeah.
Like we hate to see you go, but you're not going anywhere.
Keep listening and keep enjoying it.
Don't, don't think how am I going to factor in my, my patient conspiracy
Patreon donations?
If you're, if that thought occurs to you, just don't and, and, and lose us.
Um, yeah, this, this, this shouldn't be, this is no obligation.
We appreciate your support, but do not feel bad if like anything gets in the way of it.
So take care of your life first.
Yes, please.
Perfect.
That's I, I need to let you just do stuff.
I, that was like a one sentence summary of the five minute point I was trying to make.
You made it well too though.
I mean, the advantage of summaries is people already have the long thing.
So like, if you just saw the summary, it wouldn't make sense.
So sickness is its own virtue.
Yes.
Well, I mean, it's like the thing, a woman, not a woman girl arrives at a strange
location, murders the first person she sees, then teams up with three strangers
to murder again is a very succinct summary of the wizard of Oz.
Okay.
He's switching back.
Thank you.
That was a very good.
Thanks everyone for joining us and we'll see you in a fortnight.
Sounds good.
Bye.
Puppy, hi, it is.
Am I, am I committing a rationalist?
