So I spent a whole day thinking about this, and I'm now completely undecided, but I'm
not prepared to take a stance.
I'm also largely undecided, but what I can do is I can try to present what I think the
predominant arguments are for the people in favor of not deep punching.
Fair enough.
Let's start this off.
Hi.
I'm Steven Zuber, and I'm Sean, a guest today.
Sean is filling in for Trina today, as she could not make it, and we are doing one of
these special, I don't know, what do we call them, mini episodes?
Yeah.
Well, not during our regular time, because something happened and we wanted to talk about
it.
And the thing that happened this time is a Nazi douchebag named Richard Spencer got
punched in the face on the street while he was stopped by a reporter who wanted to ask
him about his Pepe Pin and maybe some of his other weird political views.
And a member probably from Black Block is the speculation, because he was dressed, you
know, all in black, like the Black Block uniform, suggested uniform is just hauled off and slugged
him right in the face and then ran off.
And there has been a bit of a kerfuffle, one could say, in liberal circles about whether
or not it is okay to punch Nazis.
Right.
And I guess before we start, we should quickly say who this Richard Spencer guy is.
He founded the website, alternativeright.com, which is sort of a combined group blog thing
for alt-right thinkers, and is probably the guy who originated the term alt-right, since
the website was alternative right and he kicked it off.
He left that eventually, he's got a new website now, also spreading alt-right stuff.
And he is, to call it a think tank, kind of blows it out of proportion here.
But he's head of a group called National Policy Institute, which bill themselves as a think
tank of alt-right stuff trying to influence policy.
If you knew of Richard Spencer beforehand, it's probably either because you're very into
alt-right stuff, or because you saw that video after Trump won, where this guy in a hotel
room was saying, hail our people, hail Trump.
And straight up doing the hail Hitler salute.
Yes.
There was no ambiguous, there was nothing ambiguous about it.
No.
And the audience was, you know, hailing him back with the Hitler salute.
So very much a neo-nazi on his, even though he says the neo-nazis hate him, I think it's
not unfair to call him a Nazi, especially because he, on his site, one of his co-bloggers
published a thing asking, saying that we should be asking whether Black genocide is the correct
course of action or not.
Right.
So you might not be able to technically call him a neo-nazi because he's not calling for
a particular form of genocide, but he's still entertaining the idea that genocide is a legitimate
course of action.
Yeah.
Should at the very least be considered, and possibly legitimate.
Someone found a quote for me today, I was talking with him about this.
And it's from The Way Back Machine, which takes cached versions of websites of...
And this one is actually from...
Alternative Right.
Yeah.
And it doesn't have his attribution on it, it's just, it's a picture, unfortunately.
I couldn't even get the URL to reproduce.
Oh, I know what you're about to read.
That was Collins, his co-blogger.
This?
Yeah.
Oh, well, okay.
Well, in that case, then, I can't say this came right out of his mouth, so...
It was at least tacitly approved by him.
Paraphrasing, it does say exactly what the two of you guys just said, so.
I was curious.
But go ahead and read the actual quote.
Brace yourselves.
Quote.
However, for too long now, when we consider the questions of race, especially questions
concerning the black race, we have been framing things in completely the wrong way.
Instead of asking how we can make reparations for slavery, colonialism, and apartheid, or
how we can equalize academic scores and incomes, we should instead be asking questions like,
does human civilization actually need the black race?
Is black genocide right?
If it is, what would be the best and easiest way to dispose of them?
With starting points like this, wisdom is sure to flourish, enlightenment to dawn.
Unquote.
So, I feel icky.
And I gotta say, coming into this, my initial response, I didn't even hear about this incident
until yesterday when Inyash wanted to talk about it.
I was like, well, I'm really not in favor of hitting anybody to silence their free speech.
And then I spent the whole day thinking about it.
I'm currently undecided, and I've gotta say, reading a quote like that makes me kind of
want to hit somebody, so I can kind of see where people are coming from.
Yeah.
I mean, it's not hard to find.
You go on social media, there's a whole lot of, I mean, for quite some time, there's
been a lot of argument from pathos and memes getting posted that are things, it's like
there's a whole bunch of Captain America saying, it's okay to punch Nazis.
And it's like, well, my grandfather, I'm pretty sure he was okay with killing Nazis.
So there's a lot of like, this seems intuitively okay to enact violence, physical violence
against people with these extreme views, like these really potentially very harmful extreme
views, right?
Sort of.
My one caveat on that is I don't want to really look to the past for moral guidance, right?
If you go back far enough, a lot of our ancestors were complete idiots.
It was also...
Oh, right.
I wasn't advocating for it.
Oh yeah.
I was just stating what a lot of it's been going around.
For sure.
It was also a very different situation because we were literally at war, and these were people
who, not only were we at war with them, but these were people who had rounded people
up and systemically killed them, as opposed to simply someone on a blog being a douchebag
and sometimes posting asshole YouTube videos.
I wonder if a good corollary, I guess, well, since we're not actively at war with people
who've done stuff like, who are doing stuff like, you know, in World War II, if it might
be the moral distinction between killing a Nazi soldier and killing a Nazi sympathizer
supporter at home.
Right.
You know, who like, well, I would be a Nazi, but, you know, my leg in World War I, otherwise
I'd be out there.
Like, that person's not actually out there doing anything, but I don't know.
I do want to say though, really quick, though Katrina's not with us, she did ask us to
point out, there might be a, I don't know, a weakness in our point of views, or a bias
in that, I think it's an excellent point for us to point out that none of us are actually
in the demographics historically attacked by Nazis.
So yeah, that's a fair point.
I don't know if my point of view would be different if I was in one of those groups,
but obviously I don't know.
So that's something that I guess is worth pointing out, putting up from the outset.
Yeah.
So I would like to make my, quickly present my point of view on this.
I am one of those people who is very against punching Richard Spencer and against, I'm
not necessarily against him getting punched because he's a douchebag and he deserves it,
but I am horrified that what I thought was the liberal side of America is so gleefully
embracing vigilante violence.
So we've, we've a few times before on the podcast brushed up against the topic of violence
and I've always kind of danced around the issue because I am somewhat pro violence, much
more so than I think that I thought anyway.
Other people are and so I was really kind of ashamed of that and didn't really want
to say it, but I've long been a big fan of the Black Panthers and I consider the, during
the civil rights struggle, that is a legitimate use of violence.
I mean that was state sponsored terrorism by our government against some of our own citizens.
This is a reason to take up arms and I fully support them and I just didn't really want
to say that sort of thing in public because I thought I was in the minority and it was
shameful and then this punch happens and it turns out that there's a lot of people
that are a lot more violent than I am.
So the reason I am against this guy getting punched and everyone being so happy about
it is entirely just the rule of law.
The thing that protects us from random people coming up and punching us because they disagree
with our views is the fact that extrajudicial violence is not tolerated in our society.
The reason that there are Nazi groups don't get to ride in the street and punch people
is because we don't accept that sort of thing and once society does start accepting extrajudicial
violence then is that is when we get things like the Deep South lynchings and those sorts
of atrocities because there is no protection anymore for the people who aren't on the right
side of the mob.
You mean the Deep South in the somewhat recent past?
No, not currently.
No, not currently.
No.
But yeah, it's several decades past.
So I guess I'm sort of in between, ideally I'm exactly where Inyash is and if I have
any axioms of discourse, well I have a bunch I guess if you're engaging honestly with
people.
But one of them is like if you disagree with somebody, it doesn't matter how much you disagree
with what they're saying, like shutting them up by hitting them is I guess what's the stronger
word than taboo or wrong.
It is incorrect if you're trying to, if there's discussion.
But I guess you could say...
It is a sin against civil society.
Yeah, that works.
Sin is a strong enough word.
I mean this guy wasn't really doing discussion.
He's got this platform that preaches this disgusting message.
So it's not like it was him talking with somebody.
It's not like he and the reporter were talking and the reporter was so repelled by what the
answers to questions that he got or the questions that he posed that he then hit him in the
face.
It was somebody else who came up and did it.
So that's on a perfect analogy.
I guess I'm where you are on the front of it, Inyash, but I guess that's been the whole
day thinking about this.
And I've kind of...
I had this, I don't know, this moment where in my head I'm like, really Stephen, is your
moral view so convoluted that you're looking at hitting Nazis as is this an okay thing
to do or not?
Like isn't that axiomatically a great thing?
What would Captain America think like you pointed out, Sean?
So I mean, I think, I don't know if I haven't been following a lot of the online discourse
about how the fallout here, I'm not sure if people are saying, yeah, we should have everyone,
every conservative, or if they're saying we should just hit Nazis.
No, everyone is saying we should just hit Nazis.
Oh, okay.
Well, so I guess if you drew the litmus test at explicit Nazis, maybe there's a case that
someone can make there.
And I'm curious what you have to say, Sean.
Sure.
So I guess my overall position on this right now is that I'm largely undecided kind of
like yourself where it's...
Previously we had a bit of a Facebook thread where I had a bit of input and I agree with
something in Yash said where it was essentially, if you strike someone in public, well, in
this case, Richard Spencer stands to potentially gain from being struck in public because...
And not just him personally, it seems like this gives the right for lack of a more concise
term, more ammunition to repudiate the left and protesters in general.
But also, it might make someone like Richard Spencer more able to cast himself as a victim
and gather more support from others.
I'm not sure who you would be able to get support from, exactly.
I mean, given that, and maybe this is just my own bubble, but I would like to think that
Nazism is something, or at very least like white nationalism, is something that people
generally find morally reprehensible.
Well, I mean, they can barely fill a hotel conference room with 200 people when they
have their national convention.
Right.
It's a very small portion.
They had...
Was it 200?
Because either it was like 300.
But either way, it's a very, very small subset of society.
We're not talking tens of thousands, right?
And I don't know if they're gaining power, losing it, stagnant.
They're just such a small minority that maybe they're just not that much of a threat.
I mean, how much power could 200 people have, right?
I guess even if they're gaining it, how long would it take them to gain any measurable portion
of power?
The argument I hear in favor of the...
Well, against this, they don't have a lot of power thing is that their words are violent,
I guess, that they are making people feel unsafe and threatened by advocating for genocide.
Oh, yes.
And also just the concern surrounding the people that Trump has appointed to his cabinet,
who also allegedly have some very questionable views.
Steve Bannon from Breitbart is part of the alt-right and he, I think he wrote his inauguration
speech and has some fair bit of input.
But I don't think that that is a reason to start beating people in the streets if they
express an opinion that is found to be distasteful.
I mean, that's basically what freedom of speech is, right?
We don't need to protect the speech we like.
We have to protect the speech we don't like.
That's why the people that fight for the First Amendment rights or the people who get dragged
into court and the First Amendment gets strengthened when they are defended are people like the
Westboro Baptists or Larry Flint, which actually a lot of people like Larry Flint now.
But you know, he was a pornographer and people found him disgusting.
And the Supreme Court said, this is what freedom of speech means.
I mean, the...
I'm hearing that people are saying someone has to punch this guy to put him in his place
because the government isn't doing it.
And I'm saying, yes, that's true because he hasn't broken any laws.
He's spoken and said things that are horrible, but that's what the First Amendment allows
him to do.
That's what it's there for.
I think there was a problem when we have to punch people because we have issue with
the First Amendment.
Isn't that the thing that we're supposed to like on our side?
We enjoy the right to speak freely?
Well, I mean, so one argument I've seen is the fire clause, you know, like if someone
goes into a crowded theater and he has fire, you know, obviously, I guess the idea there
is that there should be limits, like certain limits to the First Amendment when it comes
to endangering through the use of words, right?
And so I guess it really comes down to how dangerous you can consider the words of Richard
Spencer and his ilk and whether or not...
I mean, that sort of thing seems difficult to quantify.
I mean, yes, it's very hard to quantify, but my intuitive feeling is that all these people
who are pro-punching fascists and Nazis are people who view themselves as like the barrier
stopping the Holocaust from happening again on our soil.
And they're very self-righteous about it when that is not anything close to what the actual
threat is.
And what they're really doing is degrading the law that protects people from violence.
The fact that he said things you don't like is not a reason to allow for beatings in the
streets of anyone that is labeled a Nazi.
I think part of my hang up on this, I guess, is how you...
This will sound like a pointless question, but I'll give a good example of how you define
a Nazi or how you spot one.
That is a thing I'm worried about, too.
I think that's a good question.
Yeah, there was a great incident on Friday night at University of Washington.
They had some speaker that was coming that people were protesting.
Apparently some asshole.
It's not really important, but what is important is that some guy got shot.
He was allegedly by the shooter said that while he attacked me, I don't want to misquote,
but allegedly apparently the shooter thought that the guy was a neo-Nazi because he saw
that he had a swastika tattoo on his arm or swastika on his shoulder or something.
I'll link the article.
It turns out it was a swastika inside one of those red circles with the line through
it.
That's like a no smoking sign.
It's like anti-swastika, basically.
Yeah.
Maybe it wasn't as obvious as he wanted it to be, but it begs the question of how many
false positives you're willing to tolerate to take out a crowd of a couple hundred people.
Especially if the error rate right now is one guy punched, one guy shot, and the guy who
got shot wasn't in this group.
Apparently the guy who got shot was campaigning for Bernie Sanders, goes to Black Lives Matter,
rallies, plans to go to the women's march, but he was in the hospital.
To me, the slope is slippery and blurry as far as where you draw the line.
So if it's just literal Nazis, well, what about people who don't go to the rallies
but or go to what do you call them, conventions or something, but they share their memes on
Facebook?
Do we punch them too?
Or do they just get slapped?
I mean, a lot of this is like...
I have seen calls on Twitter that anyone defending a Nazi is also a Nazi, and seeing
as I am someone saying that...
That's dangerous, though.
...Richard Smithers shouldn't have been punched, I am now considered a Nazi as well by these
people anyway.
Yeah.
And not to muddle this or shoot us in too far a different direction.
But there's also different gradients of these worldviews where it's like we have straight-up
neo-Nazism.
We also have white nationalism.
I don't know how much you would differentiate those, but then you've got things like...
I actually just found out about this.
Something called...
What was it?
A kinest, I think it's called.
And I'm probably not even representing this properly, but I don't have any rule notes
in front of me.
But there are people who believe that humans should naturally fall into ethnic and tribal
communities.
Okay.
I've heard of that.
So it kind of brushes up again.
People are happier when they're around their own type and so they shouldn't mix, right?
Yeah.
It's kind of like...
I've definitely heard people espouse these ideas that it seems to kind of hint that they're
against interracial marriage and stuff like that.
It seems like there's a little bit with Norse mythological imagery associated with them.
And it's just...
I'm not entirely sure what to make of that.
I thought it might be worth mentioning that it seems like they're different kind of white
national list-esque subsets of people, not just Nazis.
Yeah.
And I guess that does make the question of where you would draw a line to say, well,
no, we're only going to hit people who do exactly this.
And I guess, I mean, it depends to...
And I did see this on your Facebook thread that it depends on how serious you consider
a punch to the face.
It was like an elbow, it was like a flying, it was just a run by elbow.
Yeah.
Watch the video.
That could easily kill somebody.
I mean, if you land wrong, I mean, he's on the street.
He could hit a curb that could have been a kill shot.
And then you only have to hit the curb.
I mean, just a good head smack, you know, it happens.
It happens.
So, I mean, was he prepared to kill this guy?
Maybe he was.
And so, I guess that...
I think if you were...
Well, I mean, there are better ways to ensure someone's death than trying to elbow them
in the face.
Oh, yeah.
Plus, I mean, he was mobile while he was doing it, so the body mechanics that he would have
used to deliver the strike wouldn't have been as grounded as if he were standing there.
I mean, like, was he prepared to kill this guy?
Not was he trying to?
Yeah.
Oh, sure.
Like, was he prepared to do all that possible consequence?
I have seen a lot of people saying something like, you know, an able-bodied man, he can
take a punch.
It's not that big a deal.
But once you're advocating for punching Nazis, you don't know if this guy's been punched
like 12 times already today and you're the 13th punch.
Is it okay to keep punching him until he's crippled?
I think they'd probably say so.
I guess I'm also curious to what the point is of hitting him, like, other than to express
disagreement.
And kind of see, I might also object to this, but it would be more civil, I think, to stand
next to him in whatever he opened his mouth to blare an air horn.
Like if you're in public...
Kind of like the guy who was yelling no, the no guy, you know what I'm talking about?
Yeah, the guy who was holding the camera, the amateur footage, right?
There was a...
We might be talking about the same thing.
I'm thinking of one where there was a guy in public like saying racist things, basically,
and there was someone standing right up next to him and every time you would say something,
the guy would go, no, he would just try to drown him out, he'd just yell in his face.
That is certainly much better than straight up violence, but even that is the sort of
thing that I kind of dislike because it shuts down conversation.
And I think once you can no longer talk with your enemy, the only thing that you can do
is kill them.
You have to either beat them into submission, which almost never happens because when you...
When Black Lives Matter protesters get, you know, someone jumps up on them and tries to
beat them down, do they go crawling back and saying, oh no, we're done, we can't do this
anymore?
Or do they rally and become even more strident in their opposition?
I mean, that's the thing.
Everyone thinks, yes, I will intimidate my opponents and beat them down and they will
not be a problem anymore, but no, it entrenches your opponents when they get physical resistance
like this.
And I'm assuming there's a strong overlap with the neo-nazi group and gun collectors slash
gun hoarders.
So these aren't the people you want to bunker down and piss off, right?
I mean, unless you want it to be turned into a quick, bloody battle that kills all of them.
Yeah.
I mean, unless you're actually seeking to eradicate your opposition, you should be trying
to talk with them.
An argument always gets a counter-argument.
It never gets a bullet or a punch, violence, you know?
You don't use violence to come to a civil society.
I'm just curious, like, I definitely see where you're going.
I'm just wondering, like, what kind of productive conversation, like, what would a productive
conversation with a neo-nazi look like?
It's so antithetical to society, it's so diametrically opposed to, like, basic human
decency that I don't, like, what's the middle point?
Well, how is this meeting of the minds going to end in something that's going to advance
the dialogue and actually be productive, I guess?
So it's interesting.
I was just reading about some history of this actually happening to people.
There was a guy, ah, I forget his name now, I should have written it down, but a leader
in KKK circles and he went to a liberal arts college to get his credentials, you know how
sometimes creationists go and get a biology degree so they can say, I am a, you know,
PhD in biology and I say evolution is bullshit, that kind of thing.
But some of his fellow students figured out who he was and that he was a, this, I'm not
sure if neo-nazi is the same as KKK, are they the same thing?
Well, KKK are white supremacists.
So like in a historical context, no, they're not the same, but I mean, there's definitely,
I would say there's quite a bit overlap between what people consider neo-naziism and the KKK.
Yeah, so he was a white supremacist and when his fellow students found out, instead of
attacking him, the Jewish students started inviting him over for dinner and after several
months of this, and he went and after several months of this, he broke down and realized
that he'd been told lies the whole time and he dropped out and became a normal person
and started fighting against the fascists, which I mean, it was interesting, there were
three or four different cases like that and obviously that's not going to happen all the
time, but it can happen and the important part isn't necessarily that you're trying
to convince the neo-nazi to change his mind because you're probably not going to convince
him with an argument any more than you're going to convince him with a punch, but at
least that prevents society from devolving into riots in the streets like they had in
Weimar, Germany, before the big rise and you are having the conversation for the people
around that are looking and seeing are these people on the left who proclaim tolerance
and peace among mankind just as bad as the right wing that they say they hate as soon
as they see someone who they violently disagree with, they go right into the punching and
the killing just like the Nazis do or do they actually stand by their principles and try
to talk things out and I think that is the greater effect of the punch that it not only
does it degrade the rule of law and bring the inevitable cold civil war we're having
to a more hot civil war area, but it also further polarize the two sides.
I see what you're saying, I think for me it's less about changing the individual's mind
and like you said it's about the crowd, so if somebody posts some disgusting article,
I mean if it's a small 200 person community you can pretty much just ignore it and let
them just have the crazy little club, but for whatever reason it makes it to a popular
red magazine or something you can write a response, you don't have to call the guy and
try and talk to him on the phone and change his mind, that might not work and I'm using
mail terms because I'm thinking of I guess we can be more inclusive if you want this
might be a situation where the exclusivity is fine.
Well the two sides that we're thinking about right now are Richard Spencer and the guy
that punched Richard Spencer.
But so if you can't change this person's mind which might not even be worth attempting,
you can write a response if you're worried that anyone's taking this person seriously
you know rather than send an assassin to his house.
Again I wanted to make my peaceful discourse stance very clear before I say that all the
arguments that sound like in favor of hitting Richard Spencer or similar people sound also
like arguments for killing him and it seems to me that killing him would have more advantages
for the people making some of these arguments, like it'll freak them out, it'll make them
afraid to go outside and just you know espouse these terrible beliefs, thin their numbers.
So you're just using fear as a deterrent basically?
Or yeah so I guess hitting them would be you know fear and some physical threat is deterrent,
but if you're serious about it then it sounds like you might as well just be start killing them.
I'm not saying that again I want to make 100% clear I'm not advocating that but it sounds like
it's a really easy slide from saying we should literally beat them into submission to where
they're scared to go outside and say their stupid things to where we should just make
it so they can never do those things again, right?
Who have we become when we're the ones resorting those tactics?
Not the good guys, right?
Well sure yeah no I mean so you mentioned that it was a black block member, is that a descriptive
term for anarcho-communist groups or is that specifically the name of a group because I'm
actually not terribly well versed in that?
I've just heard about them actually the last few days but from what I can tell they are a
specific group.
Okay I'd be curious to know if anyone claiming to represent them has made a statement of what
their intent was by like what was that actually their intent was to be like we needed to deter
these guys by using fear or was it to send a message like you said play the audience a little
bit or maybe not play the audience but send a message to the audience.
It could literally just been a happenstance occurrence where it's like hey it's that fucking
asshole that wants to kill a bunch of people right here I am I don't have anything harder than
my fist let's just go hit him sure and I can totally and I could totally see that so might not
have been a reason to attack there might not have been um but I mean if like hypothetically if
there were could it you know what what would it be would it be like these guys are extreme
it may have to it may have to involve violence at some point in time hey look I can do it you
can do it too I don't I mean I don't know that that is one of the slightly more um persuasive
arguments that I've seen is that once fascism has taken root to the point where the government is
on the side of the Nazis it's kind of a little late to fight I mean at that point it's obvious who
you should be fighting and do you take up guns and form revolutionary cells but you want to prevent
it from getting to that point if you can and this is a way to dry a line in the sand and say no we're
not going to tolerate this at any cost so would you say one of the better ways to prevent it is by
going through the motions of a civil society where we don't automatically resort to violent acts
yes that is that is my contention okay that the the prohibition on private political violence
is basically what makes civilization possible you cannot have any sort of civilized society
until you have you have this agreement that you do not use violence for political purposes
if you are not actually acting as the state as a cop who's on the job or as a soldier who's
fulfilling his duty you do not get to use violence to make political points if you are just a guy out
in the street because otherwise we revert back to a state of chaos and then no one is safe I mean
I'm not trying to use this as a way to defend Nazis because I hate Nazis I assume as much as
anybody although now I'm sure other people will be saying that I don't hate them at all but uh
there's god who was it um Sir Thomas Moore I think it was once said uh that a man who was a really
awful man everyone hated him but he didn't commit a crime should be let free and uh one of his friends
said you're giving him the benefit of the of the law here this is an awful person he's like
I would give the devil the benefit of the law if the devil didn't commit a crime and the guy says
really you would let the law protect the devil I would cut a path through the law to get to the
devil I would clear cut all of law to get to the devil and Thomas Moore said well then what do you
have left protecting you once all the laws are gone the devil can turn around and attack you
just as easily so laws are what protect us from this state of chaos and I think we do
we do a lot of harm to society when we decided that certain laws are no longer applicable and
right now I think it is far more harm than these few hundred Nazis can do to our society
but what about special exceptions so I'm with you and so if if Thomas Moore's interlocutor was like
no no I'm only going to break the law for literally the devil so what I could imagine someone saying
no no I'm I'm behind you we should be we should have people allowed to say you know whatever
that the earth is flat or something but calling for genocide or discussing it like it's a topic
on the table even maybe not saying all right I don't grab your guns Friday is when it starts
that I think is at the point where you're allowed to intervene right yeah there's a there's a big
call between saying you know the world would be a lot better place if there's certain demographic
people was all dead and saying all right guys grab your guns we're gonna make it happen I think at
the minute that you you start advocating for an actionable plan then you've crossed a line
but they might say uh just to backpedal a little bit I'm going to draw a special
exception for literally Nazis I'm talking to a person who says the world would be a much better
place if Nazis were gone off the face of the planet that sounds like scary rhetoric though
well right but he's the guy who's pro punching Nazis yeah no no I guess I see what you're saying
and then it just occurred to me that the response so I like my arguments to be generalizable yeah
yeah this is about Nazis for another for any other group and that suddenly turns into a really
dark sentence right right well right it's like that's like that's kind of a it almost seems
abstract right because it's like oh yeah of course of course the world I mean I'm sure the world
would be a better place if we didn't have people advocating we all the people who advocated for
genocide didn't exist in whatever capacity that might mean but there's a lot more nuance to it
right because how do you who are those people which people are you talking about right also
you're advocating for the genocide of those people I mean that's true also but I mean I'm not sure
I'm not sure if anyone gets tripped up there or not but that is uh seems like a weird contradiction
it's a I mean it's also how you define genocide or or eugenics because I am a strong advocate for
once the technology is there sterilizing everybody at birth in a reversible manner and once they hit
the age of majority letting them get that reversed as long as they petition all they got to do is ask
no IQ test or any of that other bullshit if you want to not be sterilized anymore we reverse it
for free on the spot you just want to make basically family planning not have to be a plan or have to
be an opt-in rather than an opt-out exact gotcha and uh there are people who would call me a eugenicist
for doing that and um that suddenly makes me a Nazi and you're not saying they have to pass a
test like I said they don't have to pass a test they don't have to write a big check so they don't
have to fit in any demographics they just have to I guess have access to the internet or a phone or
something and there are Christians who say uh that abortion is genocide yeah and that uh the
wait how would that be how would how does that follow what what what what would their reasoning
be I've never really never definitely never heard that one before disproportionate number of people
who get abortions are poor and um the this is being provided at Planned Parenthoods that are
supported by the government and so they're saying that the government is setting up baby
merger shops in inner cities to let the black people wipe themselves out they they're saying
that the fact that we support Planned Parenthood means that we are supporting black genocide
that sounds like a bottom line reasoning like they're against like that doesn't sound like the
kind of position you'd come to organically it sounds like they're already against abortion
they're trying to think what is the best way we can like make a make a punch and I would like to be
able to counter argue these people and say no you're wrong and here's why as opposed to being
afraid to leave my house because of the gangs that are going to be roaming around beating me for
being genocidal yeah I mean are we are we are we are we being way too charitable if we assume that
people should be able to differentiate between your position and and certain Christians calling
you a Nazi versus people like Richard Spencer who are very like overtly the world's full of fucking
idiots right like I said is that maybe that is charitable I guess but how it's it's not that
hard to single someone out and get a mob going after them as long as you use the right buzz words
and can point to a few things that look I suppose not well and I guess also the concern and the
concern that you're putting forward this whole time is that the second that we say it's okay to
start doing that for some groups who knows how big that how long that list can get yeah and that's
I mean the the scary part right you can say it's okay to punch Nazis but do we then have some sort of
level of evidence do they get hauled into court where we prove that they're a Nazi or is it just
once 51% of the populist thinks yeah he's probably a Nazi then he's a Nazi and do we take a poll is
it just the general opinion it's it reduces to whoever is the most willing to do violence to
people they don't like yeah just has to be the one vigilante they don't have to ask anybody
yeah I'm sure and I mean I don't know like like there are definitely some people who are more
extreme and with with the whole idea or the sentiment that like yeah we should totally just
like whip ass on some Nazis but then at least from what I've seen in my own personal Facebook feed
like most people who are who are like damn right we should punch Nazis are just kind of doing it
from a I don't know kind of a signaling standpoint where they're just like yeah I'm all about justice
I'm all about doing the right thing I hate these guys they're they're evil so and I'm a good person
so yeah fight evil people yeah I've seen and it's and and there's certainly an emotional
detachment because they're sitting here and they're in their homes or at work and with their
computers in front of them for a lot of them that's kind of a I don't know I mean it's a gesture
but it's it's basically saying don't be evil and fight evil where you do see it right so it's
sure isn't in a good way but I think that is the problem because no one is evil then okay that's
not entirely true but no one does evil for the sake of evil they always do it because they think
it's good when Richard Spencer says these things he says he does it because he thinks he is saving
the nation from I don't even know what he's saving it from and when people say it's okay to punch
Nazis they think that they are saving the nation from the next holocaust when really all they're
doing is degrading the rule of law the point is people always think that they're doing good when
they're doing evil and that's why I'm not okay with just signing on to yeah sure they're you know
they're on our side they're doing a good thing against evil no everyone thinks that they're doing
good that that's why you have the laws that stop things like actual violence and then draw a line
at bodily harm I was trying to think of parallels that might serve as intuition pumps like the
the public consciousness might be pro fighting ISIS would they be pro fighting ISIS sympathizers
at home would they be pro so someone in America shares a pro ISIS meme on their Facebook is okay
to hit them and when they go to when they're in public exactly um so I guess that sort of seems
to be the takeaway that you know once you open this door at all there's no there's no keeping
it from swinging all the way open I guess there's no bulwark to say no this is exactly where we're
stop it's okay to hit just these people unless you're gonna just uh you're gonna sound a lot like
god this is a bad comparison you're gonna sound a lot like Nazis and say no no we're not pro killing
the public just the Jewish public right I mean yeah well it's you know Nazis in in film and
literature they're like the de facto bad guys they're just they're just there do the exist to
be the bad guys that you feel okay in acting harm upon absolutely like I think it's a good idea to
take a problem where you have just one example then expand it right like what you're doing with the
whole ISIS example but Nazism has this has this I'm gonna use the word advantage but hopefully
you know what I mean it's got a historical context it's very easy to just be like to write them off
entirely and other them not that they go to example of like the baby eating monsters yeah 100%
absolutely that's one of the reasons like god went we just shouldn't use Nazis as a thing we label
people who aren't literally part of the Nazi party yeah it does carry a lot of baggage well that's
just that it carries baggage but it literally makes you subhuman and okay to kill oh yeah that too
I mean you don't have any rights because you're just so evil you're just you you've already screwed
right which I would be okay with if they actually were a Nazi like I see the pictures of Indiana
Jones punching a Nazi and people are like we should punch Nazis and no one points out that
about 30 seconds later Indiana Jones murders that Nazi when you see pictures of Captain America
punching Hitler people don't point out that we were out there to murder Hitler and we're glad he's dead
the the 1940s German Nazis do deserve to be killed and that's why they make such great villains
but calling anyone a Nazi automatically reverts into that subhuman status and so I'm really reluctant
to do it yeah I guess if you want to come out and raise your hand and say I'm a Nazi then you're
welcoming all of that filtering I guess but I don't know what to say about that I I don't know
I have a short list of notes here and most of it I've labeled it confusion upsides downsides
and the confusion takes up the bulk of the page downsides is a few bullet points and the upsides
is just two little things I'm like what could be the point of doing this is really what I'm
trying to think of I guess it is just a shut down terrible discourse so no one wants these people
to have a microphone except in principle right so yeah maybe that's the litmus test is that you know
unless we're talking abstractly no one actually wants to get these people to platform well I mean
yeah like like earlier in yasha you mentioned the west bro baptist church like what is the
worst thing that they've ever said they're mostly like they've said things about the lgbt
community basically right and mostly about god not liking them yes or hating them yes is that
like the worst they've ever done is just go around and say those things they've done a lot of things
they've I mean they're probably now most famous for picketing the soldiers of uh or the funerals
of soldiers oh right because uh america you know god hates america because america loves facts
or something so sure yeah sure so that kind of stuff right and then and then you have people
like richard spencer who say substantially worse things like and I know this was from an internet
wayback machine I haven't seen what he said recently but all signs seem to point to
hardcore white nationalist slash possible nazi I'm salutes and every all that imagery aside
aside from the subhumaneness I'm actually okay saying that he probably signs on to nazi ideology
yeah sure the only real direction I was going with that was just that like it seems like what he's
saying is substantial people in his his group is substantially worse than even what the west
bro baptist church says okay but then again that's kind of I mean that's kind of hard to compare
those two things I just well I think I mean to the west bro baptist church so far as I know
and I don't know a lot I think they they make claims that yeah you know homosexuality is the
worst thing ever and people who are gay are terrible but I don't think they're literally saying
but they don't advocate for killing them yeah so that that's I think that's
might be the line that some people draw they don't advocate for killing them
explicitly but they do say that like maybe okay with it yeah they do say that homosexuals
deserve to die that they should they're just not gonna do it but that that's but even that that
that quote earlier from alternative right calm was was more explicit than that right it was it was
like entertaining the questions like how might the world be better without these group of people
will lead to enlightenment and flourishing thought I mean west bro baptist does say that
about gays oh that the world would be better and more enlightened without them and they should
all be gone that's interesting so why aren't are all these people that are pro punching spencer
pro punching every west bro baptist person I would assume so if they were consistent but
they very strongly say only nazis yeah I guess there's there's like we keep talking about there's
this magical category for nazis it's it's it's it's it's it's it's topical and yeah I would
I'm willing to bet that they wouldn't necessarily say those that that same thing about the west
bro baptist church they specifically said they don't say that about the west bro baptist church
when I talk to them okay okay so I know um alternative right the the website did that
proceed right Bart I mean I don't remember how long ago it was okay because because you you
mentioned that you mentioned that Richard Spencer is like more or less the founder of the alternative
right movement I'm not sure if the entire movement but it seems that the name alt right came from his
coinage from his website okay okay and he's certainly a big main in the movement which is
interesting because none of us have ever heard of him before a few months ago right yep no the
first time I saw him was when he was in that hotel saying you know hail trump hail our hail our
people and everyone was throwing up the salute Stephen just said we don't want to give him a
platform but no one has ever given him a platform the only platform he gets is when he does things
so outrageous on camera that the news says oh my god look at how outrageous this is kind of
kind of like Milo Yiannopoulos yes yes exactly uh and and like uh the west bro baptists they only
get coverage when they're so fucking crazy that the media says look how crazy they are he doesn't
have any sort of uh job at a newspaper or anything of course in Milo's case I mean he's he's he's
more like an alt right troll right he's he's there to be an entertainer he's there to
stir people up and you know be inflammatory you know like like and paint the left in his
battle light as he possibly can and misconstrue their points and so on and so forth is it bad
that I'm sometimes entertained by Milo no I mean he's he's he's a witty guy like he's he's clearly
he seems like an intelligent person of the very you know but he's directing his his wits toward
being an asshole basically yeah I apparently need to get out more I have no idea you guys are talking
about oh he's he's another alt right celebrity yeah he's he's he's he's associated with bright
Bart yeah and he got his uh he was he the first twitter um person that guy's Twitter
twitter purged yeah well he was yeah he got banned from twitter um for being just so controversial
all the time but and I mean I I think it was more than just that I'm just giving kind of like a really
basic view of it but um this thing is the first person to get banned from twitter well not entirely
but there was a bit of a purge uh not too long ago of various alt right twitter trolls and I think
he was the first one in that wave right I see yeah it was it was it was like back in june or
something like that now and now of course he's he's using that to his advantage he's standing
up and being like well I wouldn't go back to twitter even if they begged me to and and so on
so he looks like this awesome martyr for the alt right or whatever it is but yeah no most of the
concerns around Milo uh what he talks about when he's invited to you know speak at a campus
by the republican club or whatever um like I believe there's a bit of a controversy about
him outing a trans person at a oh I did hear about this guy right yeah like like he named
the person's last name uh unopolis so it's like that's that's the person that was at
university of washington on friday yes uh so so that's that's who this was about that's why
yeah okay it's like why I am and yeah holy shit so now we've come full circle all right yeah
interesting now yeah so so like he was I forget which university he was speaking at but he like
he named a trans person that was attending that college and showed a picture of this person
and a lot of people view that as essentially an act of violence endangering the life of
that person by outing them and making it known that they were trans yeah that was actually an
article that I was reading here that's why I sounded so familiar yeah um I'm trying to scroll
through and find the name of the school but it's not super important guys it sounds like guys
sounds like a total dick um what do we what do we think about the argument that uh some speech
can be violence so I guess then we kind of fall back on so that's what a lot of people who are in
favor of Nazi punching would say yeah definitely and Sean you gave the example self-defense against
the classic example of yelling fire in a movie theater yeah in John Stuart Mills on Liberty
short book basically the the bible for libertarians but it's it's a short enough read you can read
it in half an hour or an hour if you're slow like me um the sentence that encapsulates the whole
thesis of the book is the freedom to swing my fist ends where your face begins and the whole
whole idea is that I can do whatever I want as long as I'm not hurting other people and
consenting adults can do whatever they want as long as they're hurting other people the example
that he gives as far as speech that might be somewhat relevant is that apparently it was common
for corn farmers to stock all their their harvest and then basically ransom it out and say oh no
we're super short you know we're gonna have to hike up sales a lot and uh that was the
analogy that he gave and he was saying that it would be perfectly acceptable for somebody to
have a town meeting and hand out flyers and say the town corn farmer might be trying to fuck us or
you know this this is a bad establishment that allows this to happen it wouldn't be
appropriate to have that conversation on the lawn of the town corn farmer and get everyone all riled
up and and hating on this this group of people or just that that it that it there's a reasonable
expectation that that could happen and so that's even where mill was ready to say you know what
I'm ready to draw the line on free speech there so I guess I don't like this is this is gonna
maybe sound somewhat annoying to somebody but I don't like that you're saying speech is violence
I think that that's I mean if speech is violence then what's then what's violence so it's it's
indirect right it's it's not like the words are actually physically harming people obviously but
it's it's it's that those words can lead to acts of violence like in in the case of the in the case
of people who are um marginalized or oppressed right oh so it can lead to actual physical
violence right well like the whole idea was was like again like if if Milo Yiannopoulos goes to
a college campus and outs a trans trans person that's potentially a violent act because there
are people that would do that oh okay I see the idea is that you don't dox people right right right
it's it's an invasion from privacy and you never know who might be willing to commit commit acts
of violence with that knowledge right yeah but that that also potentially gets into a bit of a
gray area slash slippery slope type thing so okay so I guess I'll I'll rescind my my comments on
speech not being I guess so no one's saying that the words themselves are violence they're saying
that no it's that it leads to violence and that's that's a bad thing that's obviously a fair concern
okay so personal story time again I can kind of understand the statement that threats are
violence in themselves because I when I lived at a different place once and one of my neighbors was
kind of an asshole and he would get drunk a lot and one time I was out and I got a call from my
so saying that the guy just yelled over from his porch I'm gonna go over there and shoot all of you
and I freaked the fuck out and I literally got lost driving home oh it was like I was 10 minutes
away because I was so out of my mind with with both rage and you know that when you want to kill
someone that's sort of the the shock of it that I couldn't drive straight I didn't know where I was
but I finally got home and if he would have been there like out front in front of our doors
it took me a few days to get over that because hearing someone that you love threatened like that
yeah it is it feels like violence and I can I can totally understand someone who uh
who is in a targeted minority someone who's black or Jewish hearing uh we should we should
consider black genocide being physically not physically but psychologically harmed by that
feeling that they very emotionally impactful right yeah um and it makes makes the idea of hitting
them seems super sympathizable fuck yes it does yeah no um I mean I understand why he was hit the
thing that I'm uh upset about is how many people are cheering this on and saying yes this is a
thing we should do yeah and and and not a lot of them and not everyone who advocates for punch
Nazi is is putting it in the terms that we're putting it they're not exactly presenting the most
nuanced they're they're using again the internet pathos right they're showing images of captain
america they're showing images of indiana jones they're saying well of course it's okay to punch
those people but but they're also very removed from it a lot of them are are not like like a lot
of the people I've I've seen who advocate for it are not necessarily members of a marginalized group
but they're all but they're oftentimes people who are sympathetic with people who are marginalized
they're very they're very you know they're very social justice minded I guess for them it might
make a certain degree of sense like yeah of course that you know like these are the people who are
going to be hurt by this their scale of violence is not the same as ours and thus so maybe so maybe
on some level they don't want like an axiomatic view of how a civil society works to get in the
way of protecting the marginalized people right they see themselves I mean I don't want to say
like saviors but like people who are the warrior and social justice warrior yeah yeah sure you're
stopping the holocaust from coming on our shores right no I I mean I understand that but there's
I would assume and I'll get into a comparison here in a second if you're worried about violence
against your group wouldn't you want the laws to be strong and strictly enforced because the problem
comes from when there are lynch mobs and there are people being beaten in the streets and the cops
being okay with that being like yeah no he's a nazi or yeah no he's a jew so it's totally okay
it's this guy can threaten people and yes that is frightening and that is infuriating but as long
as you know that if he tries to come after you the cops and the rest of society will be there to stop
that I think that is a stronger protection than going out and punching people and starting fights
in the streets yeah I think well you definitely have a point I but I guess I would I would say
that there are some marginalized groups who don't feel that the law has their best interests in mind
and and that's kind of a whole other can of worms or you know that's that's a rabbit hole and I
I'll admit I'm not I mean I mean I read about these things sometimes but I don't necessarily
feel like and there's a certain level I can't really speak to it on I guess I guess that comes
back to the whole efficacy point because one of the people I was talking with was big into the
punk scenes in the oh in the 90s oh and and let me get like like not neo nazi showed up to those
yeah and and they were like the only way to deal with them is to just punch them out and get them
out of there exactly they said yeah I've seen that before yeah yeah that the only way to deal with
them is to resist physically and let them know that they will be beat if they come to these spaces
yeah they're talking about skinheads who show up to punk shows and stuff yep yeah exactly just listen
to the music or to be tics both yeah I wasn't around for that scene I was way too young it's
loud thrashing music it appeals to people who have a lot of you know testosterone want to
fight on both sides and so uh they they would be a danger to bystanders they would overwhelm the
bouncer's ability to take care of the venue and it quickly became a social norm that you punch
nazis that that was just you see a nazi you punch a nazi you get them the fuck out of there or
they're going to ruin everything and make the place dangerous for people and in that case I totally
sympathize because a club like that is already an anarchistic lawless environment the police don't
come in there and they don't care about fights in punk clubs they're like whatever you you white
kids beat the fuck out of each other it's like this the microcosm of like a no man's land right
right and in those cases you do need that sort of violence and in that case I would be a proponent
of doing that but I don't think we have that situation on the streets of New York I mean
they're as you pointed out there are serious problems with how law enforcement is done in
this country and how it is in many places anti-minority and I can see how they would feel like
they're not being protected by the law and so they do have to take things into their own hands
right right they like they don't have that same confidence that you and I might have
exactly in the same situation we you know so I I guess like I just I just wanted to bring that up
is like I want to acknowledge that that's a thing you know in general that's an important
thing I'm wondering how to engage it I guess yeah I'm I'm a yeah I'm in kind of in the same boat
yeah I I mean ideally the best way to engage it is to make the law be actually just and the law
enforcement be just right easier said than done in ideal world yeah yeah race relations are not
where they need to be yet right I did have a sort of lateral move I wanted to discuss at least briefly
sure in Germany and at least at least Germany some other parts of the UK maybe it's against the law
to express beliefs of Holocaust denial yes oh that's right I did hear about that I wonder
if that you if you could say if someone might say well okay fine we don't have to hit on
we just make it against the law to say that you know we want to kill black people or something
I would actually be okay with that I I have a mixed position on this I would rather that there be a
law that singles out something that everyone in society agrees is horrific and should not be
tolerated and have it actually be codified as part of our laws rather than having this anarchistic
vigilante justice well if you had to pick sure between between random vigilant vigilante justice
and a lot of per prevent that express to believe but for me the best kind of argument I heard to
to this this law in the UK is that if if you're the kind of idiot who is a Holocaust denier
by all means put that on your Facebook or say it in front of a TV camera and let everyone know
how fucking stupid you are and then that way we can all update our opinions about you accordingly
whereas if you can't even express the belief then you know you might be friends with some idiot
Holocaust and I are not even know it right because they can't express that belief to you so I mean
if you say well you can't share Pepe the frog memes because it's whatever supportive of this
this shitty demographic of assholes well then they're going to just have some other maybe
secret signs or something but then for all you know they're going to be friends with these people
and I guess if it never came up then all the better but it seems like I'd be kind of in favor
of you if you're going out there and letting everyone know how dumb you are and the laws that
that might impede that I can see their their utility but I wonder if that's worth the cost
it might be I'm not really super tied to that belief but it is an interesting counterpoint
yeah I'm wondering how you would make that actionable like like like you're you're saying
have a law where it's illegal to basically talk about genocide or to advocate for it or something
maybe advocate for it I mean I think I wouldn't want to make a law like that case if someone
publishes a website saying we should seriously consider black genocide you would pull them
into court you would say look here is the website here's his name on it here's the picture he posted
send him to jail for two years or however long it is or slap him with a $10,000 fine
I don't know what what the case may be that sounds appropriate I I wanted to at least because we've
done a lot of I think kicking back against the probe hunch position what what should people
be doing instead that strikes me as a very important question that I'd like to at least
consider but I don't I don't really have a good answer what was the question what should we what
should we do instead of people instead of punching Spencer and that community since we're mostly not
in favor of of hitting them in the street randomly and I guess to me I get my mind I mean because
I have hard time thinking of of like not worst-case scenarios as far as in this case like collateral
damage I imagine like throwing a brick through his window and killing a toddler like I mean you
know so would would they say well fuck it that toddler yeah I imagine some people rationalize
it and say well that's how people have been rationalizing all kinds of so yeah any social
movement that rely or that could plausibly lead to the death of innocent people like that kid at
University of Washington got shot I think he's well he's been moved from critical to
serious condition but that could have very easily killed him and it still might right so like I guess
if you're gonna say yeah I'm totally down with with violence against these people you're better
be prepared to say this is the amount of false positivism we're ready to tolerate what was what
was the shooting at the University of Washington that you're referring to oh that kid had a
anti swastika tattoo oh that looks like a swastika tattoo right okay um right so I mean you know
reasonable error if you're if your goal is saying I'm gonna kill Nazis
it's just a false positive we gotta accept yeah I mean I mean I mean rough tattoo choice but I'm
not gonna obviously it's not that person's fault and no one should be shot for for having any sort of
tattoo so I guess if we're not in favor of saying yeah hit them in the street what are we in favor
of what would be a better way to engage these assholes or just ignore them if there are 200
people I'm kind of in favor of ignoring them discrediting them as much as possible disrupting
them being really just like not inviting them to anything don't don't let them go into your
private spaces at the very least yeah that's obviously the first step I don't know shame them
shout them down like there's all kinds of non physically violent ways I mean you could be
aggressive with them and yell at them and until they go away argument gets counter argument is
is always my thing because they are just wrong about society being worse off when it's multicultural
and diverse and that's pretty fucking obvious to most people there there's a reason that there's
only a few hundred of them and they've been losing for decades in this country and I think
you know first of all giving the counter argument but also as you're saying pointing out that their
violent evil assholes drives people away sometimes reaching out to some of them and I talked earlier
about the guy who was invited to to Jewish dinners there was another guy who was had a swastika tattoo
on his face and was like on his forehead or I didn't say which where exactly on his face it was
but swastika tattoo on his face really really down on his luck and he was moving furniture to
make ends meet and a rich Jewish guy hired him and he was like well I hate this guy but I really
need to eat and pay rent so I'll move the furniture and afterwards the Jewish guy tipped him very well
and said you were awesome we want to come back and help me next week he was like yeah okay sure
and eventually they they got a pretty good rapport and the guy also dropped out of the
the Nazi movement and when he asked the Jewish guy hey why did you hire me when I had a swastika
right well you were a good worker and uh you looked like you were down on your luck and needed
some work and I said sure why not and I was like first of all props to that Jewish guy I would
seriously that guy I don't know what I would do in that situation but he broke down those barriers
and that was amazing but so there's that there's just mocking them um I will link to a podcast
about um how the KKK was taken down by Superman oh that's a great one yeah okay sounds interesting
oh well it's fantastic they um they had someone infiltrate the KKK and they always have their
secret meetings where they have their special robes and they talk in codes and all this
ridiculous codes to like grand dragon and all the stuff that you'd imagine kids would play with
yeah and the secret club the secret KKK club yeah it was seriously like boys in a treehouse having
their secret club and just the focus of this we really hate black people now let's have our
fun weekend activity or whatever let's go bowling with the sight of impotent rage yes yeah uh but
the guy worked for a radio program a superman program this was was this the 40s 30s it was before
tv was big radio was the big thing okay so yeah 40s probably yeah and um he leaked all this
information to the guys working on the superman program and superman started fighting the KKK
in the program and the KKK they would reveal all their all their secret codes they would just make
them look ridiculous they would point out that these are just dumb guys in a treehouse basically
and the uh people who are in the KKK their kids listen to the superman show and they would start
running around the playground playing superman versus the KKK that's brilliant yes and guess this
is this because this is all sounding like exactly like i just heard this very recently uh i think
it may have been a radio lab maybe it was this american life i'm not sure i i know it was probably
this american life i don't actually listen to either of those i i feel like i saw this in a
document or something very like within the last month because all like this is all very fresh for
me yeah but yeah it's hilarious they were basically shamed out of being the KKK because it was pointed
out how ridiculous and dumb they are sure and and after that the KKK i mean it was still a thing
but it became far less powerful uh so there's that there is a group called indivisible and they
have a website indivisibleguide.com i believe it is but i'll double check that uh and they are posting
all sorts of things on how you can resist the trump administration in a peaceful and possibly
effective way things you can do how you can contact your congress craters how you can put
political pressure on things from your own district at home uh and i will link that as well
but there's a lot of nonviolent things that people can do and that i think would be more
effective than trying to be violent sure the the other thing i i guess yeah people some of the
people in favor of like yeah it's okay to you know punch nazis i have said that well it's not
really violence because people like richard spencer are are they're the ones they're like
they're the oppressors they're the bad guys you know like like it's it's it's kind of that whole
thing i'm i'm probably not presenting it very well but i've seen this on a couple of friends
walls where they basically say you know i'm i'm a pacifist i'm against violence but doing this is
not violence which is i mean i i don't i don't entirely agree with that but it's mostly a semantic
thing i also think they vastly overestimate how much power he has and and that's entirely right
and i mean i think like again it kind of ties into like social justice movements where like any
any form of oppression where if you're if you're a member of society that holds the card so to speak
then then some of your actions can be considered as violence whereas some other ones might not be
even if on the surface they appear to such but the guy that punched him was also an able-bodied
white man oh yes no no i'm i'm aware yeah no i i'm just i was kind of grasping at straws for
that one because this is me just trying to like like here are some arguments i've seen
like they're not necessarily arguments that i agree with but they're this is some of the
rhetoric that i've seen kicked down and i that was very incomplete just for his argument because
it seems to me like the social justice left has a fair amount of power well yeah no i mean certainly
more than than richard spencer does anyway yeah i mean you you might you might say that
i i and i mean and and here's the other thing and this is this is kind of another
like i mean a guy got away with punching a man in the street well yeah no i mean it's just like
like and i think this happens sometimes in general with people who are very fired up
and and and fervent about these ideas of social justice is that the the the have a tendency to
conflate the idea of systemic power with individual power where it's like if you if you commit an
act of violence or you do something against someone on an individual level you think things like
racial discrimination will cut all directions if you're talking about one-on-one or in small groups
on a systemic level obviously that doesn't quite play out the same way but people people sometimes
seem to just kind of say like they look at a pattern they'll be like well this involved a
person of this color and this involved involved a person this other color so therefore that wasn't
actually racist that wasn't racially motivated so i mean that might be where some of that comes from
speak of weird rhetoric i there was a great well there is a great subreddit called change my view
where somebody put forward you know in the title the the thread their position and they'll defend it
as many paragraphs as it takes and then people will try and talk them out of it and in good faith
they tend to engage in fact if the original poster doesn't respond within three hours to the original
to to comments coming in the thread gets removed so that it it demands open like actual discourse
i think change my view is another wonderful way to fight this sort of thing without punching people
there was i just was reading one today somebody said i it was basically taking your position
they had your position they were being called nazi by their facebook friends because they were a
nazi sympathizer because they were saying you shouldn't hit nazis and he's like i'm not saying
you shouldn't hit nazis and saying you shouldn't hit anybody including nazis anyway so there were
sure the further down you go obviously just like with every sort of comment thread the worst the
the arguments get and they got to be kind of dumb all along the lines of like well at what point
are you allowed to hit him you know if there's some guy marching around with a gun saying
i'm going to shoot black people do you do pin him then do you wait till he takes aim you pin him
down yeah you call the cops immediately that's a threatable that's a credible threat of violence
yeah so i think there you know there are some times when punching is appropriate yeah and so some
of these were kind of dumb but i get the point they were trying to make but poorly was at where
where is the where's the line when is it okay to hit spencer i i think i i will put forward my own
idea on it and it was what i said earlier which is when it changes from talking about the the
notion as kind of just a circle jerky little thing about you know we have our our little
fringe belief let's sit here and engage about it back and forth to our little community
and saying all right guys grab your guns we're going to go do this i think the second that they
make a plan so you're so credible threat of violence right yeah i mean soon as he actually
were to single out a black person or a black neighborhood and say let's start here that is
when you intervene so i guess we're all that was a pretty quick answer i thought it might be a
conversation but i think that that's a fair thing i guess i think maybe the concern come back to that
could be something along the lines of what if they don't say all right guys friday night and it's
tuesday they say right now let's go do this and there's just not time so is there any point where
preemptive strike is appropriate and i don't really have a good answer to that i feel yeah kind of like
we've been that's sort of the issue we've been talking about that if you if you authorize preemptive
strikes you're going to get a lot of false positives you're going to have a hard time
pinning down it when exactly it's okay i think there's definitely a point where preemptive strikes
are appropriate but that requires a huge burden of of proof if you're advocating that sort of thing
if you're advocating being violent to someone else before they have been violent first right you
better have a damn good reason yeah and like and like what is sufficient evidence for that
in that case where you simply just don't have enough information like or or well actually even
without that just like what would sufficient evidence be in general like it's if it's if it's
if it's a too little too late thing where it's like okay we're just gonna be we're just gonna
hands off hands off hands off oh suddenly some horrible thing happens a bunch of people get
lit up in a neighborhood and it's like well we maybe if we'd listen to all those nazi punchy
puncher people you know like maybe this wouldn't have happened i i mean and i think that at least
in the usa maybe this is different in other countries but at least in the usa we are so
far away from nazis actually being a threat that is we are far more and we're not close to this
either but we are far closer to the threat of random mobs in the streets choosing people they
don't like and beating them than we are to the fascists taking over and implementing their
genocidal policies i'm sure true to social media in general like they're people who are you know
catastrophizing certain things and kind of making this assumption that like yeah it's gonna be it's
gonna straight up be third right all over again yeah do we even need to point out that the nazis
got started by having mobs of vigilantes in the streets they were not originally in power in germany
they started out as groups of thugs and kids wandering the streets saying the laws do not
punish the jews enough we must do it more for them right they were they were like completely
peaceful right they they actually did use violence in small groups they would punch people they would
beat people they would even now and then kill people but it started out with mobs beating
someone that they thought was not being sufficiently punished by the government right which is what
we have here yes a vigilante beating someone who he believes is not being sufficiently
silenced by the government we have a distilled version of that like a weaker yeah right now
i would definitely yeah we had one guy there there was i mean he ran after after the punch
because he knew he wouldn't get support enough support from the crowd to stick around and and
hang out so i mean and he also didn't want to get arrested yeah so it was a little different but
it does sound like a slippery slope to something like that right
yeah i don't know if it's a slippery slope but it's something that i would like to be on the
lookout for and the fact that people are gleefully cheering on the the guy who wants to who is
basically the small scale version of the uh brown shirts wandering the streets is is what
really horrifies me i think that's fair i i don't have much else to to weigh in on that
i'm certainly open to to civil counterargument i do have one argument pro punching that i really
kind of respect even though i don't want to what's that um the argument is that
there is no such thing as non-violence or non-violent action that is effective if there
isn't a also violent action um complimenting it that for example ghandi would have failed
in india if it wasn't for the fact that the british had just gone through a brutal world war
and were militarily weakened and just didn't have the the will to fight anymore uh that the
civil rights movement here in america would have never gone anywhere if it wasn't for the
fact that there were black panthers uh burning places and carrying guns around and that uh it
originally people when they saw martin luther king were just shocked and offended that he would
do such a thing and ask for for these concessions and then the black panthers show up with their
guns and their fire bombs and they realize well he's certainly much better than the black panthers
and we're going to have race riots on our hands and uh we would rather deal with martin luther king
than deal with these uh violent mobs and that is one of the reasons i do think that violence
sometimes is justified uh it certainly was in that case when the law was on the side of terror as
instead of on the side of order uh right but this it could be made a claim could be made that
this is serving the same function by having a minority who is violent and uh does that sort
of thing it gives more power to the nonviolent groups that all of a sudden people who were
kind of on the sidelines before uh join into the nonviolent movement and push that stronger
just because they want to avoid the the violence getting out of control it makes it makes the whole
problem unignorable yeah and you can't have that if you don't have some small minority that is doing
the violence do do you think it also could mitigate greater acts of violence by like this this this
relatively minor like this guy throws an elbow when he runs away if he is is part of the argument
also that like if if you sort of like if that didn't happen maybe something could have escalated
into an even worse act of violence before people would react to it and say hey maybe we shouldn't
do this oh i didn't hear that but that that is also a point yeah just something came to mind yeah
i mean it certainly raised my consciousness to the fact that there is even a a population of neo-nazis
in the united states okay like i i probably am not a representative demographic of of people
who pay attention so maybe i might be out of the loop on this one well i think you're probably
rather um basic uh american norm i think you're actually more informed than the the median american
which would make me think that most people didn't know that there was these neo-nazi groups
yeah probably less informed than the average listener though okay but um i mean yeah i suppose i
would have i guess i knew that there were skinheads and people swastika tattoos but i thought it was
mainly like prison gangs you know a few hundred people and that apparently is what it is but i
wasn't aware that they had some some tv time and that sort of nonsense so certainly raised my
consciousness to the problem and if there's anything nonviolent that i can do that can help
mitigate their publicity i'd be down to do something like that that i wouldn't have been able to do
had you not told me that this happened so it puts me in the bizarre mental position of
wanting non-violence and hating violence but realizing that it may be a necessary thing
that has to be there and i don't want to admit that speaking of non-violence in gondi just real
quick i i have a my my bone to pick with with gondian pacifism is that his whole approach
wouldn't have worked if his enemy had been crueler right so like the whole idea of like well i'm
gonna be nonviolent only works so like say if it's you know a small town only works like on a personal
level or a small subsection level until some person is prepared to be violent will come and
stop the violent the the aggressor right yeah so it's it's not a generalizable thing it i don't
know i guess it seems like they're they're dodging a hard question and uh just putting
pushing the problem to somebody else if the occupational forces just didn't care and we're
willing to wipe everyone out then if they win the nazis yeah exactly and not in not britain right
yeah so and here we are back at nazis yep godwind i mean not really because we've been talking about
it since the very beginning but you know what i mean that's right do we have anything else
so so recently there was the women's march and i know that uh there's been talk about
organizing mass scale protests every month i'm very curious to see how that goes marches are
another wonderful way yeah to non-violently resist and good on the women's march the largest
in history yes 2.5 million people oh god yeah no it's like across the nation huge turnout like
like this is like like like just to see how much of the country is resisting the new presidency
and and marching in favor of women's rights like it's it's pretty amazing i had a little bit of
my faith in humanity restored just slightly upon seeing that i went to the one in denver for a few
hours from saturday morning and it was awesome how was that it was fun i mean there were there were
fun science people but but what i really wanted to see was to kind of gauge the the feeling of the
crowd yeah and i also really was looking to see if there were any counter protesters and i didn't
see anybody i was i was wondering if there would be any sort of you know assaults against them or
something which i mean you know you're kind of putting yourself out there to get your ass kicked
if you're gonna go out there and uh i don't know but i'm not saying you should i'm just saying you
you're accepting that level of risk uh but i didn't see anything like that everyone was cool um
it was just i tried to get up i went up on like the the hill at the capitol building and then when
they moved to the 16th street mall i went up to like the third floor there and just people as far as
you could see it was huge um yeah everyone was peaceful and it was it was nice uh dude i wish i
would have been there at least an hour or two you know i mean if they're doing it again every every
i imagine uh turnout will probably diminish but you know that you guys people probably kept some
other signs so yeah fun stuff good on you yeah i mean it was more just curiosity i don't even
really know what their platform is i did look it up and they have like six rough platforms that
they're like you know what we're pro we're pro choice we're apparently anti anti choice there
there was there was the uh there was a sentiment to where isn't anti anti choice the same thing
as pro choice yes but they're called but they were anti uh anti someone else making the choice for
you what am i trying to say they were anti what's the other side called they're anti pro life people
they explicitly didn't want them to come oh uh there there were some pro life groups that reached
out and said hey we're we want to support and join in on this and then they were like yeah sure and
then people were like are you fucking kidding they're against our right to do stuff like oh yeah
never mind guys that doesn't make sense yeah i don't understand why how a pro life well because
they're also pro life against trump still oh sorry okay i was talking about specifically like
reproductive rights like like how would the well okay that it was a multi-purpose march so that
makes sense yeah a lot okay part of the march was and that's the thing the science ranged from
everything from trump has tiny hands yeah like yeah just get your you know get your laws out of
vagina and stuff and so right it it wasn't like a unified purpose it was but it was a general thing
and to me it was mainly about uh the the impression that i got was that it wasn't so much about any of
these specific platforms there was also concern for lgbt immigrants and stuff like that um it was
just solidarity with women and i'm like yeah that sounds like a message i can get behind yeah it's an
anti-trump and women's rights yeah the anti-trump part was interesting i mean i i don't have a
flushed out opinion on this but it is interesting like the idea that we're gonna rally against
the democratic process i mean i i'm probably i'm probably more anti-democracy than the average
person but i think they're yeah well the scent is part of the democratic process though it is it
is part of the democratic and and they're i'd be willing to bet that it's more it's it's less
protesting the democratic process and more the protesting specifically trump and the policies
that he has been enacting in the last well i think the women's march was was that on the 21st
yeah it was a whole weekend right it was saturday might have been the whole weekend but i think
the first the major was the 21st on saturday but but we've i don't know like i haven't i haven't
fact-checked this a hundred percent but i mean supposedly there have been some policies signed
off on by trump already that are very troubling um the i mean so i unfortunately i'm still kind
of like coming to grips with this i never really processed the possibility of him becoming president
until like 9 30 on november 8th yep and then right there right right through friday afternoon i'm
like oh someone will probably kill him at inauguration okay it's like maybe this one actually
happened and then it did and so like then i'm i'm getting i don't know four or five news articles
a day where it's like oh president trump signed in the keystone pipeline with an executive order
president trump signed to that bill that every republican signs that that keeps american foreign
aid from going to organizations that are pro-abortion yeah so that that might have been what you're
thinking of but that's the only that's the only anti-woman thing that i can think of that he's
done so far yeah was it is it is it the gate it's like the gag rule it's like if the so much is
mentioned oh no that that's that's a that's a domestic thing and that's always been a symbolic
that goes back and forth in fact george bush the first paper he signed clinton the first paper he
signed yeah they keep on doing it and they're doing it that doesn't actually do anything this was
specifically duos gives i think point zero one eight percent of its gdp to foreign aid this bill
kept any of that money going to from going to charities that uh help with like birth control
or abortion or anything like that okay so is it point one eight percent of gdp or point one eight
percent of point zero one eight percent maybe of gdp or of the government's budget uh government's
budget okay i think okay i thought i'll double check i these were in our ea episode um they're in
that also in singers uh the life you can save his book you have the shit that's been coming out of
the trump administration just in the last few days he still freaks me out like the fact that it's
actually affordable health care act the gagging the epa yep oh yeah by friday well he the climate
change page on the on the uh washington's on white house website was gone well that is also no
longer in spanish available in spanish that well that well the reason for that and i'm not i'm not
saying that you know what anyway no the reason for that was uh the the apparently we're clearing
everything for the new the new administration so like uh there's a new domain called obama
white house dot gov that had all that original content the twitter account potas president
of the united states was also moved to potas 44 for because they had all the obama's tweets right
so it was basically clearing the record for trump to put whatever i will say that like regardless
i i wouldn't be surprised if there wasn't a climate change section there later or
a lgbt section there later i mean well we'll see if those things make a comeback i'm kind of
curious exactly it's uh if they do that'd be nice i don't know how everything else made it and those
didn't make the cut but maybe they wanted to put their own spin on it and not have obama's spin
they cleared all the main like the like the central content everything but bare bones
is basically what it was oh okay i didn't know that there was no nuance to that well fingers crossed
that in the next couple weeks they put their shit together yeah and i can i can lighten my opinion
a little bit no i'm just i'm hoping things like it's gone on record trump's gone on record saying
that he thinks that climate change is a chinese hoax meant to undermine our manufacturing base so
oh there's that that reminds me my favorite sign at the at the rally so i did i also just kind of
enjoyed the experience of seeing like in public in a large crowd signs that had the word pussy and
cunt on them and like everyone loved them my favorite sign though was a big blow up of one of
trump's tweets that was this is appalling we should march on washington to to fight this
travesty nice it was it was when obama was in auger either won the last election or was inaugurated
and perfect so someone was carrying that around i thought that was my favorite sign i think my
favorite cheeky statement about the whole um nazi punch thing is uh it wasn't a punch it was an
alt handshake nice damn dude how do you even come out and just nakedly assert things that can be
proven false like within minutes really i mean it's that's that seriously that i i hate comparisons
to 1984 because it's such a fucking cliche at this point yeah or like or like or like or like
comparing the violent parts of the protest to like um our nation's independence yeah completely
different context but even just the fact that they come out and say something which is nakedly
false and easily provable so and just stick to it anyway it's bizarre you know part of it might
actually be a calculated move i mean think about it everyone's talking about how what's his butt
is saying that the crowd is biggest in history and no one's talking about what trump's actually
well i'm seeing people talking about what he's doing too some but i think that this is a large
percentage of conversation is is here talking about this obviously bullshit thing that's just
there to you know throw this out to us to fight over and complain about for the next week while he
goes off and does stupid shit which i mean it's obviously going to be like a distraction like a
distraction tactic basically yeah i think i mean i i don't know what the level of you never really
know like the level that these people are playing at but then if it wasn't calculated move that to
me would be what they're probably trying to do it might be giving them too much credit i mean
i think it's just kind of like a side effect but memes get circulated people just repost things
because it makes them feel good i i feel like the majority of it has this added side effect of like
yeah it's also kind of an obfuscation or not really an obfuscation but just a distraction
it's kind of incidental so but hey maybe they're all just masterminds i don't know i mean i don't
know what's just scarier the fact that the possibility that he's a secret mastermind or
he's got masterminds working for him or that he is as fucking idiotic as he seems
both are pretty scary i think i almost prefer masterminds he's just so extremely shrewd he's
just like so good at this that like he knows how to play crowd perfectly i don't i don't have a lot
of faith i don't have a lot of faith that trump himself is is a secret mastermind but he might
have hired masterminds but i think i prefer mastermind as opposed to just like blundering through
for the through the world in the most powerful seat in the world okay for the next four years i
think i'd rather have you know some sinister torch lit meetings with people hoods or a villain you
can respect because they're just smart right i think well and and like a smart villain probably
doesn't want to destroy the world whereas an idiot might wouldn't know if they're doing it right yeah
so yeah i mean you gotta think this is the fucking god damn this is the guy who you know
wants to restart the nuclear arms race to show the world that the os is still on top and this is
the guy who announced this dismiss things from the cia disney but but but my thing is like not
only is that the stupidest thing to say in the world but he also announced this to the world
on his twitter feed yeah and so like this is the caliber of person we're dealing with i consider him
the twitter in chief now really in chief that's that's what he does you know but when you made the
point that you did not see the trump thing coming i also did not see the trump thing coming i guess
since i didn't see the trump thing coming that uh despite how far off i think this whole fascism
taking over the government is on the other hand when trump first jumped in the primaries i didn't
think he would last two months i thought he was a clown and sort of every yep yeah but but he he was
running up against other clowns i guess so and he just had enough like machismo to kind of pull
it off he was just so supremely confident in his but the fact that i was so wrong about that means
i should probably consider that i may be very wrong about other things that i think are just
absolutely crazy well like the fascist taking over next month well yeah i mean it's i i there's
obviously more to it than that it's it's like i would i'd be careful not to compare two very
unlike things like like this is obvious this seems obvious you know i made a mistake here
therefore i might make a mistake here you know it's that's true i mean there is there was at
least a road that donald trump could potentially use to get to the white house even if we didn't
think he would take it whereas there's no road that i can see at all that the fascists will take
over the government the other thing too is that just because you're wrong about one improbable
thing doesn't necessarily increase the odds of any given improbable thing right that you also
sign the mobility to happening right yeah yeah those are isolated out do you think sometimes
they are you you seemed like you disagreed with me do you think there's a viable road for fascists
to take over the government that's see that's actually i really am undecided on that one i
i know that's kind of my that's been kind of my default but i like to be as informed as possible
before i really can have enough conviction to be like yeah i think that's a thing i mean on the
one hand i feel like a lot of it seems like a lot of people at least over the last couple
months have been very like hey if we look to history these are some patterns that have emerged
from history and and they kind of like match that to what's going on now and they're kind of like
this is the beginning of a fascist regime and i don't know if i entirely buy that
it's it's one of those things like like i'm just not very well versed in history i don't know a
whole lot about it it was never really an area of interest of mine so i can't really look at it from
that context right but it it does and again you know you go on the internet there's a lot
there's a high noise to information ratio in general you know they're like people post these
think pieces where there's they're like here's here's the road to fascism and here's like yes
trumps a fascist and i i don't know i i i like to be as accurate as possible so i have a hard time
taking those things at face value because they're they're often from people who have a very like
anti-authority like as a matter of principle mindset i've witnessed them say other things
that make me think a little bit or i mean i mean kind of and i think i mean like it gives me pause
and i i have a you know i'm skeptical what they're saying but i don't want i also don't want to be
like oh whatever it's a benign presidency and then suddenly it's too late and all these horrible
things have happened and i mean we've already seen in the last few days like all a benign presidency
oh no no i'm saying like like months ago people were were putting forth that idea like oh it's
probably gonna be a benign presidency nothing bad's gonna happen that's sort of where i
was i was think Stockholm syndromeed right like i'm like well fuck it we're already staring down
the barrel of it hopefully he's not gonna be as bad as i thought he was the day before he
became before he was elected right and there's and there's a general sentiment of like you know
like like you want to be wrong about like it's like well i think he's gonna be disastrous as a
president but i'd like to be incorrect about that because that's objectively better if he does
if he does good if he does well then then awesome then i was wrong and that's great that i was wrong
right we've already seen now that he's he's taken a seat in the last few days it's the people who are
like let's give him a chance or kind of eating their words now because i also had like non-zero
probabilities that in his inaugural address is going to be like you guys are all fucking idiots
i'm not a politician he was just he was going to just quit right then just give everyone the finger
so now the all none of those have happened i've already seen the words and headlines you know
president trump gave an executive order and i'm like oh my god there's no such thing as a benign
presidency this is so i'm already kind of like still processing this on a real level
it's terrifying did you hear his inauguration address i read it yeah when when he delivered
the line i am never gonna let you down i saw the same thing oh i heard someone i i didn't see that
part but i everyone was like do you just rick roll this i seriously thought the next line was
going to be something about uh giving us up or deserting us yeah because i'll never give you
i might have i might have shared the speech of my i i might have i think i would have loved
that is what i'm trying to say i mean to come out of kind of the the city it's math would have been
so funny yeah i i did read it i mean it was the exact benign bullshit that every politician says
plus some stuff that you know i can see why some people would find very appealing the idea of you
know well we're gonna bring jobs back to america you know this isn't just transfer power from one
present to the other it's not from one party to another but from the from the party from the
government to you the people and everyone's like yay he's talking about us and i get like
it's it's it's populist just jargon that i i feel like i i saw people saying things like man that
was a very articulate speech i think that's pretty cool that he said that i'm like he doesn't
fucking write his speeches yeah no one writes their speeches if you want to hear what the man
talks like and thinks like watch his stream of consciousness during a debate yeah when he doesn't
have a chance to prepare a full fledged statement and just watch yeah language is important and
when you hear him use language it seems clear he's not someone who enacts a lot of critical
thought he doesn't so much use language as he just like runs in circles and can talk for 90
seconds that's saying fucking anything yeah it's like it's like it's yes mr trump those were words
did you see the list of words that were in his inauguration speech that have never been in a
previous inauguration speech no it was it was interesting there were i i don't remember all
of them but the ones that stuck out were uh bloody carnage and uh help me please help me
no no it was this american carnage remember must stop here oh yeah i i need most of the words
that have never appeared in a previous inauguration this american carnage visceral yeah like someone
gonna start a podcast called this american carnage it's like counterpart to this american life yes
ira glass alt right this american life yeah this american carnage with richard spencer
i can just hear him sedately talking to the microphone just like ira glass
so sipping on some chai tea right are we running out of steam i think we're running out of steam
all right well thanks for coming on i appreciate your input shon and uh you're welcome yeah thanks
for thanks for listening and for our little side episode we'll see how little that ends up being
all right cool thanks everyone bye bye thank you bye
i i'm i'm wary of quote mining as my ringtone whenever you call me i'm going to use we should
be investigating whether and how to do the black genocide whichever one that was
