Today's episode started with some hardware trouble on Steven and Jace's microphones.
However, it was fixed after a few minutes, so if you hang on a little bit, it gets much better.
Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Uniash Brodsky and today we are just having a live
episode with all of y'all. I look like I'm wearing those wigs, the revolutionary hair.
But brown black instead of white. Yeah, okay, fair enough. I'm trying to go for the uh, I don't
even know what to do with my hair. It hasn't been cut in so long. I would like to have it long though,
maybe get it styled in some way, but I don't know. Okay, can you just like walk in and ask
someone in a great clip to do your hair or do you like got to pay more money for decent hair?
What is it? Cosmetology students? I guess specifically hair cutting, I don't know if there's a fancy
name for that, but they will generally like give you really cool haircuts at discounted
prices to get pieces for their portfolio. Okay. But then you're also trusting yourself to someone
who's a student. Oh, so there's the trade-off. That's all right, students need to learn things too.
I fixed it. Okay, cool. So yeah, I shouldn't have turned that thing off earlier.
Well, noise suppression sounds a good idea, but apparently it suppresses all microphones
other than the first one on the list. Cool. Thank you for letting us know that Jason
Steven got super quiet right there. Yeah, I got to lean closer to the mic. Yes. No, it was,
I think we had noise suppression on it. It made both of us quiet. Yeah, yeah. It muted your mics,
I guess, and you were just coming through on mine. Steven needs to lean in.
Well, I can jack up Steven's volume. Steven's mic is practically on his nose.
We used to do big work meetings at my last job where there'd be like 100 people in the room,
and in order for you to be here, you'd pass around a microphone with the general rule of thumb is
you wanted to get close enough to lick like an ice cream cone. Yeah. And we'd just shout
like more ice cream if we couldn't hear a person. Oh, cool. So I'm always close enough to lick the
microphone. Yes. It's not a bad rule of thumb to have. It also helps the microphones, the closer
you are, the more bass they pick up. So if you want to have sounding like you have a deep,
sexy voice, you get in real close. I'm assuming that's what they did for Amazing Man. Just,
just deep throat that microphone. Aw, thanks, great, Nick. What's on them? I think on the mic,
or I mean, not the mic, the, oh yeah, yeah, the mug says true buckaroo on it. Okay, so,
yes, we are here mainly just to chat with you guys because last time we had one of these live
episodes, it was a lot of fun. We don't necessarily have a topic lined up, but we do have a Charlie
in reserve in case not a lot of people want to talk to us. Johnny's offering to talk about the
Amazing Man recording. Sure. Does anyone have questions about the Amazing Man recording? Okay.
I want to know the Amazing Man too. I need to read the Amazing Man one first. You do not. They are,
I mean, no, no, you don't. It was trying to do something totally different. The only thing
you find out is they're both really good though. It's fun. Yeah. Of course. I didn't hear about
the Amazing Man. I'm still really quiet. Oh, because you were on the red mic? Oh, I was cranking
myself up. Is it even better now? How's that? Okay, excellent. Thank you. Cool. Yeah, I know.
I was kind of peeved about the whole sad puppies thing when they first did their
Try to Take Over the Hugo Awards, and I just jotted off Amazing Man one in the course of
a couple hours because that is how I felt about them, that they were these people that were like,
I'm completely powerless and that nobody likes me. And then they did it again the next year,
but this time they nominated Chuck Tingles' work Space Raptor Butt Invasion. And I read it,
and I was like, this is actually really good. I mean, it's ridiculous gay erotica, but it has this
whole like, you know, gay discovering yourself story to it. And so I read some more of his works,
and every single one of works are basically identical. Some ridiculous thing is really
hot and some dude finds out that he's gay and falls in love with it and they have amazing sacks and
it's 8,000 words or less. And this is a dinosaur one for that one was the dinosaur one that they
yeah, that they dominated. And so just to have fun with it, I did the same thing with Amazing Man
2 but did it in the style of Chuck Tingle and I ended up having way too much fun writing it.
And I don't think there's just things too much fun. That sounds great. Yeah. And then Johnny
and Gray and Hobo Demon had way too much fun recording it. Love it. Yeah.
Yeah, no, Amazing Man was made up, but I also made him up for, you know, the first one that was not
an erotica. No one needs to read any of them really. But they were a lot of fun. Anyways,
if anyone did have a question about the recording, it sounds like Johnny is willing to answer them.
Did either of you guys have questions about the recordings? Having not heard it yet, no.
Oh yeah, of course not. Yeah. Well, now I'm curious if it's gay erotica, was there
pleasure noises that someone had to do under the microphone? Yeah, you know what? Let's
unmute Johnny. All right. Find him over there. Give him the, Johnny, can you speak? As of now,
yes. Hi. Fantastic. It's me, Johnny. You may know me from such works as the uncultured swine podcast,
getting the plug in early so as to not distract from later moments. But yes,
I very much enjoyed recording this wonderful work that you made. And to answer that question,
yes, I did have to do that. Also, Doug did. My work was fine. His work, frankly, incredible.
I don't know how he made such good dinosaur sex sounds, but they were, they were really something
to behold. I do take some credit for shamelessly stealing all of Jurassic Park dinosaur sounds
with which to augment his sounds. But that, you know, that came in in the editing process. The
voice was all him. The editing was quite amazing, too. Thank you. On the drive home. That sounds
hilarious. Gray is also to be blamed for the editing. He did most of the stuff of making our
words not be interrupted by all the ums as mine are currently being because this is live. However,
I was the one to inject dinosaur sounds and things and also rerecord all my lines
because I tell you what, in writing, those lines may be easy to get out. In speaking,
they are not easy to get out as I mentioned in the recording. Well, there's nothing easy to get
out when it comes to a tingler. You're just giggling to yourself the whole time. Or like,
well, actually, I remember that was when we were just email buddies. I still lived in New Jersey
and it actually sent me like the like beta readers like, should I, should I do this? Is this okay?
It's like, you got to do it. Yep. For for an additional example, I remember you telling us
that story when you were. That was perfect. No, no comments. I remember you telling us exactly
that story when we were recording the eye of our gun thing, which is why we actually
went and told us we should do this when we were recording eye of our gun.
Jayce is responsible for many bad decisions. Yes, and this is not any of them.
The greatness Nick asks, what was your favorite part or line doing the recording?
So my favorite part, like the thing that was like funniest, I mean, I hate to say it's something
that I said, but it's probably the thing that I included as an after the credits stinger. It
didn't happen after the credits, but just at one point, Doug was struggling with the line. He says,
like, I'm, I'm having, I'm kind of having a hard time saying this. And I said, yeah, these lines
are really hard to get out with a straight face. It would be easier if I had a gay one. But you
know, I have, and that was probably the most amusing thing we all cracked up when I said that.
However, best line, best line that you wrote was definitely the first time and you use it two
times that you say stuffing all the dinosaur Italy could take down its throat. The first time
you say that it's in a non sexual connotation, but it's a ridiculously sexual line and great just
died when he tried to say that seriously. Because his thing was for like the way he was doing this
was he was doing it very flat affect. You know, like he was a, I believe the way he described
it was he was trying to do the narration as if he was a 1940s noir detective. And he really
struggled to say that one and died for approximately 30 seconds. But then he was fine.
Cool. Yeah, that's that's a thing you don't ever really think about while writing is how hard
would these lines be to say out loud? Because I don't know, it was never really a consideration
for anyone who's not a screenwriter. And nowadays, almost everything goes in audio. So maybe people
will start thinking about that more. But I kind of like the fact that they don't, because you can do
a lot of things in text, if you don't have to worry how it's going to sound. I was just
Oh, go ahead. No, no, no, I was just gonna agree and say that,
you know, if we were proper voice actors, I imagine we would not have a hard time. It was
just a hard thing to do, because these were lines where you're saying very like, sexual or overblown
things, which are hard to do if you were not actually in that situation, or indeed an actor,
which was actors. Yeah, I, man, I, there was an official Chuck Tingle podcast for a while.
And I tried listening to a couple episodes and I just didn't like it because the people they
got to read it did it in one take and we're laughing all the way through. And that's great
and all, I guess, if you're doing it with friends, I really appreciated that you guys like just did
it, you know, straight as much as you could, you know, yes, as straight as that work can possibly
be made. Right. Yeah, I have not listened to my dad wrote a porno, but I've had it recommended
to me a few times now, I should. The Chuck Tingle podcast, by the way, is, I believe it's pounded
in the butt my, by my own podcast, because that is the naming convention. Yes. What are you going
to say, Stephen? Oh, an anecdote about like hard to read phrases. So I was watching a shark tank
this morning, and some guys brought on some like whatever truffle spy. And it's like expensive.
And then Damon, one of the sharks was like, putting it in his pocket, because it was expensive and he
was being funny. And Rachel, it's like, Oh, he tried like when he pocketed it. And that's a hard,
he pocketed it is hard to say. And Stephen, shoot, Stephen Fry did the audio book for the Harry
Potter books. And I think he said something derisive about the quality of the books or something to
JK Rowling. And then at another time said that it was really hard to say Harry pocketed it.
And I think he said that like, I think that line was first in the third book, and she made
sure to include it in every subsequent book. Nice. That's my kind of petty. Yeah. Yeah.
But yes, that that was awesome. And did you have anything you wanted to ask us as long as you're
on here? Oh, gosh, I wouldn't have any clever questions. I didn't prepare any. So I will leave
that to more adequately prepared question askers. If anyone has any questions they would like to
ask you can type them in the chat or you can, you know, say, Hey, I'd like to talk with you guys
and, you know, let us know we will unmute you. I will. I will remute myself until such time as
the world needs me again. Sounds good. Excellent. Great, Nick. Yeah, recordings about anything
you can ask any of us whatever. It's kind of an AMA sort of situation now.
Yeah, it doesn't have to be questions either. You can just like get on and say how much you
hate my contribution to the show. Sure. Or I don't know, like plug something.
Great Nick wants to know why the heck we haven't had more Marvel plugs yet.
Falcon and Winter Soldier is going great. Episode five of six came out on Friday,
and it was fantastic. It's going in a really fun direction. Great Nick didn't actually say that,
but someone said that earlier. So yeah. Or maybe it was great Nick, I don't know.
Wes says, I have family stuff today, so I can't listen in. All right, Wes, no problem. Have a
good family thing. Take care. We missed you on the mind killer. I missed listening to you anyway,
but they made sure to just whatever, try and do as many bad lawyer things as possible while you
weren't trying to do it correctly. I really want to know what Wes has to say about that,
and I guess I'll find out next week. I guess we all will. Stay tuned. Okay, cool. Yeah,
let's get great Nick on here then. All right, four people out. No, no, down. One more.
Great Nick. Yeah. So Johnny is saying the one thing you cannot do is say that you are giving
legal advice, which we did, but we literally said this is legal advice. But like, if we're not
lawyers, then it doesn't count, right? Especially if you can tell it's a joke. I'm pretty sure.
I can't imagine that there's a log against giving bad medical advice. So I mean, if there's,
I can't imagine that there'd be another law about giving people bad legal advice.
It was a bit your honor, according to Matt. I feel like that's a get out of jail free card,
right? It's worked for higher profile people. Yeah. I mean, they're trying to do it right now
for what's her name. Can you hear me? Yes. Hi, Nick. How you doing? Oh my God, very good. All
the better for speaking with all of you. There was that court case a while ago about the, I think
the Trump voting fraud. And somebody said no reasonable person would take what I said about
the Trump voter fraud as legitimate. I wonder if that's like a legitimate complaint as well.
And Alex Jones was pretending like his, his internet celebrity was a persona. So when,
you know, he was advocating that his gigantic fan base, you know, harass the parents of the
kids who were killed in those school shootings. Oh, that wasn't me. That was the character I
play on the radio show. Yeah. Yeah. The lady is extra interesting because she isn't even pretending
that it was a character. She's just saying like I'm stupid. Yeah. No reasonable person could
possibly think I'm serious. But yeah, I'm actually kind of curious about that. We'll have to ask
Wes, I guess next week, since he's gone now, if you say, you know, I'm giving legal advice,
but you're not a lawyer, is that actionable legal? I don't think it's illegal. I feel like
it couldn't possibly be a bit. Anytime you tell someone you should sue that guy, you're giving
them legal advice, right? Or is there a more rigorous definition of legal advice? Yeah, who knows?
Nick, you have an English accent. Are you over on the other side of the world?
I am. In the UK, God saved the Queen, etc.
How's, what time is it over there right now?
It's 20 past seven in the evening. Okay, that's not too bad.
I was very pleased when I saw what time this live show is going to be because I could actually
call in. Perfect. Do you, do you have feelings about the passing of Prince, was it Philip?
Yeah, is that like a thing that, is that a thing that like, in general, UK people are distraught
about? Or is it more like, over here, there's some celebrities that many people just don't care about?
So, when I heard about it, I'd like literally sat down for my lunch on my lunch break in the
staff room, and I said, Oh my God, Prince Philip is dead. And then about two minutes later, like,
I didn't care. I kind of already didn't care. It was more like a case of like, Oh, this is like
a big thing that like, people are going to be hearing about. And the TV coverage was
absolutely wall to wall. We have BBC one and BBC two with both channels, everybody can get.
And they were both showing exactly the same footage of like, the live news from,
you know, the hospital or the royal family or whatever. And it actually turned out to be the
most complained about program in British history, the coverage of, because it was like, most of the,
most of the complaints were just, it was too much, there was too much coverage,
you couldn't get away from it. Some of the complaints were saying that the BBC news readers
weren't somber enough. And then some of the complaints were people saying it was too easy to
complain. Oh, okay. This is a great story. Yeah, there's the kind of a parallel thing over here
when a former president dies. It's like wall to wall coverage, they'll do like a funeral
procession across some dozens or hundreds of miles of highway. And you know, there's always
like aerial shots. I remember when Reagan died, it was just on TV for days. By the time they die,
like, they've been out of the spotlight for so many years. Yeah, like, wait, who? That was a
president? I think, I think Reagan was an exception though, because he's almost like a saint for the
Republicans. And he was like a otherwise a celebrity, I guess. So yeah. Oh, yeah. But I mean,
I remember hearing when, I mean, I think every president that's died in my lifetime, every former
president, rather, I think I've heard about it when it happened. There was a, John Oliver was on
Seth Meyers show sometime this week, if you Google it on YouTube, and Seth asks John, who's
dual citizen between US and UK. Like, how did you feel about it? And his answer was too funny to
summarize. Plus it without a British accent, it would just sound like I couldn't do it justice.
Blimey, gov. I'll give it a go.
I want to hear what you actually said.
How far on tea? So I say that again. I'm trying to think of other like stereotypes of British
people to ask questions about. It's like, how do you feel about tea? How do you take your tea?
Correctly. So you have to boil a kettle, none of this microwave bullshit,
boil a kettle, pour it as soon as it's boiling onto a tea bag, leave it for about three minutes,
take the tea bag out, because the tea bag and the milk can never meet. They can never.
And then you put in however much milk you like, and then sugar to taste. That's a classic cup of
tea. Go ahead. Why three minutes? Because I know some people who just leave the tea bag in
until they're done with the tea. Yeah, I think those people didn't really like grow up with tea,
because after sort of three minutes and one second, the flavor starts to get quite bitter.
To the point of just like, if you leave a cup of tea brewing for five minutes and you come back to
it, it's just worth throwing it away because the taste is not very enjoyable. It's very bitter.
Huh. Okay. I've just in the last couple of years started making my tea properly.
Ordinarily, I'd leave it in the whole time to maximize the amount of caffeine I could get out of
it. And now it doesn't work that way. I figured like, if I get 90% of the caffeine out in the first
three minutes, I might get the other 10% if I leave it in for the rest of the time I'm drinking it.
But so you're just maximizing for caffeine content? Then I realized that like, I'm talking
the difference between like 62 and 65 milligrams of caffeine, and it's not really worth the
subtraction and taste I'm getting. Oh my God. Matt, leave the tea bag in cold water and sips
it all afternoon, microwaving it occasionally. I do the same thing during work week, Matt.
Don't sweat it. I'll make it, then I'll bring it upstairs, get distracted. And then by the time
I remember, I've got tea, it's already cold, and I forgot to take the bag out. So.
Wizard says milk and tea is treason. I remember reading somewhere, someone commented, look,
if you want sugar and milk, just drink sugar and milk and don't ruin good tea in the process.
It really depends on the tea. Yes. Yeah, I buy the flavor. Milk and green tea. What the hell?
I do like a chai or like peach apricot, something, something that's not too sweet.
Usually black tea, something with flavor. I was taking my plain tea with, I've had like
proper British style tea once, I think, on a plane. Matt's talking about the whiskey tea.
I know Autumn had some of that, that was actually like imported from the UK. There was,
it was black tea flavored with whiskey or bourbon. It was really good.
Oh, so it's like their version of like a, shoot, what do you call those, a four loco,
the caffeinated alcoholic beverage? No, I think it was just like, it was tea that was flavored
like whiskey. It didn't have any alcohol. Oh, see, I thought it said whiskey flavored tea.
Oh, no, black tea flavored like whiskey. Oh, look at this. Black tea flavored whiskey.
Yeah, some good stuff. Also pocha. Also, I'm the one on control of all the reacts and trying to
hit all the things. It's really enjoyable just watching Stephen frantically emoji everything.
Thank you for that, Stephen. I could not do that. I would be too distracted. I would say a good 20%
of all my work communication is in emojis and gifts. I think I am much less good at multitasking
than almost everybody else. I've noticed this especially now that I'm like, I think everybody's
bad at it like scientifically. I must be extra bad at it though, because I noticed sometimes in a
well, because I play World of Warcraft now and as a guild leader, I sometimes have to
pay attention to multiple things. And like my other officers and even some players, they're
like chatting here and running around there and killing things. And also an officer chat discussing,
you know, like who is doing what and who we got to kick out. And I'm like, I can barely focus on
one chat at a time. How is it that you're running around murdering things at the same time? I would
be useless. Yeah, I don't have it in me. Chatting and murdering at the same time. You know, it's
like they're psychopaths. Oh, oh, COVID times are so close to being over. Yeah, I got my
cool. Finally. Yeah, I got mine on Wednesday. I had to drive. Actually, it was decent. It was only
like an hour there and back or an hour each way. But I actually drove on Wednesday the day after
the scout mindset came out. Wasn't that the whole the whole drive? And Matt wanted to talk about
that. So I'm kind of curious what his thoughts are. Matt, are you willing to unmute so we can
talk about scout mindset for a little bit? Sure. I don't necessarily have a well-developed thesis
here. I was surprised at how many little tidbits of it, though, I didn't just already know. Don't
ask me to say what I'm talking about because I don't remember now. I was actually, what was the
what mindset? What are we? Oh, the scout mindset. You know, Julie Galef? Yeah. Julie Galef came out
with a new book that just came out last week, right? Tuesday. Tuesday. Yeah. Yeah. All right.
Didn't hear about this. Yes. Called the scout mindset. Cool. I'll have to pick up a copy.
My favorite part. I think my favorite part is when she uses people who have wronged her as
examples of irrationality. In a self-aware way, though. Yeah. For the most part.
I'm only, I don't know, over 50% through, but like my, I actually saw,
might have been an email from like her sub stack or something. Something hit my inbox
where it was like, Julie Galef brings rationality to the mainstream or something with this book.
And I'm like, that's kind of generous because this book, I can't imagine being read by anybody who's
not already in the sphere, which is a drag because it's, it's well written and fun. But like,
I think she crosses over a bit to the like, at least like the skeptic crowd too. Yeah. Yeah.
I mean, she isn't making it that much broader. There's a lot of overlap already. She was at the,
the James Randi conferences I went to like 10 years ago, but
Oh, quick question for the group. Well, go ahead. I was going to say, like, I don't,
I don't feel like the book is hitting like, I, I don't know how you could do it,
but I don't feel like it's written for people who aren't us. Do you? So who has brought
rationality to the masses? If anyone has any sort of things, maybe Harry Potter, the mess of rationality.
That would be my guess too. Yeah. But, but I mean, Julie got Harry Potter fan fiction,
not that many of the masses read it, right? Julie Galef did a good job with that though,
too. I mean, so like rationality, rationally speaking, is more just like one of those fun
interviews shows with, you know, random people, right? If you want Neil DeGrasse Tyson on to
talk about, you know, I'm trying to think of just like some of the earlier episodes, you know,
Zachary Wienersmith was on a couple of times of SMBC comics. Zachary Wienersmith probably.
Yeah. Go ahead. There's, there's, there's people like, you know, Sam Harris, who have clearly
read the sequences, but never referred to what they're talking about as rationality and never
referred to Galski or so forth. Oh, we just met this whole, you're a rationalist. He's,
you can tell he's read a lot of it and he even seems to stay like somewhat current.
He even made a joke about like one of the, I don't know, the last two months there's one on
Bayesian induction or Bayesian reasoning and he's like, is this where I finally start getting hate
mail? I think, I can't, or if he's mentioned less wrong or if the person on the Reddit thread
mentioned less wrong, but he's definitely in the loop on it. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know if the
amazing Randy or Carl Sagan were rationalists in like the sense of this community though,
but like definitely. Well, Sagan died before the community effort was found. Yeah. I think
there are great gateway drugs for it though. Yeah. Like, like I said, Randy is, you know,
host, or he hosted the same kind of conferences that Julia Gala went to who, you know, is another
stepping stone and all this stuff. So, and of course, you know, Sagan founded half the
skeptic organizations in the country. So, Zilla makes an interesting point that wait,
but why also definitely sounds like a rationalist, but conspicuously avoids ever mentioning that.
I think this is, I think that's common. Yeah, that is common. It's funny, like the thing you
can't name. Is it because of the, I don't know, you got, yes. Well, this is something that we
talk about in the guild in context of the Guild of Servants renaming pending is the idea that,
that we don't necessarily want the branding to be tied to the quote unquote rationality community,
even though that's obviously where we're all coming from and where we're all based in.
And so, I think, I think people like wait, but why, for example, they just want their own brand
and they don't want, they don't want to point your pointing away from their brand. They want
you to come to their website and stay on their website, right? Yeah, that works. That didn't
even occur to me for some reason. I'm not very smart about branding. Well, my biggest went right
to there's like something negative about the rationality brand. Like I know that I saw before
I even like joined the rationality community in the Atheist skeptic community, like people in
forums saying like, oh man, that you casky guys, like just nuts. There's creepy AI people and
the transhumanists. Yeah, they're just right. Then the AI will never be an issue we have to
worry about. Don't plug it. Yeah, exactly. Shoot it with a shotgun.
Right. So you took that back. So you're 20% in, Matt? Yeah, 20% in. And then I was like, man,
there's so many people I know who I should buy this for. And then I was immediately like, oh,
no, they would take that as a horrible insult. Yeah, well, also, I find generally buying books
for people doesn't do any good because you're buying them a chore, basically. And nobody wants
to get a chore as a present. I've had like some books given to me. Like recently, I had a little
Will McCarthy who, you know, is a friend, an author. He came by, he dropped off his latest
book and I was like, cool, thank you. And like, I appreciate what he's doing. And I definitely
plan to read it at some time because I like him and I like his books. But just like,
with all the other stuff I got going and the book club I'm in and now doing the worth the
candle podcast, I'm like, it could be a while before I get to this, man. I'm really sorry.
I'm probably not going to be able to help you out with the timely review.
With what you said about a chore as a present, you can reverse that and actually use it. So
for the right person, you could say my present to you this Christmas or whatever is I will read
any book you give me. Oh, that's kind of cool. Yeah. I've just been at like asking,
please don't give me a present. Yeah. If it's someone that you know well enough, you could say
like, as my present, I will come to your house and read this to you as you're falling asleep until
you fall asleep and then leave quietly. I don't know. That might be a little too creepy. I will
You could just play the audio book. No. Julie Galef has a nice relaxing voice.
Yeah, but that's not the same. That's not like the you want your presence to be personal, right?
I suppose. Yeah. We've been looking for rewards for patrons.
We'll come to their house and read to them as they fall asleep.
Okay. My patron reward is I want Enius to read Harry Potter and the Meta of Rationality to me
as I sleep. Oh, good. That's already done. Nice. Koi says everyone sounds drunk and drowsy at one
x speed. I believe we got that same comment last time. Oh, that's funny. Yeah, that's because
I'm drunk and drowsy fast, which, but I know, I don't know. I listened to a lot of things sped
up too. So yeah, for someone used to listening that two x are faster, it's got to be really
disorienting. My current like speaking rate is the is the result of yours of conscious effort.
I grew up speaking very fast. And so, you know, it's interesting. Am I the only person who listens
to podcasts at one x? Because I feel like that's how they're meant to be consumed.
Depends on the like, I feel like a fictional stuff I listen to at normal speed or things with
really great narrators. But if I'm just trying to get information in my brain, then I speed things up.
I think half my reason for listening to podcasts is to find how something to listen to.
High priest Azela says someone's going to use read me a book for nefarious purposes,
like making someone here read mine comp for my mortal. Honestly, I would be fine reading either
of those because obviously, mine camp has historical significance. So it's not racist. And my mortal
also has historical significance. So it's just awesome. But yeah, no, I always listen to them.
Generally, my default podcast listening speed is 1.25, which sometimes podcasts have music in them.
And I know they have music in them. I won't do that. Or I'll slow it down for the music part
because I think the tempo of music is a drastically integral part of it. So that'll fuck it up.
But in general, 1.25 with audiobooks, like fiction, if I am reading it for a book club
and I don't like it, I can tell how much I don't like a book by how much I'm speeding it up.
Once it's like at 1.7 speed, I'm like, I should probably just not read the rest of it because
it's not any good. But I do remember Gideon the Ninth, I slowed that down to one X speed,
and I kind of wanted to slow down even less because God, her voice is beautiful.
Yeah, the voice acting in that. Or just the accent, honestly.
The accent. And you're right. And the voice acting too.
Yeah. The character voices.
I listened to a podcast episode where a friend was sort of showing off some guitar techniques.
So he was saying like vibrato and things like that. And I, at the end of it, I just
technically like, oh my God, you're such an incredible guitar player. You're playing all
these songs so quickly. And then I realized it because I was listening to a 1.5x speed.
He is a good guitar player, but also it was that 50% faster than a normal human character you play.
I recently saw someone, I believe it was on a Chinese talent show, sing the aria from the
fifth element. There's this one scene where an opera singer sings something that came from
the 14th century, I think, Italian opera. And then they add a new, you know, kind of,
I don't know, sort of techno-ish thing after it. And it was done, you know, using audio editing
software because the whole point was, this is something a human cannot sing physically, right?
It is only an alien voice could do this. And it's really fucking beautiful.
But then like, I saw this Chinese lady very recently, I think just last year,
sing it live. And it wasn't like 100% perfect, but it was so fucking close.
I was like, oh my god, the Chinese have genetically engineered perfect singing peoples.
That's fun. Then you think of like an old George Carlin joke where like, it would have been funny
if like, you know, Bach or Beethoven had composed a piece of music that was physically impossible
to play and like, tucked it at the bottom of a trunk so it would be discovered decades after
they died. And then they find it and it's impossible to play. Chinese engineered cat girl singers.
Nice. Oh man. Oh, wizard just said the same thing. Yeah, that scene was supposed to be
impossible to sing. Speaking of the chat, can I'm going to just say Matt, just to avoid bystander
effect. Can you tag a why we cur remember they wanted they mentioned in the another chat like,
oh, I'd like to be a part of this, but I don't see them in the thing. Oh, I can do it. Sure.
Oh yeah, I don't have access to the keyboard, by the way. Otherwise, I do it myself.
You know, I said he would do it. So live. I like the fact that apparently she calls out. It's
going back to Scott mindset. Sorry. Apparently she calls out people that she doesn't like using
them as examples. Didn't. Oh, who was it? Was it Milton that wrote the the tour of hell book?
And he put everyone he didn't like in various circles of hell. Oh, no. Dante. Dante. Thank you.
That's right. Dante. Dante's in front of us. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Milton for a paradise loss.
That's a different one. Such a bizarre book. There was another like interesting, like,
what I would have considered somebody would have pointed out for Julia in the book that like,
she uses a lot of politically charged example drop my mic uses a lot of politically charged
examples, which is fine. But it's like, literally, like, Oh, yeah, if you're a Republican or you're
a feminist and like sets them up as opposite things, and I'm like, you don't have to push the
out group that hard, like if you're trying to hit a broad audience, you could have made this, it was,
it might have just been a point about, like an unfair standard of assessing evidence, like,
Oh, yeah, if it's something that you agree with, you say, Oh, good, this is evidence for me.
But if it's something you disagree with, you say, Oh, that's not, that's not
compelling evidence whatsoever. That's a poorly written study or whatever.
So the question you're supposed to ask is like, well, if I disagreed, if I felt the other way
around it, what I find this evidence compelling, because it's not fair for me to count as evidence
for my thing, if I already agree with it, if I wouldn't do the same, if I didn't agree with it.
And I think she uses feminists and Republicans, I'm like, you don't have to, you could have picked
anything, right? Green blues. I mean, you know, it's her thing. She's smart. She knows what she's
doing. I'm just kind of curious. So she must be aiming for a particular audience and thinking it's
okay if I isolate the people who don't agree with this, if it'll make me get these people,
do we agree with it more on board? Maybe she thought that like, you know, yeah,
I'm not going to reach some segments anyway, so might as well just throw dirt at them.
I think she did say something in that, that those souls are already lost.
Or maybe like, hey, somebody's talking shit about you in this book. This book here.
Yeah, buy it and find out. Or, you know, just tag, tag Scout mindset and rant about it because
any publicity is good publicity. Yeah, it could be. I mean, I think that she did say to if you
happen to feel the other way about this, you're welcome to reverse the example, but it's like,
why would you even just make that example? Oh, that intense. Do you know how I actually found
the rationalist community originally? How's that? I was a fan of the skeptics guide to the
universe podcast. Oh, yeah. And at one point, they that podcast always like does has a quote
relating to skepticism at the end. And I can never remember is it Jay or the one who does the
quote at the end is Jay. Okay, let's usually like screams the quote. Yeah. Carl Sagan. Yeah.
Or he screams rather than the person who's quote to God damn it. So he tried to scream
Eliezer Kasky. I was like, Oh, Eliezer, you're the kind of Kaskinowski. And so like, apparently,
uh, somebody like poked Eliezer was like, Hey, I think they're making fun of you on this like
podcast, this like skeptics guide thing. And he like popped onto the forum and was like,
what's going on here? And there. Oh, no, that's just my brother who can't pronounce names and is
an idiot like, Hey, do you want to be on our podcast? Sure. And then he was on an episode of
the podcast. Oh, excellent. And that is how I found there. Which podcast was it? Skeptics guide to
the universe. You cast you was on one of those. I missed that one. Huh? No, that's fun. Quite a
while ago. But uh, and I don't even know if he was on if he was like, no, I think he was on an
episode in the interview to him about AI stuff. Cool. That's cool. I might be misremembering.
That's another group of people that you can tell at the very least Jay and Bob keep up with the
Rationalist community. Yeah. But yeah, they're great. Maggie, I got Jay to do the voice of the
groundskeeper. Yeah, that was awesome. I was so stoked. I preached as Zilla pointed out the example
that I thought would have been informative to Julia when she was writing her book. Julia
has to know about it. Exactly. Yeah. She has to know about it and chose to do the opposite. So
I think that's yeah. I mean, I think she's she's calling out specific people. Right. Like I was
I was sort of joking, but sort of not like she will she will call out in the book people who
she's had a Twitter disagreement with. And it's like, okay, what's the point of doing that except
to create, uh, you know, a beef, which is then going to serve as as marketing, basically. Yeah,
I guess that's the point at least once or twice. She had said, you know, Dave, not his real name
or something. So maybe what she's trying to do with that, because again, I'm going to assume,
I'm going to take the doof fiction approach and just assume that everything she's doing
is on purpose because she's a genius. And I'm assuming that she's doing those specifically
to say these are personal examples I use in my real life. These aren't abstract techniques that one
can apply only from your armchair. Like these are things I try to do all the time. Yeah. Yeah. I
think you're right. Could be. I mean, it makes it more vivid when you have a real world example.
And there's sort of a tone I feel, which this is not a criticism, just an observation where she's
like, look, I've been, I've been trying to explain these ideas for like 15 years and you
fucking people just don't listen to me. And I have, I have a lot of thoughts on this and you're
going to hear about it now. Um, it's not entirely aggro. I imagine it feels really good to have a
book published kind of worldwide and you have the opportunity to like call specific people out
and they don't have an equal size, like a microphone to call back at you.
It's very hedonistic, but it probably does feel quite good.
I mean, the people that she calls out, I'm assuming are already people are in the public
eye because others know about them. So they have a microphone to speak back with.
One's like an example with her cousin when they were kids, but like,
you're allowed to throw your family under the bus.
That one was less about like an uncharitable thing towards the cousin, more of an uncharitable
thing towards herself. It was the, um, she wasn't halo effect exactly. This was early in the book,
Matt. It was talking about like, Oh, my cousin was playing me, you know, her favorite album or
whatever. And she was two years older than me. So in my mind, incredibly sophisticated. And so
I was just agreeing. I'm like, Oh my God, yeah, I love them too. They're great. And then the cousin
plays one and like, that's my actually my favorite song of theirs. And she's like, Yeah, me too. I
think it's my favorite. Ha, I tricked you. It's actually my least favorite song of theirs. Oh,
that's me. And then she's like, I could feel in my mind, my mind, my position on the song
actually shifting. Like, I wasn't lying when I said it was my favorite. It was just like,
I was, I felt that way because I was inclined to try and impress her or something.
It was like, that's where I mean, like, it's a very, like, you know, very personal example
sort of thing. And we do this all the time, you know, with often with things more consequential
than like, do you like this song? Right? Right. And I had the exact same experiences with the
music and movies and stuff when I was a kid. So you know, that's a lot of what you like is
being part of a culture and fitting in with your culture. Yeah, I think it takes a level of,
I don't know, I adulthood isn't the right word, but neither is maturity. Maybe you have to run
out of so many fucks before you're willing to burn any on like, challenging somebody. But,
you know, if they like something that you don't or vice versa, it also may be that like, once
you're old enough in your thirties or later, your tastes are somewhat fixed. Because at that point,
if you have not found your community and already started reproducing evolutionarily, you're already
fucked. So your taste don't matter anymore. It's, you know, it's only when you're young and you need
to fit in in order to survive that your tastes change to like what you're mostly surrounded with.
I don't know, that sounds like evil psych and West right now would bonk me. I mean,
it's too bad he's not here. I'm just thinking it's more like,
you just get like a level of confidence where you don't need to move your every
preference with the whims of people around you, right? Yes. Someone just linked the
My Immortal as Alchemical Algory, which is fantastic. They're talking in the chat about
criticism of work and how, when you can assume that the author is a genius and when you can't.
And I love, yeah, Scott's take there. All right, what is My Immortal? Oh,
oh, My Immortal is a fantastic Twilight fanfic, which is basically, it's like the amazing
Man 2 of Twilight fanfics in that it makes fun of them, but also is kind of fun to read or at least,
I don't know, maybe I'm flattering myself by saying Amazing Man 2 was kind of fun to read.
But My Immortal is really fun to read and it's a great parody of fanfics and it is
like consciously trying to be as bad as possible, while still being readable and enjoyable.
And, and Scott goes and analyzes it as if he, as if this was like a great work of literature.
He was told by his college professors is a great work. So proving that you can find
genius in anything if you are bamboozled in a fire culture. I love it. That's perfect. Yeah.
How I propose this is like the Monroe's Law, except for SKCD, or excuse me, for SSC because
of the sub community that we're all in. So yeah, first of all, yeah, she can give
herself a little more credit. Also, if anybody else wants to get on voice, it's
Oh, Evan Langley says maybe not on purpose. No one knows. I submit that there is no way that
thing could have been written with by someone who was not totally who knew what they were doing
and was doing it that way on purpose. It's like Chuck Tingle. The first time you read a Chuck
Tingle thing, you're like, is this guy crazy? And the more you read it, the more you're like,
Oh no, this is definitely someone who probably is a very successful author. Yeah, I would imagine
a very successful author in whatever genre of literature they choose to write in and does this
for fun, because you can tell after a while that these things are intentional and they're just
having fun. They're trolling you. It's mis, what? What? Maybe the story, the My Immortal is full
of these things. Oh, okay. Yeah. I mean, it's, it's, it's a strange story. It is fucking strange.
Yeah. Does anybody else want to get on voice? And as long as we're plugging books, anyone who's
not reading Worth the Candle absolutely should be Matt calling you out, especially. I'm telling you
I know you're busy. Yeah, I know only three chapters a week. Isn't that math?
It's, it's, it's not even close to enough.
Poor Steven. I finished reading this week's reading on, we record on Tuesdays. Yeah,
Wednesday that like before the end of the workday. I thought you texted me, like at midnight saying,
you know, just finished plowing through it, or was it just through chapter 19?
It's through at least a couple of chapters. Yeah, by midnight that night, I stayed up reading and
I'm like, even as I, as I read, I'm like, I'm going to regret this. I'm going to regret this.
I should stretch this out, but I ran through it. So no, that sounds done.
Yeah. I've just crunched through all of it. It's really good shit.
I'm going to get off the voice so that other people can have a chance and we're also talking
of each other. I do just want to leave you with one question though, hosts. Okay.
And that is, if there was ever a Muppet recasting of the Beijing Constituency podcast,
which Muppet would you want to play each of you? Hmm. I, are the Muppets the Sesame Street
characters? No. I mean, there are Muppets on Sesame Street as well, but there's also the ones
from the Muppet show, which would include it like Fonzie the Bear and Miss Piggy. I think
Gonzo. Wait, Kermit and Miss Piggy weren't Muppets or weren't a Sesame Street. Kermit was the only
one of the Muppets that was on Sesame Street. I see. I grew up apparently on the wrong side of
television. I didn't watch any of these things. Are those two angry guys who yell from like the
balcony? Yeah, those are on. Yeah. I want them to play me. Can be Steven. Cool. Someone has to be
Beaker. Statler and Waldorf are the guys on the balcony. That's it. Yeah. Is that a hard choice?
I feel like Miss Piggy maybe or like animal.
Oh man. Do you play drums? I actually have played drums in the past and I've been thinking about
getting back into it. I would want to be played by the Muppet version of Angel from the episode of
Angel where they turned into Muppets. That's so cool. All right. Thank you very much. Thanks, Nick.
Appreciate it. Have a good rest of the podcast, everyone. Thank you very much.
Wizard said that they'd be Count Dracula. That reminds me or The Count, right? There's a
YouTube video where I think every time he's counting... A necessary censorship? Yeah,
he censors him and it sounds really filthy when he's censoring. I think he's just saying numbers.
No, he's saying the word count. Oh, okay. Yeah. I like to count or counting is my thing.
So if you look up on Wikipedia the list of Muppets, Oscar the Crouch isn't on there. Count
what's his name? The Count isn't on there. This is not Muppets. Oh, hey. Evelyn says I look
surprisingly like the Angel Muppet. Thank you. I am very flattered. Ernie and Bert.
Yeah. Speaking of Wikipedia pages that The Count is on, if you go to the Wikipedia page on fictional
vampires, there's this big breakdown chart of all the vampires, including their powers, weaknesses,
and all this and that. Count Chocula. No, I was thinking Count Chocula, not The Count. The Count
is also on there. The Count Chocula is on there. His powers include turning milk,
like chocolatey sweet or something. His weaknesses include turning soggy and milk.
Surely everyone must be thinking the existence of a fictional vampire's Wikipedia page
strongly implies the existence of a non-fictional vampire's Wikipedia page, which sounds much
more interesting. Masquerade suppresses that one. Someone up above said Muppets include
Labyrinth Muppets and Jordan Peterson. Oh, from the lobster thing? No, it's just
Jordan Peterson. He looks like him up. It sounds like Kermit. I think he's actually embraced that
as part of his brand. I look hard from Helsing is the best vampire. Oh, from Helsing Abridged.
Okay, cool. I never saw all of Helsing, but probably because I didn't have the Abridged
version. And like most animes, it was like 12 episodes. No. There's an OVA that is a lot better
that might be what you're thinking of. Okay. And it's a lot, I think closer to the longest.
Jojo's Bizarre Adventure also has good vampires and a lot of filler episodes.
What does? Jojo's Bizarre Adventure. Good vampires and lots of filler episodes.
I have never seen that, but I've had so many people talk about it. I couldn't get into it, but
like, I like that it exists. But yeah, it's... I will say the Helsing soundtrack is amazing. Oh my
God, it's so good. So much good music. I remember you used one of their songs somewhere in
Methods of Rationality, I think. Probably did. Yeah. It stuck out because I hadn't seen the show
in years and years, but all the music is very memorable. Yeah. All right. Did anybody else
want to jump on, chat, ask us anything, that kind of stuff? Talk to us. Oh, for anyone who's not
on the live chat, they just posted a really good meme. Love it. Keep the memes coming.
Yeah. Johnny, you had something you were saying?
No. I just hopped on because I am apparently the only person on this wide and wonderful
internet with a microphone who wants to join in right now. Well, we also, I think, have default
mute just because we couldn't have 10 people try and unmute at the same time. So you have to raise
your hand if you want to say stuff. Yeah. Yeah. Just like say, add something at us in the chat,
or you don't even have to add us. We're paying attention to it. You can do the wave emoji that
he actually doesn't use enough to have it and they're frequently used. Yeah, that's true. Oh,
man. So someone gave us the, sent a link to the stage option in Discord, which would have been
absolutely fucking perfect for this, where for the most part, people just, you know, are watching,
but they can raise their hand and the moderator, like Stephen, for example, could pull them up on
stage and then they would be talking to everyone. Like it was the coolest fucking feature, but you
could only enable it if you turn your community, your Discord channel into a community channel.
And that included, like, giving Discord the, I mean, I know they already look through our
shit anyway, but explicitly giving Discord permission to scan everything that's posted and
censor not safe for work things, unless they're in the not safe for work channel. And I was just
like, you know what, fuck right off. I'm not sure I want to deal with that. Like maybe next time
we could just enable it for one day and then disable it afterwards. But what was the perk of
doing that? There's a stage setting, which is kind of does what we want to do here, but better.
I see. Yeah, you know, we're managing. Yeah. Anything we'd like to know about our audience?
Oh, turning it around on you, Megan, you asked the questions.
I asked the questions here. No, I don't know. I'll just put it on the back burner for a minute.
I think you like the turntables. I never watched The Office because I saw a few episodes,
but even I'm familiar with that and it's one of my favorites.
Like I would like to know what the average age of listeners is, but that's more of a survey
question than. Yeah, I'm thinking of survey quit. Like what careers do people have or
aspirationally want? Like, hey, me too. Where in the world are people located? Survey questions.
So we got 20, 25, 32, 39, 52.
Scooter, your voice sounds surprisingly deep for a six year old. Oh, Zila is apparently immortal.
Oh, good. I got to point out that like, I love half of what you guys say on the
non-spoilery worth the channel, worth the candle chat are like things that,
so we record on Tuesdays, the day after the episode comes out. And since you guys don't talk
about the episodes that we covered until the following Friday, I don't get to steal any
of the ideas, but you guys say half the things that I say most episodes and I love it. It's very
gratifying. And you guys had some back and forth earlier this week that thought was great about
shoot, but I'd said I'd read it. I'd pay $100 to read a fiction of it that if you guys
wanted to work on it together. That's right. I think there's some worth the candle fanfics out
there. I should look them up after we're done recording here because I mean, they got to be
awesome, right? I enjoy the transhuman future that we're existing right now where like a lot of
media consists of fanfics of fanfics. Yeah. How does that make it a transhuman future?
I don't know. This is very meta. We've surpassed fiction.
This is true. What I know about transhumanism is it's when things are more than other things.
Scooter knows of at least one worth the candle fanfics. If it's good, please link it. And I
will check it out. Alexander Wales just came out with chapters 29 and 30 last night
for the early patrons. And I wanted to read it, but then I was like, you know, that Drake meme
where he's like, nah, to reading chapters 229, 230. And yeah, that's right. The chapter is 19
through 21 again. I got the email about that because I support Scott or Alexander Wales on
Patreon. And I'm like, well, I saw that it goes to at least chapter 230. That's as far as I can see.
And you've got to wait a long fucking time to get there. I'm sorry.
Whenever we stop recording, I'm immediately going to go home and read those chapters,
which how long are we going to keep going just like until we get exhausted?
Yeah, well, probably pick a hard end time or we have no hard end time. But I figure usually
we record for about two to two and a half hours. So somewhere around then. Yeah, just hanging out.
Yeah. Oh, more coffee. Yes. We should have another. No, not right now. Oh, okay. In the future.
Yeah. I wish Alexander Wales would make one character out.
Read HPMOR. Oh, that'd be great. And then HPMOR stuff can start showing up.
Oh my God, we have to record until the sun explodes. A high priestess has decreed it.
How the stars work. Damn it. So man, one of the best fanfics I ever read was someone wrote a
crossover of this is like when I was in middle school and I did not have my own computer that
had access to the internet. So I was in middle school, like with my friends on the library
computers reading fanfiction.net. Somebody wrote a crossover of it was Pokemon and Digimon. And
they like the characters teamed up use their powers to invade the real world. And they were
fighting some politician. I actually it was so good. I think I still have it. I printed it out
on like a ton of printer paper back before they like knew that they needed to charge people
for printer paper. And I have it somewhere. I need to find it again. It was so good. It was
basically a ratfic now that I think about it. But starring the characters of Digimon and Pokemon.
Oh, that's awesome. And it also had a musical chapter. I think my very first fanfic that I
knew was fanfic was Shinji and Warhammer 40k. And we're it's just it's crazy, but it was great.
And I'm not going to talk too much about it because most people haven't read it. So it'd be
boring about people's dreams. Shinji from Evangelion. Yeah. Yeah. And he gets really into 40k. And
his miniatures start talking to him kind of the same way that Harry has the various living houses
talking to him or the various houses of Hogwarts talking to him. And it fills him with like
confidence and ability. So it's just a totally different story when Shinji is you know, got a
lot of agency. Anyways, we have we got a number of things. All right. So first, Johnny has a
suggestion, drink coffee continuously. The first one of you that needs to pee will signal the
recording has come to its natural conclusion. Oh, that's just not how we roll. We usually take at
least one pee break between like during the episode. We do. And we have a question from
Man in White, which is wow, we're really good question. What is the moment in your life that
you felt most meaningful? I'm assuming that the moment is the most meaningful. Marriage, graduation,
funerals, psychedelics, etc. Jason, Steven, do whatever you want to start. Dibs on last. I need
to think about this one. Oh, God, I mean, meaningful would be like every time a friend of mine died.
But that's not like, I don't know if you're trying to get meaningful as in like uplifting.
No, I mean, when someone's died is can probably a really intense one. Yeah, I'm sort of defined by
the death of my two best friends. First year of college, I went to college because it's like,
I didn't know what the hell I was doing with my life. I just followed my friend there.
And then I was stuck there for five years because I again, didn't know what the hell I was doing.
But like, yeah. And was that was that the friend that died? Yeah, Christina. How far into college
were you when that happened? First year. It was such a train wreck because I followed her there
because I didn't know what the hell I was doing. Then she died. And then I had decided to major in
environmental science because I was like, well, if I don't know what the hell I'm doing with my life,
I might as well save the world. But then like, I was super depressed from my friends death.
And the classes were all super depressing. It was like, basically every class was the
professors talking about, yeah, okay, you're studying this major, but actually the science
shows that were all kind of fucked already. So there might be these theoretical ways that we
could unfuck the earth, but it doesn't look good. And I was just like, I need to change majors,
I need to change majors. Yeah. And so you decided to go into AI instead?
No. Well, actually, that was when I was really obsessed with AI. I had not
found the rationalist community yet, but just like independently, I thought AI was really cool.
And for some reason, I was obsessed with the Tel Aviv Institute that was trying to make an AI
that would pass the tearing test, which was considered a hard problem at the time.
That was the car accident? Yeah. Oh, what about you?
Well, I guess mine is kind of easy. Sorry for the downy. No, no, I had to think about it for a while
while you were talking. And I mean, I was paying attention to, but I guess this is the one time.
Yeah, yeah, that too. But and yeah, everyone is saying they're sorry. And yeah, very much so.
I think it's not a single event. It was a period of time. But I think the thing in my life that I
both find most meaningful and that was most meaningful to me was the creation of the Harry
Potter audiobook podcasting, because it took many, many, well, not many, many years, but it took
several years, which was the longest single project I've ever undergone. And I don't know,
it really changed my life. I became much more confident doing this. I did a thing that people
loved, which was like kind of a first for me. I felt myself to be generally unlovable before
that moment in my life, which I know it's a whole thing. I'm over it. I'm kind of over it.
But yeah, and like, it's it's I've gotten a lot of mail from people who are saying things like
thank you, you know, this changed my life or this really helped me through a tough period or something
like that. And so I feel like it's probably the most meaningful thing I have done with my life
as well, which on the one hand is a really good feeling. But on the other hand, it's also like
now nothing I do with the rest of my life, they're going to be as meaningful. Yeah.
Oh, man. So but yeah, it was that that was definitely it, because I think that's the
thing I did that had the most impact both on my life and the world in general. And, you know,
I know it's a small thing. It's nothing compared to like Eliezer who actually fucking wrote the
thing and is trying to save the universe through AI. But it's it's the little thing I could contribute.
So I feel good about it. I got to mention that I
John Luca finished the replacing guilt audio book or audio series. And so if you're still
comparing yourself to world changing titans, you should read this sequence if you haven't yet.
And now you can listen to it, you can read it with your ears. And it's actually not that long,
but when you're listening to it anyway. So yeah, I mean, we did a whole podcast episode
or whole basic conspiracy episode about how good it was. And all that did was sell me on getting
around to reading it. And then luckily, yeah, Jean Lucas, the guy who did the audio series for
it. And I don't think I knew about it until emailed and the show. And I'm the only one who
checks the email for that. So I was like, Oh, no, you're good. But I was like, Oh, perfect,
I can now now I have no excuse to keep putting this off. So I think I've read one or two posts,
I really got to get through and read the whole thing. I mean, it's just it's all good stuff,
right? Yeah, but I mean, on most part, like, it's not merely giving your, you know, giving you an
excuse to like not feel bad about changing the world. But it's like actually a way to articulate.
I guess I don't have like self worth. Yeah, how to have feel like you have a meaningful life,
find something you care about, etc. Without comparing yourself to stuff like that,
because there's no need to it found, I don't know, I found it helpful. I don't, I don't
anticipate I'll do anything world changing, but I try to do little things that I can
and reminds me of the Dave Mustang story. Which one's that? Oh, are you familiar
of Dave Mustang from mega death? No. Okay, so mega death is a huge band in heavy metal. It was
one of the founders. It is one of the greats people like the guy's huge multimillionaire,
foundational and very influential for all the people came up behind after him.
He considers himself a failure and is pretty unhappy with his life because he was originally
in Metallica. And they had a schism earlier on, and he was left and formed his own band. It was
like, fuck you, I'll show you guys. And of course, he never got as big as Metallica because Metallica
is fucking Metallica, right? And, and like he's, he's amazingly successful by any metric, except
the metric of I want to show those guys I'm better than them. And yeah,
you can always make yourself miserable by comparison to somebody because like everybody's,
I don't know, there's always gonna be somebody better than you at something. But then you're
always going to be better at something than some other person. So that's, that's bad metric.
Oh, thanks, Evelyn. So Stephen, did you have a meaningful moment in your life or?
No, my life is utterly meaningless.
Which thing that, or what thing we're talking about is the replacing guilt podcast.
And John Luca is the name of the guy who did it. I forget his last name.
Yeah. And Nate Sorres is the author of those sequences.
Right. Yeah, I mean, I, I'm trying to think, I mean, there's, there's obviously been some big
events. I think I tried to, and I've, I think I've mentioned both of these on the show at some point.
So I can push past them, or I'll compress them down. Like the, I guess I'm trying to think of
like small things that were just like insightful for me. And, you know, one of them was I had this
coworker that I didn't like or get along with, kind of like the exact opposite of a role model.
And he was like our team lead at my last job. And one of his cats died. And like he had known
that I had a cat that died like the year before. And we spent a lot of time talking about it.
I got with him on his smoke breaks and stuff. And yeah. And it was, it was just like,
at the end of the day, I was like, you know what, I don't have to like,
relate to as a person or want to hang out with you. But like at the end of the day,
we can find common ground on really anything. Like, you know,
this is just not a guy like loves his cat, right? And I think that that was kind of a,
it wasn't necessarily like the moment, but it was a an articulate moment for like,
oh, you know what, I probably relate to everybody that way, not necessarily on like our love of
cats or something. But I share something like that with everybody, right? Not, you know, nobody's
just like this person that is impossible for me to like or get along with, right? Or at least
understand or empathize with. Yeah. Yeah. Like, and I, you know, even if it's somebody that I
just agree with on just about everything, we can find something that makes it, you know, we can,
it sounds like the hippiest bullshit ever, but you know, something that brings us together
that we can share. Yeah. Velcro mentioned proposing to your wife. That's fun. That's awesome.
Yeah. You and your, you and your, I guess, wife now, that's still weird to say that, but
it's fun. I feel so grown up saying wife. You're like one of the cutest and happiest couples I know,
and it's always adorable seeing you guys interact. So I figured it was probably
get somewhere in there. But on the other hand, it's hard to like wrap up 10 years of life and
to a single meaningful moment. So yeah, I mean, it's, we have, like, I think I, I mean,
I don't have much else to compare it to, but I want to say near perfect communication where we
can be like plain and honest and we never, as far as I know, hurt each other's feelings. And
there's never been a risk of that. It's honestly like the kind of relationship that like, you know,
the Greek eudaimonia, you know, like flourishing, whatever, it's like a eudaimond relationship.
Like if I could pick a relationship for people that I care about, I'd want them to have one like
this. She's the best and that's definitely a big meaningful part of my life. I don't quite know
how to compress that down into a moment. Right. But yeah. We have two other questions above, I think.
Phoenix said one slightly above that one. Well, I think you passed it.
All right. Well, let's tackle Phoenix's because of that one is easy. And while we're doing that,
you can scroll up and look for the one that we missed. Phoenix asked, what was the thing
that we were doing early in the podcast that took up a lot of time that we cut out? I don't have
that question directly in front of me, but that was the gist of it. I think the things that we
used to do for like preparing or whatever that we don't do now, I think the biggest one is in the
editing I used to because I came from the audiobook podcast. And in that sound quality is pretty
important. If I flub a line, I redo it. If I don't quite like how I pronounced something or
inflected something, I'll redo it. And also importantly, I took out every um and a and lots
of the breathing in sounds, that kind of thing. And so when we started doing the bass and conspiracy,
I brought that, that editing philosophy in with me. And I spent hours, and I know Stephen
you did too, just going through cutting out ums and us and sometimes breathing sounds. And
it's for a conversation podcast like this, it's not that big a deal. And it doesn't really matter.
And we cut that out. And instead just timestamp, like really big flubs that afterwards we can go
out and cut those out instead. But for the most part, all the little things stay in now.
Bathroom breaks is, you know, like the easiest thing to put in there. But yeah, I mean, editing
used to be like a six hour process. And I'd go through, listen to it. And since the episodes
are about two hours, it'd be at least three minutes per minute of listening as you're going
through and doing everything. And then I'm, I sort of, I can't remember, you know, if it was a
process or if I kind of just came to you, to you guys, and I was like, look, this takes way too
fucking long. And it doesn't, we don't get that much return on it. Yeah. And like,
and you mentioned there was like some professional podcast where they leave it in of
rationally, rationally speaking, and very bad wizards. Like, I figure if it's good enough for
them, it's good enough for me. And I was listening to Sam Harris had on a good episode, just a couple
episodes ago with Peter Singer and two other people starting that they were starting the journal
of controversial ideas. And Peter Singer uses at least as many verbal fillers as I do. Granted,
he sounds like a, you know, an aristocratic Australian. So you get, he's got that going
form to make him sound extra smart. But I was listening to him and I was gratified. I was like,
Oh, we have the same amount of like pauses and ums, like probably within a deviation of each other.
I'm like, I can't, since I can't reach the key. Oh, smart. Just in there. Anyway, so that was,
that was gratifying. But yeah, I, the, the editing time now is 30 minutes when you include like the
things that audacity just does for you when you say do this. Yeah. And it really makes it a lot
less of a hassle. I guess there was also like, we used to do a lot more scripting. We did. Well,
I don't know, when I first joined, I was trying to. Oh yeah, we had notes and stuff. Yeah, we actually
had notes that we looked at. We got to stop doing that. I still do notes of the sequences. Yeah.
That pull things out that I want to hit on. But yeah, aside from that, usually now it's like,
I made some, what was the last one where I had notes? It was a pretty recent one.
Was it the heat? Yes, I think that was it. Yeah, I pulled, I pulled things out of the,
yeah, the hate is the new sex post. I guess it makes sense when we're sort of, when our episode
topic is an article or an essay that, yeah, we could like pull quotes, make a script, but it
seems like we sort of just ad lib. We have, well, we have another question and why we cur joined
us. Why we cur? I have given you the guest role. You can unmute yourself whenever you would like
and then ask questions or whatever. But before that, Johnny asked a question for us. We all
love Ratfic. Which property ought to be a Ratfic? But as far as you know, is not yet one. And I
have a really easy answer that is almost cheating. So I'm gonna, I'm gonna wait. Do any of you have
one? Is it the Martian? No. I think that one already is Ratfic. Yeah. I mean, like, I think
I was talking to Brian about this with, when we turned this into from Jeff's impressionality to
Metropolitan Man. Because, you know, I don't know exactly how to quite gatekeep on what counts.
But really, I think anything that's like fun and entertainment that you're also
actually learning actual stuff from, I mean, that's probably too broad because you can learn
actual stuff that's fun from a historical fiction, you know, that's largely not fiction or something.
But like Mythbusters basically counts. That's true. You know, like, I'm not gonna...
It's not a fic though. Right. But I mean, they... They got the rat part.
Well, and they'll take things from fiction and then test them. You know, I know it's not,
it's kind of, you know, apples and whatever, trampolines. It's not even close. But, you know,
like, as it turns out, you know, if you're six feet underwater, you can, you'll basically be fine
if someone's shooting a nine millimeter gun at you. Like, they test that because they saw it in
John Wick, right? Or some other action movie, every action movie, I guess, right? But like...
In John Wick, was he, because I didn't see the one where he gets shot out underwater,
was he fine when he was underwater? Okay, yeah, six feet. It stops the bullet.
That's normally how they get the, you know, when they do forensics on a bullet to see
what gun it came from. They oftentimes shoot it into a tank of water so that it, you know,
has all the markings and isn't all crushed up by hitting a wall or something.
That's smart. I kind of feel like it doesn't matter what property. Like,
a good writer and Ken has made, like, good rat-fic out of my little pony. Frozen, Harry Potter,
you know. Yeah, but so what property should be rat-fic that you would like to see given the
rat-fic treatment? Well, David Yosef and I are like, we keep trying to coordinate on working on a
Dragon Ball Z rat-fic. So it should be that one. So I definitely feel like that would be great.
I think I have a lot of, well, we both have a lot of ideas for it. We just can't seem to
coordinate getting together and putting the ideas together into a coherent story.
I'm going to make a prediction of what Stevens is. I'm going to whisper it to you and then you
can... Okay, we both know what it is. I was going to say Wheel of Time and you knew that, right?
I was going to say Dr. Strange. Oh, I was, yeah, thinking Marvel. Oh, that would have been fun to
do a rational thick of. I was thinking Wheel of Time because the characters are largely stupid.
Wheel of Time would have been... It would have been on my list, but since I haven't read very
much of it, I didn't know whether it would need the rat-fic treatment, but they are largely stupid,
you say? Yeah, like, they don't optimize easy things that they could spam the hell out of.
It's not until like the last book where, you know, they can do Dr. Strange-style portals,
and it's not until the last book where someone opens one in a volcano and then opens the other
end over the enemy army. Right. And it's like, why did it take someone 5,000 years to think of that?
Yeah, yeah. I really like Scooters. Ooh, I have to tar the last
ill-better suggestion. That's a good one. That would be good. Apparently, Dragon Ball 1R exists.
Yeah, I figured. Wizard says it's already really good, doesn't need a rat-fic,
and it's true that it's really good, but it's not a rat-fic, so it could be even better, maybe.
I think the trick would be... It could be rational, at least. The trick would be writing it lovingly
because, like, I know a lot of people are turned off by methods of rationality. The first few
chapters and, like, a bit of it is, like, making fun of the Harry Potter universe. That was actually
why I liked it because I was never that much of a fan of the Harry Potter books. I thought they were...
I don't know. I grew up reading, like, Ursula Gwyn and, like, Narnia. So I was like, okay,
this is just a rip-off of, like, the magical universes that I grew up. I don't know, hipster,
push-up classes thing. But, uh... It was fairly un-originally tropey. I liked why we curse saying
that Dr. Strange is already pretty close because the magic field system feels so suited to rat-fic.
Like, they're also clever, you know, plays and moves in the movie. I'm looking forward to seeing
the next one. All I know is that I think it's supposed to be a horror movie, but I know it's
called The Multiverse of Madness. But I don't even know what year it's coming out.
Wait, it's going to be a hard one.
I heard that, like, two years ago.
Oh, that sounds awesome.
And I don't want to get my hopes up because maybe I'm...
Maybe I'm, you know, was misinformed or something, but that'd be fucking awesome.
Anyway, but, like, the... Since Enoch hasn't seen it in one day, I'll make him watch it.
I won't describe the ending, but the ending involves a thinking outside the box move
that was like, oh, yeah, I can't just overpower the enemy.
I've got to think of something creative. And this was a really, like, you know,
clever way of solving that problem. So, yeah.
What I really want is for Alexander Wales to, like, clone himself and write the Batman rat-fic
that he said he was going to do.
I love Batman.
I would love to see a Batman rat-fic.
I mean, he's already such a perfect character for it.
I know. Batman Universe just, like, has the best characters and Gotham is so good.
I love when someone pointed out, and I mean, you got to squint a little bit,
but someone pointed out that basically all the Batman villains are...
What if this one aspect of Batman was taken to a horrible evil extent?
Yeah, that's great.
Like, the Penguin is taking his richness and, you know, making it evil and way out there,
and Two-Faces having his split personality between Bruce Wayne and Batman and making it evil.
What about the Joker?
The Joker's taking his obsession and making it, yeah, kind of crazy.
The Riddler takes his detectiveness and makes it crazy and bad.
Detectiveness.
See, this is where when people shut on Marvel for, like,
oh, so the bad guy's going to be, like, a version of the good guy, but bad?
And, like, pretend like that's, you know, a fault?
Like, no, that's what makes a compelling bad guy for a protagonist.
Yeah, it's the Dark Foyle.
You want them to be, exactly, the character's dark mirror of, like,
this could be what I've done if I'd made other decisions.
Like that.
Johnny says, ah, yes, Calendar Man taking tendency to be punctual to the point of madness.
Okay, there were a lot of bad villains in that.
I love the bad villains.
In the Silver Age.
Oh, I remember Calendar Man from one of the Arkham games.
He's in a prison cell, and on real-world holidays, he'll make a reference to them.
Okay.
When you, like, walk past a cell, which you don't have to do,
you basically got to make a special visit on Christmas
to hear him complain about something about Christmas.
Oh, that's cool.
Little Easter egg.
Yeah.
All right, I'm tapping out.
All righty.
Yes, why are we curving?
Would you like to jump in here?
I'm assuming he can hear us.
I think Gotham is actually based on New Jersey.
Really?
I always thought it was Chicago.
I don't know.
I've heard, I know that a lot of people say it's New York,
but I think that's Metropolis.
Oh, okay.
My weaker has nothing.
Okay, never mind then.
I just assumed you wanted to say something.
If you do come up with anything, you know, let us know.
The internet says Chicago.
Okay.
Okay, cool.
Makes sense.
Because Chicago was always like super corrupt politics,
at least in my imagination of it.
That's what I hear is the, you know.
Yeah, the like stereotypical gangsters with Tommy guns
and doors.
Layton says Manhattan, but it can't be Manhattan
because Manhattan was where Superman is.
Yeah, the Metropolis.
I don't know.
They're fictional cities.
They probably take inspiration from a variety of actual cities.
But yeah.
I like Man in White.
Man in White has a question.
Oh, he does.
We missed that.
What is your favorite example of a time
when you changed your opinion on something?
Religion, free will, some trivia
where everyone is confusingly incorrect.
Man, I think I've talked about this on the podcast already.
Let me see if I can remember a new one.
I really should keep a record of when I change my mind
about things.
It's hard because it's usually not a,
like a hard break where I had one opinion
and then I change it on a dime.
It's usually something that takes the course of weeks
or months, sometimes years.
My leaving religion was like that.
That took a long time.
My, when I was like young and in high school,
I was very much sort of a radical communist type.
The burn it all down because capitalism is evil and unfair
and we can't labor under the shit anymore.
And now that I am much older, I'm like,
wow, that burning it all down idea would be bad.
And capitalism is definitely unfair,
but any other method tried so far hasn't worked very well either.
And capitalism has us where we are right now.
So I'm okay with it.
I don't know.
I've definitely gone from radical Marxism
to being more libertarian,
and which is still a position that is unpopular,
I guess, with people who like government.
But in a very different way.
I remember when I...
Are we cur?
Yeah, go ahead.
Oh, yeah.
Can you guys hear me?
Yes, we can.
How are you doing?
Yeah, cool.
Hi, guys.
Hey there.
I believe this is the first time we've heard your voice.
Yeah, I've done a podcast here before.
I don't know if you got, you weren't there,
but a few of the people in the discord were there, I think.
Welcome.
You are in one of those European nations, right?
Yeah, Sweden.
I have a thick accent, right?
No, your English is amazing.
I was just about to say, like, I thought he was from Europe,
but we've had other Colin in our previous episode,
people who were also from, I think, the Nordic countries.
And I was like, oh my God, did you translocate from America or something?
Jesus.
I mean, I can totally tell when somebody's from here.
So it's like, it's always surprising when people from the U.S.
say stuff like that.
Maybe it's discord.
If you hadn't told me, I would have maybe kind of been like,
there's maybe an accent, but maybe not.
I really appreciate that.
That's, I've worked out, I've worked a lot on it.
So thanks.
Cool.
Excellent.
Yeah, but anyway, my question, my question was basically,
and yeah, feel free to ask for clarification here,
but like lots of discussions I've had here with lots of people in this discord
usually boil down to some sort of thing of, oh, but I need this for my identity.
I remember you in the U.S.
A big part of why you didn't like wire heading was like,
you had this identity that you wanted to preserve, right?
Or do you think I'm mischaracterizing that?
I mean, it depends on what you mean by an identity I want to preserve
because I think wire heading basically erases you as a person,
but in the sense that I wish to have an identity as a person, that is true.
Yes.
Right.
So that was basically what I wanted to clarify.
I would like the input of all of you to be honest,
because from my perspective on the consciousness, right,
and the rest is just superfluous stuff that can be there,
but I don't care if it's there unless it brings more positivity.
You know what I mean?
But it's clear to me that most people don't agree with me.
And I would, I'm just wondering like, what is even identity at that point?
Like I don't even understand what it means.
Two things.
Stephen, can you capture wizard's question and paste it below the current one?
Yes.
Okay, cool.
Jay, you said you had strong opinions.
First, I want to maybe, can you clarify your question more,
because I want to make sure that I'm responding to what you're actually, what you're, yeah.
Okay.
So when people like, the most recent examples I have is Enya's example where he's like,
oh yeah, but if everybody's just like, do you remember the Scott Alexander post where he's like,
oh God created this universe where everybody sits on a lotus?
He said something like that.
Everybody's like perfectly happy, almost identical.
And to me, that's like perfect, but you seem to disagree with that.
And I don't understand why, what missing piece is missing?
This reminds me of like arguments I've had with Wes about wire heading where, so if you,
you know, okay, it's really hard to talk about this because I feel like there's not good
words for some of these concepts.
But so a version of me that was just eternally blissed out sounds kind of horrifying because
I actually like get meaning out of work or out of, well, okay.
I think my core like main value is curiosity.
So I get like the most enjoyment out of learning new things, exploring.
And if I was just like, you know, having liquid value, I'm like pumped into me at all times that
would stop that aspect of me.
And learning can be frustrating and annoying, but it's so rewarding because you overcome that.
Exactly.
The struggle to learn something or to achieve something or build something I think is really
inherent in what makes a good life.
And yeah, so my point of confusion here is it seems like you're explaining it in terms of
ultimate happens, right?
Would you agree with that?
I think that happiness is not, I don't know, it's not my like top priority.
And that is the main point of the main crux between me and people who agree with wireheading where
and that's also my argument against negative utilitarianism where it's like,
I think happiness is great, but I don't think it's like the best thing about existence.
I yeah, I basically agree.
And I know Matt, I don't know if Matt is still here has this thing about how all humans
are basically a bunch of competing nodules in the brain that are that want you to
do various things in our sort of in competition for your internal resources.
And what you do depends on how strongly one is weighted over another.
And I think that is a very good way of modeling humans.
And really the desire just to be happy is always like something that's pulling on me,
but it's not the only thing.
There are many other desires I have that are much more important than just that.
And if I was put in a state where that is the only part of me that was being constantly
fulfilled to the maximum value it could be, I don't think that would be me anymore.
That would be a tiny fraction of what was me.
That is that took over the rest of me like a cancer.
I think there's a lot of things that are important to me.
I have one of the classic examples is you ask a parent,
would you rather that your child is in pain, but you believe that it's happy?
Or would you rather that your child be happy, but you believe it's in pain?
And generally parents answer, I would rather that my child be happy,
and I have the wrong belief that they're in pain.
Because even though the parent would be made miserable thinking their child is in pain,
in actuality that child is happy.
And that's the important part.
Like I mean, one of my most best parts of my life was when I was creating methods of rationality,
and I couldn't do that if I was just sitting around being happy all the time.
Did we want to have Johnny on?
Hi.
Yeah.
Hey, Johnny.
Yeah, you had a fairly strong opinion vis-a-vis wireheading.
I'll jump in.
Yeah.
So.
Oh, wait, hold on.
Sorry.
Go ahead, Steve.
You're good.
I was going to raise hands now.
I was just going to say really quick, I basically concur with what they said,
but I'll take it one level further that I have this stupidly sentimental attachment to physical
reality to where like if I could move, if I could, I liked Phoenix mentioning what was that,
that my little pony.
Yeah, friendship is optimal.
Yeah, if I had the option to migrate to equestria, I would choose not to.
I have a sentimental attachment to physical reality.
A super doll.
Like things as they are, rather than things that, I mean, I would visit for sure, that sounds fun,
but I don't know, there's something exciting knowing that, or at least believing,
you know, if we're not in a matrix, you know, I could visit Hawaii and pick up a piece of lava
and be like, this is a piece of, what's the kind of rock?
That sounds right.
And like this was inside the earth, like not that long ago.
And, you know, there's something cool about that rather than just picking up a whatever,
if I was in a super immersive Elder Scrolls game and be like, look, this is an Elder Scroll,
like how cool is that?
Like that sounds fun, but not the same kind of fun.
All right, sorry, go ahead, Johnny.
By all means, quite all right.
So Wes, as we mentioned, he like, you know, he is the big wireheading fan around here.
And I must thank him for my opinion, because it is by arguing with him constantly that I have
formed such a strong opinion on this topic.
I have to expect that's why he does that.
Yeah, I do too.
And that's why I appreciate it.
So when we talk about how wireheading, we expect it would change it.
What is that horrid noise?
I don't know.
Okay, whatever.
It was a coil, I think.
It was possible.
So you have a, there is a meaningful sense in which you can say that anything that humans do
is for selfish, hedonic reasons.
You know, to some extent, that is an accurate model, because we expect that the things we do
will be good for us in some way, or it at least makes us happy to do them.
And to that extent, if you expect that if you get wireheaded, you're not going to want to do any
of the other stuff that you want to do.
You're just going to want to get wireheaded, because it is good enough that it supplants
all the other stuff you might want to do.
However, as an agent who has desires, not just about those, so you have desires about reality,
you might want your kid to be happy, for example.
You want that because you expect that will make you happy to a certain extent.
However, if you were wireheaded, you would not, because you would just be maximally satisfied,
regardless.
The reason that you, or I shouldn't say you, the reason that some people don't want to get wireheaded
is because they have explicit, meta-level desires about their desires.
They don't just desire things.
They desire to desire the things they desire.
And they do not like the idea of at least certain desires being changed.
There are some people who, I imagine many people, would enjoy thinking healthier foods
tasted better, for example.
It would be really great if broccoli tasted better than cookies.
It would be extremely convenient.
However, a lot of people would not like to change their beliefs such that, say, hurting
people in ways that were beneficial to them, felt as good as being kind to people.
Because while that might be a useful change to their values, they have a meta-level value
that they should not change that value.
And I think that is a good way to conceptualize why people don't want to get wireheaded.
Can I ask you a question there, Johnny?
I just have a quick question there.
Sure.
So my confusion here comes from, like, okay, so I imagine somebody thinking that they want
something.
What in reality is happening is they have a hypothesis of what mental states will come
from certain actions, right?
Is it possible that they have a hypothesis of how their brain would react to certain stuff
and they just are wrong?
Do you know what I mean?
Like, do they imagine something happening that doesn't actually happen?
Yeah.
I mean, I expect that a lot of the desires that people follow make them less happy.
In fact, it is almost definitionally true that if I were wireheaded, I would be more happy.
But I would still choose not to do it because the agent who is wireheaded and the agent who
is me right now have different sets of goals.
And while mine include my own happiness as one of those goals, they also include my values
staying the same and certain external things about the universe that I want to be able to
affect and would not be able to meaningfully affect if I were wireheaded.
Yeah, it's like saying murder Gandhi would be okay with being murder Gandhi, but actual
Gandhi would not.
Yeah, in theory, I totally get that.
That's the thing that confuses me here because it's like, okay, if that is true,
because I know the theory behind that, like an AI, for example, that has a utility function,
doesn't want to change, like I understand that.
But since I am okay with being wireheaded, it sort of seems to me like one of us possibly,
like we could be very different, but like one of us is probably wrong, right?
One of us is probably imagining a mental state and a reaction to it that is an actually the
reaction you would have, right?
It's not necessarily have to be true because this is a case where it's in cases where it's
a values thing, you don't have to agree, you know, if you genuinely have different values,
you can come to a different conclusion, even if you agree about the same things about reality,
you may not have to go higher than happiness.
I totally agree.
That's why I'm asking like, how do you know what you think you know, right?
But that's sort of the question I'm trying to ask you.
How do you know this is actually what you want?
It's okay.
Well, did you have something you wanted to jump in on?
Oh, we've kind of moved past that moment.
Yeah.
Oh, I'm sorry.
You can bring it back though.
I mean, we're still, did you have a comment about wireheading?
I have a more meta level observation on wireheading debate here.
It wasn't so much about wireheading as what I'm hearing is like this undercurrent of
is pleasure good and can we trust it?
And like, what do we value suffering or not?
And Alex and I were having a discussion last night, which was along those lines,
where I found myself having a very strong desire that when people are discussing these things,
that they make a distinction between suffering and discomfort.
They're very different states.
One is productive and the other is destructive.
I think with wireheading, that's probably a very strong factor that I'm not really hearing
considered.
It's just kind of being left out because all pleasure is not equal.
All suffering is not suffering.
I think people use these terms way too broadly.
So last night, when Enesh and I were talking about my previous discussion with Alex,
I said that for one thing is like the difference between anxiety, fear, and terror for me.
Where I'm like, anxiety, I can control to a degree.
It is something that builds to overwhelming, whereas when I feel fear, I have an immediate
uncontrollable reaction and terror would be that beyond uncontrollable.
I don't even have the ability to be embarrassed because I'm still screaming.
So when you're talking about wireheading, it sounds like the discussion isn't nuanced enough.
Yeah, the language barrier is so frustrating.
I don't know if this is an illustrative example, but have either of you guys ever been
blissed out on psychedelics or MDMA?
No, for probably the same reasons I don't support wireheading for myself.
If wireheading were a thing I could try for an afternoon, I might do it.
In fact, I definitely would if it was safe, just to see what it was like.
Again, assuming that people didn't come out of it saying my life will never be meaningful again,
that was the best ever, whatever, if it was a safe thing to come in and out of.
But I once took well over the recommended dose of MDMA and your thoughts feel awesome,
your body feels awesome. It's about as close to orgasm as I could imagine we can get without
literally putting wires in our brains. And even in the midst of that, when I could ground myself
and remember that I was a person with a name and a history, I was glad my whole life wasn't like that.
Because not everything that I get value and enjoyment out of was found in that state.
Now, I think if you steal me on wireheading to say yes, but wireheading includes all of the other
things, or even maybe just rewires you to not care about those things, that's a different thing.
But me as I am doesn't want to live in perpetual bliss, although that would make a fun occasional
weekend, right? Have you tried any of the drugs MDMA that has gotten you into that quasi-wirehead
state? Me? Why We Cur? No, because until... I think we just lost him. Oh dear. We can't hear you.
Yep, we have just lost Why We Cur's audio. Dread. Oh, well. Can you still hear us? Why
We Cur? Maybe you could just type. I mean, you're still in the voice channel, but it says he is on
Did I cut out? Hey, we can hear you now. Okay, where did I cut out? Very near the beginning.
Right as you were starting to answer. All right, just give me a second. I'm just gonna
exit that building here. Oh, someone posted that pleasure is your brain's way of tricking you into
reproducing. Was that it? Reproducing your genes? A little bit. Yeah, I like that. Pleasure is a
DNA thing on you to help it extend further into the future. Nice. Yes, go ahead. Yeah, so I was
just gonna say I have not tried anything like that because I'm actually scared of getting addicted
to it, but that's not... I just want to make clear that that's not an argument against wireheading
per se, because if I knew that I could live like that for the rest of my life, then I would probably
try it, but since I can't, it seems a bit pointless to me. You certainly can live like that for the
rest of your life if you don't mind your life being less than 80 years. I think that's what
they're saying though, yeah. Right, yeah, but I think that would be a negative compared to
a normal life. You know what I mean? Yeah, and I would never advocate drug use without anyone doing
tons of background homework and research. I'll just say very briefly that I don't think in my
understanding and experience that you can get addicted to psychedelics like you get addicted
to opioids or something, for example. Some people can though. Some people can. There's definitely
probably a risk. It's pretty rare. You know, certainly you could wish you could do them more
often or something, but I mean, one of the fun things about MDMA that prevents that is that
apparently the human brain, for whatever reasons, seems to only have a couple dozen, maybe three
dozen rolls in them or three times where they can get really brushed off of it in a lifetime,
and then your brain just stops working for people who've done it a bunch. So that said,
if you're desperately chasing that dragon and take a ton, I'm sure it could probably still kill
you, even if you're not getting whatever the experience from it, but you're not an expert.
So do tons of homework before doing any drugs. It's an interesting comment that I mean, I mean,
just, oh, sorry. Well, I was just gonna say, it's interesting that you said you're not, you think
it would still be net negative. I think that means almost that you might not be quite a
wireheader because I would assume someone who is like super wireheaded. If I could work up enough
money so that I could just be blissed out on MDMA for 10 years straight and then die,
that probably would be net positive for the wireheader because 10 years of bliss is probably
better than the next 60 years of just working and struggling through life and getting older,
like everyone else in the world. I mean, that depends on your life, right? You know,
certainly have a better life than the description you gave there, or at least I think so. I mean,
I would be super into having a longer length discussion on it at some point.
I'm not saying to shut it down now, but this sounds like there's a lot more to explore here,
and I need to articulate my thoughts on wireheading and stuff before I can engage with it too much
longer, but that's just me. I did want to, just because I feel like with the discussion of discomfort
and suffering and all that, I feel like we might not be operating on quite the same
understanding of what we're talking about with wireheading because when I'm talking about wireheading,
what I'm trying to say is that you are in a state where you are feeling a sufficient amount of pleasure
that no conceivable state that you could be in would be better than the one you are in in your
preference order. So it's like nothing that could possibly happen would make you happier than you
are right now. So when I talk about you have no suffering or you have no discomfort, what I literally
mean is you cannot want anything more than you currently have. So whether you conceptualize that
as a limit on your desires or a maximum point on your pleasure scale or two different things that
are happening at the same time, that is what I am trying to talk about when I talk about wireheading.
It sounds so boring. What I'm hearing is that since Wes is our resident wireheader, we should just
get him on for an episode about wireheading and why we care. I think perhaps so. And when you were
talking about being maximally blissed out and couldn't possibly want anything different,
this little voice in my head was like, yeah, but our brains are adaptive machines. So sooner
later, that's why I don't think hell would work. Yeah. Well, yeah, you assume you turn that part
off for the good wireheading, you know, you part of the wire burns out the part of your brain that
adapts to things, I guess. So does the hell. That was part Simpson's comeback is like easing into a
hot bath like you just get used to it. But I imagine that if you're a clever, clever Satan,
you turn off the part that gets used to it. Maybe we should look at current research with actual
brains of living beings and kind of take it from there with our wireheading discussion.
Maybe in the realm of possibility would be kind of interesting place to start.
We're going full transhuman future. You can make whatever brain you want.
Well, I don't know. I mean, even beyond the point of like, it is bad form to say the efficacy of
my argument has nothing to do with the nature of reality. But I do think this is an argument that
takes place in a perfect philosophical sphere that's sitting on a perfect philosophical plane.
Couldn't have said it better myself.
It's not really concerned by such constraints. It's you're feeling really good and you can't
feel any better that how that's happening is not part of the question.
Okay, but for me, that's unusual for rationalists to have that kind of discussion.
We're not saying you can't. We're not immune from intellectual or intellectual masturbation.
This is very true. Also, petitions to rename it from wireheading to intellectual masturbation.
They're different things. You can intellectually get off on whatever random thing you want to
talk. I meant it mainly in the sense of just engaging in pointless thought experiments just
for the fun of burning an afternoon talking about it. I mean, I don't hate to bring this up.
I really like to bring this up. In the book club channel, they were just reading
Steven Watts' Blind Sight. Quick question. Could anyone post real quick,
are you gotten to the point where you can talk about the full book or are people still working
through the last chapters? Peter Watts. Yes, I think I said Peter Watts. I meant two anyways.
Is it okay to talk about the full book now or are people still in the reading the final
chapter's version of this book club? Since no one's typing, I'll answer that quick question.
What was your favorite example of a time when you changed your opinion on something?
The first one that came to mind, this was early in my days of waking up as a sentient person. I
mentioned in the Worth the Candle non-spoiler channel, but I didn't really come online as a
person till I was 20 something. So maybe earlier than that, I was listening to a libertarian podcast
and the guy was fun. It was laid back and he had made some comment about how the wage gap between
men and women getting paid was like horseshit and obviously on its face because he's like,
you're telling me that Walmart, the super selfish corporation, wouldn't take the opportunity to
save 25% of their income by just hiring exclusively women. And so I was like, wait a minute, this
guy's not on, like this guy's denying the wage gap exists. Fuck this, I got out of there.
And so he basically stopped, I don't know if I unsubscribed or if he stopped posting stuff
shortly thereafter, but it wasn't until like years later when I was learning more about it,
about the nuances of the wage gap that I realized that I dismissed it only because I had in my
head that, oh no, this is a real thing, women get paid 77 cents on the dollar. And it was as
simple as that. It turns out that there's more nuance there. And that's where this guy was coming
from. And just to me, I came into it from a very politically charged point of view and dismissed
him as being just some blind shill for the wrong opinion, where in fact, I think I was closer
to that. Now that said, that's not saying that there's no wage gap, it's just saying that you
couldn't fire your staff that was mostly men and hire all women and pay them 77 cents for the
dollar that you're paying men. If that was doable, somebody would have done it by now,
and they would have saved a lot of money, right? When you get paid on average for other reasons
that some are correctable and some are convoluted, but it wasn't that straightforward. So that's
just because it's convoluted doesn't mean it's not correctable. Growth mindset. Exactly.
There are industries that are largely manned by women that, words are terrible.
Like the whole healthcare industry, cleaners, education.
Manned by women is a funny sentence. In tech and other industries where you can calculate work
and how long this will take per person of working on it, one unit is man hours. And that's what we
use at my company. And my team is now 20% women. And we've talked about it. And because I never
heard the term until I started like my first week. And I was like, you guys have like four women
engineers here, you guys call it man hours. And he's like, you know, we've asked, they don't care.
I'm like, they might say that though, because you're their boss. Anyway, so I asked, and it's one
person, she doesn't mind it. But I don't know why you would stick to that when person hours works the
same human hours. Yeah. Well, I'm doesn't man like mankind. And that have a generic, you know,
this species. It does. But but humankind isn't all that much harder to say. And it almost sounds
more formal. I really think they're going to pay you stupid. You really think they're going to pay
all this, the additional wages for you saying an extra syllable every time you say person hours.
Only if you're a guy.
I think I clicked something. I can get us back to where we were. But no, the reason I brought
up blindsight is because everyone is saying it's more or less okay to mention it. At the end of
the book, I'm I think this comes up even before the end of the book. But basically, maybe like
plug your ears for the next 30 seconds, if you don't want to hear this, basically, all of humanity
that's back on earth is putting itself into a wirehead state and just checking out of existing
anymore. And that is like, I mean, the whole book is about consciousness. So this is like,
are those humans still conscious? And it's an interesting question that the book asks. And I
think it was like, for the people that have read to the end and are pro wireheading, do you consider
blindsight to have a good ending? Because basically, the entire human species is wireheading itself.
The other the other happy ending story like that is Three Worlds Collide.
I was just gonna say that. Yeah. Although it's a really hard time paying attention to the
conversation. It's like, who, who, who, who, who?
Enyosh broke broke one of the conventions of of fair intellectual masturbation,
which is you drop the C word, you're not supposed to do that. Oh, consciousness.
Yeah, because that always gets us dragged off on to another giant whole conversation.
And it strikes me, this is going to be really weird to listen to if you don't also
have the chat to read. Yeah, we're responding to the chat a lot. Oh, yeah, who would see the
question. Enyosh, we've got a quick question for you. Then I want to jump to this next one.
Okay. Oh, Enyosh, how much of shift to libertarianism do you attribute to David,
the king of economics, who is also my co host on the mind killer podcast?
Is that his title? Maybe. The economics. Officially, this is the man of spears, yes.
David, the economic model is his current name on the discord.
Not that much. Maybe 5%. I would say that. Okay, a good 40% is just generally aging and
interacting with the capitalist system a lot, and realizing that there's a lot of forces that
that push people in a way that make would make a strict communism untenable, but also that
our current government is really, in my opinion, getting in the way of things. So part of it is
just, you know, having more experience with capitalism as it is. Another good 40 to 45%
is reading Scott Alexander, because gosh, he's a convincing writer, even when he's wrong. I don't
know if he's wrong about this, but he's been. He has the anti libertarian FAQ. He does. Which is
funny because he is like, he's basically libertarian. Yes. And so yeah, reading his
writings has really pushed me quite a bit there. So I'd say a small majority of it is due to
Scott Alexander. And then, you know, the other 5% would be David. What's fun about Scott Alexander
is he's like the Superman of steel manning. Yeah. He can write a very compelling argument for something
that he would never endorse. Then this other one was from Phoenix that I saw when it came up,
and then I'm glad you bumped it again to get it back on the radar.
What's the area in life that you're going the most slash work is the most important right now?
So I wish I'd thought of an answer before I brought that up.
I have one if you want one. Yeah, I've got a I've got a crappy half answer. So go right ahead.
I feel like Phoenix might have mine, but for the rest of y'all, I'm actually working a lot on
trying to feel my emotions and be able to name them. There's this like
this common thing that like you get from certain types of childhood and certain types of just
neuro types where a lot of my life I was really completely dissociated from my emotions. And I
think a lot of that had to do with sort of, you know, like the thing of roles and families.
Basically, my parents like thought that they could win any argument by or like they could.
They had the power because children don't have power to win any argument by saying
because I'm the parent near the kid. And that's why. And if I showed any emotion
that would further prove their point that like, you know, emotions are bad and childish. So I had
to sort of suck all my emotions deep within me to the point where I couldn't even like I got so
good at this that I couldn't even see or feel my own emotions. Oh, damn. And I'm still working
my way through that trying to be like, I guess I am a person with feelings. Meditation has helped
with that a lot where the noting practice of sitting, waiting for something to come up. And
then first of all, categorizing it as a thought or a feeling and then pleasant or unpleasant.
And then you can take it another level and say what specifically it's like, okay,
thinking, planning, pleasant, feeling, anxious, unpleasant. And it sounds really
stupid, but sitting there doing that for a long time is a really good way of
like getting a deeper, you know, getting more sentient, I guess, like becoming more aware of
your own like deep sub level processes. I think that's a really badass like level up to recognizing
yourself and then not really recognizing say, Oh, that sucks. But then to go on and like say,
okay, well, I found it that now it's actually trying to do something about it. I think that's
awesome. I mean, I don't have anything quite so profound. So horrible to try to talk about it
though, because words, I think, I think I picked up what you're putting down. But I mean, yeah,
mine are less inter, like in introspective, I think, like, pardon me, I want to grow enough
professionally. And I'm at a really good spot in my career with my current job to,
to actually get good at what I'm doing. So I'm trying to maximize the opportunity there. And
well, at the same time, I think just like, yeah, get good is a good way to put it wizard.
The I like in a not so, I don't know, math math, mathy or heavily articulate way just trying to
maximize like the positive impact I have on the people around me and in the world in general.
Like, I could just do that by giving to charities or whatever. And I do some of that. But like,
it's, it's more channeling Mr. Rogers. I think, yeah, I want there to be more Mr. Rogers vibe
in the world. And so I try to be a little, I'm working to try and actually put effort into that.
What about you, Manny Osh? Oh, man, I'm a mess. There's a lot of things I'm trying to work on.
I'm a mess too. Yeah, it's okay. Okay, it'll be messes. I would like to get back into writing,
which is something I haven't done in quite a while. And it's proving challenging.
I would like to become more optimistic about the future of, well, I mean, me specifically,
but humanity in general, just I found that I used to be much more full of energy and like,
ah, saving the world is going to be great and awesome. And now oftentimes I feel myself being
sort of nihilistic and fatalistic about things. And I don't like that. But it's also
hard to combat. And it feels a lot like when I was depressed earlier in life in my teens and
early 20s, but I don't think it's quite the same thing. So I don't know, that's the thing I would
like to work on. I would like to actually get up. This is not the quarter life crisis. You're at
the midlife crisis now. I am actually at the midlife crisis. Yeah, I'm going to die. That sucks.
For what it's worth, I helped balance some of that with the right combination of
meds. Again, I take a lot of inspiration from Jace's example, because it's not just having
identified a hard to see problem. Hard to articulate problem. Hard to articulate,
but even hard to notice. That's the kind of thing many people don't
introspect to that level. But you didn't merely stop at identifying it. You said,
how can I actually work on and fix this? And so just in general, if there's anything that you
want to try and work on, you can always try and chase down an actual solution, right?
And you've got a cohort of people who are around to try and help.
Yeah, I like surrounding myself with smart people.
As a life strategy, it's worked out really well.
I'm also not sure how much of it is just due to the fact that I seem to get a lot of
enjoyment in life by being around people, and I haven't been able to do that for over a year.
That's like the state of the world right now. It was so nice being with Alex and David yesterday.
We drove up and just hung out with them for three hours, and it was fucking amazing.
I'm looking forward to getting back to that too. So maybe it's that.
I'm on this podcast. My therapist pointed it out, but I noticed that every time you talk about
this podcast, you do your whole face lights up. Yeah, it's like the thing of hanging out with
friends that aren't just the same people that you see every day. Also, not that I live with
Phoenix. I love Phoenix, and we have a great relationship, but then there's also something
cool about having novel people. Yeah, totally. Everyone's chasing the strange. I would like to
also be less of chasing the strange. This is a very unromantic way to put it.
I would like to be less of someone who's always trying to please everyone because I kind of
like that about myself, but also not being able to say no sometimes is bad, and then sometimes
I've got to bring up something to someone, but I don't want it, so I put it off for weeks, and
that just makes things worse. That's another thing I've been working on for a long time is
not being such a horrible goddamn people, please. It's a whole lifetime of unlearning.
Then every now and then you just snap because you've been pleasing for so long, and then I was
like, oh my god, you asshole. I'm like, no, damn it. It builds up resentment, but that's part of
the whole noticing emotions thing is that I wouldn't notice the resentment building up, and then
I would suddenly just lash out at my loved ones, and it's like, wow, I don't want to be an asshole
like that anymore, but then there's this whole process of having to untangle it all the way
down to your childhood. Yeah, it's interesting. I talked about trying to be all rosy and
optimistic in the world, and I don't struggle at least as much as I did, even not all. I mean,
I don't have an opportunity really to please people, since no one goes outside to talk to
people anymore, but I used to be definitely a doormat, and I don't know what switched in me,
so I try to put positivity and light into the world, and at the same time, I have no trouble
being just a hot, put my foot down asshole if something actually matters or is really annoying.
I really value that about you. Well, I appreciate it. I don't quite know,
someone is asking me for advice on how to do that with an interpersonal issue,
and I didn't really know, like I told them, I don't know if I can articulate how I get to
exactly where I am, and even if I could, I don't know if it's advice I would want to give,
because I think part of it is that I give, I sort of don't care enough about enough things,
so like if something, you know. No, I totally relate to that. I think
Fedex was asking me about stoicism the other day, and I was just like, or I've had this come up
before too, where someone's like, how do you get good at stoicism? And I was like, well,
I really don't want to give anyone the advice that worked for me, but have one of your best friends
die. Like, it's not good. Yeah. So, yeah, I don't know if you're, if you had something like that
that like made the switch, or if it's just more that you can't articulate what happened though,
or you don't remember. I mean, it's more just, I think that like, I don't quite know exactly
what exactly the switch was. I can't think of roughly when it happened. I would have been 22
or 23, or younger, 21, sometimes somewhere in there. But like the, I don't know, it's hard to
articulate, but I like I said, if it was a pill, I could give to somebody to just say here, now
you have the same attitude towards these things that I do. I don't know if I'd give people that
pill, because I think part of it includes like, just not giving a shit about, but that's actually
not great, right? There's something you should give a shit about. And there's a lot of things that
you shouldn't. Yeah. But like, I think if you have no, no fucks to give whatsoever, then you're
in kind of a bad spot, because it means you just can't care about stuff. But I'm not exactly there,
but I wonder if I'm on that precipice. So it's good to get calibration on. I think like, yeah,
it's like a really delicate balancing act. A lot of these things, like you definitely don't want
to be too much of a doormat. You definitely don't want to be too much of a bully or narcissist or
whatever the opposite of a doormat is. We had another question. Do we want to hit that one?
Yeah. Suppose that reincarnation exists. For your next life, you get to choose the country,
but not the parents veil of ignorant style. What is your pick? Oh, man, that's a hard question.
I am not educated enough about the world to have a good answer to this question.
A first world nation. Yeah. USA. USA. Well, no, it's not really a hard question for me. I would
choose the USA. Really? Yeah. I feel like I'm hating the US. Hating the US, hipster. Don't
get me wrong. I feel like there's lots of stuff to complain about. Definitely. And not merely
complain, but to have right gripes about. Noria was a good answer. Yeah, Switzerland, a lot of those
like zero with world country. Or yeah, you know, if we're going to say first world is the US.
Possibly Singapore. Singapore would be interesting because they do have a very like
Singapore is so weird. I really want to visit. Yeah. Like I want to
I kind of want to say Japan just because it's such an interesting culture, despite the xenophobia
and the sexism, it's still like the high rates of depression. Yeah, you know, there's there's
bad things, but man, they have this. But it's fucking. Yeah, their history is fucking awesome.
Their culture is so rich. Their music is really good. Yeah. Why are we thinking USA though?
Well, because it still has the highest standard of living by far. It's
Is that true? Yeah, I think so. Does anyone in the chat know whether the US
at least has the highest standard of living on average? And what standard of living like basically?
Yeah, I guess that's what I meant. Yeah, it doesn't necessarily include things like
your health care or how stressed you are in life. But yeah, I was measuring it more in terms of
the combination. Is it Norway? That makes sense. In combination of things like GDP and
political freedom and things, I think overall and and the ability to affect the world.
Also, just right now, I mean, being that it is the the current ruling empire of the world gives
it a lot of advantages. Zealand count as a first world nation. Uh, maybe. Huh. Zealand. What is
Zealand? Isn't that the like, there's like two people in their population.
Okay, it's an offshore platform in the North Sea. Yeah, it's the like artificial. I would not want
to be a baby on an offshore platform. Maybe not. Yeah, you don't get to pick your parents. Yeah,
yeah. In this thought experiment, I feel like I really love to, I mean, this is just sort of
related to my curiosity thing and the whole like, I wish that I could experiment with fire
heading just to see what it's like. I wish I could see what other people's brains are like.
Like, wouldn't it be cool to jump into other people's heads? Yes. And see whether like their
just process of thinking is basically the same as yours or totally alien and different.
It would be really cool to jump into other people's bodies. Me and Charlie already have a
pact once a transhuman future comes. It's happening. Oh, okay. Bobby's switching in.
Same with me, Rachel. Nice. Although I think that she's, uh, like, I think she, she agreed much
without thinking about it because she doesn't think it's likely to happen. Uh, I don't, I don't
like that. I think she will, but I think she kind of agreed. She's like, yeah, sure. You know,
whatever. But I'm like, okay, you'd realize, you know, I'm being serious, right? Okay.
This living in a black face is about to count as blackface.
Wizard is trying to get us canceled. Nice try.
But yeah, like, I feel like, and I wish I could just sort of do the experiment a bunch of times
and just see what my life would be like if I were born in, uh, Bolivia versus, uh,
I keep, for some reason, I keep thinking of South America because it's been on my mind lately.
I'm like, Bolivia, Venezuela. Part of my answer is the fact that I was born in Poland and my parents
immigrated here when I was pretty young and I can compare like how my, uh, my relatives, no, not at
all. We moved out when I was six months old and then we moved out of Germany when I was like
three, possibly four. I didn't even know you were, I thought you just went right from Poland to
US. No, they were in a refugee camp in Germany for a while. Although saying that word, you think
of like tents and shit. No, this was like a, like an upscale refugee camp. It was an apartment block
that wasn't being used for anything else and so the government put people in there. Uh, it was,
you know, there was a whole program of taking in refugees from the Soviet block countries to weaken
them. Uh, and it seems to have worked. But yeah, I compare my life and how it's gone versus like
some of my cousins that are at the same age that stayed in Poland. And I'm like, this was just
pretty much on every metric, a better life. Well, that's maybe good to know for you. Yeah,
sucks for the other people. That's, that's what I was going to say about like
shitting on the US. It's not going to be wrong. There's lots to shit on, but I don't like the
hipster of like, Oh, the US is the worst. I feel like that just can't be true because we've got
people trying to get into the US and you don't try and kick your way into a shitty, you know,
nightclub. You just, you leave. So the US, the less shitty country. Yeah. So yeah, don't get
wrong. Yeah. Yeah. Johnny, not saying the best. It's much harder for people in Guatemala to kick
their way into Norway. Valid. Um, yeah. I mean, it's part of its walking distance, right? Or,
you know, commute, you know, non-C commute distance. That's a good point. People also
try to get into the 1% and they also suck. Wait, you're saying that the 1% also sucks
for clarification, right? No, they're saying that people who try to become the 1%. I'm kidding.
I think that's unfair to both the people who try and to the 1%. Some of them don't suck.
I have, um, my dad has two sisters and they both married rich guys and they are so goddamn different.
And I hope they never listen to this, but well, the cool ones can listen to it. But, uh, there's
like, there's the one couple that just like travels the world and has lots of awesome experiences and
meets lots of people and like they use their money, I think, like to make themselves and others
happy. Whereas the other family is the like sitcom level, like crazy billionaires who, uh,
are like really stressed out because they have to throw a great garden party with Martha Stewart
and like, they're like on a weird diet where they only are to choke hearts for children.
It's wild. Man, I unmuted you if you want to join in. They're poor children who went to Ivy League
schools and, you know, have great jobs and I think you have to give life guest role as well.
Oh, whoops. Stand by. Oh, hello. Oh, hey, how are you doing? Save us from train of thought.
I'm going to plunge into deep thoughts. Oh, no, that could be fun too.
So I have a question about the Discord server, actually. What do you think the main aspirations
to get people to enjoy themselves, to get solid good vibes with each other,
or to perfect the craft of rationality? So what's the point of the Discord server you're asking?
Yeah, yeah, as my inspiration, what would you picture like the good
I think that a group progression getting people to get work, getting people together
that are aware of rationality, interested in it and therefore that would make them better at it,
would make them happier. And it's fun to do. I would just say all of the above,
which is a lazy answer, but I think the right one. I kind of like how the Bayesian conspiracy
split off from the Bayesian University and one is kind of the community channel and one is more
of the like instrumental channel. I think that there's a place for both. Yeah, I would say like
the opposite. I would say none of the above. I just like the Discord server to be here for people
to chill and chat if they want to. I don't have any goal for it personally. Maybe you guys do or...
We have no control over it also. I guess we have some amount of control over it, but if we're not
like the dictators of the Discord. I never wanted to moderate anything. That's way too much responsibility.
One of the things I like about it is that there's very few rules and it's more of a
society policing itself kind of thing. And I know if it ever grew really quickly,
that couldn't be the case anymore. We'd be stuck in an eternal September kind of situation.
But since it's only been growing by a few people every week at most, it's been just fine and I'm
happy with that. Being happy is a pretty nice goal.
I love what Jan Christian said. Come for the intellectual stuff. Stay for the community.
Absolutely. And you know what? Humans learn through interaction really well. That makes some solid
lessons. So right there with you, Bro. Community matters. Super does. I think some of the best
choices I've made in my life have been ones that have been intentionally selecting communities.
When I was in Jersey, choosing to drive an hour to and from the Philly less wrong groups was
super worthwhile investment. And actually, I have any wish to thank for encouraging me to do it.
I was really scared to come to my first live in person rationalist meetup because I was like,
oh, no, I'm going to be the dumbest person in the room. And I was. But being the dumbest person
in the room is awesome. I was like, oh, it's going to be embarrassing if people are going to not like
me. But then I realized that this is a great community because you can be the dumbest person
in the room and people can still, if you're there to learn from other people, I felt so welcomed.
It was awesome. Yeah, Johnny's hitting the nail on the head. And I'm glad to have you
served the role of dumbest person in the room, Jayce. I don't know about that. But yeah, I just
saw, I put cake emoji to it. Evelyn said, question, if you could create a world planet
universe that's perfect for you personally, what would it be like? And I can't answer that other
than to say that you're asking us to like, quick, define utopia. And I don't know. I don't have a
good quick answer. Quick answers that came to mind, which I don't know if I endorse,
but I'm just going to play with it is this one. The world's pretty cool. I feel like if there
were more areas where you wouldn't just die from being outside naked in 20 minutes, like it'd be
just a better planet overall. Maybe like almost all of the planet, just if I were to drop you
somewhere at random, you would die in just a few minutes, especially considering most of it is
ocean. But I can swim pretty good. My ideal world would definitely have optional pvp.
You could turn it off and be immune to violence from other people. I did turn it on and go on
Grand Theft Auto mode. No, no, no, no, no. Like the world we're in right now has non optional pvp.
It's just like gladiator universe we're in. No, I did really love playing. I played Ragnarok
online for six, seven years. I was addicted to it. It's just like your basic MMORPG.
That was awesome. Yeah, I wish that the, you know, like, well, what is the genre that
worth the candle is? Oh, let's pick. Yeah, if the world was more, Jesus, it's definitely not
lit. Thank you. Yeah, if the world were more of a lit, God damn it, more of a lit RPG, that would
be cool. Like, because I really, the thing I really enjoy is learning stuff and leveling up
and having like that, being able to pull down a stat counter and like pick a class path and like
equip the right gear and, you know, just get like, the reason video games are so rewarding,
as opposed to real life is just that you have that feedback. I've recently become like really
enamored of recent decades. I think this started with my like being nostalgic for the 90s and I
know that's because I was just a teenager at that time and everyone loves their teenage years
once they get older, but like once they get older, but when you get to be my age, exactly,
you're like back in my day, I can rent or feed myself. My life has just been getting better
and better. Like I occasionally would think like, it has been definitely fantasized about,
okay, this is, I think it's really fun to fantasize about what if you, your current
self could jump back into like your middle school self and do it over. I would do it.
I would not because I would be a different person. Bitcoin.
It would be worth reliving the last 20 years to be able to, but that's basically just saying,
I wish I was rich. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I part of it, but I'd be willing to relive the last 20
years and, you know, even try and dodge some of the mistakes I made or something and then be a,
you know, have, have $90 million right now. See, I've kind of become enamored. Like I said,
of recent decades, like I've been watching movies set in the 80s or made in the 80s and movies made
in the 70s a little bit. We watched Dirty Harry recently, which was not a very good movie, but
gosh, the 70s weren't interesting time. Yes. And I like now I just kind of want to jump back and
live in various decades of my choosing for a while just because that would be cool. Yeah.
It would be really neat to experience those cultures firsthand. Kind of the same thing
of being able to like relive your life in different countries. One thing our earth is missing, magic.
Yes. If there was just some magic magic though, look, we, we have cell phones.
We have telepathy. That's cool. We have telepathy. But, you know, if you could work hard to train
it for telekinesis or yes, I mean, science is magic that works. And if there was, if there was
magic, it would become a science, right? But, and maybe I think that there's something to be said
that it only feels like, you know, magic is fun and attractive because it's this mysterious,
unknown thing and that if we could bring it into our world and bring it part of the mundane,
it would just be like, oh yeah, you know, sure, you can go to school for five years and learn
how to move things to your mind, or you can just go to the gym and wait to move them with your body.
Yeah. Fridge is magic though.
Coins. These are the kind of riffs that I think that make, I always put a smile on my face reading
through the, you did the blackout. The, the chat. Let's see. Wait, Lucas, no, Lucas, sorry.
Man in white is still in the channel. I'm sorry. Were there, were there, you had other things?
Well, but if we ask the same question about Vittopia, I still have a soft spot for the
Jack Fresco, a vision of Project Venus. I know it's a topic, but if I have to pick a topic,
I'll throw it into that one. Okay. Project Venus. Yeah. Can you tell us about that? I don't know
that. Oh, it's quite an individual. I think he would like to hear him talk. Is it a, a, a
book series? Yeah. Yeah. He released a book, but thanks for surrounding. Oh, I'm definitely going
to have to go back through this chat after the episode has a bunch of, first of all, good memes.
I need to scrape and then like,
Fresco was one of the main reasons that pushed me to change my mind of, well,
topic of review. Thanks to, but
yeah, I definitely got to read this now. I got to say, Zoriander, when, so Jace mentioned the,
or no, Enoch mentioned, who mentioned, Jace mentioned the University of Bays.
Zoriander started that, and this is what I pictured the University of Bays looking like
in my head. Yeah. So, you know,
Man in white, I'm just kind of curious. I've always sort of wondered this, but never,
you know, have a chance to ask you, is the, your avatar a picture of you?
No, it's JD from Skrups. Oh, okay. It was very small on my phone. I was going to say,
you are a good looking man, but I guess JD is good looking man.
I just wanted to put forth in the utopia discussion,
omelas, not because I think it would be especially pleasant compared to all the other ones,
but because as a moral philosopher who did moral philosophy for a little while,
that's the one I have to pick as punishment for my sins.
Wait, are you the kid though? Or are you the one who walks away?
That's the trouble. There's just a random chance that I'm one or the other.
I don't know. It's a very small chance that I'm the kid though.
I like Scott Alexander's argument that it is literally better than the actual world we have
in every way, but I just, I can't read that story and feel good about it. Yeah.
It's like two paragraphs where we see the kid actually discussed, but just the cognitive
dissonance that all the people have is very upsetting. Yeah. It is. It's so ominous feeling.
Uh, Scott Alexander had a, I don't, I wonder if anybody, you know, you smart people who are
fast at computers, maybe you could remember what this was called and post a link, but he
did a con world project that like he, it was his take on what a utopia could look like.
Does anyone remember what that was called or happened to be able to grab a link and throw
it in there? I don't remember the name of it. I think he detailed some parts of it in his post
about the archipelago. I remember there used to be a link to it on like the, the top bar of the
old Slayster Codex page. I don't know if it's still around. Wizzler. This was one that he,
that he like described that I don't know if he debunked it or was interested in doing that.
We, uh, just want to point out have been going for over two hours now. Do we want to
start wrapping it up? Yeah. I mean, whatever. I'm, I'm coming to keep going. Uh, but if you're tired.
No, I could help. Nice. Uh, no, no, no, it's good. We can keep going for a while longer still. I
just wanted to, you know, give everyone a chance to chime in because there has been two hours.
Yeah. Has anybody not gotten on the voice who wants to get on the voice?
Oh, things I learned by spending five thousand years in an alternate universe.
Yeah. That's the one. Thanks, April. Thank you. I've got a, uh, economics question for
everybody. I've seen like a 4,000% increase of the value of the Dogecoin I bought for fun
like three months ago. Should I hold on to it and see if it keeps going up or should I sell it?
All right. We got one sell. So the thing is, if it ever hits like 10 bucks, I will make a fortune.
Shit. Well, you guys are all saying to, uh, I don't know. I kind of feel like you should keep it.
Except for Johnny who says all coins increase in value forever.
The thing is, I don't need a portion. It's really just like, do I want to, like,
the money now isn't life-changing and the money invested, it was basically nothing.
So, you know, I could, I could get a return on my investment
or I can just, you know, hold on to what I've got here, right? So.
First Coisa sell a few lines later, Coisa's hodl. Cois trolling. I don't know. You could,
you could do what I did with Bitcoin is when it got to a peak that I thought this is ridiculous.
It's not going to get any higher. I sold half of it. So I didn't feel bad when I kept going up after
that. I mean, I felt a little bit bad, but not as bad as I would have sold it on tweet.
Yeah. Right. Just like over the last three days, it went up like, uh, from seven cents to 33 cents.
Ridiculous. It's literally a joke currency. Like I, I would, I would sell, but that's just me.
I didn't keep it. See, I would buy, would buy Bitcoin, but I don't expect Bitcoin to ever like
three X in the next couple of years. Right. Whereas if this, if, if Doge were to three X,
it would just be worth a dollar. Right. So like the, the money that I would get from investing
would be a, would be a smaller return, even if Bitcoin continues to grow. I'm not, I'm clearly
not. Of the money. If people believe it, it goes that way. Yeah. It's true. I feel like if you're,
if you're not worried about that money and you don't need it for anything,
I'd say just hang on to it. Like I've been continually impressed by how well the coins,
the fake coins, the imaginary coins, that's, that's all money.
Thank you to all the people who said don't sell, especially Phoenix for telling me what I wanted
to hear. Well, Phoenix, uh, I don't know, Phoenix, do you want to jump on voice and talk about your
Bitcoin? I love that, um, or just if you don't want a voice, you could do it.
Hi. How's my audio quality right now?
My strategy is just like throw some money at the thing and then ignore it. So it stops stressing me
out. See, I did the opposite. I put a widget on the home screen of my phone. Oh my gosh.
Don't do that. So like, I, so I recently, I ignored it for a year and then I checked recently
and I was like, huh, my thousand dollars in Bitcoin is now $10,000 in Bitcoin.
Maybe I should pay attention to this like every two months. And so I set a reminder to pay attention
to it every two months. Alright, I'll take off the reminder off my phone to remind me what month is
it now, April? It's the price of the various things I have money in. I will Google at random
when I think of it. And sometimes that's like, you know, every week. Uh, but sometimes I'll
just go for two, three months before remembering. Oh yeah, let's see what Bitcoin's up to.
I would at least say, uh, if you do cash out, just take the cash and immediately put it in
like a Vanguard or something. Well, I would think I'd take it and, you know, take a fun,
like expensive weekend trip or something. Doesn't look stupid. I put my responsible money in Vanguard.
This is, this is money I got investing in Dogecoin. I don't know if I think I might, I might be
ruining the, the vibe if I already did something responsible with it. That said, if I, if it ever
turns to 10 bucks and I've got seven DK off of it or something, then yeah, I will invest it wisely.
Yeah. I was just, after seeing this and looking at the charts for a bit a few days ago, I was
just thinking of putting $5 in like 30 different coins, just in case any of them do something
ridiculous. Yeah, whether or not. See, this is exactly the kind of thing that we should all be
doing because we've all learned that we should have done this with Bitcoin, right? Now granted,
the market's different now on the number of coins, et cetera, but this is the kind of thing. And that's
why I did it. I got 50 bucks worth in January, just for fun. Cause I was like, fuck it. I hear
about this one or might as well. And this is exactly the kind of small thing where I got like,
I don't know, 60 something or 6,000 something coins for it. And I'm like, yeah, this way,
if they ever become a buck, hey man, I made, you know, a quick fortune or a quick, not fortune,
but a nice turnaround of my 50 bucks from years ago, right? I think April has a good point that
I don't think easy come easy goes good investment advice. Like if you ever get a windfall, yeah,
a great thing to do is plow that thing back into some sort of investment or keep it where it is,
everything that's going to keep going, but, you know, just winning something and then blowing it
is, you know, a way to stay where you are forever. I feel bad for the people who, you know, made $25
million in the game to stop thing, not for the rich people, fuck them, the low level mooks like me,
who made $25 million. I didn't make $25 million. I lost $500. And I feel bad for the ones that
made a fortune and then held. And now they're down to like, you know, something much more
reasonable, but still, you know, life adjusting. The problem with GameStop is it was based on
the actual value of a real thing. Whereas Dogecoin, fake shit, both girls advice is good.
Is that the barbell strategy? I think that was from the guy who wrote Black Swan. Oh,
Talib? I think that was an assumed Talib thing. Anyway, thanks, Phoenix.
Well, it's good to hear your voice. Oh, yeah. Oh, no. Another picture of us. How dare you?
Sneak attack. Yep. Actually, that's the same picture. Nope. It's a slightly different one.
That look on my face is slightly less goofy. I haven't been wearing that shirt for at least an
hour. When did you take this one? I wish I'd been like sitting up straight for that picture,
but that's okay. No legs. Little known fact about me. Nice. There you go. Oh, we're putting a
picture of Charlie up too. So we can see the person's been taking the pictures and chiming in now
and then. You should also see that red thread where it was like somebody took a picture of their two
wrist tattoos and they're like, Oh my God, how'd you take that picture? And then there's a picture
of him taking the picture by holding the phone or this like chin and chin and chin and shoulder.
And then like, hold on, how'd you take that picture? And it goes like four more levels.
Have you ever seen the Ford Panda? I'm sure it's like everywhere, but compilations of really
awesome photo shoots. And then like the picture of how it was done, where like, it'll be this like
amazing picture of some, I don't know, cosplayer with like their hair blowing back and like
water spraying. And then like, then they take like 10 steps back and there's a picture of
like a rig that they have set up where there's a fan and like somebody like frantically sprinkling
water on them. Thank you, Johnny. Links to the thing. Oh, it's actually in some very strange
contorted position that like looked really great. Yeah. Oh, my God. This is a different one, but
it's a similar sort of thing where they're just taking pictures further out and out. This is very
in line with my sense of humor. And now I can't find, oh, there it is. There's Charlie. Yay.
It's only fair. Yeah. We look great. Also, I keep noticing that your jewelry is really cool.
Oh, thank you. This is a gift. And this is the first piece of jewelry I've bought for myself in
like over a decade. Hell yeah. If other people want to post pictures of themselves and put them in
the chat, that would be really cute. That'd be fun. Let's see each other's smiling happy faces.
I'd like to have faces to attach to some of these names and avatars that I've been seeing a lot of.
I look less like Thor than I wish I did. You don't have to find clothes. You could just sort of
get like a head and shoulders shot. Or you could just flex and send us a pex up. Yeah. We're down
with that. What are you looking for? I was looking for mine, but I'm lazy and can't find it. You
can't find yourself. Oh, because I'm probably not. You're not online. It's being existential.
Alexa, stop. You're not on this podcast, lady. Alexa, stop. See, this is the sort of thing that
if we were recording, we wouldn't put a time stamp and cut it out. That happens a lot too. Yeah.
It's like we get a random Alexa interruption like almost once a podcast. I thought it was going to
start again because we used as soon as I said it. I was like, I do not invoke the devil. No, thanks
for your picture. Yeah. Awesome. Sharper. No smile, but white in the pictures. I can see why you
use the avatar. He was saying something. You asked for a smile, but this is all I can do. Okay.
Is that you right now? I think this picture was taken about two months ago.
Johnny. Johnny. You look way different than I was picturing. I know I've seen pictures of Johnny
before somewhere. Oh, yeah, the Gilda servants who was in a video chat once. I was like, that's
Johnny. Johnny also kind of wanted to apologize to you that one time we were playing among us,
and I was like, oh my God, you're so annoying. I just learned how to play. But that was kind of
mean of me. I'm sorry. I was just trying to learn how to play and have a good time. But as soon as
you stopped doing your thing, I was like, I now understand exactly why Johnny was doing that
because we are losing horribly without his guidance.
I discovered the among us discord because it's a little more, they launched a new level. Oh,
thank God. Johnny says, rest assured, I literally had absolutely no memory of that event. And
yeah, I've apologized to my sister for things that we did once when I was like seven. I was racing
down the hallway against you and you were going to pass me. So I held out my hand to push you
back. And she's like, what the fuck are you talking about, man? I don't remember any of this.
So yes, I'm glad to hear that. Her name is always crazy on point. Oh, cool. Yeah. We just did the
amazing. It was it was going to be fade from red to bubblegum pink, but it turned out just really
vibrant pink. It's really awesome. Hey, I'm like a shirt. I'm not sure if there's more words on
there, but I like a shirt that just says life. Oh, that's the first time I've seen April. I feel
like I've seen April before, but I don't remember. But it might have actually been the last time,
like a million years ago that we did a live episode. We tried to have a video or okay,
maybe it was just the fact that your face used to be here. That's yeah, I could be it. Yes,
you now exist. I don't. Yeah, in my head, it's always been the the picture, the cartoon picture
that someone drew after the whole mindscape, Minecraft debacle. But I know that was fairly
recent. I don't know why I can't remember the picture was before. Yeah, well, oh, that's a fun
one. Yeah, I'm not sure if it was intentionally. Evelyn, your halo is showing in that picture.
Did you mean to expose yourself? It looks pretty cool. Oh, April says she had a profile picture
change on a daily basis for a bit. That's probably why when they change frequently, I just
drops out of my head. God damn, I've been trying to dress sharper. Yeah, I've been trying. One of
the things I learned during the Guild of Servants is that fashion is something I should focus on
and is easier than I thought. So I've been trying to dress better, but you've been looking good.
I appreciate it, but not that good. Very few people are as good looking as Koi, that is known.
Or at least those of us who have seen pictures of Koi. Because ear mod is crazy about a sharp
dressed man. Yeah, we should get together and have a Guild, not a Guild, a discord karaoke night.
That would be so fun. That would be great. But we'd have to fly everybody out here and that would
be expensive. I'm sure there's digital karaoke. Digital karaoke is bullshit. I've never actually
done karaoke. It's like having digital sex. It doesn't count. No comment. I feel like there's
a lot more related to digital karaoke. You get what I'm saying. It's a closer to the real experience
than digital sex would be, right? You're still singing. I don't know. Maybe. Digital sex has
gotten pretty good if you have the VR hookup thing. I was thinking...
Porn leading the way for technology every day. Ever since...
There was a David V David Harry Loki once, April says.
That is a really good shape. Porn has been pushing technology for a long fucking time.
This is true. Since the days of... Gosh, even before photography, even printing was used for Porn.
A long fucking time indeed.
Fine. I get it. I feel like those sex dolls are getting more and more realistic and
is going to lead the way for us having glycerin robots.
I have a 75% confidence that the first truly sentient humanoid robot will be a sex bot.
Probably. Wow. You think?
I think. I think someone can have a more emotionally fulfilling experience with their sex bot.
Yeah. Don't be wrong. There might be sentient...
There will probably be sentient intelligences outside of sex bots first.
I think the first time someone shows one into a human-looking body will be for a sex thing.
April, I find your comment interesting.
I feel like digital sex gets the most meaningful parts of it across from me.
Someone just uploaded a picture of Steven that's been photoshopped with him holding Mjolnir.
Oh, yes! See, this is the fun part about posting photos.
Sorry, I did not mean to interrupt you, Charlie. I just had to laugh.
That's awesome. Best ever. We love it.
Steven, I think the Chinese are getting ahead of your idea.
Sassy bot, huh? Oh. That's amazing.
In China, a sassy bot is stealing millions of men's hearts.
It's also recording their most intimate desires and emotions.
I want to read the article. That sounds super interesting.
Is it financially dominating them as well? Because I highly suspect it will.
There's a kind of a Rick and Morty-style show called Solar Opposites.
They just had its second season come out on Hulu.
And I think in the first season, they make a digital...
Like they make a robot wife thing so that they can have a man cave.
And part of having a man cave is having a wife that hates you having a man cave.
When they realized that was an important part of it, they made the wife.
And then the one that's voiced by Dan Harman.
Like really gets off on it, demeaning him, putting him down.
And the other one really likes the safe mommy aspect of it.
It's really funny.
Cool. Man, um... Robofamdom.
I remember that, Johnny. You're the best.
I wish I was... My only downside is that I was not the least bit articulate during that explanation.
And I've thought about that most recently, like in the last week.
Because I was like, God, I wish I'd done a better job.
Because I remember the force theme there.
I sort of think it's much funnier.
Like I haven't heard this, but I'm just imagining like...
I haven't heard it either.
Johnny, if you have it, will you post the link?
Layton, which one are you?
The Stephen explaining...
Base theorem.
Yes, thank you.
I couldn't read it from the start word.
You're on the right. Cool.
Further record, I think I am more...
I think I am capable of explaining it more articulately if I...
Where are you in that photo?
Yeah, Layton, where are you guys?
It says me on right.
Oh, you mean what location?
Yeah, I mean in the background.
Possibly Grand Canyon-y.
Is that...
Really sweet.
That pole says something.
Oh, Devil's Peak.
There we go.
There's got to be more than one Devil's Peak in the world.
There definitely is, huh?
Okay.
Not just my boobies when they're cold.
It's like every culture has their own dark forest or black forest.
Well, good.
April said that it's really funny for me totally bungling it,
which, yes, as long as it's funny,
then that is the most important part.
So, cool.
It's peak logger.
Oh, so it could have been anywhere.
The force of...
I may be able to just get it to play in this thing.
It wouldn't pick up on the record.
Oh, it might pick up on the record.
I think I might be able to get it to...
Oh, no, it won't let me.
I'm actually kind of relieved.
I don't want to hear my voice.
Tragic, tragic.
Everyone else can just go separately, listen to that link.
Yeah.
Oh, it's like a hat and a person.
Oh, yeah.
We love fuzzy kitties.
Oh, my God.
What a cute cat.
It's fun seeing the community.
Was this your idea, Jace,
to give people to start sharing their pictures or was it Charlie?
I think it was Charlie.
Well, thank you.
Yeah, this is fun seeing people.
Someone...
It is really nice.
I feel more connected.
Just seeing your faces.
It's very helpful.
I don't remember who,
but someone said earlier that we should do these sorts of live episodes
more than once every two years.
I don't think it's been two years.
It's been like a year and a half, right?
I don't think that's what they said, but...
It's been a long time since we were out.
Yeah.
I mean, I like them, but I also feel like the...
We don't want to burn out on them either.
Right.
The regular core of the thing is the episodes.
And if we just did this all the time,
people would get bored real quick.
Just saying, you know, Patreon exclusive.
Oh, should we have a Patreon exclusive?
Live episode every six months or something?
I was thinking every one or two, but...
That would be way too much money.
I was just amazed that you weren't thinking,
well, first, how can I monetize this?
See, I'm really bad at business stuff.
I don't know about brand management.
I don't know about monetizing things.
So this is different than usual content.
This won't be as much fun to listen to as it was to participate in.
So...
Yeah.
I wouldn't want to torture the average listener
with this once every five episodes or something, right?
Right.
Yeah, this seems like the kind of thing
it's really fun to participate in,
but listening to this would be like...
People just saying random things.
So for the 95% of our listeners
that are listening to this after it's been recorded,
you're welcome.
Oh, over there.
Hey, don't put yourself down.
Man, I was looking at...
There's a Reddit called...
Dude, you're just channeling Samwise right now in the photo.
Yeah, there's a big Samwise vibe.
Yep.
There's a...
Okay, there's this Reddit that was...
I think it's called like Everyday Nudes or something like that.
I'm going to view Samwise as an amazing man.
Sorry, there was a what?
Canon.
There's a...
Yeah, there's this Reddit called it.
I think it's Everyday Nudes where people were encouraged
to just post casual pictures of themselves
nude to encourage body positivity and show what...
Oh, that sounds terrible.
Even hot people don't look good nude if they aren't posing.
Well, that's kind of the idea.
They're trying to normalize what actual human bodies look like.
We have a 10-minute argument about that.
Yeah, she's not a fan.
You know what's on the next Worth the Candle episode.
I was looking at this and there's so many people
who are posting pictures and posting them with these like,
Ha, here's my flabby ass self.
Or like, sorry to make you have to look at that.
And I was just like, oh, guys, you're all valid humans.
With those pictures that were posted earlier of the three of us,
I was like, oh man, I really wish I had some kind of
makeup person come through beforehand.
I did like see that picture and go, oh man,
I wish I'd like set up straight and not like grin like a gremlin.
But you know what, that's me.
Oh, that is how you spell that sort of segue, I think, right?
I don't know how to spell it, but...
I thought they intentionally misspelled it for the...
For the...
Oh, segue.
Yeah.
And that makes sense.
But yeah, this and we are going to keep it that way.
Steven, you're not allowed to say that word
for the rest of this episode.
Very well.
Okay, we have to have at least...
I did say, say, you, does that count?
No, it does not.
So speaking, you know, as you mentioned,
or someone mentioned when the first picture came out
that your hair looked like a Victorian wig that was dyed brown.
Yeah.
In person, it looks more like Keanu Reeves from like the 90s,
like Point Break style.
Cool.
Yeah.
If only the rest of me looked like Keanu Reeves in Point Break.
Do you look like Keanu Reeves?
I mean, like, I've heard multiple people say that.
It's true.
Like, I guess if you squint and tilt your head or something,
but it's not like...
My ex couldn't remember your name
and used to refer to you as that Keanu Reeves looking Motherfucker.
Nice.
I always like when a description of me ends with Motherfucker.
I always read this in Portuguese.
What does that sound like?
Unfortunately, no one in this room does Portuguese.
Steven...
Do I talk about Avengers too much, guys?
No, no.
You don't talk about Avengers enough.
My constantly mentioning it
is more of like a self-aware meme at this point.
Like, I deliberately make it part of like my online character.
It's like how every single video has to have super easy,
barely inconvenience, or people start posting angry comments.
Right.
It's not the same as Spanish at all.
The way it's silent.
It's silent, eh?
What are we going to do like 20 years from now
when Marvel stops making movies?
I guess that's never going to happen, is it?
Probably not, but also find the next thing to look at, right?
That just occurred to me.
We'll probably have Marvel movies for the rest of time now.
I mean, if they put this quality,
like the TV shows blew me away, so...
Because like, they started with superhero comics way back,
I guess in the 40s, when they started getting big,
and they just haven't stopped since then,
and now that has infected movies.
In fact, it's the wrong word because it makes it sound bad,
but now that has also blessed the movies.
Expanded onto the screen, yeah.
John mentioned cowboy movies.
I think it would be really cool if somebody like
managed to reboot cowboy movies.
They did with the Mandalorian.
Yeah, that's a good point.
Yeah.
I want more space westerns, actually.
I love space western.
Space western.
This is the way.
Oh, my God.
Everyone just had a collective sigh in their hearts
for Firefly season 2.
Firefly, and...
Well, I can't remember the name of the anime.
Cowboy Bebop.
Yeah.
But Cowboy Bebop finished their run.
Yeah, it was good.
Johnny, Mandalorian very much takes place
in the western hemisphere of space.
Can I give you that?
Oh, well.
I think we're running out of steam.
Yeah, I think we should wrap it up.
We're closing in on three hours here.
Yeah.
There's a lot of fun, everybody.
Thanks for hanging out.
And now it's more personal.
Yeah, this was great.
Thanks, everybody.
Rather than just saying thanks, everybody,
into the void.
It's talking to actual people.
All right.
So you can actually say it this time.
Many of whom's faces I know.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thanks for this nice garden of rationality.
Aw, thanks, man.
Thank you for helping be in it and turn the soil
or whatever the correct metaphor is.
We literally could not have done this without y'all.
Always a pleasure.
Or we could have, but it would have been much more,
much sadder.
Johnny says, this is apparently my ideal comedic format.
Typing while people are podcasting.
He can do like the Mystery Science Theater 3000 podcast.
Hey.
Hey.
That's a great picture, Gad.
That is wonderful hair as well.
He looked very shocked or something.
That is anime hair.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Cool.
Well, it was nice to meet you all.
Yeah.
Everybody's saying thank you and bye,
and thank you and bye too, everybody.
And I guess that's it.
Yeah.
This is great.
Cool.
We'll be back to our-
Call me home.
Call me home.
We'll be back to our regularly scheduled content
in two weeks.
All right.
Well, two weeks and three days, I guess,
since we'd normally release on Wednesdays.
Oh, yeah.
But for the people who are not listening to this live,
in two weeks.
If they made it to the end of the episode.
That's true.
Yeah.
All right.
Oh, my God.
Thanks again, everybody.
Okay, bye.
Bye.
Aloha a hui hou kakou.
