Welcome to the Basing Conspiracy. I'm Nini Ashbrotsky. I'm Stephen Zuber, and we have
two guests today. I am Vivian Cape. And I'm Katrina Stanton. My Katrina, you have changed
quite a bit. A little bit, I guess. How do you feel about animal rights, Katrina? Who
cares about animals? What? Alternately, you guys can call me Cannonball Jenkins. Cannonball
Jenkins. I think that's a SpongeBob reference. I'm not sure, but all right, we can go with
that. I never watched SpongeBob. I was not. Mini McWeberman Jenkins or something wasn't
that it like is really. Yeah, well, they just keep changing it. It's something Jenkins and
toward the end it's Cannonball Jenkins. Okay, Leeroy. Anyway, so I'm Katrina Stanton. Yeah,
no. Fantastic. Call you Leeroy. All right. We're going with Jenkinses. That's my favorite
one. Okay, cool. Cool. I'm ready. Cannonball. Let's dive in. So we brought you in here because
we want to do an episode on spirituality and rationalism or I hate the word spirituality
because it sounds so fruity and New Age and like, yeah, exactly. We'll have to touch on
that. Yes. But you had, was it just this last solstice? God, that was seven months ago
now. Well, not the last solstice. Last winter's solstice was seven months ago. Yeah, well,
no one celebrates the summer solstice. We tried or maybe you guys don't celebrate the summer
solstice. Okay, well, definitely celebrate the summer solstice. So no one cool. It's just
more of a summer solstice. More of an outdoorsy, you know, like naked dance to the sun god.
Yeah, right. Depends where you are. But on our last winter solstice, you were trying to do the
solstice ritual thing that some some rationalist groups have been trying to do throughout the
country. I suggested we do something similar to the Bay Area solstice and kind of follow
their sorts of guidelines, I suppose, that they had. I was I was going to, you know, push very
lightly on it. I don't I wasn't I didn't have like a lot of plans for like singing in groups or,
you know, like holding hands and passing around dark chocolate, which I think is actually something
they do. But yeah, it was more just like, I wanted a time when like, I could read something,
you know, to a group, and then somebody else could read something. And then we could all
sit and reflect on the thing we read. And then, you know, go back to doing whatever else we were
doing before. You know, maybe dim the lights even or or or wear a funny hat. But but nothing
like too crazy, I think. And I think yeah, I just wanted to weigh on that. I like my I'm getting
like this sense of revolutions too strong of a word, but like repellents to that whole thing. And
that was what I expressed when we were initially talking about it like last October. Well, that's
what I got from pretty much everybody when I discussed it. And I was like, okay, well, then
this is not really the right time or place or group. Well, what we went for it, we had like a
party, but it wasn't like the same. I mean, so that's what I was going to get as like if you said
nothing too crazy, if holding hands and reading books with weird hats on isn't too crazy. I'm
wondering where that line where the line is. I mean, well, there's like, you know, the you
know, any sorts of blood rituals or, or, you know, okay, that's definitely crazy. Yeah,
sacrifices, rational circles. No, I don't think so. Yeah, not really much of anything, but it's
more about the, you know, having a group experience was what I was looking for, right? So it's like,
you know, we all drawn to this whole rationality thing in one way or another. For me, it's mostly
because I was reading, you know, I read the sequences and a bunch of Scott Alexander stuff,
and I thought they were really important and really interesting. So I wanted to connect with
the people that did that. So any form of connection that I thought it could be interesting was one
that I was willing to pursue. But I mean, it ended up just being a party and that was fun.
I enjoyed that. I seem to recall there was also a tapestry. Oh yeah, I brought a tapestry to cover
up a television because I don't like screens. I think that was part of the ritual. Well, I suppose
so. We did a book exchange, which I don't know if that was part of the intended ritual or not,
but that's that's the kind of ritual I can get behind. Yeah, well, that's for sharing of knowledge.
Katrina and the other Katrina, rather. I think like, I came up with a bunch of ideas and she
came up with a bunch of ideas. And we ended up doing like one of them. Because I think the book
exchange was the one that people felt like the least creeped out about, right? And specifically,
Katrina's husband, who like, it was hosted at Katrina's house. Katrina's husband was like,
I don't like the idea of any sort of ritual anything. And like, as soon as that happened,
I was like, okay, it's dead. Like, I'm not going to try and push against that because, you know,
it's in his house. I'm happy to respect that. It wasn't. Yeah, I think that's that's the main
reason you're having me on, because I'm not immediately repulsed by ritual. And that's
interesting to you guys, right? Kind of. Yeah. Okay. That's one third of the reason. Okay. The
other one was I laughed at you guys for for having Taran on as kind of a pseudo authority on psychedelics.
And we can get into that later. And I was like, Hey, if anybody's going to be the drug authority,
like, look at the guy who looks kind of like a wizard, maybe first, like, by the way, those of
you listening, I look kind of like a wizard. I try not to judge people based on outward appearances.
Picture Jesus, but if Jesus showered and wore t-shirts, if Jesus showered occasionally. Yeah.
Yeah, I did shower it this morning. So that's
yeah. So I don't know what was the motivation was just to like get a sense of belonging with
other people. So group bonding is part of it, right? So rituals are great for group bonding.
Secondly, it's just it's nice to have a group experience. Just, you know, try to create some
sort of powerful experience, whether it be through music or dancing or or art or or whatever,
just a group project or or anything like that. Having powerful experiences is
something I usually try to to do, I suppose. I'm curious, Vivian, would you have gone to
this ritual thing if you had known about it and been invited? It depends on the parameters.
With attending ritual, there has to be a sense of purpose and a sense of commitment to it.
Because if you if you spring ritual on people, they tend to react poorly
or react well, depending on what's going on. Like, for example, if you're at a concert,
that's basically a ritual. And people go there, they're like, I'm here, I'm expecting to
participate in this in some way or another. And I'm down for that. If you turn the concert into
like a mass or something, and they're like, wait, wait, I didn't sign up for this, guys. Why are
we kneeling? Oh, God. Is that why you wouldn't participate in the Welcome Tonight, feel thing?
Yes, actually, the Oh, so quick setup for the audience. I we went to the Welcome Tonight
Veil show, All Hail, which was fantastic. And I highly recommend it to everyone wrote a blog
post about it. But it felt to me kind of like a combination of modern sort of like meta tongue
and cheek ritual, and also like audience participation, really, I love going to the
Renaissance Festival for the same reason. They have a lot of audience participation in those
things. I love yelling back and doing things on cue and whatever, and like doing it with
everybody else at the same time. It's not as much fun. And there's only one or two people
doing it. That's pretty much that is. Somebody that loves, maybe a little bit, but I'm going to
get to as to why it also freaks me the fuck out. But no, in Welcome Tonight feel, it was just fun
stuff. It was like, we are hailing the glow cloud and shit. And it's a joke, but we all did it
together. And I felt a sense of like community and bonding with people. It was really fun.
And I was like, you're not doing the thing to Vivian because she was sitting next to me. And
she was like, yeah, I don't participate in ritual unless I have decided to do that beforehand
or something along those lines, right? Yes, very much so. It when you're doing audience
participation stuff, it's very important to consider the intent of it. And in this particular
case, it was very playful. It was this very like group bonding kind of thing. But it was making
me feel like there was intent and purpose behind it that I wasn't 100% committed to. Therefore,
I didn't feel like I was able to participate fully in it and comfortably.
Two things really quick. I wanted to get out one. Welcome to Night Vale is a weird podcast for
those of you who are super out of the loop. And weird is maybe operative. I wouldn't say it's
please explain it to me. Oh, really? No, yeah, I have no idea. I would mention 50% of the people
who are familiar with podcasts are familiar with Welcome to Night Vale. But for those we are assuming
we're not, it's actually sort of like Garrison Keeler meets the X files. And it's this very quirky
LGBT friendly kind of like weirdness in the middle of the desert. And you kind of just go
with it and you slowly learn about the people and start to care about them and their weird,
weird ways. Yeah, it's billed as a community radio show for a very small desert community
called Night Vale. But it is really bizarre and kind of like surrealist absurdist kind of existential
horror lots of the times, but also in a laughing at ourselves sort of funny way. Like we're all
going to die. Let's have some fun before we do like Twin Peaks meets Rick and Morty. Yes. Yes. Yeah.
Yeah, I got it. I listened to it for like a year and it's still going like what every week?
Twice a month. Yeah. Many years behind. But it's I mean, it was it was fun. I don't know. I would
say that. Okay, so Welcome to Night Vale. I only think like maybe one out of every four episodes
is good. But I consider it worth listening to for those one out of every four because when
you do get those they're really good. And more importantly, it gives you the background context
to attend the awesome touring ritual that they do once or twice a year because I really love their
live shows right on. Yeah, we went to one. Yeah, a few years ago. That might have been. I think I
was slightly out of the loop at that point, but I was roughly that's where I don't want to fall off.
Anyway, I also, unless I'm derailed too far for you to remember your points already. I also was
curious, will you keep using this word ritual to encompass everything from like bloodletting to
going to a concert? And I feel like that's way too broad. Is it though? Huh? Yes. I'm I'm
prepared to say the word is useless if it encompasses everything from animal sacrifice to
listening to music in group. Well, the thing is, is it applies to groups and it applies to how people
operate in groups. The point of ritual is to share intent. And so if you're sacrificing an animal,
for example, and I hope none of our listeners are, you're called barbecue. I'm vegetarian. All right.
The barbecue is a specific type of animal sacrifice. That's actually a very good point.
But if you're participating in a ritual with an intent, for example, I'm gonna I'm stuck on the
barbecue thing now. Thank you. If you're performing this ritual to get food and also to share community
with members of your family and friends and maybe people you don't like, but you invite it anyway,
there's a purpose behind it and there's a thought concept behind it that forms the
framework of the people's interaction. And so when you say, Hey, I'm going to have a barbecue,
people know what to expect and know how they're going to participate. Well, other than like the
fact that you guys also like, I think jumped around a bit with like animal sacrifice there. If I went
to barbecue and they killed the animal in front of me, I'd be kind of turned off, right? Right.
It is not the ritual you were signing up for. Does a ritual need to have more than one person?
Yes. Well, no. So I mean, I can definitely think of examples in my head that archetypally fit one
person morning rituals, but I can think of things that I do, you know, every day with intent that
I don't think are rituals like I brush my teeth so they don't fall out. I don't do it as some,
you know, for the same reason that people go to concerts or whatever, right? So or sacrifice
animals. There's this fantastic article slash post. I don't even know what to call things on the
internet anymore over at melting asphalt where someone does go into the aspects of ritual and
makes lots of different comparisons, things like meditation, listening to live music in a crowd,
that sort of thing, singing in a choir, being all around a fire and telling a story and says that
the thing they all seem to have in common is that you sort of subsume your sense of self and more
feel like you're one with the community and with the people that are around you and that's
the actions too. And that seems to be the purpose of ritual that humans have this sort of built in
software for being able to cooperate with other humans and do things in groups and rituals are
a way of helping to reinforce that and, you know, say this is the group that I want to do things with
and I will cooperate with them and together we can make more, you know, awesome things and you
can't seem to do it like that well through rationalist means. I mean corporations do exist and they
motivate people with money and fear of starving to death, but they don't work as well as groups that
have that deep social bonding and trust, which is why the military has, you know, their basic
training where they break you down and a lot of groups oftentimes all wear the same uniform or
something to help make them all feel together like a single entity. It's sort of a call sign and
whatnot. Yeah, a call sign. It's a way to help build the hive mind to be part of a community.
Well, I mean, your point with corporations that that seems kind of weird. I mean, corporations
are usually consist of a much larger number of people than like Dunbar's number. Dunbar's number
is like 150. That's supposed to be like the, you know, about whereabouts the number of people that
we can actually like simulate in our own mind of like, this is how this person acts, etc.
So I'd say that that's not too surprising that that corporations aren't as functional as like
small military groups of 50 guys or something, right? Yeah, but like large military groups work
too. We've managed to make it a whole military because they're broken up into, you know, groups of
like 50 or so. I don't know. Anybody that has been in the military is probably laughing at me
for not knowing how large. I believe eight is a squad size. Maybe seven. I don't know. Sorry. I mean
concerts have more than 150 people, but the intimate concerts have a different feel to them than
like larger concerts. So if you're at like a small venue kind of thing, like the Welcome Night Vale
show or whatever, there were maybe more than I feel is medium sized by now. Oh yeah, that's true,
but like 300 people are ish-esque. And so if you go to that and in contrast, going to like a very
large concert, you don't feel that same level of intimacy. You don't feel that same level of
like crowd participation. I should just close. I've been to one concert. It was like 12 years ago
and I didn't have any fun. So yeah, I hate all the things that really turn me off, even like as
much as like the like get together and lose your sense of self with a community like that doesn't,
that's not something that I've ever been comfortable with or enjoyed. I've attempted to dance like
three times. Oh, you should try dancing. Dancing is really fun. I can't. I have no rhythm or groove.
You don't have to go to more concerts and then you'll develop some rhythm and groove,
and then maybe you'll learn how to dance. I mean, I mean, this isn't one way to cost. Well,
I mean, dancing is like this really basic human thing that I feel like everybody should do,
even if it's like square dancing or something. Yeah, but like I'm going to throw out that like
that, not everything that humans bait that base humans do. No, no, no. I'm not equating the two.
I'm just saying that you can't use that as a persuasive argument. I read a criticism,
which I wish I had the source for it because all I have is the actual criticism now. But
someone was taking basically Steven's view that my position is that a longing for community or to
be part of a whole is unhealthy, as is indulging in it. It's why we can't have nice things because
that's how people establish political power and motivate their bases. And you are not a hunter
gatherer who will die if you're separated from your tribe. Religious rituals are communitarian
super stimuli that we should avoid weighing in. That's not necessarily my position. My position
is much softer than that. And I personally don't like doing that stuff. Okay, if other people
want to do stuff, I'm not going to be like, Hey, you guys are, you know, worse than religions and
all that stuff. It's just that never appealed to me. I was emailing someone who went to one of the
solstice rituals in a different city. And she said that she just felt and I think this is one of
the reasons that I get squicked out. Like when you propose your ritual thing, I was like,
you know, I'm all for you doing whatever you want. If you know, Katrina's okay because it's
our house or wherever you want to do your thing, but I'm probably not going to participate because
for me, like religion, partly I always felt like an outsider. And any sort of that sort of
religious ritual or space makes me feel immediately like this is not a place I should be. I have a
strong psychological, this is a bad and run away aspect to it. Did you never like take communion
in church or anything? Did they do that? Jehovah's Witnesses are a fairly young
religion in the grand scheme of things about a century or so. They don't have a lot of ritual.
They're their main. Sacraments or the, you know, no, no sacraments. Their main ritual is going
from door to door and telling people about Jesus. Have you heard the good news? Yeah,
exactly. Right. It's not a good ritual. Okay. So more importantly, as the person who was making
the counter also pointed out, ritual and that sort of communitarian mindset is often used for
evil things. And lots of times like the Catholic church being a great example, you managed to
unite these people and give them a common purpose. And then a small minority of power hungry people
managed to take control and pervert that purpose and use it to their ends instead. And that is my
main objection to like ritual things is I don't trust any of these motherfuckers. And by any of
these motherfuckers, I mean any of you either. Why am I subsuming myself into this collective hole?
And I don't necessarily believe that you have my best interests at heart. So briefly return to
the night veil thing. That's my problem with the night veil thing. Okay. See, I was much more
comfortable with them, which is weird. Okay. It was really weird because I know you don't like
ritual. And I'm like, this is actual ritual. I don't know what the intent is behind it. I have
not agreed to participate in this. And I don't know how I am going to be affected or choose to
affect others through it. Yeah, but you listen to the show too, right? Yes. Don't you get the
intense impression that they're just here to like tell a good story and let people have fun? Yes,
but I didn't want to become one of those people that just subsumes to the ritual without
understanding it. Okay. That accidentally loads your way into fascism. Okay. Pretty much not really
actually. I mean, not that exact thing, but yes. And yeah, that's sliding down that slippery slope.
I'd say you guys are being careful to the point of missing out on like important,
nice experiences, right? So Vivian is nodding. So we're on microphones. You have to actually make
a noise. I have to nod to agree. I agree. Affirmative. Word.
So to go back to like the whole communion thing, back, I was raised in a Christian household,
like a lot of atheists, honestly. So I mean, we did the whole Ash Wednesday thing. We did the whole
Good Friday, Easter, and you know, each one of those religious holidays had their own thing.
I remember Christmas Eve service, there was always a really great, we'd all shake our
keys and sing, come on, ring those bells like the Christmas tree. It's this hilarious song
that we only sang at the one church service. And I really enjoyed it, right? So it's supposed
to be a joke with the keys. Well, it's your bells. You're ringing bells. Can you go and buy like a
one dollar bell? You could, but that would be wasteful. That's money you could give to the church.
Right. Everyone has keys on them. So do literally anything else with it and not throw
bells in the garbage tomorrow. But bells are so cool. You should keep them around your house.
Yeah, slave bells. I mean, a few people had slave bells and they'd bring them.
Cool. I like those people.
But yeah, just like the basic like communion thing, I think that happened like every other week.
So while I was a believer, I really enjoyed that, right? I mean, that was a nice experience that,
you know, it was usually, most of those were like fairly solemn. Some of the, you know,
the bells won. That was, you know, happy and cheerful and it's like, yeah, it's Christmas time.
And, you know, while I'm a kid where I, you know, I'm into the whole Jesus loves me sort of thing,
that was really enjoyable. I like that. And now that I'm not a believer, I can't really
participate in those specific rituals anymore because I don't believe in any of that crap.
Like, I mean, I don't want ashes on my face and, you know, but I feel kind of robbed,
like I'm missing something because I don't have any form like that. So I don't know.
So I go to a lot of concerts, like a lot, a lot more when I was working instead of being in school,
but I have a very similar feeling to yours. I do feel like I have sort of a religious mindset,
even though I'm not a religious person. I just have that mental architecture that it works with.
You have a Jesus sized hole in your heart. Not in my heart. It's somewhere in the brain.
In your heart. Jesus shaped. But the thing, I mean, I would like to have those rituals,
but when you're a kid and your parents say, trust me, obviously you do trust your parents,
and they say you can trust these people. So you transfer your trust to the church.
And so you have all that trust naturally just built up as a child. Now that I'm an adult and
people are like, Hey, come do this ritual of trust with me. No, I have, I don't know why I would
do that. I have no reason to trust you. You have to break me down like in a basic training.
What if you do trust them though? Like you spent enough time with them and they're not asking you
something interesting like, here, let me read you this story. I think you'll find it, you know,
as powerful as I did when I first read it. Have you ever read Howl? Yeah, right, right. So
do you remember how you felt the first time you read that? I'm not a big fan of Howl specifically.
I really like that. No, no, no. There is a, well, in general, I'm not that big a fan of poetry,
but there is a poem. I absolutely like howl structure. I love the God. I wish I'd gotten
ready. There once was a man from Nantucket, right? No, so big a fuck it. No, but the one, you know
the poem, go not into the dying of the light. Robert Frost. That's Robert Frost. Yes. Oh,
okay. That's a very specific type of poem structure, which I just discovered recently,
and those are beautiful and amazing, and I love them. I have one final note. Okay. It was Dylan
Thomas, not Robert Frost. Oh, okay, then that makes much more sense. So that is the one that
really touched. So yeah, so would you be really opposed to being around a bunch of friends that
you already know from a different context that you're just used to hanging out with and having
somebody read things or you reading one of those that you're like, hey, this is really important
to me. Let me share it with you guys and see if you guys react to it the same way I did or what
not. I mean, that would be something that's very ritualistic, right? Yeah. And it's not, and I feel
like if you, you know, went from that into some sort of like bloodletting ceremony, that would be
like a bit of a betrayal of trust, right? It's like, hey, I brought you in with like promises of
like interesting reading, and, and, you know, now I'm making something bleed. That's weird.
Then like, yeah, I feel like you have, you have room to be, you know, kind of
weary of that sort of thing. But when, when it's kind of laid out like, hey, we're going to do
this, and then we're going to do that. And then, you know, we'll light a candle. I feel like you
can, you can kind of just deal with that, right? Like what? Why a candle? Yeah. Well, that's not
as efficient dim light. So I mean, really, really, it's for the aesthetic thing. It's the same reason
why you turn down the lights when you're, when you're, you know, doing it. Maybe doing the whole
sex thing. Yeah. Well, yeah. Well, I was just going to say that like, there's a difference between
saying, Hey, let me share this cool thing I like with you. Like, Hey, let's go see Spider-Man
Homecoming this weekend. I think he gets all I really like it and saying, but you all have to
wear white and we're going to hold hands and chant at the end of this thing. Like, so, I mean, there
is a difference in kind between those two things. And I feel like it's being disingenuous to equate
them like saying, yeah, let me share this cool poem with you and doing all this extra. So like,
one of those things makes sense on that level of what you're trying to do, share this cool thing.
And the other thing is like adding a bunch of weird shit on top of it to make it like special
for your in group kind of thing. And that, that's the part that I find. That's the part that makes
it even more powerful, right? If like, say, like after a couple of years, you guys all like this
thing, you're like, wait, now we're going to, we're going to have our like poetry reading hats
that we're all going to wear because we all really like this thing. And we've done it so many times.
We're all going to, you know, we're all just going to do this thing that we do only during
this time, right? It's like, you know, that song that we only sing, you know, for the one year,
right? I feel like having to wear a hat is a good sign that you're becoming a cult. Who cares?
Having to wear a hat, not getting to, saying you can't come if you don't wear your, your sorting
hat is like, turns, turns your like Harry Potter fan club into like, we all have wizard hats all
the time. And yeah, I was just pointed to his literal wizard hat up there. That's cool.
So one of the interesting things about ritual, and I'm agreeing with you that you are, that we
are being a little bit disingenuous, but we're also not discussing how ritual is built. Ritual can
start out with something where you're like, I'm going to get a couple of friends together. We're
going to read a poem or read poetry that we like. And then it can grow from there. And as the years
go on, it turns into the Catholic church. And so I'm many, many years, about 2000, about 2000.
But people build ritual as they find things they want to bring to the experience they're having.
Bring things. Can you expand on that? And I'm not trying to be like,
thick for the purpose of like, making you guys are being articulate. If, if Jesus, or if, if, if
Enyosh has a Jesus sized hole in his brain, I have a poetry sized hole in my brain in that I've
never been the kind of person to appreciate any sort of art that you like. I mean, you don't dance,
you, do you like music? You don't go to concerts. Do you like visual art? I like watching movies and
TV. Movies are cool, right? I mean, I can appreciate a good camera angle and stuff. But like,
I guess what I'm getting at is like, how much, like how angry do you get when somebody's talking
in front of you in the theater? Oh, this is a man that avoids spoilers to the point that he
does not watch trailers. Yeah, I mean, I don't know. I mean, I don't know what that counts as,
as ritual or not. A lot of trailers are really. That's actually a really good metaphor example for
ritual when it comes to cinema, though. And it's not going to see a movie with friends. It's going
to like the 50th anniversary of a movie and being able to like talk on all the lines with everyone
and share that like, we're going to share this experience. Rocky Horror. Yes. Rocky Horror is
a perfect example of this because everyone knows the lyrics. Everyone knows the words. And we go
through and we participate in this and build a community through this, even if it's just for a
moment. I haven't seen Rocky Horror picture show. Oh, that's okay. Maybe because the cultish fandom
deterred me from it. Huh? Yeah. So the whole thing, it's like, it's not a very useful term,
right? So like, there's, there's, um, ritual is sorry. Yeah. I'm coming off more adversarial than
I'm clear. I'm not pro blood ritual. I am pro barbecues. I like, I mean, you consider like
our monthly less wrong meetups to be sort of a ritual. Yes. No, because anyone can wear what
they want. You don't have, we're not holding hands. We don't do a stand up ceremony. We don't,
but they're always on the first Tuesday of the month because it's convenient for a calendar.
Just like I always brush my teeth at night, like not at, not at 10 in the morning because I'm,
you know, at work, right? When we, when we push it back to the second Tuesday, because of the
fourth of July, I was like, aw, that's a little less special this month. I didn't feel that way
whatsoever. I know. Okay. I think I'd have felt maybe that'd be less special if three people
showed up because everyone else is off doing for the July stuff. There were fewer people this month.
Yeah. Well, because like we also often order food and or drinks. We are imbibing the, the
intoxicants as a group. We are taking communion. Can I, can I articulate my thought on that? Is
that we're ordering food and buying drinks because people buy drinks during social things for like,
because it's, I call them social lubricants, but someone laughed at me once. That's why you
imbibe alcohol when in group because it's more, it makes you more relaxed. And we buy food because
it's 7pm. Most of us came from work. So like it's not, if we all bought the same dish and we,
and you couldn't come unless you ordered a white Russian, then it would be really weird, right?
Yeah. So that's what, that to me, that's, that's where I draw the line at ritual. Like when you
have to do this to be part of the club, all you have to do to be part of the less wrong community
to show up and not be a dick. And I'm not going to say that. I order for everybody else because I
have the most refined palate. What would you order out of curiosity? No, you should have something.
What? Oh, no, the, the, the adult mac and cheese is really great. Yeah. Solid. With the black and
chicken. So, you know, all the, the vegans and vegetarians feel really, wouldn't, wouldn't the,
wouldn't the whole context of a very different feel if we had to come in bathrooms and order white
Russians? That would be kind of awesome though. Maybe awesome, but wouldn't it be very different
than what we do? Yeah. So that's what, that's what I mean. All right. Yeah. So I, like, I'm okay with
not calling that a ritual. I don't, I don't mind. So I see your point as far as... I actually am
disagreeing. I think it is a ritual, but I think that you are possibly confabulating. Okay, I'm
going to get really weird here. Right with ritual. That's, I believe that I'm, I'm open to look to hear.
Right are the very formalized, we will do this thing. We will wear the silly how we will say
the sayings kind of thing. Ritual is something that we do to build things. And as I'm a witch,
so as a witch, I use ritual, like intentionally to create things in my life.
Can we get into that in more depth? I don't want to talk about that.
Yeah, that's kind of an interesting thing to drop into a conversation. And I don't know what that
means. Yeah. If it means, or I think it means, you just casually dropped that I can, I can fly,
and I'm one phone call away from winning James Rindy's million dollars.
And I sleep with Satan, which can confirm.
So, okay, there's a little bit of backstory here. So I'm a psychology major and I love hacking
the brain. I think it's really interesting to be like, well, if I do this thing,
how do I feel about that? And how do I perceive the world through this different lens?
Magic is basically that to me. I use ritual to look at the world in a different way.
Can you discuss your methods briefly? Or is there some ceremony involved or we can't talk about it?
No, we all need a hat. And bathrobes. And you need to give me $2,000. So that's
kind of the stuff I expect from ceremony, right? Or from ritual.
I'd like to make it clear that even though I said I look like a wizard, I'm not a wizard here.
So Vivian, please continue. Okay. So it ties into intentionality and putting yourself in the
mind place of being able to think and look at the world in a different way.
So when I do ritual, for example, I use dim lighting, I use candles, I use incense,
because it transforms the world that I am used to into a world that I have created as a ritual space.
So like a darker, smellier room? Yeah.
Okay, that's fine. Just make sure I'm on the right page.
Your olfactory senses are really closely linked to like emotional memory also.
So like if you're trying to create a specific feeling at a specific time and then like you're
only going to do that at a certain time of year or certain, you know, whenever you're doing a
certain thing, like burning incense or a certain type of wood or whatever is actually a really
good way of doing that. Sure. And it trains your brain to be like, okay, brain, when I want to do
this thing, I smell this thing and that is the place where I want to be in my head to be able to
generate what I want out of this scenario. And I'm not saying that I'm going to like suddenly
operate millions of dollars or some random shit like that. That's not how it works.
What magic is for, and I'm sure there are many people on the internet who will disagree with me,
what magic is for is transforming how you see the world and how you participate in it.
So magic is DMT or LSD? That's another question. That's a question for someone else.
But that fits what you're talking about. Yes, I have heard a lot of people say that.
Okay, so it's different than like, I'm going to make this happen by chanting the right words
in front of this circle that I drew. Oh, do me now. Okay, so you painted, I think the word
witchcraft carries quite a bit of weight. So like, because by your definition,
Jenkins is legit a wizard. Kind of, yeah. When I describe the smell of DMT, I literally describe
it as smelling like magic. Like, I don't know how else to describe it. It smells like magic.
Sure. And there's a little bit more to it. I'm oversimplifying it.
I don't use the word magic the way she does at all. I have no idea what she's talking about,
to be totally honest. I'm still very confused. You don't use the word magic in the Harry Pottery
and sense of you make things happen by doing things. No. Okay. No. But it's all psychological.
Why use that word then? Because it's ritual. It's because it ties into the, it's a, it's a
shorthand for what we are creating in this world. And there, there are, there are several schools
of belief that talk about this in different ways. And I'm completely oversimplifying what I'm actually
doing. But I'm going to use the Setian, sort of a part of you for this to just kind of describe it.
The temple of set is an offshoot of the church of Satan. And the Setians believe that, and I'm
going to hope that I'm getting this right. Something along the lines of that you are a God.
And it is your point, it's your point to find out your meaning in life. And so when you use magic,
the point of the magic is to make you the person that you see yourself being in kefir.
And that's basically the point of magic is like this, not, it's going to sound hokey to say it,
but to self actualize and self grow to the person and the, using the power you want to have in the
world. So I mean, I minus a lot of the vocabulary there, a lot of that sounds like things that
are desirable that like most people try to do all the time, right? So like we try to self
actualize and make a difference, become who we're meant to be, that sort of thing. I guess it is
interesting that you'd couch it in turn, like the first premise of the Setian sect of whatever
that you're a God, and it's irresponsible to figure out who you are. I guess how do they come to
that first premise? I mean, it sounds like abuse of God. Like when most people say God,
they mean like a being that can do things that regular humans can't do. Well, I think that's
probably why they use the term because of the, because of the emotional load that comes with it.
It is very empowering to tell someone you are a God. We are all gods. We can affect this world.
I, like some of Yutkowski's favorite, well, some of my favorite of his writings are things that use
very, like not religious, but emotionally charged words. He, when he compared evolution to the
gibbering idiot God Azathoth, I thought that was a wonderful way to make his point. And I'm not just
like speaking it in physical terms. This is what evolution does. And this is how, why, you know,
these things make sense and these things don't, but to actually put it in poetic terms like that
spoke to me on an emotional level. But wouldn't it be like deliberately misleading to obfuscate
and say, now I'm going to just henceforth without any explanation or without any further explanation,
I'm going to start calling evolution God without any caveats. So how many times do we just in our
in group refer to Azathoth instead of evolution? Or what do we refer to Malik when we mean out of
control optimization systems? So Malik is two syllables as opposed to out of control optimization
processes right out of fingers. But no one who hasn't read meditations on Malik and admittedly
probably a dozen posts before that to get the context is going to know what we mean when we
say Malik. Yeah, but I guess we wouldn't necessarily then stick to that word if we're losing people.
We wouldn't say no, no, we have to call him this or we have to call it this. No, we, I mean,
no, we wouldn't stick to it necessarily, but we know that everyone in our group knows what
that means. And so we use it for shorthand for us. Okay, so I think maybe that was my, I mean,
I like invoking Malik and in regular conversation also. And in terms of you are a God, I mean,
but I agree even in that it's like it's really it's not useful as far as getting a point across
to somebody who hasn't read the source material, right? Right. So I think that's one of the
neat things about saying you are a God if you're part of the temple set, because it is specifically
in a Christian culture. And they realize that basically everyone has the same idea of God
as they do. So when they say you are a God, they know that everyone has basically a similar idea
to them. And they can invoke that shorthand when we say we invoke Malik, we can only do it with
our group and people who know that. If we were in a Christian setting, we could reference Jesus or
the cross or something. And everyone would know what we're talking about. Okay, so I think that's
what I'm going to be straight with you, Vivian, that you, I've known that like you called yourself
a witch in the past. And so like that is a very loaded word, and maybe that's part of the goal.
That's very much part of the goal. It's all hacking. It's on what? It's all hacking. Well,
but like it paints the picture of an insane person. And so only because only because this
wasn't the first interaction I had with you, I knew that it must have been something else.
But if that was all I knew about you, you'd be like, Oh, she's insane because insane people are
witches and wizards, right? So in the broadest use of the word. So that's why I feel like the
like the language that you're using is kind of important in that you're missing a lot of people
by. It also depends on your culture. Well, and the thing is, is there's a height. There's a
there's a phrase called anti-nomianism, which I find to be particularly interesting. And it's you
do the thing that will contradict the culture in order to prove it to itself, basically. And I'm
oversimplifying and kind of adding my own spin to it. But when I call myself a witch, I'm doing it
because I think it's funny, because it categorizes some of the stuff that I actually do. And also
because it pisses off Christians. Okay, so I can, those are things I can understand. So like,
you're not the kind of person that people thought they were burning at the stake 400 years ago.
I actually probably would be. Well, but they thought there were burning people who are casting
spells and doing witchcraft, which I do. But you don't do it in the way. See, that's that's where
I'm getting out with like the language problem is that you don't really you're not waving a wand
and casting spells and turning people into cats. And so that's unless you are, I would really like
to that would be fine. Okay, but like so that's that's wanting to actually doing it. That's what
witch burners thought that witches were doing when they set them on fire. So sort of if you look at
I study this particular point of history, I know that I'm oversimplifying it. So like,
I'm probably less less than you. I know that like for the most part, it was never that clear cut,
but like the picture that we have in our heads of like, the person down the streets of which,
because they're casting spells, and you know, making the rain not come or making it come too
much. That's a picture. That's people picture, right? But that's the that's a really interesting
way to look at it, though, because I call myself a witch to defy those who call people witches.
Yeah. And I so I guess I can dig that. But like, by every sense of the way that you're using the
word witch Jenkins is a witch too. Yes. And well, unless he doesn't want to get burnt at the
start. The thing is, is you're using okay, there's a thing called labeling theory in sociology. I'm
also a sociology major, where the label is either applied or inherent. And witchcraft for very long
time has been an applied label, and it's been an applied deviant label. And so when you say,
like, if you were to call Jenkins a witch, you would be like, you would be applying that label
and you'd be applying all the concepts that you had in your head about a witch in that label.
Right. And when I say I am a witch, I am taking that label and saying, I defy you and these things
you assume about me. Yeah. And I so I guess I and I totally understand where you're coming from
and what what you mean by that. Plus it's funny. Yeah, I think maybe that's where like, I mean,
I see how it's funny. But like, it's, you know, and I'm pointing out this is tangentially related
like the the atheist movement realized that atheists had a lot of baggage, they tried to go
with brights for like three years, and it never really could took off. So I can see how they
it was a very small subset that actually wanted to go with brights. Yeah, but it was some of the
big names. It was people who go to conferences and people that people go to conferences to see.
So well, some of the people. Yeah, not obviously all of them. But I mean, there's not much to,
I think, be here except for like, I don't know if, yeah, I mean, I think I'm not sure where we
disagree other than disagreeing. Yeah. So I guess I'm not sure what we're talking about. Well,
the thing is I'm yeah, I'm hearing more. Yeah, the thing that we're kind of talking about is
the application of the label and why I use it. And I use it to a piss people off, be to describe
what I do and see to confuse people because it's funny. Yeah, I certainly get points one and three.
I think two, you only describe to people what you're doing to people who know what you mean when
you misuse the word or when you miss. Yeah, so like that then that's fine. But that's just what
like that's that stream or like it seems like this really needlessly complicated language game
unless everyone's on board at the whole set. They have to buy the whole deck unless they want to
understand everything, right? Some people just got to be contrarians. I'm just saying that
in fairness, I do kind of hate on it a little bit. I'm like, why you got to make things complicated
and difficult. But the reason I also use it is for that second reason. So people that are also
witches are considered themselves as such know that I have a commonality with them. So you have
a commonality with the type of which that you are not somebody who believes that if they really
wanted to, they could cast a Vodka Davra. Unless you do, I have a commonality with them and that
we use the same tools, but I use them intentionally.
Right, like as placebo's without knowing exactly. I mean, and I'm not like saying, you know, I'm
so much better than all those witches out there that believe they can turn people into cats,
you know, because that's absolute bullshit. I think I'm so much better than all those witches
out there that believe that they can turn themselves in the house. You're a wizard. I'm
prepared to say that as well, and that like I feel like I have a better grasp of my sanity and
reality where like if I felt like I could wave up a stick and make stuff happen, like then I would
be doing that, right? I wouldn't just say I could and just never do it. I mean, my go-to weapon has
always been James Randi's million dollars, the JRF million dollar paranormal challenge. It's like
if you could do anything magic and you can demonstrate it under or if you could do anything
paranormal supernatural occult and demonstrate it under controlled test conditions, you get
a million dollars. So somebody who is like, Oh yeah, I could do that. I just don't really need
a million dollars, right? So like those are the people that I, they're okay with like this huge
inconsistency in their head that I'm prepared to say that like I would, I am not okay with those.
I feel like that's a better place to be. Well, I think you're confabulating the people who
say they're witches and the people who believe they're witches, which I know I definitely am.
Because why would you say you are? I'm making a very, I'm making a probably incorrect distinction
here, so forgive me. But people who honest to goodness believe they are witches in the context
of American Christian society are usually not people who are actual witches. This is going to
sound very like, what's that movie? The, never mind. But people who say, you know, I am a witch,
it's usually like a practice and a way of living your life and way of looking at the world.
Rather than like people are like, I'm a witch and I can turn people into cats for a million
dollars. Those people tend to be delusional. That's sort of like the picture that's painted when
they use that language, right? And so I get going against that and cutting against the grain. I,
I feel like while I often don't have the energy to do that or the inclination, I feel like it's
an important thing to do if only to make people keep things in check for why they're doing the
things they're doing. And it's also a religious sort of practice as well. I tend to dislike the
word religion to a large extent because I grew up Catholic and my family is incredibly capital C,
capital A, capital everything, Catholic. And when you look at paganism and witchcraft as a religious
form of looking at a life, it becomes a very different thing. It becomes more than just I'm
going to turn people into cats. And I was using that as a shorthand. I'm also using it as a shorthand.
All right. So I think we're on the same page. This is great. I'm really, I'm really enjoying
this. I feel like this is, I mean, it's certainly cleared up where you, where I knew you couldn't
have been coming from because I talked because I've spoken with you. But yeah, that was well.
So now that we've had a big kumbaya moment, what can we use spirituality or and or ritual for
in more rationalist circles, powerful experiences? Yes. Yeah. I don't know if we're ready to move
to that. Did you have anything you wanted to add to like, because we were talking about like, I don't
feel like I was a part of that conversation. I didn't really literally open the book.
Yeah. No, that's fine. Well, I don't know. It was I'm not calling myself a wizard, except in
jest. Sometimes when I when I dress up like one or something, which which I think it's fun. I
think people should have wizard robes in their home, like just to have. I thought a really charged
example I could use here. Oh, I could be like, oh, I'm going to read the word pedophile because
I love children. I love people. And I'm going to go against that nasty use of the word. That's
actually really interesting because it talks about this people off. Most of the boxes you're
checking. You can't. You can't. And it's how labels are used in the value and doing either one of
those is what I was. I think that's why I opened the book is I don't see the value. But apparently
you do. I it doesn't bother me enough that I'm going to like yell at you for it, though. So
what I'm loving about this is these are the two strong ritualists in the room. And I suppose
so. Yeah. Well, there's there's a difference between understanding ritual and understanding
basically religious practice. I know. I just like how you guys came in kind of on the same team.
And now there's some at never on Jenkins team. Oh, yeah, I didn't think I was on her team either.
But I thought that you guys are defending ritual to me who wasn't a big fan. Yeah. I mean, there's
there's not teams, but we talked about how an actual group thinking was. So yeah. But in answer
to the question that any of us was saying powerful experiences. So so we're going to unpack the
pedophile example. But I don't I don't want to. But I think that's a good example. And what would
you like to say about the pedophile example? Well, when you talk about labeling theory,
you're talking about using labels to deviantize groups of people. And so we do that legitimately
with pedophiles to be like necessarily just to deviantize. It's also for all kinds of other
hugely useful things. Yes. But we use them as deviant labels to say that person is dangerous.
So as pedophiles, yes, that person is dangerous. Okay, yeah. But when you reclaim the label,
like in the 1500s of which was dangerous, given certain parameters for if you believe people,
if you believe people might believe, yeah. But now witches aren't dangerous, which is our
pagans or Wiccans or Satanists or whomever who have a specific way of looking at life that
tends to be on our sort of religious plane when dealing with that. And so you reduce the label
to make it less dangerous. Pedophiles are always dangerous. Well, unless I rebrand pedophile
to mean I love all humans, including young humans, no, because there's a difference when you're
looking at something that is dangerous and something that isn't dangerous. I mean, but like
I feel like we play the same sort of language game, like you said, you're casting spells and
doing stuff. Well, I'm loving kids, right? Again, don't take this out of context. I'm making a point.
But you see how like, so that's why I'm not a huge fan of those language games because they
pave the road for exactly that sort of obfuscation. And then if we're able to shift the culture around
the word pedophile, and then all of a sudden loving kids was great because everyone loves kids,
well, then what about like what we mean when we really mean loving kids in the way that we mean
currently for how pedophile kids. To use that, what do you think we really mean when we're talking
about witchcraft? I don't have a succinct definition for it. People who believe they have powers that
they don't actually have. Yeah, so like that label has also changed. Well, I mean, so that I think
I think that Jen considered right on the head, which was my my impression of the of the previously
going into this is the most people who said I'm a witch were people who believed they had magic
powers. And when I hear that, I think of the people that try to sell spells on eBay and like
the standard uses of all those words. So like when you if you want to like rebrand, you know,
four words in that sentence, and and change where basically all the labels are pointing,
then you can get away with something very different. But like I said, I don't see how that
is any different from changing. And maybe there's for the sake of argument, I'm going to to like,
you know, fall back on that pedophile example, right? I don't see where the important difference
is there. Maybe you said something about harm. Yes. Can you expand on that? We use labels
in ways that allow us to describe if someone or some group is dangerous to us as an in group
out group, not necessarily just to us. Pedophiles aren't dangerous to me, but it's dangerous to
look young, but not that young, dangerous to our society. Yes. And that's dangerous.
They're dangerous to us. I mean, just by by like lowering. So like if I go hang out at a park,
looking kind of like a wizard, and I'm like staring at kids a little too long or something
like that. Yeah, that affects me in that sort of way. Just just the fact that they exist.
And our culture is terrified of them. Just kind of assumes that, you know, then then that, you
know, damages me like I like kids. I, you know, I feel pretty comfortable around kids. But like
if one comes up and like gives me a big hug, like I'm going to run away, like, you know,
because even though I don't mind, right? Like I would not mind receiving a hug from a child.
I don't, I don't, that sounds kind of nice on the surface level, right? It's just, you know,
this basic. Sure. People don't dress up as pedophiles for Halloween. Yes, they do. Do they?
Yes. Oh, goodness. Yes. Yeah, Jarrett, the subway was a costume I definitely saw. Oh, that's
disgusting. Yes, they do. My sense of faith in humanity has just been destroyed. Thank you.
Yeah, well, so yeah. We don't have to beat this too much longer. I feel like it was a fairly large
digression, but it was interesting. It was a conversation I wanted to have and I appreciated
having it. I just, so there's a difference. So like this, the language obfuscation game is a game
that is only okay as long as everyone knows they're playing the game and what the rules are,
and they're not doing it to hide something harmful. Yes. Okay. So that's, that's a good
understanding that I can walk away with. And I would think so, yes. Okay. Except if you're
Christian and you really think witches exist and then that's just funny until someone sets you on
fire. I would like to see them try. Do you think you're impermeable to fire? No, I know kung fu.
You bite? I know kung fu. You don't need to be within kung fu range that somebody on fire.
Well, it's hard to set a human on fire. Unless you've got actually really hard to set a human
on fire. We're both slain or wider or wider fluid or all the stuff that you usually get at
Walgreens. Okay. If you're going to really go out of your way, you can set someone on fire.
You go to the grocery store once every couple of weeks. I was thinking like you were,
you were going to try to use a lighter or something. That seems like a lot of work.
I'm all about that lazy path, right? Okay. Air is pretty flammable. Yeah. That's true.
Cleverly. You don't have a lot of it. Maybe that's on purpose.
Fix that. So, so going back to the using ritual because it gives you experiences.
Powerful experience. Powerful experiences. Yeah. I don't know. Interesting experiences.
That's, I suppose if that's your thing, you can do that. If powerful experiences are your thing.
Yeah. Why don't they not be? You're like reading good books or just books.
Okay. I mean, specifically the power, powerful experiences you get from rituals.
For a lot of people, it would not be because you get the weird, squeaky.
They're trying to channel me and use me for their purposes feeling.
Yeah. Being hit in the face is a powerful experience, but it's not one that you want to
have, right? Or many of us. Well, I mean, being recruited into the military is a very powerful
experience, but I wouldn't want to experience that. Oh yeah. Like, I mean, and so it's like
skydiving and I don't want to do that either. But like, I guess I'm trying to think of like,
just because it's a powerful experience doesn't mean that it's good or desirable.
I like to just set my boundaries because I really don't, right? So you can,
you can accept that many powerful experiences are desirable, right? Sure. Yeah. Like orgasms.
Orgasms would be powerful experiences that most people want to have, right? So do you think most
of the, the people in the rational sphere that do try to do these sorts of rituals,
it's for the powerful experience aspect? I think it's mostly for the group bonding
from what I can tell. I think a lot of rationalists who are aspiring, whatever,
less wrongers are kind of weird socially. Right. Right. So they're kind of building
their own thing in their own way. And I think that's cool. You know, do it. However, yeah,
I don't know, but I think that's the main reason for most people, but, but it's also like,
I think for me, it's always going to feel like wearing your parents clothes until we get something
that is comfortable and doesn't feel like the churches that we grew up in. That's why you
have to build it. Yeah. That's why you make it your own. That's why I liked Welcome to Night
Vale so much. It's just something, you know, it's got several years of just, you know, fun,
weird stories. And then they come along and do just tongue and cheek sort of things. I mean,
I could totally see like maybe on a university group, people start doing re-enactments of various
shows and that building somewhere in the future. Right. But it ties back to the reading poetry
example. And then you getting silly hats to read poetry in. You build, and it's kind of a weird
comparison, but you build ritual and you build it through what you do as a community.
So you got to start small. Can't jump right into the candles and the holding hands and chanting.
No, because that will automatically make people adverse to it, especially people that come from
a religious background or come from a background that is dubious of the trappings of religion.
So, I mean, kind of running with and thus butchering Inyasha's example of wearing your
parents clothing, which I'd never heard before. But then to me, something sounds really just
super unappealing about like trying to recreate the experience of wearing uncomfortable parents
clothing, right? Because like just because you miss wearing it, like, I guess maybe I'm the kind
of person, again, told you I'd ruin the metaphor, who never liked that. So, I mean, I guess luckily
in my childhood, it wasn't super full of ritual, at least not that it's tasteful kind, like we did
do Christmas on Christmas Day, but not like we didn't sing a song or, you know, read a Bible
verse or anything. So like, it was Christmas is the best. It was just done as like, you know,
the thing people do, but not in like, okay, well, we also do all this weird other stuff.
Like, I mean, you can, I feel like a good rule of thumb that I'm kind of running with is like,
you can wear whatever you want. So there's, you know, I've never had anything like that in my life
that I, you know, really wanted to get into. I mean, I went to like my graduation ceremonies
because it was important for my family, not because I wanted to. Like that's the level of like,
eh, just send it to me in the mail. It's the same thing for me. Like that's just the level
I'm operating at. And I'm not saying that's better. I'm probably missing out of something.
But you weren't too uncomfortable with the everyone had to wear the same sort of graduation gown and
walk up in order and no, I mean, like with the song playing in the background.
Yeah, I wouldn't have done it of my own. I mean, it wasn't my own volition in that I wasn't held
at gunpoint, but I wouldn't have done it if I didn't feel like my family would have been bummed
if they couldn't go to this. Like they wouldn't have had as much fun watching me open it when it
arrived in the mail, right? So like, I didn't do it for me, I did it for them. Did you feel
more comfortable with that ritual because, or that ceremony because it was explicitly non-religious?
I feel like I just, like I only did it because I felt like I would be letting people down if I
didn't. Yeah, but you didn't feel like weird and gross when you did it, right? No, I guess not.
And maybe it was the lack of seriousness. And I guess not all, all rituals are serious from
what I'm understanding here. Well, the ceremony, I mean, the graduation ceremony is supposed to
be very serious. Well, it's serious to the, like people talking to the microphones,
but the rest of us were just goofing around, just sitting there and, you know, making jokes.
A lot like church when you're a kid. Probably. I didn't go to church a lot as a kid either,
so maybe less than half a dozen times. So it's a lot of lucky you. It's a lot of doodling
in Sundays and cartoons. It's a lot of doodling inside the watch tower and just daydreaming.
Oh, you know what? I can bump that number up to like a dozen because we used to go
out of like every summer ish when my great grandparents would go. So that count. But I mean,
yeah, you're right. Cause I specifically remember the doodling. We weren't allowed to doodle.
Oh, I'm sorry. You had to just sit there and listen to that shit. Well, yeah. You know,
in church, you can't deface the mess. It's called a missile in Catholic church. MIS has a L and
it's the book that shows you where you're supposed to stand and sit and kneel at words to say in
all the ritual, right? Kind of stuff. And that's R I T E, right? Not, right? Oh, thank you. Thank you,
Jenkins. That I can't sing either. I should put that on the table. That was you should try singing
it. That was actually really cool. Yeah, just learn. It's good. No, I say all of these things
stop sucking Steven. It's not stop sucking. It's like most of these things require practice,
right? So when I was a child, I had to sing like really, really terrible worship songs,
like contemporary Christian music is the worst form of music that I can think of.
It's the worst classic hymns, though, when done properly. Yeah, you're right. Yeah, that's why
I said contemporary Christian worship music. It's it's the worst. Um, yeah, but yeah, just
it takes time and practice and and whatnot. It's like you start biking the first time you got on
a bike too, but you stuck with it. Yeah. I mean, a lot of this gets into like probably
repressed childhood memories of bullying or something, but like there's difference between
to like I can enjoy, uh, like maybe some of these things are started earlier and it made it easier.
I mean, a lot of people are told when they're young that they can't sing and they should stop.
And I recently heard that that is like a violent thing to do someone and I agree because singing
is such a good, awesome, enjoy emotionally enjoyable thing. And so I'm going to try to
start to learn, but right up until a year or two ago, I also always felt people tell a lot of white
boys that they can't dance and it's really sad. Yeah, white boys, you can dance. You just got to
try a little harder. Yeah. And up until a few years ago, I haven't been doing it is the same
sort of thing. I would never sing, never dance, because dancing is more to find y'all should
be embarrassing, horrible and just start working on it and it is nice. Yes, exactly. Well, and the
thing is, is that's preventing people from being able to experience a lot of the stuff that we're
talking about though, because it's like you can't participate in this thing because you aren't
quote unquote good enough at it and therefore you don't get to experience that community and that
ritual. Maybe it's intentional to funnel people more into like churches and doing things like
the chanting and yeah, as opposed to dancing and stuff. Well, I mean, and there's some like
Christian sects that do dancing as part of their ritual. Yeah, dancing was, I mean, most of the
reason most Christians don't do a lot of dancing is because it was like not allowed. I mean,
dancing is really sexual a lot of the time too. So it's like, it's hard to not have it be like
not sexual. Unless you're Holy Ghosting doing the Holy Ghosting. That's what I call. Oh,
space enough for Jesus between you two. Is that what you're talking about? No, I mean,
when you feel the spirit coming over you. I know what you're saying. Comedian Hannibal Burris
and I call it Holy Ghosting. I mean, that sounds fun, but I don't know. Like yeah,
don't like give yourself a seizure or anything, but but yeah. So do you have any forms of like
self expression that aren't this podcast or no or anything like that? Yeah, so I don't say that
tongue and you're missing something of value. I'd say like something that well. It's really
valuable to me anyway to have and I think if you developed one or or multiple well,
Stephen, it would be valuable to you too, right? I think memes are sort of a modern day
weight. Yeah. Oh yeah. I don't make or share memes. I observe them on Reddit and I'll occasionally
text a cute picture that I find. Yeah, I've had you've shared memes with me before. You name one
example. Not off the top of my head because you literally showed me one. I showed you an XKCD
comic that's very different than like a picture of Eugene of the graph. Oh yeah. That was a meme,
but I'm okay. So we're I think I think is very modern day sort of way to express yourselves.
So my first one, I didn't make either of those. Second of all, you don't have to make my first
exposure to the word meme was in the Richard Dawkins, Dawkins Ian sense. And I really really
liked 2011 when people started using it all the time. I like this book like get really popular
again. What's happening in this high class motherfucker over here. I mean, I wish we still
had the origin of the word meme. I wish we still had a word that meant that because it's a very
useful word. Oh, yeah. Well, we do. It's just only with specific groups of people, right? Right.
Depending on the yeah. You have to say meme and original thing. Are you a good witch or a bad witch?
Memes like image macros. And then I mean, that's that is most memes. Yeah. So no, I think you're
absolutely right. I'm missing out something. That's one of the reasons as eager to do this podcast.
I did run a blog for like a year where I wrote something every day and then deleted it like
five years ago. But like my main thing is I don't have like maybe it's because I'm not good. It's
I'm I'm told I'm not good at singing, not by like mean people, but just like as a matter of fact,
it's just like I'm told I'm not over six feet tall, like you happen not to be good at singing.
So like, you know, I don't have a good pitch for or you know, ear for pitch or tune or whatever.
I can't hold a beat. I mean, so like it's the same way as like telling someone in second grade,
you're not good at algebra. That is true, but they can become good at algebra. I
like being color blind. No, no, no, no. Like you're not. You're not good at discerning the
colors green and red. Well, like maybe you'll be dead. Yeah. If you if you tried really hard and
like you never progressed maybe, but and it might be one of those things that you have to learn
when you're a child. Also, I don't know. I did take music classes all through primary school.
You did or didn't I did like to K through six and then in junior high. I was in choir. Just
like, but I was on the ship. Music classes. Yeah, those aren't. I don't think those really
count to be totally honest. I mean, it's like intensive practice. So yeah, I've always been
a fairly musical person and musically inclined. So I don't it's it's hard for me to empathize with
you in that sense. But I assume that if you spent a lot of time or spent, you know,
small piece of the time, you know, any musical person has spent, you'd start to get it. I think
right. Not as often as most people. That's probably the first step is listening to like and
liking music, I suppose. There's YouTube videos that teach you how to sing.
But yeah, while you're doing what like, what's your feedback? You have to have somebody listen
to you sing and say thumbs up, thumbs down. You can hear yourself for one and you can also record
yourself. Yeah, not doing that. So I mean, maybe steps. I'll find some way to edge into this. But
Stephen does have ways to express himself. You were really big into that soul, the game that
hurts you until you like it. Soul Calibur? No, not Soul Calibur. Oh, Dark Souls. Dark Souls, yes.
I play video games. The honest trailer pitch for the Dark Souls series was the game that
fucks you until you love it. So I mean, like I play video games, but I don't know if that counts
as self-explanatory. Like I don't make video games. Right. But I think there's a difference between
playing video games and like getting deep into them and knowing a lot about them.
One's a form of like hobbyism, another is like a form of self-expression.
Hobby is a form of self-expression. Like once you're the guy who's playing Dark Souls on the
Guitar Hero controller. I never was. Well, okay, I know. But that is a form of self-expression
itself. So I mean, okay, I see you're saying, but I do feel like there's a difference in kind from
that and like writing a song or writing a book. Like I don't, I'm envious of the people who can do
that because there's nothing in me that's creative trying to get out and do that sort of thing. I
feel like we're sort of far afield from where we were trying to go. But as long as this is, you
know, I'm fine talking about it. I just, if this is, I don't know. Well, this is related to
powerful experiences, right? Vivian, would you warn people away from attending Jesse's ritual
thing because you don't know what he's trying to channel them into? As long as he didn't spring
it on me. No. Okay. Don't spring ritual on me. I'd like all of us to, to join hands in prayer now.
So not going to do that. No, I mean, that's the thing. Cause like powerful experiences are
powerful. And that is one of the reasons that I try to avoid them because I'm not necessarily
sure I want to get wrapped up in that sort of thing. If I, if I don't completely know it's
that this is a trusting thing. And also like you're giving me the, Vivian's giving me the
look right now cause the welcome night feel thing, but the welcome night feel thing was
also safe. It is like a crush on your high school teacher cause you know, you're never
going to fuck your high school teacher. Unless you're never going to fuck your high school teacher.
Okay. Unless you are in one of those Florida schools with the, that you hear on bottom news.
Yeah. But no, it's the same thing. The welcome night feel people, they're going on to Santa Fe
after Denver. They're not going to have us riding in the streets or whatever or giving them 10% of
our income. I was about to spoil the crap out of that, but they kind of did.
Well, okay. Just a tiny bit, but it was only just like a little bit and it was for the greater good.
That's what they wouldn't tell you. Not good. I feel like it's okay to spoil it. Yeah.
There was just a little bit at the end, sort of a, a, um, a slight nudge towards, you know,
and maybe resist the current administration sort of feel stay strong, stay together.
Every artist right now. Yes. Yeah. Right. I mean, is that, is that dangerous ritual or is it only
dangerous because it came after a ritual? Spoilers. Ah, okay. I mean, we'll, we'll put a spoiler tag
before this. Okay. Spoiler tag before this. Okay. And anyone who does not want the spoilers,
skip ahead by two minutes. There's only like two weeks left in the tour anyway.
Oh yeah. That's true. Yeah. So the thing is, is there like go forth and say this particular phrase
to everyone that you meet as a way of acknowledging them as another human being. I'll hail. Exactly.
But that is in itself ritual. What, what do you think? Amen. It's
yeah. I'm okay. It's like, hey, we also see listen to night fail. I'll hail.
So it's not going forth and acknowledging other human for being another human. It's going forth
and acknowledging another night veil fan for being the night veil, but it's like when metal
heads throw up the horns at each other. That's just like we both like heavy metal. It doesn't mean
it actually means hail Satan, but well fine. It actually means hail Satan, but nowadays it means
we like, it really just means metal. Yeah. I do this for hail Satan. Well, you are also a witch.
We have appropriated your symbol and now it means I like metal.
It can be both. It can be both. Yeah. I'm not begrudging you the use of it. I'm just
staying for accuracy that it also intentionally means hail Satan. So if you don't want to hail
Satan, maybe don't do it. Okay. Hailing Satan. I'm not a big fan of like, well, of those things
you're like, well, you know, this actually means this, right? It's like, no, it means what I thought
it meant. It means that 100% of the time. I'm just using a word wrong language is determined by
usage. Kind of. Yeah. So like, if everyone uses it for I like metal, it means I like metal. Yeah.
That's, I mean, but that's sort of just one of my little nitpicky things. I could be wrong.
I think that's the common accepted thing that God, I forgot the word, but the saying is
language is determined by usage, not the other way around. So usage determines language.
Yeah. I mean, certainly it'd be weird. Like if you could change the definition of something and
then change the thing, right? So that's, that's why like, I feel like the map, the arrows point
the other way. Right. So anyway, so we're done. Spoilering, I think we're done. Spoilering. I think
so. Okay. Okay. And I don't think that was really, I don't feel like I got spoiled. Yeah. Okay. I
don't think it was really the dangers of the thing. It's not dangerous, but there's an intent
behind it. One of the things that I think is I'm not conveying very well is that it
doesn't have to be dangerous for it to have an intent, but unless I want to fully participate
in that intent, I don't participate in it. I heard anecdotally, or let me rephrase this,
I have a memory of reading in Shirley or joking, Mr. Feynman, that when he received his Nobel prize,
he either wanted to or actually went up the stairs backwards to take his prize because he
didn't like the ceremony the whole thing. And I feel like that's sort of where I'm coming from
or like where my feeling is like on ceremony in general, like the whole idea of we do it this
way because we've done it this way is something that I am just repellent. I find that's like my
initial pushback. And then when we were talking, I guess bringing it way back when Jenkins and I
were talking about salsa stuff eight months ago, I was initially like, oh man, that sounds gross
and weird. But then you're like, well, no, what about all the cool community stuff? And some
people like it as well. Some people like it. I'm willing to acknowledge that there's probably
something there that I'm missing as happened so often that other people will want to have. And
if people want to do it, you know, I'm obviously not gonna like try and stop you. But I was just
initially like deciding whether or not to go. But then I was like, well, all right, I'll give it a
shot. I don't think I would have held hands if that was part of the thing, but I would have watched
you guys hold hands. I probably would not have encouraged it. Or whatever like other thing that
felt super ceremony-y. Like I might have not participated. Like what if all the lights were
off and I let a candle and then read something over the candle or like slightly behind the
candle? I would probably not be a dick and turn like around a corner so I could play on my phone.
Like, so like, I wouldn't want to let it through with my phone and be like that level of destroy
the ritual because I'm right now. I was mind that that's probably not worth doing. So one thing
I usually used to point out that like most people have a sense of, you know, the sacred or ritual
or whatever is just basically like if you're at the movies and the guy is talking in front of you,
you kind of want to punch his head. Well, I want to punch his head. Other people want him to stop
talking, right? And you want to punch his head to make him stop talking. Right, right, right, right.
Yeah, sorry, violence. Violence is always the answer guys, remember that? Violence is always the
means. It's never failed yet. I share that impulse, but not because he's ruining the ceremony of the
movie, but because he's ruining the mood. Immersion broken, man. And like, so that to me is not so much
the ceremony as it is like just the experience, right? And you might equate the two, but I feel
like they're just they're importantly different. In what way? In the way that I can't think of
a better way to articulate it than say you can wear whatever you want to the movies. Okay,
but and like if for like, I went and saw the Avengers when it came out, a lot of us are wearing
some sort of costume, but I didn't like sneer at the people or tell them they couldn't come
with people who weren't wearing costumes, right? Maybe it's a large part because going to the
movies has never really done a lot of harm, whereas we've all seen a lot of harm coming from
religious fanaticism. And personally, probably all of us, I don't know about Stephen, because
you raised in a non religious environment, but have been at least three of us, I'm assuming
have been harmed by religion in our past. And which is one of the reasons I have a very strong
aversion to those sorts of things. Like I would not have been comfortable with that sort of thing
if you turn off the lights and light a candle and read a thing. I to me would have started feeling
weird at that point, because I'm like, this brings up too many, too many associations with religion
and how how that was abused to hurt people and control people. What if it wasn't things that were
like reminiscent, but it was just other random things like, all right, everyone stand on one foot
and well, it depends if you know, if it's Cecil Baldwin up on stage saying, everybody raise your
hand and say, I swear fealty to the glow cloud. I'm totally fine with that because that's fun.
Yeah, but like, what if we tried to do that around like our like local community of rationalists,
right? Or whatever you want to call it, like, then that sounds weird. Like to say, all right,
everyone's swear fealty to whatever. I guess like that level of yeah, that would be weird.
That's where I see this going, right? So I mean, part of it, like the harmlessness is, I think,
maybe I'm, I think I'm pretty sure I'm missing something integral here. I would first have to
feel that it is harmless, which is why I was okay with the Nightfield stuff and why I'm probably
less okay with other things. So why would it be harmful in a rationalist context?
Not it wouldn't necessarily be harmful. I just wouldn't already think we're a cult.
Well, I mean, some people say that and I think it is a gross misuse of the word cult.
But I don't think- Sounds like someone in the cult would say.
No, I just would. The fact that someone would ask me to be in that sort of a ritual would,
that itself would make me raise my suspicions because anyone who I trusted would not ask that
of me, I guess. So instead we say, hey, we're going to do a thing? Then that's fine. You can do
your thing and I'm invited. Would you like to participate in this thing rather than
using the word thing instead of ritual? Yeah, no, I'd be like that. No, I would not like to
participate in that. There's too many candles and other religious trappings. What if we used
LEDs, right? Those don't have any religious- No, I mean, depending on what it looks like.
Okay, again, I was not attached to it enough to even- As soon as there was a little bit of
pushback, I was like, no, never mind. This is not the time or place or whatever.
And I know that's not what you were trying to do. That is my own psychological gut instinct. Word.
I feel like I don't like adding things on top of things that don't bring any tangible- Well,
tangible might be the wrong word. Any clear value to it. So if we want to get together and hang out
for a solstice party, that's down. But if someone's like, all right, and now I'm going to recite the
12 virtues of rationality, all gather around. Even without the use of LEDs or candles or hats,
it still feels like now we're doing a thing that doesn't- I don't know, seems janky and just shoving
this into it to try and make it a thing. I don't know. I'm not- It's hard to do right. The Hugo
awards that I've gone to a number of times now are definitely a ritual, but they're just to, you
know, celebrate authors that we like and, you know, have a fun time as a nerdy sci-fi reading
community. And so I don't have a problem with that particular ritual. And it also feels, I guess,
it also doesn't have any of the feelings of religion. It has the feelings of a secular ceremony
like the Oscars or something else where you dress up in suits and there's a stage and an emcee and
all that, which is very different from a more religious sort of thing. So that's what I was
going to say is that like, I'm not sure I've never been to the Hugos, but I pictured something like
the Oscars where they're calling names and handing out awards. Like they're doing it that way, not
because it's like the way we've always done it and this is our rituals and our ceremonies,
they're doing it that way because, well, we can't just like have the crowd rush the stage and we'll
hand out rewards at random, right? Like then it's like they're doing it because there's a real point
behind it. But they've started to build rituals into it. Yeah. I mean, I haven't been to the
Hugos. What do they do? Well, I mean, it's now it's more like the Oscar sort of ritual thing,
but originally for the first, what, 20 years or something, it was just like, here's the list
of winners and come get your statue whenever you want in this room. There was no like,
pomp and circumstance behind it at all. Isn't there also something with like a tiara this year?
Yes. Which was kind of a joke. Which they've been doing for several years now. They have now.
It's like they're running gag. The ritual. Yeah. Maybe all rituals start as running gags.
That would actually not surprise me. And then, you know, like the kids that come up are like,
and we have the tiara, which goes from person to person and the parents are dead so they can't
tell their kids, guys, that was a joke. Maybe that's the point that I stopped liking it. Okay.
Because then people are just doing things unthinkingly and they don't know where these things
came from or why they're doing them or they think they have, they know where they came from. But
no one wrote down that it was actually a joke. They wrote down some joke. And so people take
that seriously later. But do you have to take ritual seriously? I guess I still don't have a
good idea of what ritual is. I know we talk about it a lot. I prefer the rituals that you don't
have to take seriously. That's why I like participation and theater and that sort of thing.
Yeah. That would be like a concert concert. You don't have to take seriously. So like,
if you're at a metal show during the breakdown, you mosh. And maybe that's why I don't like the
word ritual, which encompass this entire variety of things. Because I mean, the other obvious
examples are like using the word sports, describe everything from contact football to chess,
or like using the word drugs to describe DMT and aspirin. So it's like, yes, they all have
some things in common, like in chess and in football, all the contestants are breathing.
But like beyond that, like that's about it. Well, they are competing against each other
in a display of skill. Sure. But I mean, and I was using breathing as kind of a joke. I mean,
there are, yeah, there's obviously the other things. That's what separates things like chess
from sleeping. You're also breathing doing that. So, but you're not going to convey, like if you
had never heard of chess, I'm like, oh, it's this cool sport. Like, that's true. I mean, so, you know,
if your only usage of the word drugs was like the stuff you can get at Walgreens and like, oh,
you should have some LSD. Oh, what is it? Oh, it's a drug. Oh, you mean like Tylenol. So you see,
so like, when you say like, so solemn rituals. Okay, so it's like, you always have a problem
with a ritual that you have to take seriously or is meant to make you feel some sort of sense of awe
or sadness or wonder or or joy or just to make you do something really just doing anything like
not not literally anything. But because like I said, I mean, you know, the elevator doors open,
the people on get off and then people want off one on get on, right? Like that's not a ceremony
or ritual. It's just like, that's makes sense because everyone's trying to do their thing. So
do you have a movie that really fills you with deep like sorrow moves you emotionally?
I could think of one, but I'm trying to think of Jesse's example of like rituals. I think maybe
it's because of ritual to me always meant one thing. And now I'm being told there's this whole
other class of things that it means. Okay, no, I can just have it be whatever you
I mean, if I'm using the if I'm missing a lot of labels on that, if we see it, I suppose.
Yeah, so I think that's what I think what it was was like, you know, I pictured I'm trying to think
of a another example, but I'm stuck on the other ones. So I had my in my head what ritual meant
as like the kinds of things that you do at churches, not even churches, because that that's a
specific kind of thing that people don't like. But you know, or I don't know, I think ritual is
anything that is a thing that tries to subsume yourself of sense and self identity into a broader
hive mind sort of communal thing, yeah, feeling. So like in that sense, like, like I think a
graduation ceremony is supposed to instill that sense of of awe and that you are part of something
greater, you're this class going forward into the world. And yeah, most people don't take it that
seriously. But at least that's the intent, right? But you don't even have to take it seriously,
like even goofing around during your graduation ceremony, you're still part of the graduation
ceremony and joining there with your classmates. So but I mean, you're not joining in like the
part of the ceremony that they're trying to make ritualistic. That's because the adults are stupid.
Right. So my my my mental schema of sports is things like, you know, basketball and football
and hockey. And you're like, Oh, no, what about chess? And I think it's something even less exciting
to watch. Okay, well, let's let's just go with the solemn rituals growing communion, but not so
like, do you do you see that communion has value for Christians who who participate in it, right?
For sure. Okay, right. And I totally get what they what like why they so they're they're affirming
to the community that they believe what they believe. They're they're taking part in some
sort of ceremony to to, you know, show that. And then, you know, they're they're having a solemn
moment, right? And they're like, Hey, you know, this, this whole Jesus guy was really important
to us. And he told us to do this thing to remember him. And we're all going to sit here and remember
him together, all at the same time. I think the examples I used way back in December when
we were talking about it was like, I think we all kind of share similar, not not similar, like,
you know, we all think Jesus is the rad or something. He seemed like an all right dude.
Right. But in so far as yeah, right. Insofar as not when he created your mental well, never mind.
Thought crime and whatever. Anyway, um, ignoring all that, right? So, so like, I feel like we all
kind of think that like, sometimes life is hard, you know, love is a powerful emotion, you know,
uh, you know, death is scary sometimes, or, you know, just life is scary sometimes, you know,
sometimes we feel really small. Things like that, right? Where it's like, these are all these are
all things that most of us can, can, uh, you know, uh, feel sometimes. So as rationalists,
also we could add a few things to that, like the world would be better if people thought through
things more. Yeah. Yeah. I suppose so. In the specific way that we, we like, right? Because
our ritual tries to focus at least a little bit on that. Right. I'm really happy that smallpox
is not around anymore. Right. So I don't know about you guys. Pretty stoked about that one.
Right. A lot of progress is a good thing. Yeah. In a lot of cases. So could you kind of daisy
chain from the community example to either what you prefer, either the glow cloud hailing at the
night veil or like a concert? So like, well, so like, I understand where they're coming from at
communion and those, because that's what those people want and they, and they have all those
things. I think I need some handholding to get me from there at least some incremental steps to
how going to a concert is. Well, let's keep on the train of thought I was building on. Right. So
if, if we all tend to believe that like sometimes life is scary, right? I'd say maybe the winter
solstice is a good time to reflect on that. It's the longest night of the year. It's really cold.
A long time ago, people would die around that time or start to die because they were starving
or freezing. Right. If they went to the horse. Right. Right. Yeah.
Uh-huh. Isn't it terrors? Yeah. Damn it. I ruined a game of Thrones quote.
You know, when you put it that way, I kind of, right? So you did this once before, right? Yeah.
And it makes sense, right? Right. Yeah. So that's it. It's like we all, we all kind of feel that
every once in a while, right? It might be nice to feel that all at the same time together in the
same place. Yeah. Right. And when you say that was the main point I want to go to your right.
Yeah. See, don't you want to go to my home and recite verses to do that. You don't have to.
You don't have to. Right. But that's that's more like getting together and not dying all night.
It sounds like a lighting thing. And so there's fewer distractions. Right. So you dim the lights
for if you want everybody to focus on a specific thing. Same thing for movies or theater or whatever.
You dim all the side lights and you focus on the main thing. So the reason I brought up a candle
candles are good mood lighting, man. I hate blue light at night time. Everyone hates blue light.
Well, not everybody realizes they hate blue light at night time though. It's weird.
Not everyone has tried flux on their laptops. Right. Well, yeah. Doesn't that like track our
shit? Everything tracks. Your laptop already is tracking your shit. All right. Whatever. Anyway,
so like the reason I say like bring up a candle and read a thing is because like I'm thinking of
a few specific things like some of the sequences or like things that Scott Alexander has written or
there's this big I think it's on like almost everything is broken. Almost no one is evil.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Jay. The smallpox one. Right. Yeah. Right. 500 million, but not one right.
Right. Right. I was like I read that and I'm like that's really fucking cool. Like like I think
that's a really, really cool piece. So like reading that with a group of people. It's like
maybe everybody else will feel the same thing I felt when I read that. If they're hearing it for
the first time or even not for the first time, they're just set aside this time of year, every
year to focus on this thing and to be stoked about it. Right. It's like you can't every day say so
glad I didn't die of chickenpox or smallpox or whatever. Glad I don't have the polio and so
people forget about how useful vaccines are. But if you dedicated one day a year to that sort of
thing, maybe. Right. Also, practicing gratitude I think is really valuable. Like I, you know,
saying thanks before you eat. Right. I think that's a great ritual. Honestly, that I still kind of do
in my own way. My lady friend shows us blessings and then we eat. It's great.
And yeah, and I don't mind at all. I'm like, yeah, I should probably, you know, be reminded to,
you know, be thankful more often being thankful. I mean, like, I mean, just for like a purely selfish
reason, the more thankful you are, generally the more happy you are. Right. So even if you're,
you don't see the value in it inherently, you can get something out of that that way. So you kind of
see my point there where it's like maybe a solemn ritual even is like specifically that's what I
was going for. And that's why I was going for it. But if people are resistant to it, they're not
going to enjoy it. They're not going to want to be there and I'm not going to do it. Right. So,
so that's why I didn't do it. Yeah. Some things you said really resonated with me and I want to
get to those in just one second, but I'm trying to think of Norman Borlaug. So it would be one thing
if, if your wife or your lady friend wants to say blessings and then you eat, if she said, now let's
hold hands for 30 seconds and close her eyes and give our thanks to Norman Borlaug for creating all
of this awesome food for us to eat. He was the guy who's Norman Borlaug. He pioneered the green
revolution. Yeah, GMO stuff. No, not necessarily even GMO stuff. Well, because they didn't have
GMOs yet back then. He pioneered careful selective breeding and is credited with saving roughly a
billion lives. So yeah, not necessarily. Well, depending on how you define GMOs, it's a whole
thing. I'm prepared to bite that bullet, but like bull aren't. So you see where like the difference
would be even though you probably do have almost directly to think, especially if you're living
in a place where I don't believe in God. So I don't think God, right? But would you sit there
and for 30 seconds think Norman Borlaug? Why 30? Why not 25? Like those are the things that like
bug me during rituals, right? Oh, I mean, so, so sometimes it's just like have this set amount
of time that just because, but we've decided previously or we've discovered previously that
that's about the amount of time that you need in order to like really focus on what's going on,
right? So, you know, if you need a moment of silence, how long do you decide that moment of
silence is right for, you know, somebody who died or whatever? Sure. Similar thing, right?
Yeah. For me, the blessings thing is a second. Yeah. You know, I always have a second, right?
Right, right, right. It's just before food goes in my mouth. Borlaug's the best. Yeah.
Maybe I should start doing that. So one of the things that I liked was, you know, you have an
intense feeling about something and then you want to try and have a room of people feel that feeling
at the same time while you share with them for the first or maybe multiple time. I can see the
value in that. I think I'm trying to think of what my objection half an hour ago would have been
to that. And I'm not sure it's weird. Well, other than it is weird, right? Well, I mean, weird is
never, I mean, I'm signed up for cryonics, a lot of weird things like, right? So I'm not so much
repelled by weird, but I think it's nerd like it's the book. Sorry, I needed to slip one of those
in there. No, you're good because you're holding a book. Yeah. So I only brought like four books.
So yeah, I wrote my phone, which has however many books, right in books. Yeah, I cheat.
Steven. Oh, sorry, I don't want to distract if you had a thought. I consider me distracted.
Oh, damn it. Okay. Well, you're a big fan of Sam Harris. Doesn't he have quite a thing about
like the meditation and sort of a spirituality thing? Yeah, but not in a ritualistic sense that
I think even in the terms of the yeah, he's carrying the book. Sam Harris is waking up.
It's a good book. Yeah. And I recommend it. It's very big into like the meditation, right?
It is. Yeah. Which is sort of a spiritual experience. Definitely. Absolutely. Well,
spiritual, not ritualistic experience. And this evening, I think in the broadest sense of the
word that we're using ritual, like maybe like the circumstances by which you set up an environment
for mindfulness kind of sound like what Vivian talks about when she sets up her spell chamber.
What do you want to call it? Let's call it a spell chamber. Why not? All right.
All right. It's also a sleeping chamber. Yeah. Bedroom. It sounds like a bedroom.
But it changes. It changes. It changes purposes when you do different things in it, right?
Yes. You have different colored lights, though. Do you have like red lights?
No, I have a fader on the light. It's actually really cool. And I use candles,
even though some people don't like them. Yeah. I mean, my bedroom is also my dining room when I
eat dinner in bed. You should never eat dinner in bed. I don't do that. It's a horrible habit.
When you've had as much practice as I have, you get good at it.
There's no crows in my bed. So the key is to lay down like a blanket or something and then shake
that off on the floor. I'm just worried about us all turning into those people from Wally,
where we never get up off the couches and we eat in the couches and they hover us around everywhere.
And like once the bed is used for more than just sleeping and fucking, I begin to worry.
I mean, sometimes there's not a huge like metabolic difference in like sitting or
laying or like sitting, like sitting on a chair or sitting in bed. I know, but it's
a psychological aspect of the bed that once you start using the bed for other things, it's like,
why don't you just do everything in bed? It breaks your rituals. Thank you.
I do have a strong ritual with beds. Well, it's like you do your work at work. You don't bring
your work home with you because then it's just like having a separate space for separate activities
is usually just better for getting those activities done. But not always. I mean,
and you don't need to be that strict for it. But most people advise that sort of thing.
Well, I mean, certainly with like sleep hygiene, sure. But I mean, since I don't have a problem
falling asleep, that's never been an issue for me. Well, I don't currently have a problem
falling asleep. But I mean, yeah, I mean, this particular example, it happens to be that my
bed's more comfortable than my dining room tables or my dining room chair and table. So like it's,
I mean, it is what it is. Sorry, didn't mean to jump on you. No, you're fine. I shame you.
Oh, no, you're good. Well, I brought it up. We were we were moving into Sam Harris's spirituality.
Yeah, little Sammy Harris from down the street. Yeah, so you,
thank you for that. Yeah, I do that from time to time. It's like Stevie Zuber from down the street.
It's just fun. It gives it gives an image of like that person like writing a single speed chew
and bubble gum. It's great. I like it a lot. Okay, I can yeah. All right, keeps you from
from building up anyone too high in your head. Yeah, like if people did that with the Pope
every now and then, I just that would be awesome if you did that with the Pope. He might actually
enjoy it funnier than it actually is. So it's a joke that I just tell over and over and over again
to keep the Pope, you know, humanized my head. I just picture his hat falling off,
falling off when he was wiping his ass. He probably takes it off. I'm sure he does.
But then I wonder if he wipes his own ass or if he doesn't wear the hat because he's afraid of it
falling off. Yeah, he doesn't write in the Pope mobile either. So that's actually pretty legit
pretty cool dude from everything I can. I mean, as far as popes go, right? Yeah, like I mean,
there's mafia bosses that are pretty good for more mafia bosses. Yeah, but yeah, but as far as
popes go. Yeah, yeah. That's one in my living memory anyway. Well, you've been through what three
yeah, which is, you know, a lot of popes actually. Yeah, it is. So Pope, Nazi, Pope Ratzinger was
the only one to have stepped down or was the second one. Yeah. Well, wasn't he the second
one to have stepped down ever before dying? Yeah. Yeah. So that was kind of cool. That's why I got
three popes. Anyway, so Sam Harris is definition of spirituality. I think he sort of moves the
goalposts sort of like moving the goalposts of the division of witchcraft and except,
except there's not a better word for what he's talking about. Whereas there probably is
with witchcraft. But it's not as fun. The whole first chapter is him talking about. Again,
waking up by saying, good book. I'd suggest it, but. It's about time someone other than me is
pitching Sam Harris' stuff on the show. So thank you. Yeah, I think especially this book.
Yeah, I like it better than his other ones that I've read. Yeah. Except maybe lying. I really
liked lying. Well, I think the difference is like reading like Richard Dawkins
or what was his antithism book? The God Delusion versus reading Unweaving the Rainbow.
Like one book is about something like, this is driving me nuts. I got to get my thoughts out
about this and people might read it. And others like, this is really cool. I love it. Let me talk
about it. So it's a very different tone of book. Yeah. Yeah. And it's more, well, it's more personal
like it talks about his personal life too. That too. Yeah. So I don't know. I enjoy it a lot.
But yeah, the whole first chapter is basically like, I don't have a better word for what I'm
describing. I'm not describing like ethereal spirits or like, you know, beings or entities that
interact with this world. I'm talking about, you know, a specific set of like feelings and,
and, you know, the practices you can, you can put into place to make those feelings come about.
And there's no better word than spirituality really. Like I could make one up, but that's really
stupid. And I'm not going to do that. So yeah, that's, I don't know. I think there's an audio
version of that too, which you can, it's not a version of just about everything. Yeah. Well,
I mean, like that's out for free that you can just link to instead of, instead of like, the first
chapter is the first chapter, which is what he goes through. And also the last chapter,
which is about, I think it's like drugs and the meaning of life is his title for it. But it's
basically like psychedelics did this for me. And this is what they can do. And this is why
they're important. It's actually got me off the fence on psychedelics. Yeah. Yeah. So yeah,
I think what he uses the word spirituality, because it encompasses what people who use that
word in the hokey sense, it encompasses part of what they're getting at. So like contemplativeness
doesn't really pack the same punch as like having a range of experiences. And so that's, that's what
he's getting at there. I mean, there's also the important distinction that like the kinds of
practices that he describes in the book are not the kinds of things that you need to believe
things on insufficient evidence in order to do. So like mindfulness meditation where you're focusing
on breathing is not where you're not, you're not reciting a mantra in your head, especially not
one that you don't understand. Did you have any, you brought it up the book, did you want to have
anything you wanted to get into or just curious what your thoughts were on, on how he treats
spirituality? Because I haven't actually read it myself. I just knew you were a big Sam Harris
fan so you'd probably read it. Yeah, it's fun. I do think it, I mean, spirituality in the Sam
Harrisian sense encompasses everything from like good contemplative mindfulness meditation to
an intense acid trip. So that's the kind of stuff that he's talking about, not necessarily where
you're holy ghosting at the church, right? So. Oh, that's another way to get the same kind of effect.
I think that's totally within the whole spirituality thing. I just think
people who are holy ghost might say that the way they do it is the only way to do it.
Whereas we're just broader. Yeah, I think there's a good article again by Sam Harris. I think it's
called like Islam and the misuses of ecstasy. That's exactly what I was going to say. Yeah,
right. Yeah. So it gets into that where it's basically like, look, I've been a part of these
sorts of rituals before that like Muslims do on, you know, in regular practice or whatever. And
yeah, they have an effect. Like they do something real and measurable and you'll notice it,
maybe not measurable, but like you feel it, right? If you do it and you're told over and over again
that this is like, you know, this is coming from this specific God or whatever, then like that'll
probably really affirm what you already believe about all this stuff. But they're misusing this
ecstasy that they're creating through ritual and, you know, it's... He makes the case in the book
that all religions are basically doing that. Yeah, yeah. In the essay that you're talking about,
he links to a video where it's like a very passionate, the speaker, I forget what I don't
think it was necessarily any mom, it was whatever the speaker was clearly emotionally charged,
the audience is having visible feelings. Yeah, he's like singing a sermon. Yeah, yeah. And then
the word... It's beautiful, really. Like it sounds... Well, if you don't understand the words.
Well, yeah, right, right. If you understand the words, then it changes a very different context.
Yeah, and then it's like, you know, those who do not believe will be burning for, you know,
it's something like that. But it's like, it's this incredible, powerful moment for all the people
that are in the audience or... I think that's probably what turns off most people who are
worried about these sorts of rituals is that we're worried it will be that same sort of misuse of
ecstasy. I feel like that's a safe assumption that's... Or at least for a lot of people.
Yeah, I'd agree with that. I think that's fine, but you're wrong because you can just look into
what we're doing, right? So, you know, like that's where, you know, you do the whole... I don't know
if this counts as like system one, system two sort of thing, but you use your rational mind to
work through like what's going on. Okay, where's this going to take me? Is this a place I want to go?
You know. And that's exactly how I participate in ritual. I assess it, determine if it's something
I actually want to participate in. And then if I am interested in participating in it,
then I will fully do so. I don't blame some people, though, for being along the lines of, well,
I can't fully trust that I can suss out all those things by myself. So to err on the side of caution,
I'm not going to participate. Or just like... You can't always see everything. Or, you know,
ritual might all smell the same to some people, right? So, you know, and if it has the smell of
a misuse of ecstasy, even if it's a proper use of ecstasy, it's like, still, you know, has all
these warning signs. Or ecstasy at all. Yeah, little ecstasy. People are scared. I mean, yeah. No,
I don't mean the drug. I mean, the experience of ecstasy. Some people are, I mean, they're like
actually scared of, you know, powerful experiences, right? It's like, this is making me feel too much.
I'm going to go do something else, right? We've been going on for over an hour and a half,
so we should probably jump into some quick listener feedback and then call it. If you want to move on,
yeah, that's fine. Okay, so first thing is we are going to have our supporter thinking segment,
as we always have now. We would like to give thanks to our Patreon supporter, A.A. Bowser,
who is helping make this possible and bringing this to all you guys.
Thanks, A.A. Bowser. Is this a ritual? This is just polite. This is actually kind of a ritual,
but this is just also courtesy. It's not even, it's not solemn, so it doesn't fit Stephen's
spookiness. Right. Maybe solemnness is part of an ingredient. You're not like solemn things. Do
you like serious movies? No, actually the things that, like when you're thinking of sharing, like
moving things, I was thinking specifically solemn things, that's not an appealing. I think it's
the idea of like forcing that on somebody or like having to convincingly, or having to try and fake it.
Oh yeah, no, they shouldn't be forced. And yeah, I have an issue with like having children participate
in them, because I think children can totally gain something from certain rituals, but I don't
think they're equipped to understand what's going on, really. But like children can have powerful
experiences. I don't know if you guys, I mean like dreams when I was a kid were like these crazy
wacky things, but not so much anymore. I know we just went back. We said we were gonna move on,
but we didn't. We had another thing to say real quick. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So would it make it more
of a ritual if we played like Angel Choir of Angels when we thank the listener?
No, we're just gonna make Jesse sing.
Thank you, AA Bowser.
Okay, should we go on to listener feedback? Yeah, all right. So this is, we are a little bit behind.
So our last episode actually came out already. So we have a few listener feedbacks on that one,
which is very rare for us. Usually we record before the last episode. So anyways,
Googleplex Bytes, speaking on our last episode, when we talked about the sparrows,
with the getting their feathers pulled out, there are two different stories which got conflated.
One of them is about Kim Jong-il, who for his grandfather had these, not for his father rather,
had a quilt made out of the chest feathers of the sparrows because they are the softest ones,
and decimated the sparrow population. And I link to that one. Apparently there is a
different one that does include Mao. Mao in 1958 was told that sparrows eat the rice grains,
and that's affecting production. So he ordered all the sparrows killed to increase yields.
It ended great. Yeah, by April 1960, the Chinese leaders realized that sparrows also ate large
amounts of insects, and so rice yields decreased substantially. So that's a really good example.
Thank you for sharing that. That fits perfectly. And I mean, sorry, the
sharrows got shafted twice in just a few decades. That sucks. Yeah.
Googleplex Byte also said, in a different comment,
illegible humans, this is an interesting point I thought,
illegible humans by their nature can only be assessed as a collective. So modern day individualism
and all its benefits exist because of legibilization of the state. Only legible humans have strong
property rights. Only legible humans can have a one person equals one vote policy.
Only legible humans fit into modern economic markets, which is actually true. It's one of
the points that was made in those articles. Only legible humans can be factored into
utilitarianism. I thought that was an interesting comment. And only legible humans can participate
in science, which I think some of those may be true. Definitely the ones using the government
social technologies like one person, one vote, and strong property rights, you'd have to be
a legible human to the state for to make those work. Yeah, there may be more benefits to legibility
than we were letting on in that last episode. Well, certainly, like you get all the benefits
of having an organized system, right? And like we did talk about like, you know, the relative safety
of, you know, knowing that you could defend that you could depend on, you know, law enforcement
or something in many situations. Googleplex specifically said that science and utilitarianism
only become possible in individualistic societies. And those are only possible through legibility.
So I don't know, because like, even if you're in a non organized collective, you could still say,
well, I'm going to give my $5 to whatever system that would help distribute it evenly. But that
requires some legibility, right? Yeah, I guess you could still say I'm going to give my $5 to
this beggar and not my, you know, my friends just because I like him, right? So that's still more
utilitarian. Maybe you need to be like effective because you could also like do science in the
sense that, you know, you could measure what you're doing and tell people about it or whatever.
Or check your beliefs systematically against nature, which is my favorite definition,
even though it's kind of vague. Yeah, I don't think you necessarily need to be legible to the
state to do science. But it makes it easier for the state to fund science. But I don't think
they necessarily are the same thing. On the other hand, who but large states can fund things like
the LHC? Yeah, you have to have some sort of agreed upon vocabulary and system of, I guess you
could say rules to do proper science or to do formal science. So like, you know, you can't be
doing, you know what I mean? So like, that's why whatever the fake official language is Latin.
So, you know, because every scientist can write and read the right Latin words, not necessarily
fluently. So maybe that's what they were getting at. That's kind of that's really interesting.
GADBB, I think is the name, also from our subreddit, made a comment on when we had the
transhumanism podcast, and we talked about AIs controlling every aspect of our life because
they know this stuff better than we do and how that was like weird and icky and we didn't know
how we felt about that or I didn't anyway. You guys had different opinions. But GADBB says,
every time you talked about that, I am reminded of Scotland's laws on consent and autonomy,
specifically the adults with incapacity act, which in my opinion is a remarkable piece of
ethical lawmaking. And he didn't he has quite a long thing here, which I will not read all of it.
I would recommend people read the post. It seems like a wonderful model to use for
superhuman artificial intelligence things. But the law is has an emphasis on maximizing autonomy
and minimizing interference. And consent in the law is defined as being the expressed agreement
of a patient who understands the options, alternatives and their associated costs, risks
and benefits. And when someone can't do that, they the state, first of all, has to make a
reasonable effort to assist them to understand these things. But if they can't, the state
can make the decisions for them in some cases, but they have to be as non interfering as possible
and have very clear benefits. And the views of the person, what they would have wanted if they
were not incapacitated must be taken account, such as taking an account, you know, their
their past history or what their friends and families say about them. And if someone with
assistance can make, have an opinion on something, they are allowed to make the
wrong decision, even for terrible reasons. I thought these all seem like really cool things.
So being able to opt out was something that I think we kind of agreed on during the transition
during human episode. For the rest of it, I feel like that's sort of where we were at,
but the problem was like, how can you inform somebody or something that they can't really
understand? So whether it's, you know, you literally need to be as smart in relation to
or rather like you need to scale like from us to ants, but up again. And like, so how can I explain
anything to somebody like that? If, or how can I have anything explained to me other than being
told, look, trust me. But I mean, even like, I'm, I'm something like, so I like, I do like the
spirit of what that's getting at, but I, I'm thinking of like, you go to the doctor and they're
like, yeah, you're going to need surgery and here's all the great reasons. Well, like you're,
I mean, they could even list out your two alternatives, but, you know, you're not,
you're not, you don't have 20 years of medical experience to weigh those options. Like in
what sense do you really have informed consent? Like you, you just, there's too much to cover.
So I don't know if that solves the problem. Other thing gives like another way to look at it,
right? Maybe you have more time to explain stuff, you know, if, if for running in simulated time,
you'd be like, all right, here, step into my office. It'll take two days of outside time and
inside it'll be all the 50 years. I need to explain all this shit to you, but it won't be
uncomfortable. I don't know, but then there's trust them for that house 50 years in that room,
not be uncomfortable. Fuck. So it'll only be an hour. I don't think I would want to age 50
subjective years either. I was thinking in simulated time where it wouldn't be right,
but in simulated time, my mind is still ageing 50 years. Like I've gone through 50 years of life.
It's been 50 years since I saw that my loved ones so that I could make this stupid decision.
Even if only two days passed for everyone else. So then I'm just trying, I'm not trying to ruin
the point because I do like where it's getting at. I want to reemphasize that, but I'm thinking,
okay, well, then we can just Neo matrix this into your brain. Like, you know, he learns kung fu,
but how do you know if you want to know it or how if you'll change if you know it?
Like unless they can, you know, so at that point, you do just need to kind of trust the
super intelligence that you're dealing with and that like, well, look, I ran all these simulations
and you liked all of them. So I'm pretty sure it'll be fine. And when I'm pretty sure it's pretty
damn sure. I don't know what else he could go on. Yeah, I don't know. Okay. All right. Thank you for
feedback. Swindle says we talked about Dunbar's number in the last episode and actually this
episode too. Swindle says on our homepage, the basin conspiracy dot com, you touched briefly
on Dunbar's work in this episode. It's a bit more complex than you explained and a bit more
far reaching than a single number. So he just goes into a little more detail for us. Dunbar
correlated brain size with social group size. The short version is that yes, a post human of
some sort that will have a higher intelligence will almost certainly have a higher Dunbar number.
And also Dunbar's number is actually a set of many numbers that match up to various intimacy
levels. The levels basically started five and triple more or less from there. It's been five
years. So bear with me if this isn't 100% correct. But your initial five are basically people you
see every day and would openly sob at their funeral. Your next 15 are like close friends,
people you might put in your wedding or make your pallbearer. 50 is basically your community.
And 150 is all the people who are real people in your brain on an instinctive emotional level.
It goes out further, but the numbers get really nebulous after that point.
And he says he has a bunch of examples in the book compares them to military units and sports
team sizes. There was an interesting one about Amish communities and how they will split the
community on purpose to keep the population at a low level that can be controlled by peer pressure
alone, which is a good point. Can't control like a city of Denver by peer pressure. There's just
too many people, but you can get much smaller groups. Anyways, he ends with an infinitely
smart person that can potentially care deeply about an infinite number of people.
I like the whatever 150 ish is the number of people that you can model as actual people
instinctively. So that's actually a really interesting way to think about it, right? You're
way more bummed when even like somebody you knew in high school, you know, gets a divorce or gets
killed or something. Then you are hearing about a tsunami in Japan, right?
Definitely. I know, but the, I guess it depends on how close you were to people in high school.
Yeah. And I'm throwing out, because I don't know 150 people. So I'm trying to think of,
I have to go back. I can sometimes get really bummed about certain celebrities. If they were
celebrities that like I had a lot of emotional experiences as we were just talking about with
through their art. If it was someone who like their music really deeply touched me and I read
a lot about them. And I felt like even though I'd never met them, they don't know who I am.
They don't have any sort of connection with me, but I somehow managed to glom onto them a little
bit anyway. And it feels like, I don't know, maybe celebrity culture is invading our Dunbar
numbers. Oh yeah. I can feel that way. I can relate to that, at least like with authors and
stuff too, right? Yeah. So, you know, and that's, I mean, when did Ian Banks die?
Two years ago? Oh, 2010. I don't know. I was throwing up a number.
Some time ago. God, time passes fast. Well, like Derek Parfit just died last year or the year
before. So like, you know, but you know, part of the point of being an author is that you can get
your, your thoughts and stuff out to people well outside that limit. So I don't think that there's
anything, I don't think you were implying this either, but you know, there's nothing wrong with
like having that impact go one way, right? So. Well, aside from the fact that if there's only
150 people, we can feel emotionally instinctively that like they're real people, then having people
that you'll never interact with take up one of those slots is kind of a bad thing.
It's, it's a use, it's a poor, it's a suboptimal use of a limited resource.
Well, maybe, maybe. Yeah. I think it depends like, because I could get a lot more out of,
you know, maybe a, a musical artist or an author than I could out of the 150th person
that I can find in my circle, right? It's true. So it might be suboptimal for like the purpose
of maximizing my monkey sphere in the, you know, almost literal use of the word, well,
in the almost figurative use of the word monkey sphere. But it's optimal for like me in my life,
right? I guess it would also help a lot if you have those sorts of emotional connections with
people that are distant from you in cultures. Like if you have that emotional connection to
someone from Zimbabwe or, or someone in China, then it becomes, you become a more accepting,
non-racist sort of person, perhaps. Now we can wonder if you're wasting that slot,
if you're doing that with dead people, but probably not for the same reasons.
Because I'm thinking like, you don't lose anything by reading like Derek Parfit just
because he's dead. I mean, other than the fact that you can't get him to articulate if you
didn't write it anywhere else, right? But, you know, I was thinking of people having
emotional experiences thinking about Jesus dying or something, which some people do.
Well, they're not, that's a waste. You decide. I don't know.
That's interesting. If one billion people all have an emotional connection to Jesus
as one of the part of their 150, that sort of ties them together in a way.
Well, for a lot of them, he's like one of their five. Yeah.
That's kind of intense. Yeah. Really? Yeah. Wow. Okay.
I think he won the monkey sphere.
Wait, Muhammad might have won it. That's true. He's got more than a few years.
Muhammad made a huge comeback. Yes.
We're not comeback. I just, whatever, we're ending that sprint, but yeah.
That's all the listener feedback I got for this week.
I didn't look anything up, so I don't have really anything.
All right. Thank you for joining us. We'll be back next week, not next week.
We'll be back in two weeks. Bye. Thanks.
This is the part of the ritual that I don't like, is I always get a look
minyosh when I don't say bye to the microphone. Why don't you say bye?
Because I'm not talking to the, like, I'm not talking, I'm talking to the listeners
abstractly. I'm not saying bye, like, hey, see you later. That feels forced.
All right, fine. I will never ask you to say bye again.
No, no, I don't want to make you do anything you're uncomfortable doing.
All right. It's not so uncomfortable that it, I mean, does it have a value?
I kind of, if anyone writes in on this, that's basically what I'm going to go with.
So if there's two, try to just, try to agree so it's not an even split.
I don't insist that you do it, Steven. No, you don't got to do it.
I sometimes listen to this podcast. You prefer the bye?
What? You prefer the goodbye at the end or does it feel awkward and forced?
No, that makes sense. Bye.
It's a closing of the ritual because the entire...
And then you have the music play and then it makes sense.
Well, the entire podcast is a ritual.
I love that little arm.
And so you close the ritual by saying goodbye so everyone knows it's over and they can go on
to do the next thing.
I'll concede that by saying that the entire podcast is a ritual in the same way that you're
doing witchcraft.
Yeah. And with that, we can see you in two weeks.
And also, of course, big thanks to our sound engineer, Kyle Moore.
