Therefore, I strongly encourage this public speaker to click the subscribe button.
Please click the bell icon and turn on your notification bell.
Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Ene Ashbrodsky.
I'm Steven Zuber.
I'm Jay Sticky.
And we have another episode for you today. And like all episodes, we start out with
the less wrong sequences. Yes?
Yeah.
Sounds fun. And a brief disclaimer that we're recording remotely due to COVID scares, so.
Oh yeah. Do we want to quickly mention that?
I guess by the time this...
Like, any talking over each other, like what just happened, is largely due to the fact
of talking, you know, over the internet, so.
Yeah. I guess by the time this comes out, people will have already known, because it'll
be a couple days after We Want More Should have come out. But we suspect that one of
the hosts of We Want More, the one who is not with us right now, has the COVID.
Yeah. Sometimes I'll line up. That said, Ene's daughter's school was closed last week due
to COVID outbreaks, which is, you know, who could have seen this coming? But, I mean,
I think he's recovering fine. He's just not, you know, able to sit and talk for two hours
without hacking up. So yeah, we're going to take a week off. I am trying to find content
to fill that for tomorrow, but because we're recording on Sunday, the day before We Want
More comes out. But it doesn't look like we're going to have anything ready in time. So yeah,
we'll just have to do a week off, which is no big deal. So, but yeah, then my wife was
sick around the same time, which is part of what made this interesting. But her symptoms
weren't quite the same and went away faster. But, you know, presents differently, different
people, different durations, et cetera. Her test came back negative too, which is good.
And I don't feel any shittier than usual. So I don't think I have it. So we're just,
you know, but still taking it easy.
All right. And hopefully we'll hopefully we'll hear from from Brian today or tomorrow, whether
his test has come back positive or negative. Maybe it's just like a really bad flu.
Yeah, it could be. I mean, I'm texting him, you know, every day, just to make sure he's
doing all right and to chat and he's doing good. So, you know, as good as one, it's just,
you know, coughing, sore throat, all that nonsense.
Yeah, I mean,
it's going to be really disappointing if he dies just before you get to the final exam.
It's going to really disappointing in general.
Said that because I don't like, I haven't actually met Brian, so I feel like I don't get
to make fun of him or whatever. But like, I've just been listening to my like backlog of
podcasts, including We Want More and I love We Want More. I'm really happy that you guys
did that because first of all, like I told you the other day, it's like I'm getting to
re-enjoy one of my favorite stories. But also I super did the like, what was it? The
Y butt thing, except with Harry. I always was just on Harry's side and just like, Harry's
such a great character and would defend him. And everybody was like, he's kind of an asshole.
And I was just like, no, he's not. It's just all the other characters are so unreasonable.
It's interesting to get an outsider's take on it. I think that's what I found the most
valuable, like, because not just outsider of like, outside the rationalist community, but
outsider in the context of somebody who isn't already like, doesn't already enjoy the taste
of the Kool-Aid. And so, like, it's not that I agree with him on everything, but I think his
perspective is valid. And it's enjoyable to see where, you know, we lie and where we don't.
But yeah, I mean, if I felt like he's at any risk of, you know, his, you know, if it's COVID or
not, his illness turning dire, I would be much more somber and serious about it. As it is, I
think he's, you know, on his, he's on the mend. It's just annoying. So yeah, he'll be fine.
Yeah.
All right, should we jump into the sequences themselves?
Let's do it.
All right.
First one is a condom in planning anecdote.
And this one really would have gone good with last week, but we already had three and didn't
want to expand it to four.
Yeah, this is another sequence related to planning fallacy, my like, biggest weakness in
life, planning my old nemesis.
Yes.
Sorry, God.
Oh, I was just going to say, I think one of my biggest weaknesses is aging.
You know, for that, I'd have a lot of things figured out.
I guess I mean, of the ones that I can currently work on, you can do it for aging, but not
anything super significant yet.
My biggest weakness is that my skin is permeable to bullets and knives.
Yeah.
I was waiting for that.
Still crack up a bit.
So anyway, this whole sequence is an excerpt from one of condom and psychology
articles called Timid Choices and a Bold Forecast, Cognitive Perspectives on Risk Taking.
And we can link the full paper.
I found it, it's like a 16 page PDF available for free online.
I found it on JSTOR and it's just, I think, open access.
But the summary of the excerpt, so in 1976, Cognitive was on a team trying to develop
a curriculum on judgment and decision making under uncertainty for his really high school
students.
And after a year, the team met to discuss how long they thought this project was going
to take to finish.
And Cognitive wanted to make the conversation more productive, which I appreciate.
So he had everybody write down how long they thought it was going to take before
they had a complete draft ready for the Ministry of Education.
And he says, the estimates, including his own, it ranged from 18 to 30 months.
So then he asks one of the members who was an expert in curriculum development.
So you've been doing this for a long time and your experience, how long did other
teams like ours take to complete their projects?
And the expert says, of the ones he could think of, 40% never finished.
For the rest, he couldn't think of any that took less than seven years or more
than 10 years.
And also he adds, Cognitive's team seems slightly below average in resources
and potential.
Yeah.
And the great part is, is that he says that 40% chance of failure and then taking
at least seven years, neither of these were outcomes that were an acceptable
basis for continuing the project.
Yeah.
So they ignored this.
Yeah, it says, it was so demoralizing that they just ignored the experts
forecast and also stopped attempting any long-term planning.
And so the end of the exit is the project eventually reached completion eight years later.
However, in the comments, uh, in the, the original last wrong post, someone
wrote, there exists a curriculum for the study of judgment and decision making
under uncertainty for high schools.
Somebody spent eight years developing it.
Where can we get this curriculum?
And in reply, somebody else linked to an article review of Cognitive's thinking
fast and slow, which, uh, I took a little clip out of part of the pleasure of this
book is Cognitive's willingness to incorporate counter arguments.
He inspects his own misjudgments, including a painful decade, sunk into a
committee work for a high school textbook that never saw daylight.
And he went the project.
So apparently it actually never saw daylight after all that.
It's like they finished it, but seven years after the planning window and no
one wanted to buy it when they were done or something.
Yeah.
As a couple of other people pointed out that the curriculum's going to be out of
date now.
Yeah, that's a good point.
But like, I guess it at least, um, informed his writing on thinking fast and slow.
So maybe planning a curriculum is way harder than writing a book, but like, it
shouldn't take, well, I was about to say it shouldn't take that long, but I'm not
even an industry expert.
So what's funny is like, you know, if we're sitting down for a planning
meeting at my job and someone's like, all right, well, the goal is trying to get
us out end of Q one next year.
You know, what do you think we can get done in that time?
I don't think that like an acceptable answer would be, I don't think this is possible.
Um, like, so I wonder how much of that is just kind of inherited from like the
work environment to where saying that I don't think this is even doable.
Um, or that like, Hey, look, I looked at the numbers, you know, like imagine
you're sitting down with your friends to do a startup or something.
And they're like, all right, well, what do you think the odds are for us getting
to market by the end of the year?
And I think that if you're the person who points out, be like, you know, 80% of
these never make it, you know, past the whatever, like even to the alpha phase.
Right.
I don't think that they would let you come to the next meeting.
But it's kind of like understood though that like, that's the rescue
taking versus like something like this sounded like kind of more run of the mill.
Could be column a little column a little column B.
I think, I mean, the only startup I've worked at is a fairly, uh, like robust one.
And I got in, you know, six years in, but, um, you know, at the beginning it's,
it was funded by one guy who was paying, you know, three engineering salaries.
So like he clearly was at least gambling with, uh, the confidence that this would
go to somewhere because he was spending hundreds of thousands of dollars trying
to get it going, right?
But, you know, if it's you and your friends doing it in part time, that's
different, uh, but trying to like actually sit down and start a company
and with payroll and I don't know, right?
I just, I gotta think that once you put your, not just like 50 bucks, but
something like $300,000 a year into it, you're thinking, okay, yeah, this,
this better goes somewhere.
Right.
Um, of course, too, if you're getting paid, you'll overcome some of the
assembling blocks that probably stop hobby projects from reaching completion.
Just trying to imagine working on something for 10 years and then having
nothing to show for it afterwards.
It's like my career in the video game industry.
Now there are a few games that came out.
They just, none of them ever really hit it really big.
The real thing was the friends you made along the way.
Yeah.
Womp.
Or the stuff you learned along the way.
Not for working the video games.
A lot of work.
It's probably like that though.
Like, I mean, with accounting, you're just doing the same damn thing.
Every quarter and then the numbers go away and don't matter anymore.
I would assume like anything where you're working on an assembly line
or we're extracting resources, you don't see the finished product.
Jack, you're just kind of doing the same thing every day.
I guess maybe most jobs are like that.
Or after 10 years, it feels like you haven't really done anything
aside from getting paid.
I felt way more satisfied that I was like being useful to humanity when I was
working like a food service job than when I was in the games industry.
It would have been different if I was making games that people love
that weren't really popular, but we switched from like a model of trying
to make like dungeon crawlers and tank games and like web game stuff
to click bait mobile game bullshit.
First of all, I was like, we're making like slot machines,
which is just exploiting people's psychology.
You're not even giving them a cool product in return.
And then secondly, like, you know, when you're working in food service,
it's like, well, at least I'm providing people with food,
which is one of the like basic necessities of life.
Yeah, I think the most profitable mobile game is Clash of Clans.
And I think it just hit eight years on the market.
And I'm not sure what it's made, but some billions of dollars.
And like comparing it's like the slot machine, random, you know,
nonsense cash grab apps that people just generate, put out for a month,
try and make some money and then start on the next one.
Like this one at least offers a game underneath and all the paid stuff is optional.
So like it's not paid to win or pay to play.
It's just paid to fast track, which you don't have to do.
So like, I don't know.
I think that the psychology, though, I tried playing it and I was just like,
there's nothing fun here.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, I feel like the farming game type things where like it's basically
a resource management game, but then the fact that you can also pay to get ahead
like means that people are playing it in order to compete with friends, I guess.
Yes.
But I mean, I think the main difference between like it and Farmville is that you
get to build armies and attack other people's bases.
And so like there's there's actually like a game component to it that isn't just click.
Yeah.
So like, I mean, it's not a it's not a stellar, you know, triple A game
that I recommend to anybody.
But I'm just thinking of as far as successful mobile games that aren't
at least complete crash grabs, that at least put work in to make it an actual
game, even if that isn't like the main draw.
I want to create a game called complete cash grab, where you pay five dollars
to attack like someone else on the map, and then they defend themselves by paying
dollars and whoever spends the most dollars wins.
There was an app briefly on the app store, I think called like I am very rich.
Yes, I remember that.
Yeah.
The 30 second version or the 10 second version is that basically it cost, I think
$50,000.
And when you open the app, it displayed a picture of a diamond that said, I'm very
rich underneath.
And I think the guy sold three of these.
Oh, he actually sold some.
Yeah.
Probably to teenagers in Dubai.
Nice.
I mean, I like that's the thing is this thing would have taken a few days to spit
out and get approved by Apple.
The fact that it got approved at all, they changed the rules and you can't do
that anymore.
But like, yeah, just make a quick hundred and fifty K and I mean, yeah, that
sounds awesome.
My brother got a quick $20 or I guess half of that.
Did you guys use the Google survey thing at all?
No.
Every now and then, like roughly once a week, sometimes twice, they'll send you
like a few quick questions and for every question you answer, you get between five
and 10 cents and each one only takes a few seconds.
And, you know, I've been doing it for a while and you can, you don't actually
get money.
You get credits.
Oh, okay.
Yeah, I was gonna say, I've done mechanical Turk, but that's okay.
Yeah, no, Google Play credits is oftentimes based on like, hey, where have you
been recently?
What did you spend money on?
It's a, and you don't get money.
You get Google Play credits and I've used some of the credits before to like,
you know, rent a movie or whatever.
But I was, uh, if you don't use them within a year, they go away.
And I was like at $25 in credits and they were starting to go away as
fast as I was earning them just because I like, didn't really have anything to
spend them on.
I'm like, I don't want anything from the Google Play store.
Yeah, I bought a podcaster, which I really liked.
And then I haven't, yeah, I needed any other shit.
And so, uh, my brother who does, you know, uh, web development now, uh, I told
him, look, just put something real quick on Google Play for $20 and I'll buy it
and you'll get, you know, the commission you can get from that.
And so he made an app that does nothing and called it like the useless app or the
app that does nothing or something.
And I bought it.
And so now he has some of that money because my money was literally going away.
And I would rather they go to my brother than to just disappear.
Yeah.
Sorry.
I'm sorry.
I misunderstood what you were saying, but that's, that's actually really funny.
Yeah.
I was, I was kind of, kind of cool.
You know, he could turn that into like an actual service that he got shut down.
Hey, you know, you can, you can buy money with my app that caused nothing to download,
but then you spend Google credits on it.
And, oh no, it needs to be through the purchase of the app, doesn't it?
Yeah.
Although possibly he could buy like an app tokens or something.
Yeah.
But then he'd have to like put more work into it.
This was something that he just threw together.
No, no, but then I'm saying he advertises it as saying, get, you know, 90% of
your, uh, Google coins back as cash and that could be his service.
And then he'd just Venmo the people, the money, 90% of the money and keep 10%
for himself or his trouble.
That could work.
Yeah.
But I do want to point out that there's a business that will give you back most
of the money of your gift cards that you receive for like holidays or birthdays,
which I saw that I saw a guy pitching that on Shark Tank.
I thought that was kind of funny.
Oh yeah.
No, that's a thing.
Uh, and it's hilarious that that is a service that people need and use, but
that's not on topic.
No.
Yeah.
Okay.
So in that case, we should go on because we could, we could just keep talking forever.
I'll restrain myself and drag us back into conjunction fallacy.
Anybody else like when I was reading this one and the conjunction contrary
racy, it was like the conjunction junction song was just stuck in my head.
Yes.
Schoolhouse track.
It wasn't when I read it, but now that you have said it, it will be forever after.
Uh, so the conjunction fallacy is a whole bunch of examples and I'm only
going to pull out two quick ones so that we can cover what it is.
Uh, it starts out with bill bill is 34 years old.
He's intelligent, but unimaginative, compulsive and generally lifeless in school.
He was strong in math, but weak in social studies and humanities.
And then the, it gives you a series of statements about bill and you have
to rank them in order of how likely they are.
Uh, the, I'm going to ignore most of them.
The three important ones is bill is an accountant.
Bill plays jazz for a hobby.
Bill is an accountant who plays jazz for a hobby.
And the interesting thing is that the vast majority of subjects indicated
that bill was more likely to be an accountant than an accountant who played
jazz, but he was more likely to be an accountant who played jazz than a jazz player,
which if you think about it for a while, either bill is an accountant or bill plays
jazz for a hobby has to be either one of those more likely than bill is an
accountant who plays jazz, jazz for a hobby.
Cause you're any, any subset of people who are accountants or who play jazz is
not going to be 100% or even if they are, it would at most be equal, right?
There would be no world in where it's more likely for someone to be an
accountant who plays jazz than to just be someone who plays jazz.
Yeah.
Um, and the thing that Eleazar's pointing out was these people were supposed
to rank these six propositions by probability starting with most and ending
with least, and then he points out that the conjunction rule of probability
theory states that for all X and Y, P of X and Y is going to be less than or equal
to P of Y.
So the probability of X and Y are simultaneously true.
That X and Y are simultaneously true is always less than or equal to the
probability that why it's true.
Violating this rule is called a conjunction fallacy.
And yet when you give people these kinds of like thought experiment sorts of things,
like here's this guy, Bill, he's like this, uh, people aren't thinking about
probability, but there's a psychology thing that happens.
Well, uh, I don't know if any of us, if you want to like explain more of the, uh,
yeah, we, I'll give a couple of more examples that were, uh, that were
given in this, uh, another one was, uh, considering a regular six-sided dice
that has four green and two red sides, it's going to be rolled 20 times.
And you have to select a sequence from a set of three that might show up.
And if it shows up, you win $25.
And one of the sequences options was red, green, red, red, red.
And since green is on a four out of the six and red is on two out of the six,
that's fairly unlikely, but you know, out of enough rules, maybe that would
eventually happen.
Uh, another one of the options was green, red, green, red, red.
And if you'll notice a thing about these two, uh, it's not immediately apparent,
but if you stop to look at it for a second, red, green, red, red is strictly a
subset of green, red, green, red, red.
Cause the second one is just the first one with green in front of it.
So in any sequence, in any, uh, sequence of die rolls, if number two appears,
number one will have half to have appeared as well.
Uh, but number one could appear without number two appearing.
Uh, yet nonetheless, 65% of subjects chose sequence two, uh, in, in theory,
because this seems to be more representative of the die since it has a
higher ratio of green to red sides and the dice is a higher ratio of green to
red sides.
Uh, but again, strictly wrong, cause there's no way you could get to without
getting through number one, uh, and an extra condition on top of that as well.
Yeah.
So it's almost the analog of the thing about bill the accountant where sort of
if you think about, yeah, like the word representativeness, people are kind of
like, instead of thinking in terms of probability theory, they're kind of
thinking in terms of representativeness and like pattern matching.
Yeah.
Or is the second one, yeah, the second one feels fairer because it looks more
like it's got more, more of a balance between green and red.
And so at a non probabilistic intuition at it, you're thinking, well, if I had
to guess, I would say there'd be some number of greens and some number of
reds and the first one looks two red heavies.
I'll say, I'll say two where it has a couple of greens and the same number of
reds, but yeah, that's, uh, it is just the exact same pattern of one with a
green, uh, with a green before it.
And that it's funny.
Yeah.
I mean, I was thinking too about the, the bill example.
I remember when I first learned about this in high school, it was like, I
forget it was Linda or Alice or some, you know, 1970s girl name.
And it was like Alice is a feminist who is also a librarian or something, you
know, they give some big description.
And if you want to wait just a little bit, that's literally the next post.
Oh, is that right?
Yeah.
But you can go ahead and reading yet.
Oh, that's the one.
Yeah.
Perfect.
Okay.
Yep.
I will skip it.
That anyway, that one did appear in my high school textbook.
Um, yeah.
So experience with it when it went, or maybe we should wait to, we'll hold
off and see if I can summon any memories from high school that are like, uh,
not whatever or that are autobiographical rather than just like data.
But yeah, the third example is my favorite.
It's easy to summarize, uh, cause it's, it feels less abstract, like
mathy somehow than the first two.
Um, certainly the second one feels like, you know, you have almost
have to do math to see it, even though you really don't.
Um, but the third example was, uh, 1983, uh, or published in 1983, um, and
it was conducted in 1982 at the international Congress of forecasting.
Uh, the experimental subjects were 115 professional analysts employed by,
employed by industry universities or research institutes.
Two different experimental groups were respectively asked to rate the
probability of two different statements, each group seeing only one statement.
One, a complete suspension, diplomatic relations between the USA and
the Soviet Union sometime in 1983.
And two, a Russian invasion of Poland and a complete suspension of diplomatic
relations between the USA and the Soviet Union sometime in 1983.
So you had two groups, each were asked one of those questions and asked
how likely do you think this is?
Um, the estimates of probability for both were, or were low for both, but
significantly lower for the first group than the second.
Um, which again, if you were able to see both at the same time, you'd see
how, how insane that is because it can complete suspension, diplomatic
relations between USA and Soviet Union could happen for any number of reasons.
But since two gave a reason, it just sounds more plausible.
Oh, here's an explanation.
Yeah, that sounds likely.
Okay.
Yeah.
So I would think it would, you know, suspend disbelief or suspend diplomatic
relations or whatever.
Um, yeah.
And that's the moral.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Add a more detail or extra assumptions can make an event seem more plausible,
even though the event necessarily becomes less probable.
And then it ends.
Do you have a favorite futurist?
How many details do they track onto their amazing futuristic predictions?
And I feel like I must have talked about this before, because it sounds so
familiar, but I remember watching something with Michiu Kaku on TV, like 10 years ago.
And he was talking about how like, oh yeah, in 2030, we're going to have
like interactive wallpaper that'll be your TV and your, your, uh, your
tablets and all this stuff, be all over your house.
And, um, there were, there were a couple of other things that he tacked into it.
But I found surprising, like, and didn't really articulate at the time, but
looking back on it, I remembered it was like, okay, so not only have you said,
we're going to have this exact stuff, but it'll do these things.
And this is when we'll have it.
Why not just say at some point in the future, or maybe we'll have something
like this, but it was very finite.
Yeah.
I mean, he didn't straight up come out and say it, you know, at six 30 in the
morning on December 21st, you know, 2030, we're going to launch this product.
But he almost did.
Right.
Yeah.
Uh, I was like, maybe a little disappointed that they didn't get more
into the psychology of why we think this way.
Cause I like, when you do the first example, it's kind of like, okay, well,
you can think that we're giving some details about the Skype bill.
And then here's more details.
And if you think of, okay, well, maybe humans, when they're modeling other humans
are thinking of a story or they're, they're thinking of stereotypes of people.
Like the feminist librarian, one makes that one seem more obvious because
you're like stereotypes about librarians or just like likelihoods about someone
who is a librarian is likely to, you know, they probably have a master's degree.
They're probably well educated.
And, but like, but then the ones about the politics and the like probability
of the dice doesn't, you're not telling a story in your head about dice.
So it really seems to be something that like in the math part of our brain
that's broken that way.
Well, if we want to get into the next post that specifically does mention why
this happens, not mentioned, but explain why this happens, how they nail it down.
Yes.
This one is called conjunction controversy and then parentheses or how they nail it down.
And boy, this was a long one.
I'm going to skip a lot of it, but there was just a lot of discussion
about methodology and various ways that they tried to test this thing
and different techniques that they used.
Like at one point, even just straight up asking people what they were thinking.
But if you're interested in all the details, they are there.
And it is, you know, it's kind of interesting to read through it.
But we want to get more to the meat of the things which starts out with Linda,
which Stephen, would you like to take it away since you are familiar with Linda?
Sure. Linda is 31 year old, single, outspoken and very bright.
She majored in philosophy as a student.
She is deeply concerned with the issues of discrimination and social justice
and also participated in anti-nuclear demonstrations.
Also, this was in 1982.
Or no, it appears nice to need to book.
When was this conducted?
It doesn't say.
I'm going to guess in the 80s.
Anyway, please.
Yeah.
Please write the following statements by the probability using one
for the most probable and eight for the least probable.
And I'm going to go through them quickly just because, just to make the point.
So remember, we've got an outspoken, very bright philosophy major who is
concerned with discrimination and social justice and participated
in anti-nuclear demonstrations.
So one, Linda is a teacher in elementary school.
Linda works in a bookstore and takes yoga classes.
Linda is active in the feminist movement.
Linda is a psychiatric social worker.
Linda is a member of the League of Women Voters.
Linda is a bank teller.
Linda is an insurance salesperson.
Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement.
And so the funny thing is that I can't remember which one is without reading
it again, which is the highest voted.
But the last one was voted higher than Linda is active in the feminist movement.
The last one was Linda is a bank teller and active in the feminist movement.
And I think this one is easier to illustrate the point of at least part
of what's happening because you've got this model of Linda now.
She, you know, philosophy major, outspoken, concerned with social justice,
participated in anti-nuclear demonstrations.
And to hear that she's a bank teller, you're like, well, that doesn't sound
like the Linda I know that I learned about 10 seconds ago.
But then if you say, oh, and she's also in the feminist movement, you're like,
oh, OK, that sounds likely.
Maybe it wasn't more likely than, let me see here.
It was if you do the if you look at the actual ratings, the most likely
was that she's active feminist, second most likely was she's a bank teller
and active and feminist, and least likely it was she's a bank teller.
Right, that's right.
But they but they still put that at higher than.
Yeah, then just the just active in the feminist movement.
Bank teller and active was more likely according to people.
You know, bank teller and active was more likely than just bank teller.
Yeah, that's what I'm OK.
And do you do remember six point two for that one?
Yes, eight is least probable.
One is most probable.
OK, so the scale is kind of reversed.
Or the lower the number, the more probable something is.
Stephen, do you remember like when you came across this, how you felt about it
or how your class reacted or anything?
I don't.
It's hard to distinguish any memories I'm trying to conjure from once I'm making up.
If I am running with my intuition that my memory is, you know, give it 30 percent
chance that this actually happened, I seem to have some inkling over memory
of people saying like people defending their decision that the eighth one was
likely or like likelier than just being a bank teller.
And I think because we're using the same sort of like
psychoanalysis reasons I was using earlier, right?
Where it's like, well, no, but it said that she had all these things.
It's like, yeah, sure.
But the odds of that person turning out to be possibly just a bank teller are non zero.
And so any any world where she's a bank teller and in the feminism
movement would mean that she's also a bank teller.
And so like there's I think the easiest way and I don't know if he does this
in this long post because I didn't read this one.
No, a line graph, no Venn diagrams.
I think that either Venn diagrams or just circles with epicycles inside
are the easiest way to illustrate this, right?
You've got the whole space of possibilities of what she what she did.
And in one circle, you've got Linda as a bank teller and inside that
because it has to be inside that inside the bank teller circle is Linda
as a bank teller and something else, right?
Yeah.
So you can have the in the feminist movement as a bigger circle,
but it's only going to be partially overlapping with the bank teller one.
Like it's it's easier to visualize with a white board.
Right.
No matter how big the feminist movement circle is and how small the bank teller
circle is, their intersection will always be equal to or smaller than the bank
teller circle because it just has to be.
Exactly.
And that's that's actually a good way to think about it.
Yeah, the circle where they intersect can't be bigger than one of the circles.
Yeah.
So the he goes through a whole lot of why people make this mistake.
And eventually, the researchers came to the conclusion that subjects substitute
judgment of representativeness for judgment of probability,
which means their feelings of similarity between each of the propositions
and Linda's description determines how plausible it feels that each of the
propositions is true of Linda.
Since Linda more closely resembles a feminist than a feminist bank teller,
that one is more likely, but she more closely resembles a feminist bank teller
than just a bank teller, which is why that one feels more likely.
And Eliezer asks, maybe that's our theory, but how could we possibly know
that that is the case?
And he said, the answer was you take a different group of subjects
and just ask them how much each of the propositions resembles Linda
and then compare their ratings of how much each proposition resembles Linda
to how likely each person in the earlier group said each thing was
each statement was likely to be.
And he shows that this was done and the correlation between the two groups
on representativeness and probability was nearly perfect.
0.99 almost a straight line.
So, yeah, it was because people were thinking exactly that,
that she looks more like a feminist than a feminist bank teller,
but more like a feminist bank teller than a bank teller.
Even though if you were thinking with math, you would see how wrong that actually is.
I love it.
And what's fun is like that's the kind of like, I don't know,
creative approach to like, again, how do you...
OK, well, that's what we think it is.
How could we possibly test it?
That's a very creative answer, like to approach that problem.
And that's why I really liked the field enough to go to go to school
and learn more about it, that that kind of creative problem approach.
There's a few ways that they tried to test, like just to really make sure
that this bias was happening to where.
It was in the previous one, too.
It was this is to make sure that people weren't just
misunderstanding the word probability.
They were... That was why they were... This is really long.
Yeah, it really is.
He makes a similar example.
They did the same thing with doctors judging what symptoms are likely.
Yeah, to present.
Well, they did the best part to make sure that people weren't just
misunderstanding what was meant by probability.
And then they said, well, it might have just been
that people were thinking B to mean only B and not A.
And so that was the one with the doctors where they worded the instructions.
The probability they will be among the conditions experienced by the patient.
And then an explicit reminder, the patient could experience
more than one of these conditions.
Yeah, and they still still ran into the conjunction fallacy.
But then also found the probability
rank and representative rank exceeded 95 percent when they did the secondary test.
Yeah, I still wish that they had gotten into like...
I think without... Oh, sorry, go ahead.
Why?
It's not some hypotheses of why our brains might be wired like this.
Maybe it is just that we think of everything as like people and having a story
the way like sort of animism works.
Or even if you're thinking about a dye or dice, awkward plurals in English.
You're still kind of thinking about, well, the red guy and the green guy.
I don't know.
It hasn't been six in a while.
It's bound to be six one of these times is the kind is like a super natural way
to think that a super natural but wrong way to think about dye, right?
You could see why you might think that about some things in nature, though.
Yeah, I mean, for sure.
I think that it's I don't know it doesn't get into into here much.
But without treading into the waters of evolutionary psychology,
I think that that's about as far as we can get.
I think it's
understandable how our brains didn't evolve to do math.
And so it evolved to say, well, how reasonable does that sound?
And reasonableness doesn't necessarily relate to mathematics in our abish brains, right?
Yeah, I mean, we did kind of evolve to be like human pattern matches.
Since I think we were primarily like our own worst enemy.
I mean, we're social manipulators and as well, or that still makes it seem bad.
I'm trying not to put a value judgment in there.
Like we evolved mostly to understand and work well with one another
because we're social species.
There's a lot of PPP in our human experience.
And yeah, the like second half, though, of the sequence is just
Eleazar actually uses the phrase like hammering it down or
he says nailing it down.
But why do I keep hammering on this?
Well, it's because this fallacy, the conjunction fallacy, he says,
was probably the single most most questioned biased ever introduced,
which means it now ranks among the best replicated.
Yeah, I like that.
He says he continues saying questioning in science calls forth answers
and links that over to the proper use of doubt sequence post.
Yeah, which is a great thing about science.
How you this is how you summon answers by questioning things.
It is almost an eldritch ritual.
I emphasize this because it seems when I talk about biases,
especially to audiences not previously familiar with the field,
a lot of people want to be charitable to the experimental subjects,
but it's not only experimental subjects who deserve charity.
He says scientists can also be un-stupid.
Someone else has already thought of your alternative interpretation.
Someone else may have already devised an experiment to test it.
Maybe more than one.
And I wonder if it's when you read these kind of studies,
psychological studies, it often feels like you're trying to trick people.
And that's why I like these like these subjects didn't know what was going on.
And the scientists tricked them and like I've got to defend them.
Yeah, I don't know.
I've encountered that attitude before and that's weird.
We're like, I will study show this.
It's like, well, the people probably were doing this, this and this in the study.
You know, they didn't realize that the researchers were going to blah, blah, blah.
I'm just, you know, like, I think you're misunderstanding the point of this.
Yeah. So I mean, on the one hand, I totally agree with him, especially.
Well, OK, so real quick, he also says like a blank map is not a blank territory.
If you don't know whether someone has tested it, that doesn't mean no one has tested it.
And and so all this, all the sequences were written before the replication crisis,
which it kind of makes the whole thing a little it puts in a different light
because yes, he's he is correct.
And lots of these things have been multiple times tested and and verified.
But there's also a number of things which weren't and were just accepted as common wisdom.
And when the replication crisis hit and people started trying to replicate the stuff,
they fell apart.
And I think a lot of people nowadays are a bit more more wary about things
because specifically because of that, things that they were told were
where rock solid turned out not to be so much.
Yeah, well, I think it's like, sorry, I was just going to say,
we'll have to get a psychologist on at some point who knows all the modern stuff.
I've got somebody in mind if they're interested to talk about like.
So you use the word fall apart.
I think more like things are shown to have holes in them.
Like, I don't know how much of the edifice of our last century of knowledge,
especially like in social psych, completely fell to pieces.
Like whether or not you can get somebody to sit in a room filling with smoke
because of, you know, bystander effect or whatever.
That there might be reasons explaining what was going wrong with how that experiment
was done in the whatever decade it took place in.
But bystander effect is still probably definitely a real thing with or without
that experiment and we can devise better ones that have demonstrated the same thing.
But like that one in particular doesn't replicate or has problems with it.
Right. Yeah.
Well, like the conjunction fall scene specifically, he says it's one of the most
question biases ever and which is why it has so much replications
and so much proof behind it.
But there were lots of other things that like it turned out were just
researchers literally manipulating people.
Like in the case of the what was it the Stanford Prison Experiment?
Right. Yeah.
There were there were some that were just like really bad methodology
from the very beginning where someone was just trying to make a point
and didn't care what kind of trickery they had to do to make it.
Yeah. It's I think it's worth noting that.
I remember like this period of the rationality community.
A lot of people were talking about this and I think in the scientific community too,
although I wasn't part of that at the time, but like people.
You see Eleazar being like science is great because we can replicate this stuff
and like we can know things about the world because that, you know, like.
There are facts about the way the universe is that we can test and we can retest.
And what like actually caused the replication crisis was more of the publisher
parish sort of model that we pursue science through where there's no
prestige really to be had for replicating studies.
Grant Money is going to people discovering new things and negative results
never get published. Yeah.
Yeah, they aren't sexy, but it's still like it's still human biases
that are causing us to get the wrong results, which is why I, you know,
I'm not sure what point I'm trying to make here.
I guess I'm just I well, I got this.
I like the way he expressed the frustration at the end here.
He says it does become a little frustrating sometimes to know about this
overwhelming mountain of evidence that from thousands of experiments,
but other people have no clue that it exists.
After all, if there are other experiments supporting the result,
why haven't they heard of them?
It's a small tribe.
Surely they would have heard by the same token.
I have to make a conscious effort to remember that other people don't know
about the evidence and they aren't deliberately ignoring it in order to annoy me,
which is why it gets a little frustrating sometimes.
We just aren't built for worlds of six billion people.
Very big tribe.
But at the very end, he does say, I'm not saying, of course,
that people should stop asking questions.
If you stop asking questions, you'll never find out about the mountains
of experimental evidence.
Faith is not understanding only belief in a password.
So yeah, don't stop asking.
Keep looking.
Try to replicate and disconfirm and shit.
Yeah, good faith.
Yes.
Not because you don't like where the evidence is going or something.
Yeah.
The the whole ending, the whole second half of this sequence post
kind of reminded me also of Alexander's Scott Alexander's post.
Yes, we've noticed the skulls where he talks about the researchers
saying, yes, we are aware of these things that people keep pointing out to us.
Yeah.
But yeah, that was that.
It was something else to say about this.
No, it's fun.
I always I always enjoy this stuff.
And there's plenty to read about like with the history of this field of research.
And I mean, I guess you can I was going to try to recommend a book,
but I can't remember quite the title of one of my favorites that I read
that wasn't recommended to me from anything in the rationalist sphere.
It was just like I came across it in a library and it was like great 20th
or great experience of the 20th century or something.
And this woman tried to go through and like like in her own
investigation, trying to replicate as many as possible.
And none of them I can't remember anything related to conjunction fallacy in there,
but it was just fun.
Like I find the the 1900s to be like the most one of those fruitful,
probably the most I don't know, whatever, fruitful decade or centuries
of social psychological research, right?
I think it was in the early 1900s when like they first tried to test
like how many words can a small child remember or something?
Like just basic shit about people.
And we went all the way from that to all right.
Well, now we've got some basic idea of how people work.
Oh, how do they not work?
And that stuff started to come up at like 1950s and later and it was really cool.
And so there are a few book links at the end of this,
but they're all kind of in a diverse key, but no doubt they link to other books
and their own citations and essays.
So there's lots to look into here, look, lots to look into here
if you find the stuff interesting.
Yeah, there's kind of an interesting conversation in the comments as well
about the disparity between psychologists suggesting that people
should trust their instincts, but then also like being aware of biases.
Yeah, it's a tough balancing act for sure, but I don't feel bad.
So we can roll on if you want.
Sure, our posts, our sequence posts for next time will be burdened
some details and what is evidence?
And also, should I mention the thing that I have been talked into doing at this point?
Yes, actually, I was going to bring it up earlier
because when we were saying this one's really long, so I'll just skip to it.
I was going to say, but yeah, all right.
So on the TBC discord, a couple of people,
one in particular keeps asking me about this.
Shout out to you. Why we curse. This is all for you.
People keep asking me to like read the sequences.
And I'm like, but there's already two podcasts, two podcasts
that we link in every single episode that read the sequences for free.
And there was there was just like some desire to actually have me read them,
I guess, because people have gotten used to my voice and or like me or something.
And I was like, well, someone asked specifically again, why we could ask,
look, can I pay you to do this so that like it wouldn't be just such a terrible
imposition to you? And I was like, sure, I guess I would I would read a post for 20 bucks.
He's like, all right, I'm on it.
Just put up something so that I can get this money to you.
I was like, oh, God, OK.
So anyways, I have now created a commission, a sequence read page
on the Basin Conspiracy website.
There is a list of every single less wrong sequence
and a way to PayPal me $20 if you want to do that thing.
And I will read one of them and put it up.
And I can probably do between one and three a week, depending on like how busy
I am with other stuff in my life.
So please don't like swamp me or anything.
And again, there is other podcasts that are doing this, so you don't need to pay me.
But if you would like to, I will be happy to do that thing for you guys for
twenty dollars or even ten dollars for like the really short ones.
So yeah, there'll be a link included in this episode.
And I guess thanks in advance to anyone who does that.
You've also already done a handful on the Methods of Rationality podcast.
Yes, those are also already included in the initial page.
And the sponsor of those is just marked as HPMOR.com.
And yeah, if you do pay money for this thing, your name or whatever
you want me to put in the sponsored by space will be included on the website
forever or until the website goes down.
I was going to make a joke, but I don't think anyone want me to do them.
But I could just threaten to do them.
And if you don't have any ash to it, I will do it.
And then the world will be much worse off.
So nice, holding them for ransom.
So my question is any ash will will you read other things for money?
Sure, I suppose so.
All right, we've got them.
I don't have anything in particular in mind.
Just I just love this idea.
But you bet we'll find something terrible for you to read.
Now you have to.
I have a gun.
Oh, God.
I mean, it starts to with stuff that's copyrighted, there is the question
of actually getting the permission of the current rights holder.
So there's that.
The sequences are easy because Eliezer has already publicly said.
Feel free to do what you want with this, guys.
Alrighty, shall we move on?
Yes, what are we talking about for our main topic this week at Inyash?
Well, that is a good question, because I don't know, over the past few weeks,
I in particular have been kind of down and full of anxiety.
And I think it's in large part due to the election.
I don't know how you guys have been feeling.
You guys have been feeling the same way.
Oh, yeah.
You know, it's been a bummer, too, because I've been watching like,
I mean, everything has been talking about it.
But the last month of SNL nonstop openers about the debates or whatever
and watched last night's episode.
And it's just wall to wall election stress.
And, you know, it's weird.
Like, I don't know, the malaise you're talking about, man, like looking back,
like this all feels like, oh, yeah, I remember how this was like,
I mean, it just seems like yesterday where we were talking about,
oh, my God, can you believe the outcome of the election?
And then it's like, oh, yeah, like three times a week, this insane bullshit.
You know, like yesterday, the president tweeted out a video of those trucks
full of Texans harassing that Biden bus that they eventually ran off the road.
And whoa, I didn't hear about that.
Well, he tweeted out the he didn't tweet out the video of them running
him off the road, but they and harassing the vehicle.
Well, it was the harassment video that he posted.
You know, he posted in all caps.
I love Texas.
And like, it's just this is the the president and it stresses me out.
And, you know, part of me thinks it shouldn't.
But part of me, that part of me gets tired and gets stressed out anyway.
And so like, then you, but like this, the reason to hear about it,
because three things like this happen every fucking week.
And now we look back and realize it's been happening.
This has been going on for years.
And it's just like the whole world has been this exhausting and stressful nonstop.
I don't know, man.
We kind of try to avoid politics on this podcast sometimes.
I don't know. I guess not.
We don't focus on it specifically.
I guess we don't actually try to avoid it.
It's kind of weird though, because by the time this comes out,
like the election results will already be known, hopefully.
Not really. I mean, that's that's the thing is like because of the
the increase in mail-in ballots, like, I don't think we're going to have
a winner on Tuesday night.
We're going to have a prospective winner.
And like, I mean, the other thing to keep in mind here, too, is that like,
Trump could lose the election, but still fight to retain his seat in office, right?
The thing is, if we don't have a winner by Tuesday night, it'll be because
it wasn't so fucking overwhelming and obvious that he lost, that we have to
keep counting votes.
And to me, that in itself is a bit of a defeat because, like, we really
need him to lose that hard.
Just send a message to the Republican Party.
You know, don't do this shit again.
Well, I guess, I mean, this is all perspective.
I tell you what, we can make a wager.
Who wants to bet that there'll be a declared winner on Wednesday by the
time this episode comes out?
I don't want to bet on that.
I'm just saying that I would consider that already a lesser win, a bit of a defeat already.
I mean, Biden could be ahead by 15 million votes on Tuesday night, but there's,
I don't think that a concession is going to happen on Trump's side, right?
He would push it off for weeks and months while it was fought in court and then
debate, you know, challenging the results and making it this whole fuck all mess,
where then once it comes out, once all the, you know, votes are counted and they
don't try and do an Al Gore thing or they can't because he's lost by too much, then
he'll just, you know, sue a whatever the committees that are counting these and
drag this out for years, right?
If he sues individual voters for not voting for him?
I mean, I wouldn't put it past him if he thought he could get away with it.
Yeah.
So I guess it sucks because like everyone's saying, oh yeah, no, vote him out.
We'll all get this over with and I don't see it happening.
I see like, I mean, and everyone probably by now has heard, but like Walmart in the U.S.
stopped selling guns this week.
Yeah.
I think that, you know, like Red Cross volunteers, I've been sent instructions on how to handle
like basically prospective civil unrest next week.
And, you know, like, I mean, I guess the thing with Walmart, you know, to take it with a grain
of salt, like they don't sell the kinds of guns that you use to kill people with.
They sell, yeah, they sell like hunting.
They sell the kind of guns you can use to kill people with.
Right.
If you can hunt a deer, you can hunt a person.
Yes.
But I guess they don't hunt the one, they don't sell the ones that like you use for mass shootings.
They sell like 22's and like 22 calibers, which are not the ones that you use to shoot
a mob of people and like the small grain shotgun pellets that you use to shoot birds with and
stuff, they're not, they're not, they're not selling the kinds that you can use easily to
take to a nightclub and shoot 50 people or at least kill 50 people.
You can shoot people with 22, but they're not, they're small bullets.
Again, it's totally doable to kill people with them, but it's not the one, it's not the
weapon of choice for people who want to kill people with guns.
All right. Yeah, I guess it's not, it's not really a armed conflict sort of weapon.
That said though, I mean, just keep in mind what this still means is that like, you know,
somebody has decided, oh yeah, things have gotten insane enough to where we don't,
we don't want to risk putting these out on the shelves at our stores right now.
It's just a weird time to be alive.
One of the worst places to be, which do Walmart and police trying to protect themselves.
Uh, yeah, and so it's going to be here.
She always does time at Walmart.
That's where they store the toilet paper in the Walmarts.
So yeah, due to, due to, I guess, haha, I said due to, due to the general anxiety and
malaise and stuff. We, we like had a hard time getting our shit together.
So instead of like having a single unified topic, I just came up with a bunch of stuff
that grabbed my attention in the last week and thought maybe I would throw it out there for
us to bat around for a while. If you guys are down for that.
That sounds fun.
I've got some stuff that I grabbed.
I've got one quick thing just to shout out that we have been requested by one of our
awesome patrons, Lucas, to hope I'm saying that right, to do an episode on immortality research.
The, I feel like this deserves more than like my uninformed speculation.
So we're going to put that off until next episode where we have a couple weeks to do some homework
and actually form informed opinions. So that will be, that's my, that's what I'm bringing to the
table this week.
Yeah. So look forward to that if you, you know, are also feeling malaised and want to hear about
something other than Trump and COVID.
I want to say too, if you are feeling malaised and want something fun to do, we are doing
the, we've got a role on the Bayesian conspiracy server for, what do you call it, among us.
And so if you, if you're looking for people to play with, and it's a lot more fun to play with
people online, like that, you know, over voice, you can jump on this, jump on the Bayesian
conspiracy server, go to the, actually, I don't know if the welcome page has a bot for adding
the imposter role or not, but just at me and I'll, I'll either make the, make the robot or add you
manually. And that way, when someone jumps on to the, what, land parties channel and pings
imposters, you'll get a ping and you can play with people and it's a lot of fun. So yeah,
that's my, my, that's what I've been using to treat malaise is playing video games.
As long as I'm rambling about that, uh, Ghost of Tsushima is a game that I played a few months
ago when it came out and the, the single player was amazing. And they launched like two weeks ago,
an online mode that is so, uh, like broad and well done and, uh, versatile that I can't believe
they didn't charge number 60 bucks for it. It's amazing. And they totally could have. Um, it's
just, uh, anyway, it was free, free update. If you have Ghost of Tsushima and if you don't,
you can still buy it for 60 bucks, but the online version of that is awesome. I've been enjoying
this game like why would I enjoy it? Oh, uh, like, so the online is different than the,
the single player, uh, in a nutshell, um, it takes place in the age of the samurai,
they're fighting off a Mongol invasion and I played it coming off of, um, Last of Us 2.
And so this, this had like, uh, the, the gameplay is never stops being challenging,
but it's, it's, you're able to master it and actually get good at it and then really enjoy
it. It never stops being rewarding either. It's not like Dark Souls where it's just you
severe meatball your way into the enemy over and over until you memorize their movesets.
It's just a lot of fast timing, a lot of, okay, how do I go against this person?
Um, it's a game that requires a lot of, uh, like quick thinking and strategizing while in the
middle of a fight or approaching one. You can, uh, coordinate things. You can set things up.
Um, and then like the game is just pretty and fun and has a fun story. Uh, so in the
non-compet moments too, it's also really enjoyable. And, uh, what, what like genre is this? I'm having
our time picturing this. Uh, RPG with Katanas? It's, did you ever play it? Okay. I didn't play it
myself, but it looked a lot like the, um, first person fighter kind of thing, like, uh, Ninja
Gaiden. No, I think this is, uh, more like, you know, if you miss hit a button, you're going to
take damage and damage is severe. It's not like just a smash the square button until the enemy's
dead kind of thing. Oh, okay. Um, it's like, I mean, to go, I don't want to rail on it for too
long or not rail on it, but I don't want to, uh, hammer home how great it is for too long because
I don't want to suck up the whole episode, but like there are enemies with, uh, you know, there
are brute enemies, like the big heavy ones. They're one of the shields, one of the ones with spears
and one of the swords. And there are four different stances that you learn that you can,
one stance is good against shields, one stance is good against, uh, spearmen, and you can switch
immediately in the middle of combat without pausing the game. I think you hold like left
trigger and triangle to switch to the spear fighting stance or something. And so while you're
fighting a group of enemies and one's coming out with the spear, you quickly switch the spear
fighting stance and then counter that move and take the guy out and then switch back to the sword
fighting stance, but it's just really engaging. Um, check out YouTube and watch 10 minutes of
gameplay and check it out. Yeah, I'll check it out. Yeah, yeah, yeah. There's also a girlfriend
reviews on the, uh, game. So if you're, if you're like me and like that channel,
although she does not say, yeah, yeah, yeah, she says, hold up a minute. That's right.
Hold up a minute. You're running my catchphrase. Nice.
Okay. Uh, I don't know. Should I throw one of them out there or what?
I think Jason's going to say something before I interrupt it with video game stuff.
Oh, that's right. No, I was saying that I also have stuff that we could,
that I found that was cool. I don't know. I could, I could throw a thing out, but
sure, do it. Um, there's a list of posts that I really enjoyed. Uh, it's Katya Grace,
the bads of ads. Did I, did you see this one? Uh, maybe it doesn't sound familiar on the title
name of it. It's just about, um, it's first of all, like the best breakdown of why advertising is
terrible. Oh, I did see this. Okay. Yeah. The saturation of advertising and,
but it really like, it breaks it down like all the different ways that it just makes life less
good and, uh, talks generally about like attention theft and then at the end about what good and
ethical advertising might look like. I, um, first of all, this is like near and dear to my heart
because I hate ads and write about them all the time, especially the way that they're just shoved
in your face so much. Yeah. The ones specifically that are designed to, to grab your attention when
you don't want to divert your attention are the ones I really hate. Yeah. Back in the day when,
uh, TV was a still a thing and you sat down to watch TV, you knew there were going to be commercial
breaks. So you knew when to go and like leave the TV or muted or whatever. Like that was just part
of the deal. But when things are just like there to, to interrupt your thought process or what
you're already doing and try to take your attention, it's like you're, you're literally taking the
thing that I use to fuel my life. And I don't appreciate that. Auto playing videos with the
sound on websites. Oh, murder is what those people deserve to happen to them. I guess that's an
exaggeration. No, but it is almost, it's an understandable exaggeration because I don't
quite know what possesses them to think this is a good idea. Like I disable it or I leave the
site and I never come back. Like this is not something that the users enjoy. I don't know.
Speaking of annoying things, that's on the list. Yeah. Uh, I like this line stepping back, uh,
or no, it was, uh, sometimes I fantasize about a future where stealing someone's attention to suit,
uh, for the 14th time that they, to suggest for the 14th time, they watch your awful looking
play is rightly looked upon as akin to picking their pocket. Um, but the thing that actually I
wanted to say about this was something somebody pointed out in the comments, because it was about
podcasts. Uh, it was user mad saying, uh, I put my money where my mouth is, I support ad-free podcasts
uh, with unlockable ad-free versions on Patreon. This podcast brought to you by VP Nord VPN.
Sorry. Yeah. That's what they start talking about because they were saying that, uh,
first of all, it bothers them that we've been conditioned to accept ads as the price of the
internet and not have their precious time taken up with podcasts, who's aka people I trust telling
me about how much they love whichever meal box kid is paying them this year. And then, uh,
they talk about a time they emailed a podcaster to listen to when her podcast ran an ad for a
product that they knew she wouldn't support if she knew some easily Google backstory. And she
emailed them back, pulled the ad and said, Oh, I didn't use the product. I didn't know that it was
bad. And then, uh, mad goes on to say, Well, obviously, you know, a lot of these endorsements
are fake, but I find podcasts, especially insidious as the podcaster listen to relationship is
surprisingly intimate. And like, I rarely hear like tepid endorsements, um, of anything on podcasts,
most of them that listen to don't have ads. Uh, so I get by with very few like the Joe Rogan
experience opens with like six or eight minutes of ads, but he is nice enough to pre record them
and put them at the very beginning. So you just hit the skip forward button 20 times and then you
get to start the actual episode. Um, it's the ones where like partway through, uh, like a very
bad wizards does this, but they, they do it like in a self aware way, but is still kind of annoying.
Um, where they'll be talking and be like, Oh yeah, man, I've been so tired lately. That's why I got
this cool mattress. And, uh, then that's, that's their plug for whatever, right? Um, so it's kind
of funny how, uh, that, that all pans out. But yeah, some people managed to do it well, still
like, I still find it weird that it, it's sort of just, it's unfortunate that this is a money
making, you know, strategy that works for people who are making some or all of their income podcasting,
where clearly like they're providing a valuable experience for people. But what the hell does
like blue apron or how should I even say brand names like have to do with, I don't know, uh,
some like, or tabletop or PG podcast. Uh, it's just, I don't know. I think you actually had, uh,
on your blog, like years ago, probably at this point, but I remember there was an article you
wrote about, uh, like being pro targeted ads where you're like, I'd rather have, you know,
ads that actually like might be something that I might want to buy that like pertain to me personally.
There's a couple of ads I ran into that were really handy. They were telling me that someone
that I really loved was coming through town. I was like, Oh hell yeah, I'm going to go see him.
Thanks, ad. But, uh, yeah, I had that experience too. I mean, like, but there's privacy issues,
which are like a whole nother subject. But there's something else that Katya was talking about in
the original post where it's like, you know, could I, uh, let me just read the last sentence,
the last couple sentences is this, what would good and ethical advertising look like? Maybe I
decided I want to be advertised to now and go to my preferred advertising venue. I see a series of
beautiful messages about things that are actively helpful for me to know. I can downvote ads if I
don't like the picture of the world that they're feeding into my brain or the apparent uncooperativeness
of their message. I leave advertising time feeling inspired and happy. Yeah, but it is just sort of
like, it's not like people don't want to buy things. I don't know. It just, it seems like it's
just the coordination problems with, with marketing are so bad. There's got to be a better way to
do this stuff. Well, there's that great documentary put out by Tristan Harris, who was on Sam Harris's
podcast a couple of times. He was like the director of like ethics at Google or something. I forget
exact title that he had there. Um, but the YouTube or not YouTube Netflix documentary is called The
Social Dilemma, where it talks about the like digital avatars that are built by every activity
you do online that not just curtail ads to you, but curtail like certain permissions and offers
and stuff to you in particular. It's, it's rather insidious and more like, because I'd recommend
just listening to the episode he did on Sam Harris's podcast a month or two ago. It was a lot of fun
and Harris played the part of like the, the devil's advocate and he's like, well, what's so wrong
with, you know, I like seeing an ad for, oh, I didn't know this author put out a new book I like,
you know, it's nice to get that information. And he's like, sure, but it comes at a big cost.
And so, uh, I found that whole conversation really valuable and I didn't actually watch the
documentary because I'm already sold on it, but I will one of these days when I feel like being
bummed out. So, uh, probably in a little while, if, if things stop being less shitty and I have
less to be bummed about already, then I'll sit and deliberately bum myself out watching this.
Oh man. Deliberately bumming yourself out is not tight.
I think at least one person I trusted that they thought it was like pretty bad and pointless,
the social dilemma. Uh, Wes, maybe? I don't know. I haven't said it myself though.
I thought he said Wes, but stay, we love you bud.
Yeah, it does sound like a Wes thing.
I was thinking that too. Of course he hated it.
Uh, okay. But maybe he has good reasons. I, uh, but there's some,
there'll be some discussion that maybe I can follow.
Oh yeah.
Well, in that case, um, talking about bumming yourself being not tight, uh, the next thing I
was going, or the first thing I was going to throw out was that, um, I've kind of, uh, I was
listening to the skeptic sky to the universe recently speaking about, you know, podcasts
that we listen to and that sometimes pimp stuff for money because they need to pay bills.
But in a very recent episode, Steve Novella, who's the primary host, was going off about
pessimism and how pessimism sucks. And like what he said really struck a chord with me because
I have been for, I don't know, several months now on The Mindkiller, um, which is a different
podcast where we specifically do talk about politics. And it's, I mean, it's fun. I enjoy
hanging out with those people and, and I feel more informed. Yeah. And getting my mind killed,
right? But, um, always after I do this, I just, I feel like what, how is the government existing
as it does? And, and, and the, um, one of the co-hosts, David, is very much a, this is the
dumbest timeline. The government is terrible. What did you expect? It's, it's always, it's a
kind of pessimistic look on things. And like, I'm not trying to shit on David. He's cool. He's a cool
guy. Um, and we have a lot of fun. But like more and more, I've been feeling like, why do we even
bother having our government? It is awful. If you always expect the worst thing, you'll generally
always be right. And just in general, I've been feeling not like I did when I was a teenager,
when I was like, hell yeah, if we can like all coordinate and get together and work together
on these problems, we can fix our issues. And I've just been having more of a feeling of like
pessimism. And, and Steve Novella pointed out that like, pessimism leads to accepting things
that suck because, well, that's just the way things are. Of course, you know, everything's awful,
of course, the government's incompetent. And Steve was saying, no, we should do, don't be
pessimistic, don't accept things. If something isn't good, that is a problem. And you should
rage against the machine and go down fighting and screaming because, because that just as, as much
as pessimism feels like the wise thing to do, because it's who you know, it's a correct interpretation
of the world, maybe, maybe not, it leads to things being worse in the end. So it is a losing move to
to just be pessimistic as it brings you to accept crap. I don't know, what do you guys think?
It's hard because sorry, go ahead, Jason.
Um, he said, you actually said, I think that pessimism is like, there's it seems sort of wise,
because like, maybe it's a more realistic view of the world, but like,
sort of the meaning of pessimism is being pathologically negative about things.
Yeah, but what if you are accurately negative about things?
Well, I think there's a difference between reviewing the facts and choosing to be like,
okay, like, well, first of all, you can interpret what just there's so much unpack.
Like, I think it may be actively beneficial to be pathologically positive
to surround yourself with my little ponies in Steven Universe and like,
always see the good in stuff.
Well, that's like, sort of, there's a difference between I think, first of all, like,
diluting yourself about reality. But if you're, I don't know, if you're looking at the news and
you're only like, the thing I always point out is that the news is
deliberately like cherry picking stories that they that have like been focused tested to be as
basically attention grabbing as possible. It's more of the sort of attention theft thing.
When like, larger global data about the world shows things getting better.
But we like, but if you focus on all the stuff that's bad and you over focus on that,
and you discount the positive, repeatedly, you do train yourself to just expect the worst case
scenario to always happen. And you lose your motivation, because you don't feel like you have
any control over your life, over your outcomes, or that like humanity as a whole can do anything.
Right. Humanity is doing like really cool stuff all the time. But like, when we start looking at,
you know, all politicians are stupid, and I can't believe this is happening and like,
everything's so bad. It's like, is this really worse than like the dark ages?
Is Trump in office and like saying like COVID, COVID, COVID, everybody talks about
his COVID, it's over already, you know, like, but the thing is that like,
we're working on vaccinations and treatments. And if you think about, you know,
bionic plague, or other, you know, historical pandemics and compare it to now,
compare our situation to theirs. I mean, we're so much more informed. There is so much more
that we can do. Part of me finds solace in that kind of perspective, where, you know,
the Steven Pinker style, you know, things are a lot better than they historically have been,
like that's all great. But then it's on the one hand, you don't want to use that as to saying,
therefore, we don't have to push harder and keep going. And you also don't want to say like,
well, you know, it was way worse 500 years ago, back when a splinter would give you
infection and you die. Yeah, I'm not sure what the formal fallacy name is for that,
but I call it the starving kid in Africa fallacy. But in this case, the starving kid was, you know,
our poor ancestors. But like the, I guess, yes, even now in the state of the United States,
with over a quarter million dead from fucking this particular pandemic,
it like, yes, is that better than the robotic plague? Probably sure, definitely. But like the
point is, like, we as a species are capable of doing better. You know, I think Australia last
month had no cases. Like the the it is possible for our species to do better. And so like then
watching our our neighbors and community not is infuriating and drives me up the fucking wall.
So, and I'm not trying to to put down the the positive note you're bringing up so hard, it's
just like, I don't want to use any excuse to say like, well, no, but it could be worse because
sure, but that doesn't help, right? That's not what I'm trying to do either, because I can imagine
sort of coming to the conclusion of like, well, everything sucks. So what's the point of trying
both as like, or rather, backup? I think it's bad to, yeah, get make yourself really depressed by
how like, you know, focusing on the negatives or anything, then being like, well, what's the
point? I'm going to watch Netflix, and not go out and vote or whatever. Or, but also, you don't
want to just like, be like, Oh, everything is great. There's nothing to worry about in the world.
I think just it's the thing of discounting the positive, which like the thing that it's not
being a pessimist isn't having a more like accurate view of reality, being able to look at, okay,
there's positives and negatives here. And yeah, like that gets you out of either being pathologically,
like, you know, anchored on everything's fine. So I don't have to do anything about it or everything
sucks. So I'd like, so why bother doing anything about it? It's like a, are you using, I guess,
sort of, are you using the way that you view the world to motivate yourself, like in a healthy way
for yourself and for the species or it, you know, are you kind of binging on outrage porn and then
getting depressed and watching Netflix? That's a good point. I think that that toes the line a lot
more than I was giving it credit for. I think I just had a knee jerk reaction to it. I thanks for
the clarification. Yeah, sorry, I'm trying to like articulate something that I'm having a really
hard time articulating, but it's more like the point of, I think rationality is actually like,
you know, let's look at both sides of this thing that like, let's not discount the positives,
but also like, let's, you know, be aware that the negatives exist, and then just make like,
the best decision based on the data and not based on like, what my emotions are doing right now,
or, and that's so many things. It's not to say you shouldn't take care of your emotions either. I
mean, that's I think super important as well. And I hear what you're saying. I think my, my
inner David spearman is saying, thank you. No, you're good. I think it's my inner David spearman
is saying like, my emotions aren't playing a role. I'm just making accurate predictions.
I assume everything will be dog shit. And lo and behold, I'm right 99% of the time.
Does that sound like I'm channeling him pretty well? I would say that is not inaccurate.
But I think that like, on the one hand, you can, you know, just a, as of all things,
this goes back to methods of rationality, you can take the quail perspective and say,
yep, so everything's fucked and fuck everybody. Or you can take the hairy perspective and say,
so yeah, we've got to stay here and fight and make this better.
I think, I don't know. I, I've been personally been finding myself espousing the pessimism thing
a lot more than I used to and would like to. And it's, it's been like negatively impacting me.
So I need to find some way to start surrounding myself with more positive things, even when it
feels like a stupid sacred thing to do. Yeah. Well, that's sort of the taking care of your
emotions part of that too. And also I need to like specifically stand up and say things like,
you know what? Sure, it's dog shit right now, how it's done, but it could be done better. And
someday we will do it better. Okay, like this is bullshit right now. However, like first of all,
let's give ourselves credit for the fact that we are doing X, Y and Z things that like we weren't
able to do in the past. And then also we're learning about all the ways we failed this time.
And like people are going to be more prepared in the future, know what to do differently,
better, etc. Yeah, I think part of it like with, you know, like the Steve Novella,
you know, don't, don't give in a cynicism and, you know, stab and fight rage against the machine,
like my rage against the machine tank is empty, right? Like part of it is just gets,
it gets, you get so burnt out on this. I'm sure there's a word for it, you know,
Trump fatigue or something. But I guess to Jayce's point, I like, I like the way you're putting it
that, you know, it's, it's, you can take solace in the fact that like things are better than they
were without saying we can't do better. And like the other thing too, you know, I just think about
this when for fuck's sake, this impeached fraud president got three Supreme Court seats that
like, you know, yes, worst case scenario, I remember when he nominated her and this was
obviously going to go through because of course, like, yeah, this could end badly. And it could,
you know, make the United States less comfortable for a few decades. But hopefully my view is that
like in the long run, how does Scott Alexander put it that like, you know, the, the, I forget he
paints this picture in the Molek essay, but like, you know, history might have might swing
different ways, but it always moves left. Like we are historically always on an upward trend
with the occasional setback sure. But like in 100 years will be better than we are now,
almost definitely, right? Or at least if you're based on historically,
things have been getting better, right? So setbacks aside, I think we're still moving forward.
Yeah, we still have the capability of moving forward. Also, I think that there's something
about sort of just like, also, I guess, believing in humanities, like potential to be good and to
be competent, where maybe that is sort of like the having blind faith or whatever.
Thank you. I think, I think that's what my problem was. I was, I was losing my,
my faith that humanity even had the potential to do good and do better. That like, it was,
everything always seems to reduce to status games and, and this zero sum fighting over, over
heavy shit. And, and I need to stop, stop thinking that. Yeah, like, because what's
everything, you're like, everything always, that those are actually like,
those are things that are literally false, I know. I mean, this is like really, I'm trying to
find this CBT article that I was, I'm going to just give up because I've been really articulate
while I've kind of half of my brain is trying to say podcast words and half of my brain is
trying to figure out where I put the link. But this is like literally how you use CBT to,
to combat depression and anxiety by catching when you have these thought distortions of like,
always never discounting the positive catastrophization and, and realizing like,
Can you quickly say what CBT stands for? Because there's at least three different things
that cognitive behavioral therapy. Okay, thank you. Not not CBD. Not to be confused with the
non psychoactive cannabinoid or whatever the other one is. The other one was cock and ball torture.
Well, I know I can at least advocate the CBD. I went off benzodiazepines entirely with a
CBD tincture. Oh, okay. Not CBT. Actually,
Well done, you guys. Thanks for putting a smile on my face. This was kind of grim.
Yeah, when you were getting to a dark place, I was actually also about to read you.
This is a super tangent, but like really quick. I was, since I was homesick from my like,
partner's Halloween party yesterday, I was playing around with AI dungeon, the
I think it was dpd2 at that point, right? Sort of interactive adventure game. Some people had
written some Halloween scenarios. And there was this clip from one that I found that is just excellent.
You walk towards the kitchen before you hit the doorbell ringing. It's probably your father
returning from work says your mother. He always comes through the front door.
You nod and walk towards the front door. You open it up to find a man standing on the porch.
He has a large gut and thinning blonde hair. His brow is furrowed. And he has a confused look on
his face. Hello, he says. I'm your father. I came through the front door. I know you reply. I'm not
stupid. Awesome. It's me. I came through the front door like I always do. This sounds like an alien
replaced your father. Yes. It's actually like, yeah, it does create this spooky feeling, but I just
love the playing with, you know, baby AI, how it'll be like really loose. And sometimes then
sometimes this is why humans are like great. Humor is really good for combating stress, depression,
anxiety. So yeah, and also like cute animal videos. The Great Britain Show. Yeah.
Japanese week this weekend. It was awesome. And I might need to see if I can find that.
It's on Netflix. Most recent episode. Oh, nice. Okay. I remember that. So were you,
I was going to say you were I just as you were breathing weird stuff. I remember you were going
to tease us with some kind of time travel thing. Oh, okay. Now I'm looking for another link. Okay,
it's not time travel. It's this. Well, the article is on psychology today. I found it as just like
a Google recommendation, which like sort of in the thing of targeted ads, Google is pretty good
at suggesting the articles sometimes too good. Because definitely I was supposed to be doing
my like programming boot camp. So I can talk about but instead I was reading shit like this.
In the time of Takasensia, which I will link so that people can read this but apparently the
psychologist wrote an article called is there such a thing as Takasensia and then received dozens
of feedback messages with stories of Takasensia bouts along with comments claiming that there's
no such thing as Takasensia. What is Takasensia? So it's sense of time. Yeah. People get apparently
like and it usually comes up when in reference to like PTSD, fevers, migraines, stress, fear, anxiety.
This frightening, like weird feeling of time going really fast or really slow.
Oh, yeah. And it's apparently like, if it exists, which I've experienced this, or at least I think
I have. The part of your brain that like creates a feeling of things being consistent and logical,
you know, time following, time sort of passing at the same rate. It can get messed up.
There's a couple quotes. So I felt like I was in a tunnel with a person approaching me,
the same person many times over and over again at great speed. I would hear a clock on a wall
ticking so loudly as I saw the second hand whipping around. It sounded like someone was
hitting a giant bell with a sledgehammer. I'm standing on an escalator going up but the people
on the down one to my right are descending five times as fast. The surroundings around me appear
to move fast as if someone pressed fast forward on a movie. Like all of this sounds stuff that
would be terrifying if you didn't know why it was happening, but like really enjoyable if you'd
taken some drugs and were expecting it. Yeah, I was going to say, first of all, this sounds like
things that people experience on psychedelics. Distortion or dilation of time, I think is
like something that is consistently reported as one of the side effects or intentional effects
of some recreational drugs. Well, it's different from doing it on purpose.
Yeah, I mean, it could still be really scary. I had actually an experience with this,
what I think is the same thing, when I accidentally combined drugs that should not be combined.
And the way that the psychiatrist explains this is in line with the like surfing uncertainty
predictions all the way down model of how your brain works. But I remember before I even read
that article or knew anything about that model. One time I was at this, I was at an anime con.
And then I like, it took some drugs that shouldn't be mixed and had like one beer. But like,
it was really scary actually, because it was early in the day. When we arrived at like,
I don't know, 10am or something, I like took some prescription drugs and like
some metropic. And then like that night, we were eating dinner and I had one beer. And then
suddenly it was just, I started experiencing time as just like a bunch of saccades or like
still snapshots with all the space in between that like, I think is actually
the stuff that your brain fills in to make it seem like there's this consistent pattern or this,
you know, okay, this happens, and then this much happened. And this person was walking across the
room at this time, like your brain's actually just like making all this shit up and filling it to
get like, you know, piecing it together. And it seems really logical and consistent. Unless you
break that part of your brain, and you realize how little sense experience you're actually getting
from the environment and how much your brain is just like, sort of making a hologram of what
it thinks is going on. I don't know. I think it's really cool. And also, something that I,
I don't know, something I'm just like interested in lately.
Yeah, it would be a good, not good. Oh, I was just saying like,
and since it's on drugs, you, you always then you have to wonder like,
is this because it is breaking down my brain's ability to fill in these details. So I'm noticing
it. Or is this because the drugs are just making me think this is what normally happens when
usually my brain is running just fine. Yeah, I don't know. Like, are you seeing the true
functionings without this, the, the, the, the artifice layered over the top, or are you just
having a malfunctioning period? Yeah, I mean, if you look at MRI scans of the brains of people
on psychedelics, which they, I know that they've done a lot of mushroom scans, I'm not sure about
other kinds. But what neurologically appears to be happening is that where, while normally
parts of your brain will show active electrical currents that are associated with whatever tasks
at hand or whatever you're processing, all of your brain is just lit up on mushrooms.
And so you experience what you're experiencing is actually the, the loss of your ability to
selectively focus to filter out information, which is kind of interesting. I also can't help
but imagine like how easily a trip could turn bad sitting is at an MRI. It could be fun. I actually
don't mind the rhythm of it and they tend to get really warm, which is nice. But it could be a,
you know, an odd experience for sure. I think it'd be hard to sit still.
Some noise-canceling headphones that played in some cool music and
because just being inside that hollow metal tube would be awful. But if you got something to look
at and something fun to listen to, it could be pretty good. Yeah, they usually throw on the
headsets that feed through, you know, whatever noise, but still an odd time.
I got to say, one of the most interesting things that happened from taking LSD to me was
you know how you have the, the saccades with your eyes where they're constantly moving just a
little bit and your brain edits it out. You never see it. I was coming down and I was looking out
my back door at the power lines and I could see them jumping, like just little, little bounces.
And it took me a couple of minutes to figure out what the hell was actually happening.
But like when there was something interrupting my line of sight to like,
a, not a post, but you know, one of those things in your window that goes up and down,
but just don't know what the term for it. But yeah, the central thing that would
break your line of sight, like the jumps to the left and to the right of that were different
and not in time with each other, even though they were, you know, the same line. And I was like,
oh, okay, I get it. I'm seeing the saccades. Like I'm actually seeing the effects of my eyes jiggling
a little bit all the time. And my brain is just failing to stitch it together into one seamless
thing. That's really cool. But the neat part was apparently some part of my brain got the message
that these power lines are different from all other power lines. And so for the next three weeks,
whenever I looked out there at those power lines, I could always see them not nearly as much as
when I was coming down off the LSD, but I could always see them jiggling just a little bit. And
I was like, how long is it going to take for my brain to realize that these are just normal power
lines again? And they should interpret them like all other power lines. And it took about a month,
but just the long term effect of that where it had really been ingrained in my brain that
these power lines, you really got to just take them on face value. They don't stay still like
all the other ones do. That's really funny. Yeah, that was neat. Yes, anyway, I want to
like this article because I don't know, I found it to be really fascinating and it brought up a
bunch of other questions about experiences that I've had. And I'm actually just curious to hear
if other people in the community have experienced this sort of thing and to hear more people's
experiences because they're really cool. And I think that there's something really valuable
about the experience of kind of getting a firsthand view of like your brain's abilities and then
also like your brain's sort of limitations. It's humbling. That's that's my random thing.
Okay. No, that's really cool. Some of my favorite action scenes, like both in novels and in movies
are things that try to portray that sort of thing where someone is under such stress that
it breaks down those those normal brain functions. And I remember Altered Carbon specifically
had one in the book where he disassociates from himself. Bullet Times, yeah, that's a good one
too. In Altered Carbon, he disassociated from himself. And that was really fun to read where
like he felt like he was trapped within him and just reporting on what his body was doing.
But I think that's one of the things that really got me into anime when I was younger because
in the 90s, like TV and movie budgets weren't nearly as big. And there were things you could do,
but it was harder and not as not as realistic. Whereas with anime, you can just literally draw
whatever. So when someone is having a psychotic break, you could just draw what the shit is
happening. And that was some intensely fun, fun stuff to watch. I'm assuming you're talking about
Evangelion. I mean, that is certainly one of the things I'm talking about. But there it's a common
thing in a lot of anime of that time period. Yeah. And maybe still, I just don't watch nearly as
much as I used to. That's something that I liked about anime as well. But I find that I always
prefer to watch animated things than live action, unless they do have like that incredibly high
budget that you're talking about. And I think because you're able to better portray emotional
experiences, even in the way they're designed, I've had to explain to people from like an art
theory perspective, like, oh, why are they drawn so weird? And it's like, the eyes and the mouths
are huge because you use them for expression. There's no nose because you don't use that for
anything. So it's pointless data. And all the crazy like symbols and stuff appear in order to
just better like communicate what this character is thinking and feeling and doing. It's very
expressive. That's the point. I know a certain Scott Daly who would who would have argued with
you intensely on that. Yeah, well, bring it on. Yeah. Different strokes. I mean, you know,
whatever it's doing in animation, it's, we're not exactly as fine tuned for that as we are for
watching someone's actual face. And so like, what was that? Especially for autistic. Right.
But I'm just saying like, it's, it's fun to see like, very subtle facial changes in human actors
that are hard to get across in anime, you know, they'll zoom in on the person's eyes or something
in anime and show them or whatever. But watching, I don't know, some good dramatic acting is is
also epic. Yeah, I actually started watching the office and I was not able to watch the office
before because it stressed me out. It still stresses me out, but in a like more enjoyable way
now. And I honestly think that a lot of it had to do with just studying some, I don't know,
being so exposed to real time facial expressions and actually like doing the work of trying to
analyze faces, which I did, makes it more like, okay, I know what's going on in this story now
whereas before it was just like people twitching their faces oddly, and I don't know, I couldn't
tell what anybody was trying to express ever. And I was just like, yep, this is my experience with
like being in an actual office and it's terrible. Oh, man. I tried to watch that show a couple of
times and I can't get past maybe if I skip the first season or something, but I kind of hate
Michael Scott as a character. I hear he gets better, but he's just like to me like the worst
kind of boss and everything about like he just exudes stress and I don't find it fun. That's
what I've seen a hundred clips of the show and a lot of it's he was just genius and really funny.
There was a better. Yeah. Yeah, that's what I hear. I should give it another another fair shake.
I'd like a lot of the gifts from it, but yeah, I agree. I watched an episode or two and I'm like,
I hate everybody on the show. Why would I bother watching them do things when I hate them so much?
There's a great video. They do a lot of cold opens where it's just like a sketch that doesn't go
anywhere. And there's one where, shoot, I forget, John Krasinski. Instead of him coming into his
desk because he doesn't like Dwight and they mess with each other. So instead of him coming
in one morning, it's Randall Park. And he's just like, Hey, Jim, or he's like, Hey Dwight,
and it's like, wait, you're not Jim. And he's like, of course I am. He's like, okay, if you're Jim,
what deal did you close? And he's like, Oh, you mean this one or this one? And he's like, no, no,
you're not Jim. And he grabs the guy's picture off his desk. John Krasinski. I forget his name
in the show. And he looks at it and it's, it's got Randall Park in there. And he's like horrified
because he's like, Oh my God, I've been wrong this whole time. Randall Park is Asian and John
Krasinski isn't. That's why it was so dramatic. Oh, yeah. So it was just like, it was a great,
I mean, so like those little sketches, I think are really funny. Like, you know, it doesn't
involve anyone being as nutty as they usually are in that show. But I guess I'm not informed enough
to talk about the rest of the office. But I did have a question, Inyash, in our here's some random
ideas to talk about. You had a couple of other things you wanted to, to get to. And I'm curious
about the second two, because we talked about the, you know, rage against the machine stuff.
So all right, the one of the other ones is this came up just by on the discord watching again,
Why We Cur, he's really coming up a lot in this episode, talking about driving in Sweden. It seems
to me that if society makes a really big deal about something, it can really kind of screw up
the practice of it for people. Because like, in America, driving just isn't that big a deal.
Like you, you get in a car, your family car with someone in your family, and they kind of show
you how to do it first in the parking lot, then in some like, more abandoned streets. And, you
know, for the course of a week or two, you pick it up. And then you kind of drive badly, and maybe
you crash the car or get close calls or something. But, you know, everybody knows teenagers getting
more accidents. And that's why their insurance rates are so high, whatever. It's, it's not a big
deal. You learn how to drive. And like in Sweden, apparently, it's this huge thing where not only
does it cost thousands of dollars for lessons, but like, it's, it's very rare for someone to pass
their driving test on less than the fourth time. And when, when Why We Cur was talking about it,
he was like, how do you merge onto a highway where all these cars are sipping past? Or like,
how do you know that without all these tests, how do you know to check all your mirrors and
look to your right before you start pulling out so you don't hit the bicycle pedestrian?
In most cases, like, I know, but like, he just said, like, the thing was the,
the way he said it, like he was taking the test and the instructor was like, oh, you didn't look
right there. That's a dead bicyclist. And I was like, wow, holy shit, like it seemed like it was
such a big deal and so stressed and so stressful, I guess, in their society that it just the entire
process of learning to drive seems to have become this, this massive thing that it just
doesn't really need to be. And as someone who's lost people to car accidents, I actually think
that people dying in traffic accidents is a big deal. And that we should be driving seriously.
I don't think, you know, I was just saying that we should take the acceptable loss of human life
over how easy it is to get a driver's license. No, I don't think. What point is? Well, I mean,
I don't think that it's not a big deal, but I think like they overstressed it to a rather
ridiculous degree that like the way people were finding out. Causes of death. I mean, like,
car accidents? Well, yeah, I mean, yeah, I was one of the really big ones in the US.
Well, so we should look and see what the difference is between, you know, the percentage of Swedish
car deaths versus American car deaths. I mean, if they're. Absolutely, the better outcomes.
That's a good question. I did not look. Yeah, so that would help settle it. But I am curious,
because like, you know, on my driver's test, when we finished, he said, other than that stop light,
you didn't stop once, but here's your permission to go get your license.
Like apparently I came to a rolling stop at every stop sign. So, but he didn't care. And I do think
it should be harder to get a driver's license. You know, it, it's, there's definitely like a fine
line, you know, should it be as hard to get a driver's license as it is a pilot's license,
you know, should you need 1,000 hours with, probably you don't need 1,000 to get a pilot's
license, but should you need hundreds of hours with a certified instructor in order to drive a
car to get to work? I mean, unless there's going to be some enormous new government department that
will enforce this, it's going to cost a fortune and most people just won't be able to drive anymore,
which like if you live in, you know, the middle of some, some city that's not a big deal. But if
you live where almost everybody lives, you need a car just to get to work, right? Dang it. I think
Jace has just already convinced me that I was way too blas about this. And maybe we should take
this a lot more seriously. Well, both Jace and your particular anecdote about you fail horribly,
but here's your license anyway. So I think that actually, like, I have very strong feelings about
this. We should have self-driving cars. Humans should never have been given the ability to drive
cars. We're so bad at it. Yeah, every time I drive anywhere. And like, I guess it's hypocritical to
be like, and like, you know, and I drive all the time. So I see all these terrible things, but
nobody knows how to drive. Like the whole, yeah, I've definitely like, remember, the drivers test
being kind of shitty, not covering a lot of things that like, basically they were testing, like,
can you turn the car on and sort of drive it around and mostly figured, okay, you're fine.
But I see people just, you know, merging without looking and cutting each other off. And
especially like, I see this a lot when I'm driving, like towards Thornton area where one of my
partner lives. I don't know what the deal is, if it's just coincidence that I happen to just see
so many shitty vehicles. But like, there was a day where there was a car in front of me falling
apart. Like, I'm driving and something that like just falls off the bottom of their car, a long
piece of pipe. Oh my God. And I had to actually like, drive off the road a bit where luckily,
there was like a full two car lengths of margin on the side of the road. Like, because I was on
the highway. But like, I had to keep dodging like that. So I like pull up to this person,
you're still driving like your cars fall apart, you might want to pull over. He's and he's gripping
his steering wheel looking straight ahead and doesn't like behave as though he's heard me just
keep striving. But there's just so I like have relayed the story to a few people because I just
find this baffling. I don't know what was going on there. But yeah, that's the kind of thing that
can just like happen when you're on the road. I mean, yeah, I do still think like, Sweden seemed
like it's over exaggerated because I was hearing stories about not hearing stories. I was literally
reading people saying like, how do you manage to stay in the lane when you can't see the tires?
And you know, with the lines on the road are, I'm like, you just, you just from a little bit
of experience, you get the feeling of, you know, you know, how it looks when you're in your lane
while you're driving from your car from the driver's side. And I think another one that brought
up was like parking. And I thought they were talking about parallel parking, because you know,
that can be if you don't know the algorithm, it's hard to figure it out on your own.
Once someone teaches it to you, you're like, Oh, okay, that's how you do it. But before you've
been taught the method, it's tough to figure out. But I guess it was even just like pulling
straight into a regular parking spot. And I'm like, this just this doesn't seem at all difficult.
And I know Americans are reckless and bad at driving, but there's some things like staying
in the lane and pulling parking lot that seemed really intuitive and easy from the from pretty
early on. Yeah, getting a sense of how big your car is is the kind of thing you get sense of.
But like, first time in a new car, you might not get exactly right. You know, like I once in a while
will park my wife's car in our single car, little garage unit. And she drives a Subaru Forester,
which on its side isn't actually all that big, all that much bigger than mine. It just feels
a lot bigger because it's it's a taller car. And maybe a couple inches wider or something,
but not not radically. But it's still like, because the angles are all different, you know,
when you're turning to angle into this thing, because you can't just pull straight in given
our the way our parking lot is all set up. It's there's this, you know, moment every time where
I'm like, am I gonna, you know, hit the bumper on the edge of the garage here? And so far not yet.
But maybe this is a thing about like, in Europe, a lot of people don't own their own cars. And so
you're always driving some weird strange thing. Whereas in America, you have one car that you
intuitively get a feel of after a few bit of time.
I remember it taking a very long time to get that feeling. When I first started driving, but like,
I don't know, recently, I've been driving a lot of moving trucks. And it's definitely like a skill
that you can build. Like it takes me a couple of minutes behind the wheel of a new car to like
get the feel of the dimensions. And I feel like the first time letting any random model with
20 bucks drive a commercial vehicle is kind of insane. There's a great little clip on Family Guy,
YouTube, Family Guy, U-Haul, that summarizes it perfectly. But yeah, I mean, you don't need a
commercial driver's license to rent a, you know, big U-Haul and drive this from wherever you want
to wherever you want, right? It's surprising that I'm allowed, you know, I'm licensed to drive my
little Honda and then for whatever 50 bucks, they let me borrow it for a day, some giant truck
that is, you know, no rear view window and it's a whole different beast. But they're like, eh,
you're moving, it's fine, go nuts. And just the amount of weight in it, especially when it's
fully loaded, like is a drastic difference. You're like, holy shit, I got to start breaking a lot
earlier in this thing. Right. Yeah, I've only driven a U-Haul a few miles once. But yeah,
I mean, it's, it's a different thing. I think the, the weight thing I was probably already
in tuned with because I'm like, well, I got all my stuff in here balanced somewhat precariously in
the back. I want to, you know, slow, you know, accelerate and decelerate fairly smoothly. But
yeah, it's a nightmare. But I'm with Jay's 100%. We should not have apes driving cars.
I think our descendants will look back at us and be like, why'd you guys do that for so long?
You guys could have stopped doing it 15 years earlier. And we'll say, well, people threw a fit.
I guess, yeah. When I was trying to think of, of, uh, parallels to this, I was like, well, U.S.,
the U.S. is kind of that way about like sex and people losing their virginity. Like it's this
huge thing. Then people get all sorts of crazy neuroses about it when really it's
probably a pretty small step between what you were doing before and the actual sex. Like
people rarely jump in completely cold into losing their virginity. And you've been like
fooling around and kissing and doing lots of other stuff for weeks, if not months, if not years
beforehand. It turned out so bad that you die in sex sexual intercourse. I mean, it happens,
told people, uh, but like, yeah, people mess up in their BDSM scene. But like,
this is like, think about the amount of regulations around getting a gun.
You can kill so many people with a car so easily. Yeah. Yeah. I think we have a lot of pathos,
neuroses as a society in the U.S. based on how crazy we are about sex in general.
Well, even just like turning 18 or turning 21, people act like they're these big watershed
things. And you work out on your 18th or 21st birthday realizing you don't feel any different
than you did the day before. But there's just all this buildup about it. You know,
maybe graduating high school is not one of those things where, you know, you're told it's this
big dramatic thing and it's just not. It still feels like the exact same person I was when I was
like in middle school. Like it's just one of those things that keeps occurring to me like as I'm
getting into my 30s where I'm like, is there ever going to be like a point where I feel like, okay,
I'm an adult now. I hope I don't have that. I, I finally over the past two years have started
to feel that a little bit like even all the way up until I was 38 or something. I was like,
yeah, I guess I have some gray hairs and some wrinkles, but I feel just like fucking teenage
me. What the hell? But I don't know. I think, I think specifically having
certain emotional betrayals in my life recently really did change my personality a bit. And I
actually do feel older now. Like I trust people less. That's the correlating things I wasn't
necessarily trying to correlate. I'm just saying, if you want to grow older, have someone betray you
really bad. I think there's also the one, one way to feel a little bit like older and more
competent is just like getting good at some adulting style things. Like once you can file your
taxes and it's not a stressful thing or whatever sign up for new utilities or something.
Like adulting at all. That's just like a different form of homework. Like they,
the teachers told me, you know, do these problems and then I get a, the government says,
do these problems and then I get some money back. It was, it was literally the same thing.
Fair enough. Yeah. I don't quite have that sense. Maybe my, my metrics aren't, aren't, aren't right.
So, you know, I, I don't ever want to feel like an adult quote unquote, because in my
childhood experience, adults weren't happy people. And so like I want to be like, oh,
if being adult is like just, you know, being miserable or whatever all the time, fuck all
that. I'm going to, you know, just do whatever I want all the time and stay happy. So
I was going to say like a long-term injury also helps with feeling older. But on the other hand,
like you've had back problems for far longer than I've had and you still say you feel pretty
much like a teen, Steve, right? I mean, I don't know what teen Steven felt like. I mean, physically,
I feel old, but like, since I guess I felt this way for so long, it's just how I am. But
like my, I just mean like cognitively, I guess, and I'm probably modeling that up of, you know,
bad archetypes. But yeah, I mean, just, I don't know, I decided that like, nah, if, you know,
being mature means like, I don't know, whatever, doing boring adult stuff instead of having fun
and watching movies and playing video games, I'm just not going to do the boring adult stuff.
Yeah, forget all that. All right, what was the third item on your list,
Yash? It was confusing. Oh, okay, right. The last thing was gatekeeping as a way of limiting
new stakeholders. This came to me when I was finding out about eviction law, because, you know,
now that I went to place out that might become important. It, it's weird to me, like how many
laws there are making it hard to get people out of a place that you live, like,
even when they're actively doing bad things to it and not paying you any money. And really, it,
it seemed to just came down to the fact that like, once someone is somewhere, they kind of have a
stake in it. And I don't know how to put this exactly, like, once people mix their own lives
in with anything at all, they feel a sense of ownership and, and, and like, they've invested
in something. And that's, I mean, that's accurate, right? Another one that comes to mind is like,
I'm in, I'm the guild leader of a guild in World of Warcraft right now. And a lot of people, I
like, I have ultimate saying who can come and who gets kicked out of the guild. But you, if you're
in a guild for a few months, you put in a lot of time and you've like, you've dedicated some part
of your life, which you will never get back, because we're all getting older and dying into,
into helping to build this thing. And so it becomes like a really big deal to kick someone out, even
if, you know, legally the only, they don't have any, any right to stay. And the whole, the whole
idea, I guess, seems to have been that like, and squatters rights are the same kind of thing,
like if you own some land and someone just like moves in to a building, if you don't kick them
out within a certain number of years, it becomes their building, which just seems like the strangest
thing to me. But I guess like property rights are, are delimited by the government in order to
keep people from not killing each other, right? And that's what it is. When someone feels like
they have a stake in something or someplace, because they've mixed their own life with it,
then they might get angry. And just because the law says, Oh, this is technically my car
or my house or whatever, and you have to go out now. If they're like, no, I have been using and
maintaining and living in this place for X number of years, I will fight you, I will, you know,
maybe start a fire and endanger the neighborhood, I will maybe attack someone violently. The government
doesn't want that to happen. And so they take the, the interest of all stakeholders into account,
even not necessarily people who have legal rights to stuff. And so, and so I kind of
like understood now why sometimes there would be, there would be an instinct to
gate off communities or, or social groups or whatever to not let new stakeholders just join
willy nilly, because then once someone is in, they do start mixing their life with stuff and
getting investment in it. And if you don't like what they're doing, it can be really hard to dislodge
them afterwards, both from them fighting back perspective and even from like a legal perspective.
So gatekeeping seems almost like a rational thing to do in various situations. I don't know. This
is just a random thought I was having. It is not well thought out. So I'm just kind of throwing
it out there and wondering what you guys think. That's the theme of tonight's episode. Don't sweat
it. I don't know. That's interesting. I see what you're saying. Like, you want a barrier to entry
into things because it, I guess, makes it more, it keeps out things that'll easily ruin the,
the, or that could easily ruin the situation. Is that a good distillation?
Um, yes. Like, yeah, someone joins a new community and they try to change the community norms a bit
that might, you know, annoy everyone else there. But on the other hand, if they've been part of
this community for a long time and contributing to it as well, then it's hard to just, you know, say
kick them out or ignore them. And that might be why you want to, you know, vet the people that
you let join your community in the first place. I'm trying to think of any things that this can
apply to. It seemed like, Jayce, you had some counter argument early on before I got going.
Um, not really a counter argument, but just, I wish that I feel like probably there are people
who are better equipped to talk about this because I'm weak on history and economics. But
I believe that the eviction laws are so strict because there was a point before that that they
were really heavily weighted or just maybe a hundred percent weighted like for the benefit of
the landlord. And it was, it led to this like really oppressive or I don't know, I'm sure that
there's also different opinions about this too. But yeah, there's definitely abuses that can be
that, that a landlord abuses the power can, can do, can, can exercise. So there definitely needs to
be some protections to protect against that. Yeah. I mean, um, the other thing is like my
experience is my dad, uh, is like a carpenter. Everybody also like started like when he was
in his fifties or so buying some investment properties, fixing them up and trying to rent them.
And then I also did this, uh, not the exact same thing. I like owned a house, lived in it and
rented out rooms to roommates. And some of my friends and coworkers also did this in my experience.
This is that I had and that I'll always hear of terrible tenants who are so protected by laws that
you like can't care for them. Yeah. Uh, and yet it can be as bad as like literally having someone
living in your house who is like eating your food, not paying rent, trashing the place, having
parties there all the time or having their like various like creepy boyfriends come by and just
giving them the key, like just all kinds, especially if you're living there too. But like,
my dad's like renters regularly would like trash the place that he'd fixed up and it ended up
costing more to fix it than like he had earned by having them as tenants. A coworker had a,
it was like his and his wife's first house. And then they got another one when they had kids
and they're like, we'll rent this one. And the person living there kept saying that they had
medical bills so they couldn't pay the rent, but they wouldn't leave. They went through the process
of evicting them, which I think took years. And the person was so mad that when they, when they
moved out, I think they broke all the windows and then also broke all of the pipes and let the lower
floor flood with sewage. Jesus Christ. In order to get back at my coworker who, you know, owned the
house and was still paying a mortgage on it. Is there no like way to get insurance against this?
Because all this is making me want to never rent my place. It's, it's a risky thing. I have learned
well the, that and I didn't learn it precisely the hard way, but almost that you really, really
got to be very careful who you went to. You mentioned vetting people. Serious vetting. Yeah.
I think also probably contractual agreements. Like I made the mistake of not making some of my like
friends pay or sign a renters notice. And then if they hurts, what is it called? It might just be
a renters notice, something like that. There's some document, but then like apparently legally,
if you don't have them sign an agreement, renters agreement, but you've let them live there for
a certain amount of time, then that means that like legally they now have a stake in it. And so
you can't pick them out even if you own the house because it's like, well, you invited them here
and they weren't paying rent before. So you can't just suddenly start charging them rently. It's
like, so are they? Okay. So then you have to prove that they've done something bad.
That sounds like madness. I'm with you. Like I'm certain that there's, there's probably some
really justifiable back reason for how things got to be this way. But, you know, because like you
said, tyrannical landowners or landlords or whatever, but certainly the state of affairs as it is
sounds just totally untenable. I feel like it's one of those things like universal basic income
where I'm just sort of like, if we have these like societies, it would be cool if they could
guarantee people at least like somewhere to live and food to eat like close to where like it seems,
I don't know, if we want to live in a society where we're pro human flourishing, maybe give
people the basics of like literally the ability to survive. But I don't know, maybe I'm just insane.
Yeah, you get out here with that pipe dream. Come on.
We didn't have to defend ourselves against ourselves all the time.
We have to hack human psychology in order to oh my god. I'm getting like four or five like phone
calls from elected or like representatives of elected officials. Are you guys getting those?
Well, I voted like a month ago, they need to get off my back. Yeah, someone called during the
recording too. This would be the third. I just have my phone nearby and I'm gonna actually
just get like, I'm gonna place it on the bookshelf. You know, that actually brings us full circle to
the beginning of the episode and we're a couple hours in so we can wrap up here. Yeah, we probably
should at that point. I just wanted to like kind of end up saying that gatekeeping sort of seems
it has a very bad, bad connotations nowadays. It is not a popular thing. And in general, I was
always against it as well. But I have come to see lately, it's practical applications is like a sort
of self defense thing. And maybe it isn't all bad. Yeah, no, I hear you. That's a bigger topic
than we have time for, or that you know, or brain for. But I am glad you got me thinking about that
because definitely there's I think ways that the model of economic like, you know, renter
landlord relationships and the politics around that like has parallels with the community
gatekeeping that you seem to be sort of paralleling it to but I'm sure that there's differences.
Well, we should have we should have time to get to everything if we all live to be immortal,
which would be the subject of our next episode. You could listen to us talk forever.
If you want to do forever and ever and ever. Oh, God. Yep. That was already terrifying. All right.
Who is our awesome patron? We're thinking this week. I got last episode. Oh, I think it was me.
Looks like this time we are thanking patron Mark and Mark. I made a clapping gesture,
but just came short of clapping into the microphone, which would have been a nightmare for everybody.
Mark, thank you very much for your patronage. You are helping everybody who listens to the show
get it without ads, which we all hate because they're terrible. I was just going to like reference
the bads of ads thing, where honestly, like, it's because of people like Mark that you guys
don't have to listen to us talk about are like really excellent mattress. And Mark and I have
chatted a bit. Yeah. And Mark and I have chatted a bit on Patreon and, you know,
seem like a cool dude. Glad to have you as listener. It makes me feel awkward to talk to
somebody I tendentially know in this medium. But, you know, we say the same thing every week,
but doesn't make it any less meaningful. We appreciate everything. And, you know, being
like we just bought new microphone stands, what, two weeks ago? Because other ones were
four years old, and they'd been through some some moves and gotten pretty beaten up. And
one of them, the superglue finally broke on it. So it was time to finally buy new ones.
And that's all possible. Thanks to listeners like you. So thank you very much.
Yeah. Thank you, everybody. Thank you, Mark.
All right. Anything else to hit on this one? Or are we all set?
I think we're good.
All right. We'll see you guys in a couple weeks.
Cool. Bye, everyone.
