Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy. I'm Inyash Brotsky. I'm Stephen Zuber, and today we
have two guests, Matt Freeman and Jason Kleinberg. Hello, Matt and Jason. Thank you for joining
us. Our pleasure. The reason that we have invited the two of you on is because you both
have children, and you're both rationalists and trying to do some kind of rationalist
children-raising thing, which Stephen and me have no idea anything about it because we
are child-free, as the term I prefer, rather than child-less.
I'm not on the high horse there. I just happen to not have kids. I also thought it'd be nice
to get your guys' perspective because we did a whole episode on child, or I guess on the
decision to have kids, maybe on a touching on child rearing, and none of us had kids,
so it's kind of like just one of those pointless abstract conversations where none of us have
first-hand experience, so I thought you guys could weigh in on all the stuff we got wrong
because I'm sure we missed something. Yeah, I listened to that one, so I'd be happy to
weigh in there. Yeah, I listened to it, and I was definitely yelling at my audio device
at the time. Cool. I want to talk about that. Well, then let's start in on that. You said
that you were having to yell at the audio device, and I want to know if there's anything
you remember specifically that you want to address. Well, let's see. I think it was you were talking
about how being a rationalist kind of made it more difficult for you to be a parent,
and it was specifically regarding the autonomy and a respect for the individual,
and so being able to, or being a, I'm totally butchering what you said,
and so it would make it difficult for you to be a parent, and I think that I'm a good parent
for those exact same reasons. I wish I could remember some of the specific things that we might
have said. It's been so long since we recorded that, too, that I having a hard time recalling.
I kind of wish I'd gone back and re-listened to it today. So one thing I remember being talked about
was the idea that the felt the desire to have children was somehow icky, and I was thinking
as soon as I heard that, I was like, well, I mean, it's among the most basic human
feelings. How is the desire for food or sex or human connection any more noble than the
felt desire to have children or to snuggle with children? I think that was particularly what it
was, is someone in the podcast said it seems weird to want to snuggle with a child, and I'm like,
first of all, that's the same instinct where you want to snuggle with a puppy,
and that's not viewed as icky. So I don't know, it just that struck me in particular.
Yeah, or another person in general. We all like having that contact.
I think, I believe Shelly said that even wanting to snuggle with a puppy was kind of gross to her,
because again, she had the whole the helpless thing that is dependent on you aversion.
Yeah. Did you have this desire to have kids before you had kids?
I didn't have the, so maybe borderline sex or sexist remark, but I feel like women have it
more strongly than men. So I didn't have the like urgent burning need to have kids, but I always
wanted them in the abstract. So that's, yeah, I mean.
Then once you had the kid, you felt that desire much more.
Can I ask Jason if you had the same or a similar thing, or did you want kids even before?
I pretty much always wanted to have kids. I had a pretty awesome childhood. I had fantastic parents
that were a really great example and resource for me. So I always kind of like that idea of
continuing that. Did you like notice a greater emotional desire to like have
a child to care for after you had the kid?
I don't know. Here's one thing that I've always kind of
thought annoying about parenting. It's not parenting in itself. It's parents. How
often hear people say things like, oh, well, until you have a child, you'll just never know.
And that's just wrong. I've got a really good imagination. And like all those things that
they said that you won't know until you're a parent, I kind of figured it out beforehand.
And it's pretty much what I expected. It's challenging, but awesome.
Yeah, I think that makes sense. Like one thing that I talk about sometimes and this,
I don't know if this is in contradiction to what you just said, but maybe it's,
I think everyone has their own lens and way of talking about it. Like,
I do feel like having kids rewired me. And I think I've said that before in some of their
contexts. But it took me and made me a slightly different person who was now concerned with
the kids in a way that I had never been concerned with any person. You like to think that you would
step in front of a train to save your best friend or whatever, but you know when you have kids on
an instinctive level that you would do that. Like, I don't know if that makes sense to you.
It makes sense to me in terms of like the felt difference between the two sensations of those
two hypotheticals. I don't know, does that make sense to you?
Yeah, it changed my priorities. So instead of just being, you know, mostly concerned about
my own needs and, you know, needs of my partners, I have this thing that this person,
nothing, this person that is very much dependent on me and my survival.
So it's been very motivating to want to make sure that he has as good of a life as possible
and that he survives. And yeah, I agree. If I am going to be able to save his life in a way
that's going to, in mine, I will probably do that. I can't say yes for sure because, you know,
never actually been in that, but very likely. Yeah, I don't know why exactly I chose that
particular hypothetical other than like, it's a question where it returns a very clear answer for
me. Whereas like, if it's for anyone other than my children, I'm just like, well, I like to think
that in the right circumstances, I would behave that way, but I'm not 100% sure.
Does that detract from the other goals you're pursuing in your life now that you have this
new overriding goal? I don't know if it would be an overriding goal.
It's something that I always have to take in consideration, but it doesn't feel all that
different than like when you have a partner that you live with or, well, that's not true because
my son is not, he's still a young child, so he can't quite make all of the decisions on his own
just yet, so he's not fully responsible for his actions. But I don't think it's changed me
or changed my other goals as much as it's just reprioritized things.
Yeah, I don't feel like I've become any less productive, but like I still work a job and
I was able to finish my PhD after I had had my first kid. You could argue maybe it took longer
because I had a kid at that time, but I still did it. If anything, I think it's made me more
disciplined and clearly prioritized things because like for example, before I had a kid,
I would work at work and then I would come home and the laptop would be on
in my lap or whatever and I would be half-assed working essentially all the time.
And not only is that not healthy, but it's probably not effective either.
And now when I'm at work, I focus on work and I know I don't have any other opportunity to
focus on work, so I have to do the work at work. And when I'm at home, I'm fully present with the
kids to the extent possible. The net productivity either didn't change or for a while I was even
convinced that I was more productive with a kid because it gave me something to protect as it were,
but I can't prove that. So this is going to sound kind of weird, but I have this fear of loving
things because then they can be used against you in like the mafia boss kind of like,
I'd be ashamed if something happened to your kid. And do you not have a terror of that kind
hanging over your head? So I kind of do and I actually have some notes on this topic.
Jason, what do you feel about that first though? I actually don't.
No, you do.
Well, I have had that fear. I'm polyamorous and so you know that's kind of like a thing
in some communities where that can be a problem. But in general, no, I don't. One of the things
that I've always, that's kind of an essential part of my parenting philosophy is I have like
a risk threshold. And if it's not, if something doesn't have a greater than like say a one in a
thousand chance of happening, I'm just simply not going to worry about it. And so yes, if that
happened, it would be catastrophic for me. But the rarity of that event happening is so high
that it just doesn't really register for me. And step one, don't make enemies of the mob.
Yeah, but I mean, yeah, right. But I mean, the mob was kind of an extreme example. There's lots
of people, if you even draw attention online, there's people that will like track down where
your kids go to school and send you pictures and be like, Hey, shut your mouth. And then
I don't I don't even know what the fuck I would do. Like if they're threatening me, then
at least I feel like well, I'm willing to die for, you know, saying the wrong thing or whatever.
I don't want to die. But at least it's just myself. I'm risking. But if they were coming
after my kids, I don't even like know what I would do at that point.
Yeah. So like, I guess, I guess I don't have, I don't have any anxiety about risk to the kids
in a generalized way. Like I don't entertain hypotheticals like that. And it kind of like
Jason said, like if it's a low probability thing, I'm just able to dismiss it largely.
But however, like one thing that I had in mind coming into this was like, I don't actually just
want this to be like an hour long or whatever sales pitch for having kids because I'd rather
give everyone a circumspect view of like what it entails. And like I wrote, I wrote down this
list of things and it's kind of a mix of things that have happened to me and things that have happened
to parents that I know. And then just like a few things thrown in there just to,
just of things that happen to people. And that would just be like really high
fevers in your baby and you don't know how to handle it. And you end up having to hospitalize
them and you don't know what's going to happen. A premature baby, like a severely premature baby
who has to stay in the NICU for a month or two. Hey, that was me. Oh, really? I don't think it was
a month. Those are a couple of weeks or so. I don't really remember. I might as well say,
immediately post birth. I don't remember. But as far as the timeframe I was given,
it was something like that. Yeah. I mean, that was my first daughter actually. So
like that's kind of an unwelcome surprise for your first experience with kids to be
something that's actually much worse than you expected. But then of course, there's like
SIDS. And then there's like a million small things after you've had the kid where it's not really
deadly dangerous, but it's just something you didn't anticipate. Like a kid who really doesn't
sleep for the first three years of their life. You didn't bargain for that, right? And now it's
something that's really affecting you. And so my list had more things on it. But I think I made
my point of there's, you do expose yourself to the possibility of negative experiences
with kids. But like even with all the stuff that I've experienced, it's still
like by far a choice that I'm happy with personally. Yeah. I had a similar kind of thing with
my kid when he was born. He was born with, his digestive system wasn't really fully developed.
And so he was always crying for like the first month or two. And it was just nerve wracking.
And yet in those times where I could get him to calm down, just like sitting there swaying
with them and singing to him are some of the happiest memories of my life.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I kind of agree that like getting through that stuff is its own reward on
some level. And I think we must be wired for that in some way because I'm sure this has always
been the case for all mammals practically. Like raising the kid in and of itself is
not rewarding in an objective sense. So your brain kind of finds ways to make it rewarding for you.
And those feelings are just as authentic as any feelings. Why would you choose to
get your happy feelings through that route as opposed to something else?
Well, I don't think it's an either or thing, first of all. It's a qualitatively different
flavor of qualia in general. I mean, it's just like I can't get the warm fuzzies that I get
from children by engaging in a really deep philosophical conversation and vice versa.
Although when my children grow up, maybe I will be able to have a deep philosophical conversations.
But I guess this is like the main sales pitch that I had kind of
walking in was like, it's this whole avenue of human experience that I didn't even realize
existed. And I mean, it's the closest I'm going to get to saying like, you'll just never understand
unless you had kids. But it's the kind of thing where it's like if you've never had food and
someone's like, yeah, you should really try food. It's pretty cool. Like you get all these
experiences in your mouth and you're just like, I don't see the point. I have a tube that goes in
my stomach. Why would I? It's like, well, I mean that... I hear the same thing about hallucinogens
that like you just, you can't really explain it. You have to try it. That's actually what I was
going to bring up as an analogy, but I don't know if either of you guys could relate. That's the
kind of experience that you can't articulate to somebody in a way. It's like, you know, trust me,
it's just cool. And then if you try it and it was cool, then you're like, yeah, it was great.
I can't really explain to you why it was great, but it's different kind of thing.
If you have a bad trip, you come down after eight hours. If you have a bad kid, you've got 18 years
and really basically your entire life. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I want to dismiss that as a joke,
but like that's a reality for some people. I mean, it's not a reality for me, but like
some people have like a psychopathic kid, right? So before we go on to the next topic, I was kind
of wondering on more utilitarian terms, I assume both of you get the feeling that, well, or maybe
you, maybe this has nothing to do with it, but do you have the impression that the world is better
off with your kids in it? Absolutely. Yeah, but yeah. Well, the thing is, is so
I'm biased, I know this, but my kid's pretty awesome. Like he's, he's extremely caring,
extremely good at communicating for a kid his age and identifying his emotions and being able to
help people kind of calm down. And he always makes friends very easily. And these are traits
in people that I admire. And it's, it's rewarding to see that in someone that I have helped
become that kind of person. Yeah, I mean, for my part, I kind of view my life as having been good
and worth living, etc. And, and like I have the wherewithal, I think, to provide any kids that I
have with the same level of, of like, attention and love and material comfort that I had, if not
more in some cases, you know, so like, like one thing, one thing for me is that my brother was,
was like, is still like a huge part of my life. And he's kind of one of my like top, top tier,
you know, Maslow, what is it, the monkey sphere people. And, and so I was always like, well,
if I'm going to have one kid, I'm going to have more than one kid because, because like I couldn't,
and I fully recognize this is a, this is a bias of my own. But I was like, I, I can't actually
guarantee that life would be worth living without a sibling. So I'm going to go ahead and make sure
I have three kids, just, just to, you know, cover all the bases. But like, because I got so much
value out of, out of my relationship with my brother, I'm like, well, I'm going to
give my kids the gift of having those, those type of relationships with each other. And I'm,
and I'm glad I did that too, because they're, well, one of them is a baby, but the two who are
old enough to communicate or like best friends and they play all the time. And it's, it's,
it's everything I could have hoped actually. So, so that's like, I look at my kids playing
and I'm like, I have no doubt that in this moment I've created something of, of value
to the universe or for its own sake, whatever.
Damn, that's so sweet. I almost got a cavity and almost cried.
I think we forgot to ask, how old are your guys's kids?
I just have one and he is just turned seven.
My oldest is going to turn five shortly. My middle one is about three and a half
and the youngest turned one recently. So fairly tight spread and they're all really small still.
So keep in mind, neither of us have the experience of having a teenager yet.
Right. That's, that's one thing I was, I was thinking coming in, I was like, you know,
this could all just turn south really badly and I could be giving people terrible advice.
I think you guys are kind on the forefront though. I don't know of any rationalist
people that have teenagers yet, at least not in the, in the
rational circles I'm familiar with. Yeah, I don't either.
It's still kind of a young community for that, I guess.
Yeah. All right. We, since we, this isn't entirely just about whether
have kids or not, we wanted to go on to actual rational or optimal parenting.
Oh, I had a quick, quick thing to throw at you guys really quick.
Are either of you guys familiar with the comedy of Louis CK?
Oh yeah. Yes. How does that map on to actual parenting compared to his portrayal of it?
I've gotten mixed reviews from parents, so I'm curious what you guys found.
Episodically, yes. I mean, he's, he's obviously going to be exaggerating and whatnot.
But no, that there's, there's definitely a lot to that. There are times where I am
exasperated and frustrated and, you know, just going out of my mind, trying to,
to not kill my child. But, you know, that also comes with any kind of relationship
because there's a lot of good stuff too.
He has this great, no, that's totally the case.
Yeah. That's, that's good to hear. I mean, that, you know, that is worth it.
He has this great line that I like. He has a lot of stuff on parenting.
I'll find a good clip and put it in the comments for the episode. But
one of them was like, you know, I can hold my daughter and just be moved to tears by how
much I love her and it's amazing. And at the same time, I kind of wish he'd never been born.
I get the impression that you guys have that regret because I don't know,
you know, I'm not close with, you know, he doesn't, I divulge it that much, but I don't
know if you plan on having kids or not. But he has that line and someone told me,
he was like, oh my God, I feel bad just, you know, verbalizing that thought, but it's so true.
Yeah. I mean, I think, I think there's definitely a lot of truth to the,
to the anecdotes and everything. I mean, but like you can tell that Lucy K. loves his kids.
He's, he's just expressing how absurd life with kids can be. And that's completely true.
Right on. I just get that out there.
I, yeah, I actually, while things, there are certain aspects of my life that would be easier,
it's definitely not something that I have regretted. My life is way better for it.
Also, I have really awesome parents that will watch my kid. They ask to watch my kid pretty
much whenever I want.
Solid. Yeah. That's a resource if you need, you know, an afternoon to go to the movies or something.
Or a weekend to not strangle your kids.
He has this joke about like those little vacations from your kids and he, he paints it up like,
you know, taking a weekend to yourself, but then he's like, yeah, those little vacations,
like where you close them in the backseat of the car and then you close the door
and the short walk around the car to the driver's side, just those minutes, like, oh God,
catch your breath for a second.
Not, I don't think this is too much of a tangent, but I mean,
it is one thing that I'm constantly aware of is like,
especially when I'm feeling overwhelmed by, by parenting. I'm like, this is not natural.
What's natural is that I'm surrounded by, by blood relatives, including my parents,
who are also hardwired to love and want to take care of these creatures.
And when I'm overwhelmed, I should be able to go lie down and my, and my parents or whatever
would just come in and, and everyone and the load would be more, more evenly distributed.
More aunts or uncles or cousins.
Exactly. So that's one thing I like.
I mean, and my parents are very supportive, but they don't live near here.
And so it's like, yeah, the, the, just one of these ways in which modern society is,
is making things a little bit harder for us.
But you do it anyway?
Yeah. I mean, it's not, it's not like soul breakingly hard. It's just, it's just,
you feel frustrated in the moment that it shouldn't be as hard as it is.
So it makes the kids lives less rich?
Sure. Yeah.
I mean, what specifically?
Do not have like a large extended family that are all like living together in a same
very small area, maybe even same house.
I mean, I don't have any experience with the, with the counterfactual where you would have that.
But I kind of do.
I mean, once again, I'm Polly. So like, I have a pretty big family.
My wife and I are separated, but she's, she's dating like my best friend since middle school.
He has a daughter that is just a few years older and he, and my son considers her as his step-sister.
And my partner and her daughter love my son as well.
And, you know, previous partners that I've had have been the same.
I also live with my wife's cousin and he's always helping out and doing things with my son as well.
And so yeah, I've, my son kind of got a bit of a village looking after him.
Okay. Anything else before we move on?
I want to volunteer quickly that my, I know someone's very close to me was a single kid,
you know, just her and her two parents. And it worked out great for her. I think she had
like the best parents for that relationship dynamic. And so she did miss out and having siblings.
I have a twin brother, so I had a close sibling and I have an older sister,
but I feel like she turned out remarkably well adjusted. So I just didn't want any,
any single kids hearing this to, you know, think that your life is forever impoverished
for having missed that relationship. They're probably missing out and having that relationship.
But I mean, everyone's missing out on something, right? So anyway,
Always opportunity cost.
Yeah. I just, I didn't want to make it. I didn't want to, I was trying to anticipate
someone writing and be like, Hey, you guys shout on single kids or whatever. I don't know what you
call that. Yeah. Yeah. Only kids. Only kids. Yeah. And I didn't mean to say that either.
It's more like I have no idea. I wouldn't have any idea what I was doing if I had,
if I had an only child, because I model myself on kind of the way my parents did things so,
so much, even on, even on an unconscious level. The first two years you had an only kid.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, what's funny about that is like, so, so me and my wife put,
you know, infinite energy into the one kid for that period of time. And now, you know,
when the third kid rolls around, there's just so much going on that you can't put that level of
energy into the third kid. And what you realize is not, is not, oh, I'm really letting the third kid
down. I wish that I, I wish that I could devote that level of energy to the third kid. What you
realize is that you didn't need to put that much energy into a baby. Yeah. And if anything, she's
actually just enjoying having these two other crazy little creatures running around to watch and
interact with. In some ways, I think having more than one kid is easier at times,
because the guy that only has one. Well, I mean, like, what it does in my, in my,
in my experience, which is admittedly sort of short term, is it forces you to be
disciplined and organized and to slow down. So, like, when, like, you know, whenever,
whenever, every time you want to go into the grocery store, you have to get
three kids out of three car seats and get the appropriate number of shopping carts or strollers
or whatever to make that happen. You, there, you know, you just know that that's going to be a,
that's going to be a process. Whereas if you have one kid, you, you tend to get, you actually tend
to get ironically or, or whatever the word is. You get complacent and you also get like impatient
with small delays. And, and it's like, when you know that there's going to be a delay, you just,
you just work the delay in, you're just like, whatever, I'm getting, this is the part where
I get all the kids out of the car. I'm not going to pretend that this is fast. And then it's fine.
It's like stoicism. It's like you, you expose yourself to the thing that you're, that's going
to be hard and you accept it and then it's not hard. I feel like that transitions neatly until,
you know, a quasi-rationalist approach, or at least somewhat relating to rationalist approach
to parenting. Cause I imagine other parents just get three times as upset, right? As opposed to
like just, you know, having it spread out and just realizing that this is just a fact of how
my grocery shopping process now works. They're just three times as pissed.
Yeah. How's, how's your background in rationality affected how you do parenting?
So yeah, I guess I'll have a couple of notes here. Like one, one, there's a few different
things, but like one of them would be like how I talk to the kids in a number of ways. So like,
I try to do the, I try to use a gross mindset thing for one thing where I compliment effort
or, or like I'll, I'll say something specific that I like about some specific thing that they've
done rather than just saying that they're good, you know, good boy or whatever. And that actually
feels better. Like once, like as soon as you start doing it, you just like,
I feel like I'm actually helping them rather than just patting them on the head with,
with no real value. Yeah. Do you, do you have anything to add there, Jason?
Yeah. It's, it's providing that, that valuable feedback and, and I agree. Another thing for me is
I, I try to use proven techniques. I tried to actually use, you know, real science on it and
avoid the, a lot of woo that's around parenting. I also,
What would you, what would you qualify as the real science?
Um, so like what he was saying about, um, about not just saying you are good or you, you, you,
you are bad. You're saying, or you so much the, the, um, you're so smart. No, I don't say that.
I said, you worked really hard on this and look what you did. You actually accomplished it or
it's okay to be wrong. There's nothing wrong with being wrong. It's better that we admit it,
learn from it so that we can, we can be less wrong in the future.
And, and those, those, I guess that's not so much a scientific approach as, uh, from,
from a rational approach, but, um, I, I do try to keep up with, uh, like behavioral science.
Yeah. Like the, the behavioral, like behavioral modification is one thing where I've tried to
be more like evidence based and using, um, using techniques that were actually like taught to
me by a professional where, um, you know, you, you, you get, there's like an algorithm. Basically,
it's fairly, it's fairly complex algorithm, but, um, complex in the sense that there are a lot of
kind of like forking paths that you can go down. Uh, but once you put it into practice, it's just
kind of becomes instinctive, but it's like, and I don't know, you can feel free if you, if you
think this is, uh, if this is like strongly different from what you do, tell me. Um, but,
but like it would be, um, if, if you give the kid a, a command, first of all, you want to,
you want to kind of minimize commands because otherwise the kid just, just gets overwhelmed
and they're just like, no, I'm going to do what I want to do. Uh, you give them a command
and if they don't, I don't know, I'm going to mess it up. I'm going to mess up saying it,
but like the point is it's, it's a very fixed thing where the kid learns that if they don't
comply with the command, then they're going to get like the consequence of going to time out.
And if they go, if they don't go to time out promptly, then they start losing privileges in
a very systematized way very quickly. So it's just basically creating a very clear incentive
gradient that causes them to obey the commands. And like, like I said, if you give too many
commands, then basically their life is better if they just don't listen to you than if they do
listen to you. So, um, that doesn't work either. I mean, it's, it's, it's a, it's a balancing act,
but like that was really helpful to me because like if you have a kid who just doesn't listen,
then it's really helpful to have, um, some kind of like method for dealing with it that
is kind of almost like a, an algorithm that's outside of your hands. You don't have to think about it.
Yeah, I, I actually, I tend to avoid, um, uh, punishments. Um, I tend, I focus on consequences.
Um, so one of the things that, uh, is that I do with, with my son is, uh, every night I read to him,
I'm reading the Harry Potter series to him. And, um, he, it's just, it's one of those things that
we love doing together. But every once in a while, like if he's just acting like a little asshole,
you know, before bed and I'm just like getting frustrated and he's, it's not working. I'm like,
all right, look, I'm just not going to do this tonight because this does not, I'm not in the
right kind of place to this. So I love you very much. Good night. I will see you in the morning.
And he understands that like if, if he acts like an asshole to me, he's not going to get what he
wants. And, and without it having to be a direct punishment, luckily that works for my son. It
doesn't always work that way for every kid. They're all different. Um, but I've, I've been very lucky
in not having to rely too much on, on punishments and, and use more positive, uh, and negative
reinforcement. Do you, do you, um, I guess, did you grow up with corporal punishment? I actually
have a question. Well, first of all, I wanted to mention on your approach to, uh, like praise for
children. I think, you know, having not being a parent and only given this a cursory look,
that, that what your approach seems to line up perfectly with what stuff I've read about,
you praise the effort and the actual achievements rather than like saying they have good character
traits for having achieved what they did. And cause like, uh, are you familiar with this,
Enyosh? Like the point is, yeah. So for anybody who's not, it's basically like, if they get a,
you know, whatever an A on a paper or if they're younger, whatever they,
I don't know what kids earn. Um, they turn in something at school and they get good marks
or something. They get a gold star. I don't know how this works. You say, hey, you did a really good
job, um, on this particular thing. And this looks great rather than saying, you're great. You did
it. Cause then when they, you know, get a B or a silver star or something, then they're like,
Oh, I must not be great. Cause I didn't get an A, right? So they, they, you can still say, Hey,
good job. You did this. Looks great. And that leaves room for growth, but that also doesn't
tie their character in with their achievements. And I feel like that's got to do great for their
psychology. Um, I honestly don't remember what I grew up with as far as that approach. Um,
does mean the, the punishment thing? No, I meant as far as the, uh, the,
my kind of praise I received. I'm sure I did get praise. I just can't remember, uh,
I was told all the time that are like, I'm gifted and I'm smart and stuff like that.
I could have imagined that going the opposite way with your upbringing too. Cause I'm not
sure how Joe was witnesses view like innate humanity. If you were told you're a center
from birth or something too. Yeah. I don't, I don't think it really impacts the child raising
part of it at all. The, which part? The, the, the being a born a center that's like divorced from
how good you are as a kid. Wow. That's really nice that they didn't drill it into you. Cause I'm,
I think I've definitely heard of, uh, I was going to say user reports of people's first hand
experiences of having that ingrained and be like, yeah, I was told as worthless from as old as,
as I could understand sentence sentences. That's probably much more of a, uh, individual parent
kind of thing. Like I, I don't, I can't see either of my parents being cool with that.
Fuck yeah. That's awesome. Yeah. Like I said, I, I, I had a fantastic childhood growing up. I never,
I think my parents hit me twice growing up. Okay. Not like, you know, like spanking kind
of thing. Yeah. And it was when I'd done something really, really bad and they, I'm, I'm sure they
even regretted it as after it happened anyway. I was going to say my parents were never big on
punishment. Uh, for what it's worth, my autobiographical memory is terrible. And I was just
talking to my brother about this and apparently there was some small level of corporal punishment
involved, but not that I remember. Um, but I don't think we were like ever spanked. I think
they might have tried it once and it just like, Oh, okay. Well, that wasn't our thing. Um, I also
only remember being like grounded once and I was not a very, really kid. I mean, we, you know,
played with fire and snuck out of the house and all the stuff you don't want your kids doing.
I mean, other than like getting hurt and going to the police station and going to the hospital
and using drugs, like all the other stuff kids could do we were into. Um, but they were just more
about like kind of letting us do our own thing within, you know, as long as you color inside
the lines, you can use whatever colors you want basically, right? I remember like one example
might be they didn't really care. Like we didn't have a bedtime. We had a be quiet enough for us
to go to bedtime and so whatever time that was, um, we had a, at some point when I was a kid,
we got a TV in our room and it was just like, turn the volume down, but I'm just turning it off.
Like I'm not sure if they ever tried like making us go to bed at some point. I think they probably
may have, but I can't be sure. But I just explicitly remember just like, we don't care
what you're doing as long as you don't keep us awake. And that seems like a like,
what I liked about that is that rule made a lot of sense, right? Like you have to go to bed at
eight. It's like, well, I'm not tired. So I'm going to just be pissy. That doesn't seem like that
would land that well. Now that's your approach. I don't want to shit on it. Um, but it worked great
for me, but maybe it also just worked with my parents parenting style and my kind of upbringing.
It can also be your like, how old were you at that time too? God, I don't know. Um, oh wait,
hold on. I can give some rough estimates. I remember the room I was in and I moved downstairs
when I was, uh, I'm actually not sure somewhere between 13 and or 11 and 15. So you were in
early teenage? Well, no, that's when I moved downstairs. The, I remember specifically not
having a bedtime when I was on the top bunk of, I would have been 10 ish, give or take
two years. Okay. Maybe three somewhere in like a child age.
Yeah. The thing is, is like kids, young kids especially, they just need more sleep for their
brain to grow properly. Um, I'm always telling parent, that's my son's name. I'm always telling
parent that when, you know, he's wants to stay up all like, sweetie, you need to go to sleep.
You need more sleep than I do. That's why I'm staying up. When you get older, you will be
able to do the same thing. That is why this is not unfair because you will have the same
opportunity that I have now. Does he just not get tired when he is supposed to be tired?
Cause like you think if he needs sleep, he'd be tired. Um, kids are weird, especially kids with
ADHD. He, when he's tired, he becomes a lot more active. Like he wants to get up and jump and play
and make noise and he's emotionally volatile and, and he just doesn't want to sleep.
That's like me when I'm tired. I can see that you're about to pass out. You're sitting there,
you're sucking your thumb, your, your eyes are rolling back your head. And yet you are fighting
and saying, I'm not tired. Yes, you are going down. Yeah. None of my kids have ever been like,
Oh, I'm tired. I think I'm going to hit the hay. They just want to keep playing forever.
They don't have like the self knowledge to be able to do.
I think that's accurate. Yeah. I mean, they lack introspective awareness almost completely
on, on everything. So that would be one of the things. Yeah.
So okay, this is going to sound a little bit strange because I know you love your kids
completely and like would not advocate for any sort of calling them lesser humans or anything,
but how, how far along they are they on the like personhood scale sort of thing
if they don't have an introspective experience? Well, so, so my, they, they have an inner life.
Like, so this is one thing about me that probably made me want to have kids more than
some other things. It's like, I remember being a kid very much, like more than most people.
Like I have a lot of memories from being like two and three, which a lot of people don't have any.
And I remember having an inner life. So, so it, like it helps me relate to my, to my kids a lot,
I think. So like introspective awareness might be the wrong term. Like, like one thing I thought
about saying earlier when we were talking about behaviors, like, like behavior control is I kind
of try to introduce mindfulness concepts, especially to my oldest as a way of, you know,
both just because I think they're valuable, but also as a way of like understanding herself.
And so one thing that'll happen now is like, she'll do something that she knows she's not supposed
to do. And I'll be like, okay, why did you do that? And she'll say, I tried to tell my brain
not to do that. My brain didn't listen. And, and it's like, she's not just parroting. She's not
just parroting what I say, because she'll use interesting linguistic constructs like that one,
that I never quite said that or anything like that exactly. So she's trying to explain like,
look, I know that I'm not supposed to do that, but I just felt compelled to do it. And then I
didn't have the executive control to not do it. And what's funny is whenever she says that, I'm
like, oh, okay, yeah, I get it. What's amazing is that's a thought most adults wouldn't have,
right? Like I tried to do it, my brain just did it anyway. Like that's a level of mindfulness
that I think most people go many decades without coming across. Yeah, I don't know. I don't know
how much of it might be saying what she knows I want to hear, but she at least has to understand
the concepts well enough to say them in a way that I find intelligible. So yeah, that's my story
there. I tend to think that like, there's certain things that just aren't there yet in my son,
like certain levels of abstract thinking aren't there yet. But he's got ideas and opinions and
he uses logic. And he's also introspective. Like the other night, he was saying, I'm feeling so
angry. I'm like, why are you feeling? Are you angry at me? No, I'm not angry at anyone. I'm just
feeling angry. I'm like, okay, well, thank you for not directing that at me. And you know, we
talked from there. And it was probably just that like he needed to get something to eat. But
he was aware enough to know that like, I'm having this feeling it may or may not be attached to
something that's happening externally. I don't think I hit that level of introspection till I was
an early teenager. I remember having thoughts like that, where I could pinpoint like, man,
I'm having feelings right now that don't make any sense. I'm going to just kind of go sit and
take care of that really quick. I wanted to mention, I'm not sure if either of you guys are aware of
this. Annika Harris wrote a book on mindfulness for children that might, I'm not sure if you
were aware, because you mentioned specifically your kid mindfulness. What is it called?
It's called I wonder. That's cool. Yeah, I might check that out. Yeah. I recently read an article
and I just wanted to take get both your opinion on this as quick background. Like for some reason,
kids have generally always liked me, like not all kids, but for like, they would always end
up making friends with me. And I didn't necessarily always want to have kids as friends, because I'm
like, you don't have very much interesting to say. But I had no idea why. And recently I read this
article about how most people or I don't know, most a lot of people treat children as like
non-persons. They will ignore their wishes and treat them as objects and do whatever and talk
about them as if they aren't there. And I realized that maybe it's just that I don't do that. I
give them the consideration of a person and like talk to them rather than at them.
And I was wondering, do you see that happening a lot? Absolutely. It's one thing that I work very
hard as a parent to avoid. Because I remember when I was a kid, all of the adults that just
ignored me and just didn't care about what I said or what I thought, even when I felt like I was
contributing to conversation. And so I really try to take those lessons of how I felt when I was a
child and apply that to how I interact with not only my son, but children in general. Because
they are people. They're just smaller and they don't really understand the world as well. But
they're still people. And to treat them any other way doesn't grave to service.
They're usually more perceptive than people realize at almost any given age, like a three-year-old
even a three-year-old or maybe even a two-year-old is... I would say infant. Yeah. They're perceiving
things. They can't articulate that they're perceiving it, but they'll respond to it in an
intelligent way. I already had a lot of respect for the subconscious, the elephant process versus
the conscious writer process before I had kids. But if anything, they just really kind of proved
it because you know that they're not like... My kids will run interference for each other so
that one of them can escape. And I know they're not... First of all, they're not talking to each
other. And they're also... I strongly suspect they're not plotting it out in careful...
A causal trade, motherfuckers. Exactly. They're literally... They're doing it instinctively or
intuitively rather. They're doing a very complicated two-man con in an intuitive way that does not
involve verbal rationalizations for things. So this is one of those cases where intelligence
is definitely a separate thing from reason, I guess you could say. You said the elephant approach
versus something. Oh, yeah. Sorry. I shouldn't use extremely fringe things, but the metaphor is
like the elephant is being ridden by a man. And I put my own twist on it that I don't think is in
the original literature, but the elephant is the subconscious mind and it's bigger and in some sense
is more powerful. But the writer who's up on top essentially thinks he's in control, but actually
the elephant is the one who's really in control. And on the other hand though, the writer can kind
of see farther and call shots in like long-range sense, like long-term plans that the elephant
can't really comprehend because your subconscious is, well, it has a lot of power. It's fairly
reactive to the present context. So I don't know. I use that metaphor a lot. Like a good writer can
lead his elephant and generally almost always get it to do more or less what he wants. But if the
elephant really wants to do something, ain't a goddamn thing in the world, the writer can do to
stop it. Right. Yeah. And there's so many human... Like you classify all the human drives, I would
say, are subconscious drives and you're just like the drive for a mate or whatever. You're like,
that wasn't something that you decided through rational discourse with yourself. That's
coming up from deep in your brain. And you're like, well, okay, if I'm going to go about this,
I'm going to go about it smart. And then the writer gets involved. But it's the elephant's
decision. And oftentimes the writer can manipulate events to such a matter that
like the elephant never even realizes that there's a snake in the grass over there or
that it can be free from the stakeholder. It's like, if it's really wants to, because
with enough intelligence, you can make sure the elephant sees what it needs to see to go where
you want to go. Yeah, totally. You can totally use it as a metaphor for training your subconscious
to behave better. Cool. Thank you for elaborating. So anything else that you parents do that's
informed by the rationality knowledge that you have? Oh, we didn't actually dive into
corporal punishment. Oh, yeah. No, we didn't. How do you guys feel about that? I'm against it.
The closest I've come is when my son was very, very little to just kind of like swat him away
from something that would injure him. But no, I don't think violence should be used as a
punishment. It's just anti-human, I think. Yeah, I mean, I think the evidence is that
it probably does more psychological harm than the value that you're ever going to get out of it
anyway. I guess you'd both say that, but I don't want to make you feel bad if either of you guys
were fans. But yeah, you guys, I think you're right. Well, that is what the consensus is,
is that turns out hitting your kids isn't great for their psyches. I mean, I feel like Jason's
position on swatting it away from a danger, even if you could have gently guided their
hand away from it or something, a swat will bring that lesson home without them also getting
stung by a scorpion or something. So it's like, if I deliver a bit of a painful message, it's not
because I'm teaching you a lesson. Well, it's explicitly because you're teaching them not to
touch the thing, but not because after they did it and you're punishing them for it, right?
Lots of times, the medium is the message. And so if something is literally harmful and dangerous
to them, it can be okay to do the swat because it really gets it through, especially because it's
right there and immediate. But if you take someone away from something and then intentionally hit them
like for no reason aside to cause pain, that's, I feel like that is a more sadistic thing and a
less, it's not a good lesson anymore. It's not a good lesson. And I do think that there's something
kind of fucked up about like grabbing somebody that's a third your body weight and hitting them,
right? I mean, maybe it's my thing on free will or even just free will as it approach, as it applies
to children, but like they don't have enough agency for like even that sort of lesson to
really do anything, they're just going to learn to, you know, lie and hide it or,
you know, I don't know, like a dog that pees in the carpet, you know, you find it half an hour
later, they're facing that they don't really quite get it. But all they know is that like,
oh, he's pissed and I'm going to be scared now. I don't know. I'm sure there's more articulate
ways to put that. It feels like it's more for the parent than it is the kid. Because like that is
emotionally satisfying, I guess, for some people. And if you've been raised to really frustrated
and angry and you want to do something and that's immediate, you know, and you were doing your part
to keep society safe from predator children or whatever. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, I feel like
swatting the kid's hand away from a danger is falls under the umbrella of like a natural consequence.
I don't know if the non parents here are familiar with that term, but
like the term in vogue, which I think I do like it actually is natural consequence
would be like, you know, rather than telling your kid like they're on the playground,
you're like, be careful, don't go over there, watch out, don't go on those. You just let them
play. And as long as it's within the scope of like reasonable safety, you just let them fall a few
times doing the thing. And they learn their capabilities. Or, you know, that's that's only
one example. There's there's an infinitive of examples of natural consequences of like, you
know, you, you even things were like, Oh, well, you, you, you lied to me about this thing. So now
I'm not extending you the trust that you're going to behave properly. So you're going to lose a lot
of freedom over the next while. There's there's a lot of ways of applying the concept. Basically,
the concept is just like the punishment is just the thing that would happen if you were an adult,
and now we're just letting you get the consequence of what you did, which is a negative consequence.
And that's why you shouldn't have done that. Yeah, because then it becomes they can learn on
their own, essentially. And those are the lessons that I've always learned the best with. When I
can try something out, see what works, see what doesn't. And, and so that that's definitely
something I've tried to do with my son is is to rely on those natural consequences.
So going on, I assume the focus isn't just on rationally raising kids, but on specifically
raising rationalist kids to someday grow up and carry on, you know, the the torch, the mission,
I don't even know. Spread the good word. Yeah, exactly. Knocked on doors, hand out, watch towers
or whatever. What? How do you go about doing that? And is that a goal as well? It's kind of a minor
goal, mostly because I want him to live the best life possible and to be successful in life.
If, if ultimately he finds another philosophy that that speaks to him
more than than rationality, then I'll support that. But to me, it's the one that makes sense.
And so those those are the ideals that I try to instill in him or not instill in him to teach him
and to to appreciate those those sorts of things and to always try to be better.
So you're reading him Harry Potter at night, you're not reading him Judgment Under Uncertainty.
Yeah, yeah. Matter of fact, I even started reading Harry Potter and Methodist Rationality to him.
I think he's a little bit younger than that. I'm gonna wait till we're done with the the
Canon series. Smart. I worry about getting kids like pre 10. I'm not sure at what age. There's
what is it chapter 11 where Draco threatens to rape Luna Lovegood?
Seven. Yeah, so that's I mean, how do you explain that to an eight year old? I mean,
maybe maybe you're reading it to them, they're not reading it primarily you could say
beat up and you could basically get the same point across. But still,
I don't know. I tend to I tend to just be open and honest with my son. And and whenever he has
questions about something, I answer it. That's one of the things I really enjoyed about reading
the Harry Potter series to him. It's given me such an opportunity to talk about things like
death and slavery and and racism in a way that's like relevant to the particular situation that
we're talking about at that moment. And so I'm really looking forward to getting to methods
of rationality because he's such a huge Harry Potter fan that we'll be able to have those
kinds of conversations as well. And there's rape in the Canon series as well. It's just not as
explicit. Right. It's like Umbridge is hauled off by the centaurs. And Voldemort drugging his dad
or Voldemort's mom drugging his dad. But like that's different than flat like they don't use
the word rape, right? Right. But I understand. Yeah, it's it's a whole thing. I had a long
conversation with with my son about that scene, the Umbridge centaur scene. No, about Voldemort's
mother drugging his his father, okay, with a love potion and and keeping him prisoner for years.
Yeah. Because he asked, why did why did he go away? And I was like, okay, well, this is because
he didn't actually want to be there. His his will was being subverted. He was she was taking control
of his mind and making him do things that he wouldn't want to do. And, you know, we kind of went
into some examples of that. And it was it was it was an interesting experience. You can see like the
comprehension done in his eyes. And he's just like, man, that's fucked up. Yeah. Sometimes other times
he's just kind of, okay, or whatever the other whatever the eight year old version is of that's
fucked up. Yeah. Yeah. This is one of those occasions where it pays to remember that, like,
like it actually takes time to develop that moral sense and that prefrontal cortex stuff that makes
you actually have those feelings about things. Because like, me and my brother always laugh
about how we watched all these horribly violent movies when you're really, really young. And
they never bothered us. And then like, like, I mean, maybe sometimes or some particular
horrific thing would bother us. But like, it wasn't the psychological themes that would bother us.
It was the idea of a monster being in our room, you know, like, like the level on which a scary
movie works on a kid is is the level of like fear of of small, you know, creatures being in your
proximity that are going to harm you. Because that's what a kid is concerned with. It's not until
you're older that you can even emotionally connect with something as as abstract as those things,
I guess. So so like, you can explain fairly dire things to a kid. And like my five year old, I
can explain, you know, fairly detailed things that that might even be uncomfortable with an older
kid. But she's just like, okay, yeah, I get it. I think I saw a pet cemetery when I was six or seven.
And it was more scary because like, Oh, no, the, you know, the dogs now attacking the people or
whatever. But then you see it as a teenager or somebody can reflect on what's actually happening
and like, Oh, my God, it's like a monster demon baby. Or like now the wife is this, you know,
murder. Do you don't see pet cemetery? Oh, so the premise is that there's this like graveyard
or if you bury stuff, they come back to life, but it's not them. So people will occasionally
bury their pets there because it's like, Oh, well, I'd rather have it still in the house. But like
then it's just like this kind of asshole monster thing. Well, it's still like, it's not like a
monster that has like extra powers. It just is this evil version of that. So I guess horror alert,
the guy's kid gets hit by a car and he buries him there. And then it's this little psychopath kid.
And then I think the wife, maybe there was two movies, there was pet cemetery too. And one of
them they bury an adult there and it comes back as a murderer, unless I'm completely misremembering.
But most part of that is true. Anyway, the level of horror that I got as a kid, it was like, you
know, the scary darkness and the live music and whatever. But like the full on horror level of
it isn't like, isn't something you can get until you're much older. So yeah. And I mean, another
thing that I think about in this context is like kids used to grow up on farms and twist the heads
off chickens and be involved in, you know, butchery of animals. And it never, it didn't bother them.
Didn't bother them the first time they saw it and they just grew up used to it. So there's nothing,
humans can adapt to anything. We have to learn that those things are scary, you know.
So are you also trying to raise children that are rationalist?
Yeah, I guess there's like the mindfulness angle. There's also the not telling them lies
about the world. So like that works in a lot of ways. Like any questions they ask,
I'm game to answer as far down the rabbit holes they want to go. I'll try my very best to never be
like, okay, that's enough questions for now because I want them to finish building out that
knowledge web. Me and my wife both agreed that we weren't gonna, well, she was more wanting to
do the Santa Claus thing than me. And what it ended up being was just like the Santa Claus story
was there. We tell the story. And then at some point, my daughter finally asked like,
is this pretend? And I was like, yes, this is pretend, but it's still fun. It's still a fun
thing to pretend, right? And she wasn't crushed by it. So what do you mean? How did you tell her
the story that she asked if it was pretend? I mean, like did you, did you set up presents and say
Santa Claus brought these or? I think what we do with presents is we've just set out the presents.
So did you just tell her about Santa like as a bedtime story or something?
Yeah, yeah. Like you read the Nightmare Before Christmas, which is funny because they like
that movie quite a bit, which speaking of kids being immune to things that are supposed to be
scary, they love that movie and don't find anything at all scary about it. That movie
fucked with me more as a kid than Pet Cemetery and Chucky and all those things. Just putting that
out there, but I didn't mean to interrupt. Yeah, that one terrified me when I saw that I was much
older, whereas they were small and thus it's just like, oh, okay. It's kind of like a cartoon if
your head comes off. Yeah. How old were you when you saw it? I have no idea. It would have been
around the same age, maybe a little older. I remember it was like that was one of the things
I remember having a nightmare about when I was a kid, which I guess is appropriate for the title.
You're kind of always inundating the kids' stories of various kinds through media. One thing
that we could talk about is TV and how hard it is to avoid TV. I don't know if you experienced that,
Jason, but definitely when I had the first kid, I was like, well, I'm not going to ruin this kid
with television. It's just not really practical to avoid that. No. Well, television is not really
the biggest problem. I don't have cable. I'm one of the cord cutters. He's always on YouTube, though,
and I'm starting to have some issues with that with him, because on YouTube, everything's extra
boisterous and more aggressive because he's watching game playthroughs and whatnot.
I'm having to correct him and say, no, I understand this is what you're seeing on there. This is for
entertainment, but that is not a behavior that you need to model. You should not be doing what
they're doing. Is there a way to configure YouTube accounts so that the user can't read the comments?
YouTube comments are the cesspit of the internet, right? Yeah, he doesn't care about the comments
yet. We'll see. One of these days, he's going to ask you to clarify something you read in the
comments of a YouTube video, and you're going to have some tough questions to answer. I haven't
read any YouTube comments in two or three years now. I think they're pretty tame on YouTube. I
happen to share your son's interest in YouTube videos. I watch a lot of video game playthroughs
and stuff. I think the comments there are pretty tame. I usually don't read comment section of
anything ever. Smart. There's just very little that's ever good in the comments, aside from one
or two sites that I know the commentary at is pretty good. I was going to say, occasionally,
I'll skin through the SlateStarCodex comments, but you're not getting YouTube comments on that medium.
Reddit can be good. Depending on the subreddit. What is your take on the Christmas thing?
Pretty similar. I was always pretty against Santa Claus, mostly because I think it teaches
entitlement to children. You're just getting presents because you deserve presents because
you're a kid. That's what Santa Claus does, because he's this magical god thing. He's also
the punishment of if you're naughty and he's always watching you. That is extremely creepy to
me. I never really liked Santa Claus. I've been fairly tolerant with it because my wife was more
into it when he was younger. I didn't really push too much against it, but as he started getting
older and we had more conversations, it became less of an emphasis when it came to Christmas time,
and now it's just a story. I don't know if he believes in Santa Claus, but my guess is he
probably doesn't. I always thought of it as the first big, rationalist test. How long until they
can figure this out on their own. On the other hand, I don't want to then set the precedent
that for the rest of their life, the kid is always asking, so is this another test?
Well, that's not the worst way to think about it, unless you're wondering about how my parents
lying to me. I always thought it'd be fun. I've never had the opportunity to go to a 12-year-old
and be like, remember how you figured that stuff out about Santa Claus? Yeah, now Jesus. Just
like, see if I can make an atheist out of a kid, but I've never decided to jump into another family's
life like that. The Santa Claus thing, that was the first time that I really realized that my
parents can lie. Before that point, I had absolute faith in my parents, and I believed in Santa Claus
much longer than the rest of the kids because I had that faith in my parents. Once I finally
confronted them about it, when I was basically defending them, when one of my friends was saying,
this is nonsense, and they're like, yeah, it's not really. I was devastated because I had such
utter faith in my folks, and that's what made me an atheist. Did it hurt you? First of all,
that's fucking awesome, but also, did that hurt your relationship with your parents?
No, I mean, I was angry with them for a bit because you do that as a kid, but then I kind of
realized that like, oh yeah, they're people and everybody else lies now and then, and they weren't
trying to hurt me, so I, you know, I forgave them. What do you do in relation to like other kids?
Like, did you tell your kid not to tell other kids that Santa was fake, or did you just not even
bring that up? Well, the biggest thing I always try to do is, is not to, it's spoilers, I guess.
It's spoilers, like, you know, they'll, they'll, they'll figure it out. There's no point in,
in hurting them, and you know, it's, it's kind of like religion too. It's, it's the same way. It's
like, they have their beliefs, and that's, that's fine, whatever they want to believe,
there's nothing wrong with that. This is what I believe.
So your kids are familiar with the concept of spoilers then, or your kid?
Oh yeah. Oh, very much so. He's not allowed to watch the, the last two Harry Potter movies yet,
because we're still on the Half-Blood Prince.
Did you have the concept of spoilers when you were growing up, Stephen?
I don't remember. They're really a spoiler. I remember I was, must have been 15-ish,
whenever the second Inhergent Cycle book came out, someone ruined it for me.
I mean, it was, I mean, it did suck, because at the beginning you get the impression that
this character died, and then she, then she was like, oh yeah, this and this,
I don't want to spoil everything. Oh wait, well whatever. It's, it's been 10 years.
But I remember that I finished, it was either the, it was whatever the next Harry Potter book
that came out after that, but before she did, and I texted her, it was like, I finished the book,
and that was, or I texted her, told her at school, however old, whatever age this was,
and I told her that, and then she was like, please don't, I was like, I'm not going to,
but I could, and that's enough. I could tell you how it ended, but I'm not going to do what you did.
I had the, I knew that Darth Vader was Luke's father long, long before I ever saw the first
Star Wars movie, and I don't know, it just, it didn't occur to me that nowadays kids like,
growing up already know the concept of spoilers as they're growing up, since basically media
comes out all at once, and you can watch it at will. Whereas before it was like,
it was only on when it was on, and either you saw it at the same time as everyone else,
or you missed out, and they just talked about it around you, because it's not like there was
another time to see it, another chance to see it. Yeah, that reminds me, you mentioned that your
kid, you know, has trouble like managing his sleep, and that's probably true of most kids.
I remember when I was a kid, I think I was just less tired than I am now, and maybe than other
kids. I did this game where like, I tried to stay awake, and since I was in the top bunk,
I would like hold the remote control or like something small off the edge, so that if I
fell asleep, I would drop it, and then that would wake me up, and then I'd still get up at like 530
to watch cartoons with my dad before he went to work. So I don't know, yeah, God, if I had that
energy now, I could take over the world. But I, that was just came to mind when you're mentioning
how your kid has difficulty, you know, coordinating their level of tired, or his level of tiredness.
I do that sort of now, like now I am self-aware enough to like, all right, time for bed,
but I still get like this weird sense of ansceness. So I could totally imagine like,
if as a kid, I was less reflective, and just push through that initial wave of tiredness,
then you're just like energetic, but also really want to go to sleep. That's, that's me
three or four nights a week now, but at least like now I'm aware of it, and it's fine. So
as a kid, it was probably taxing and probably extra taxing for my parents.
I said, how many times have you been tired and like, grabbed your phone, and now all of a sudden,
the next thing you know, it's falling on your face because you're passing out while playing on it.
I'm better about that now, but that was, that definitely has happened.
Yeah, once I'm that tired, I have no trouble just letting myself go to bed. It's more just like,
if I happen to get tired at like nine, but I still have to shower and do stuff, then I'm just
like at that level where, you know, all right, I'm going to just do stuff, then I'll get in bed,
and just like, I don't know, flop around and let all my energy out.
So I guess, going back to the topic itself, what things do you do to try to get your kids to
grow up as rationalists?
Once again, I don't know if I'm specifically looking for him to find rationalism. I hope he does.
It's mostly just the
living the principles of it and being honest with him, and valuing growth, valuing learning from
your mistakes, and finding where you're wrong, and correcting for that. Some of the things that I do,
it's kind of everything. It's just the whole way that I approach it.
It's so hard to think of an example. I'm sorry.
No, it's okay. Do you have a rationalist community where you live?
No, and that's part of the problem, probably. I'm living in Gainesville, Florida. It's kind of a
small college town, but for some reason, there's not one here.
You said that you live in a poly-relationship sort of thing. Are your metamores and other
partners in the rational scene at all?
No, I have two friends that don't live around me that are, but no, pretty much none of my
none of my friends, family, or poly-cool are rationalists.
Okay, that must make it a bit harder, too.
It makes it a lot harder. I'm very envious of you guys.
Oh, well, I mean, we don't really have kids yet.
I was going to say, really quick, the way to get that going is just to
put out a meetup and get things going. I can send you this little pamphlet that is a good primer,
if anyone's interested. If they read this and they're like, oh, that's cool,
I want to talk about it, then they're the kind of person who wants to come up to a meetup or
something. It's still really damn hard to start things from meetups, though.
It's not that bad. I've done it before. I started the local poly community.
So I've done that. Unfortunately, I also kind of burned myself out of it after about two years.
And I've thought about starting a rationalist community here, and then I thought, oh, God,
not again. That's fair. But I totally agree. Because if no one's going to do it, I need to be
the one to do it. How old was your kid when you came into this rationalist thing? Or was it
pre-aged kid? I think it was before him, but not too terribly long before him. I think I was still
kind of going through the sequences at that time. I know I was definitely... I mean, he's eight, so
methods of rationality was still being written at that time, I think.
I think it was almost pre-written methods. When did that start?
God, if you say it was more than eight years ago, I'm going to feel so old.
It may have started more than eight years ago, I don't remember.
It sucks. It took like five years to put out, and it's been two and a half years now since it
ended. Oh, lame. So it was probably about seven to eight years ago that it began.
Womp. Yeah. You two are growing old, Stephen. Join us on the other side of the hill.
Just as old as I feel. I was going to say something else about...
Oh, I didn't weigh in on this earlier, but you mentioned talking to your kid like it's
a person rather than like it's a pet. I can't remember much of how that works with me as a kid,
but I do know that that's how I approach kids too. And I feel like that's just got to be...
I maybe I'm typical minding to something that you can't typical minds to because kids are a
little different, but I feel like that's got to be awesome for them because they're not treated
like people a lot. They're treated like talking plants, right? So...
You know, I never really noticed, and I think maybe it's because I'm just inept and bad at
seeing what... That's what I do, but I think it works out great. Yeah. I'm like, I just treat
like a normal person, and I was kind of surprised when I read that article. I'm like, really?
People do that? That stuff you saw in like shitty old movies. I read an article about
somebody who got a chance to meet Stephen Hawking at like a party, and she was introduced to him
as like, oh, and this is Stephen. He's right here. Not... Like the same way you would talk about
like a cool thing had on your bookshelf and because he couldn't talk back in real time.
And she... The whole thing was basically her reflecting on like how they... The people around,
you know, obviously modeled him as a person, but didn't treat him like one because he couldn't
respond in time, right? Yeah. So I think that might be something like how people treat kids.
Uh, let's see, there was that and... I'm sorry, go ahead. I think it's also just our society
doesn't value the opinions of children very much. They can just be dismissed as unimportant.
I did read something just recently within the last week or two, and this is something that
I've thought about a bit. And I think I made a joke before about how like every time a kid's
crying, especially a young kid, it's because whatever's freaking them out is literally the
worst thing that's ever happened to them in their entire life. Probably. So there's...
At least to talk about whether or not not engaging those concerns that kids have
as much as like they would want you to or something is damaging to them or not.
I feel like it can't be that damaging because that's never happened before really and people
are more or less kind of okay right now. But like not validating their concerns.
Like I am freaking out about... I don't know what kids freak out about that they don't know
which piece of toast to eat first. So like, you know, I guess A, you have to be some just
god to have the energy to engage that on every level. But I guess do you have any
thing to weigh in there? Like whether or not it's fine to like, you know, I'm gonna let you
just work this out for a minute or, you know, I guess not engage them on the way that you engage
as I can say a person in the way you'd engage an adult on them having an emotional thing happening.
Yeah, I think one of the biggest things is to really discuss with them about why they're upset
because I've found at least with my son often when he's like getting really upset about something
that doesn't make any sense. It's not because he just has this weird quirk. It's because he's
misunderstanding the situation and it's a problem of communication. And he's just not reading by
not reading a situation right. He's thinking that I'm mad at him or that I was trying to hurt him
whereas instead what I was just trying to get him to do is to just not bump his head or something,
you know. And often when I can get him to take a deep breath, that's usually what I do, I say
take a deep breath. Okay, now talk to me. How are you feeling and why are you feeling that way?
And by doing that, I can get him to kind of go through the process of does what you're feeling
match the situation and if not, then maybe we can find a solution for you.
You know, I think that's a good skill to have even for adults and I think it's really cool
that he's learning this, you know, before he reaches adulthood and has that in his toolbox
already. Yeah, I also try to model nonviolent communication with him too.
What is nonviolent communication?
So when you are arguing with somebody, you will instead of saying,
you're being a dick, you say, I feel like you're
exactly, you say, I feel hurt because or when you when you insult me because it makes me feel
like I'm not valuable to you. I'm not important to you. And instead of it being an accusation,
it's a collaborative sharing of this is my experience. This is how I'm interpreting
situation. And this is why it's it matters to me. And it tends to make
conflicts easier to resolve, because these won't get quite as defensive a way.
Can you hold on for just a few minutes? We have to take care of a few things right here.
Matt heroically worked the whole episode with not like a intensely nauseating,
inducing migraine that apparently like was supposed to get better and never did and
that just got worse. So he's taking off. But thanks for hanging in as long as you did. So
we'll we'll push through the rest of this, which is the three of us.
At this point, I think, or is there in more that we want to talk about?
I don't know. Did we miss anything, Jason?
I can't think of anything in particular. I was kind of curious where
you were exposed to nonviolent communication, but that I guess is kind of off topic.
I mean, that's that's fine. It was related. I honestly don't remember sometime in the last
eight years. Those were techniques that like, I think I'd heard bits and pieces of in passing,
but I hadn't heard it articulated until several years ago. Just that it's, it's a,
I also majored in psych and college. Maybe that's where I heard about it, or in psych and high school
is where I heard the term. But yeah, just the idea of like not having the
it also not having the context of the conversation be about what the other person did,
but about your feelings about it. Because A, that makes it like to where they can't just
deny it and say, I wasn't being a dick. They can't just deny it. I didn't make you feel like a dick.
It's like, because you don't know that or they rather they don't know that.
Is there, do you think that that nonviolent communication specifically helps lead to
having a more rationalist out view outlook on the world as you're growing up?
I don't know if it leads to having more rationalist outlook, what it leads to is more
rational discussions. Instead of getting caught up in those defensive emotions of,
well, no, I didn't, you did this instead. Instead of going down those, those rabbit holes, you,
you, you're able to kind of come to, well, I didn't mean to hurt you. And I, I, you know,
I didn't realize that I was having that effect on you. So let's, let's find a way to, to, to not do
that. And it works really well on kids, at least my kid. Yeah, I don't think it's necessarily a
path to rationality, or it might be a necessary ingredient to it, in some extent, but not necessary,
but it might be an ingredient to a rationalist lifestyle, just in that you're having a productive
conversation rather than a useless one, where you're just bickering, because then it's like,
at least talking about the part that matters. It doesn't matter that like the sinks full of dishes.
That's not like, what matters is your reaction to it. And that's what you want to talk about.
So it's just kind of keeping your eye more on the ball. But no, I think I know people have been
doing this for ages and aren't the least bit interested in rationality. So it's just, it's
a separate thing. It's one of those methods we have to have difficult conversations, the, the
kind of things that, that can get runaway emotions where people just don't, they're not part of the
conversation anymore. One thing that I think was in one of the emails was the fact that
Inyash and I expressed interpretation about having our priorities shoveled. We touched on that a
bit in the beginning of the episode, but I was wondering if we, if we missed anything there,
because that was, I think, one thing that I mean, I guess we touched on, but I'm not, I'm still not
convinced. Like right now, I find my time not, in fact, another Louis D.K. bit, he has this thing
where, you know, he's listening to his daughter read Clifford the Big Red Dog at a rate of 50
minutes a page, and he has to sit there and be incredibly proud and incredibly bored at the
same time. But like, yeah, so like that's a super boring sounding activity. And yet at the same time,
I'm sure that he and other parents find things like that super fulfilling. You know, like right
now the idea of like pushing a kid on a swing for 10 minutes sounds kind of boring, but that's
got to be like the highlight of your week for many parents, right? Maybe not the swing example
in particular, but things that mundane. No, you're actually right. Like I said before, when,
when, you know, singing to my son when he was a baby, and, you know, finally got him to calm down,
that was, that was a very rewarding moment to me. Yeah, it does shift your priority some
quite a bit, I guess, but it's not like it subverts all your other ones. It's just you have
this new high priority thing as well. So I don't know about like it supplanting other priorities
as much as you just have another one too. Yeah, I think I can kind of imagine what that would be like.
I'm kind of curious if, if your kid grew up and decided to completely reject all tenants of,
you know, rationality and, and that sort of thinking and instead like embrace post-modern
nihilism or something, how, how, how would you take that? And strict monogamy. Like a lot of
things that you care about that they just went the other way with. I would, I think I would be proud
of him even still because he is rejecting what he is taught and thinking for himself and choosing
the path that he wants to follow. I would probably be a bit sad, at least with the rationality part,
just because that's probably some conversations that we're not going to be able to have as well,
but maybe we'll have some really good arguments instead and that'll be kind of cool.
As for monogamy, I don't really care whatever relationship style he has a preference for.
I just want him to be happy and loved. What would be your, I guess, one biggest piece of advice to
raise a kid rationally or to raise a rationalist kid or both?
Honesty. Don't, don't lie to your kids for any reason, even if it seems convenient or that
they will be happier in the moment. Be gentle, but always be honest because otherwise you're,
you're, you're destroying their map of reality and that's inherently violent.
Yeah. I think Julia Gale have had an anecdote from her childhood that she shared on one of
the rationally speaking episodes where apparently her parents were like amenable to reasons
from her being at an early age. And I can't remember any examples that she gave, but it was like,
you know, they would say, we should do this or, you know, something, whether it's like bedtime or
whatever. And then like she and her brother could present counterarguments and they would say,
that's actually a good point. Let's do what you said. Like that, that level of interaction,
I think is just a lot of like humanizing children. Like we're talking about earlier,
right? Just like actually listening to them. And then, you know, like you would an adult person
and just consider what they're, what they're saying, like it actually matters. And, you know,
lo and behold, it's great for him, right? So I thought that was a fun anecdote too.
I agree. That's something I do with, with my son all the time.
Now, there's certain times where I'll say, I, we don't have time to talk about this right now.
I will be happy to, to listen to your, your argument when we have the time,
but I will always have those, those discussions with him. And I will always listen to his opinion.
And, and if, if he's right, I will admit it and I'll go with what he says.
I think that's just like an adult person. You don't necessarily have time for the argument,
but that doesn't mean that you won't, you know, give them the respects to have it at some point.
So I think that's awesome. All right. I, with swell, it's appears to be 10 o'clock.
And I think we hit the things we wanted to hit on, unless you have anything else.
Not that I can think of other than just thanks for having me on. This has been a really fun.
Oh yeah. Fantastic. Well, thank you for coming on.
Yeah. Well, thank you for talking to us. And hopefully we can talk to you again at some point.
I look forward to it. Yeah, I really appreciate you, you volunteered to come on and do this with us.
Was a very valuable perspective and a good conversation.
And thank you for inviting me.
Yeah, man. And I know Gainesville, Gainesville is two hours ahead.
So thanks for also staying up till midnight with us and hanging out. So anyway, we won't keep you up.
We appreciate it.
Thanks again. Take care.
Hello, we are back or by we, I mean me and Matt are back.
Matt had to leave about halfway through the previous episode, as you could probably tell
by him dropping out due to illness. And he wanted to come back and touch on a few things
before we put the episode live. So he is here now and I am going to continue a bit with him.
Welcome back, Matt. Thank you. Yeah. Thanks for having me back. I appreciate the opportunity
to finish up because I was really excited to talk about all this stuff.
Are you feeling better today? Yeah. Yeah. Awesome. Glad to hear that.
Okay, so one thing that I really wanted to get your input on and both your guys input on and I,
you know, wasn't able to ask you was what you have the two kids and the oldest one is five.
Yeah. I have three. I have five, a three-year-old and a and a one-year-old.
Okay. The, I'm not sure how much they get out and socialize with other children right now,
but what do you tell them about interacting with the rest of the world? Like,
do you give them any direction on socialization that's rationalist informed?
You know, where it seems appropriate, I try to. It's, it's especially with the five-year-old
because she understands many things, but usually you have to couch it in a way that is designed
to be interpreted by, by her, her view of things. I don't know how specific to get into it, but like,
in terms of playing with other children, she'll, she'll report kind of like interpersonal problems
with other children at school and you kind of have to think through like, okay, what, first of
all, what is actually happening versus how she's reporting it because it's like, like very often
she'll, she'll say someone was being mean and it's like, well, were they being mean or did they
just want to play with their own toy that you were trying to take from them, for example?
Yeah. And, and so just try to, to give, I wouldn't, I wouldn't say that it's all, that it's
necessarily rationalist so much as just like trying to apply a lens of like, one thing I try to
encourage in her is, is perspective taking, which is really, I'm not sure if it's something that
she's neurologically capable of yet, in terms of, you know, not, not having that, that brain
module online yet, but like, say like, well, what do you think this feels like to this person?
A lot of what that comes up in is just her interaction with her, her brother who's three
and they get along really well, like 70% of the time. And then if certain combinations of blood
sugar and sleep deficit are not met, then they don't get along very well and, and it can be,
it can be unpleasant, but like you try to try to intercede in that in a way that isn't just like,
stop yelling at each other because that doesn't solve any problem that doesn't address anything.
It's more like, okay, why, why is this person, you know, vexing you in this particular way and,
and try to think through it rather than just react to it and maybe have some, some self-awareness.
Again, all of this is like aimed at maybe an older kid, but I just, I kind of, I don't know,
I feel like when you expect more of kids, they rise to the challenge. Yeah, they rise to the
challenge. Like, like one thing is like, this may be kind of condescending toward my brother,
but like my brother was five years younger than me. And I feel like the fact that he was always
essentially acted like a peer to me and I treated him like a peer to me, kind of accelerated his
social development in certain ways, perhaps. And I try to apply that kind of perspective toward,
toward the kids. Like, do you view this whole having kids thing as this really cool, in-depth
sociology project or because I mean, that's, that's kind of how I think of it, but I don't have any
children, you know? And so I'm like, it would be fun to experiment with little brains and see what I
can do. But then I'm assuming once actual emotions and being responsible for a life get involved,
it would be quite a bit different. I mean, there's definitely an element of, of that.
Like, one thing that I'm continually made aware of is that the, the details of the kids individual
personality usually trump any like intent of doing experiments that you intended. So like,
they're just, they're all just really impatient whenever I, like, for example, I don't, I mean,
this is probably no surprise to anyone who knows me or is a rationalist. But like, if you,
there was the recent Slate Star codec post about the Polgar sisters. And I was, and I was like,
well, you know what? I'm going to get out of chessboard and I'm going to try to, I mean,
I'm at least going to see how far we can go. And of course, the answer is we went about five minutes
because first of all, it just comes down to temperament and just being like, okay, this is the,
this is the, this is this piece. And then one of the kids grabs it off the board and you're like,
well, let me hold on, let me, it goes like this. And then the other one like just starts like moving
them around like they're, you know, army men or whatever. And you're like, okay, I understand
how this is not going to work the way I was imagining. And that's fine. I mean, I guess
I kind of like I alluded to earlier, the only way in which I quote unquote experiment is like,
when I see them having a conflict, I very much try not to just be like, stop yelling at each other,
you go over there, you go over there. I try to be more like, everyone, let's sit down and understand
why we're having this screaming argument that makes no sense. And, and resolve it and go back
to being pleasant with each other because it usually works too. I find unless they're just
like really chronic, like like overtired. And then it's just like, okay, well, you just need to nap.
And this is one thing I noticed even when I was a kid is like, I would see other kids having tantrums
and just be like, the parents in the situation are not letting them nap. Like that's all that's
happening. Like they're just, you're not, it's as if someone were dragging you around in the middle
of the night and you're just like, leave me alone. I'm, I'm exhausted. You haven't fed me
properly. You haven't let me sleep properly. Why do you, why are you surprised that I'm,
that I'm having a breakdown right now? So I just try to be like, I tried to, first of all, never
do that to them because it's, I see it as somewhat cruel. And then if I, if I feel like, okay, we
have, we have, we have to be out today longer than usual for some, for some reason, and we're not
going to get the naps and we may be late getting a meal. Then I try not to be like, what is wrong
with you that you're having a normal human reaction to malnutrition and whatever. Um,
yeah. So did you have anything you wanted to jump in with? So yeah, I had some, I had some,
some general parenting notes that, and none of which are, are like rationalists per se. But,
but they're all sort of like the things that come up when you have, when you try to be like
thoughtful about certain things, like, um, be careful with, you know, there's, at a certain
point they get old enough that you kind of have to issue threats to get them to do things. And
if you have, you know, smart kids, which I mean, most kids are pretty smart actually, like they
will quickly learn like to take advantage of when you're bluffing. So like, um, uh, I mean,
one time it's kind of funny, my dad was visiting and, uh, and, and he was, and he actually said,
like, you, you know, you know, we were out at a restaurant and he was like, uh, he was like,
calm down or we're going to have to go out to the car. And my son immediately goes like,
okay, let's go to the car. And, and, and, and my dad thought that was hilarious because that would
always work on me when I was a kid. Um, but, but like just he, he was just like, oh, uh,
basically he knows on some level, you don't want to take me to the car. You want to stay here. So
I'm going to, you know, I'm going to make this costly for you. Um, yeah. So I mean, it's sort,
sort of, sort of game theory, I guess, if you want to twist it and make it rationalist is,
is your, you're playing an iterated game, uh, with, with the kids. So first of all, you, you,
even if you were bluffing, now you have to actually go through with your threat.
Otherwise they see that like you're, you're giving in. Um, so did your dad take them out to the car?
He did. Yeah. Nice. Yeah. It was funny. Um, so yeah, like I try to awful, you know, in terms of
game theory, I try to offer like compromises that will be acceptable to them rather than just being
completely hardline all the time, because then they just bulk at everything. Um, yeah, I'm not
sure how much of this is interesting. I always, I'm never sure like what, which of my strategies
are, are things that I've had to adopt because I have three of them and they, they, um, play off
each other and, and sort of run interference for each other and, and distract for each other on
kind of an unconscious way. Um, and it, but, uh, yeah, these are, these are the strategies that
I use. And, and I, I don't know if I said this last, last recording session, but none of this is
really like, uh, um, I, I'm not putting myself forth as a, as a primo rationalist parent who,
who has read all of the literature and, um, and applies all of the strategies consistently. It's
more like, these are the things that I end up doing with the, the smattering of rationality
exposure and, and, uh, attempt to be thoughtful. Um, yeah, this is a little weird and it's been
bothering me a little bit, but, um, so rationalism is sort of kind of an ideology and I, I remember
in my atheist days, uh, like I'm still atheist, obviously, but like in the more, uh, hardcore
strident days, there'd be, uh, pictures shared of three kids and, uh, like that said, this is a
Muslim kid. This is a Christian kid. This is a Jewish kid. And, uh, the comment underneath it being,
you wouldn't say that, you know, oh, this is a democratic kid. This is a Republican kid and
kid. This is a libertarian kid. It's wrong to put kids into these categories before they even have
any idea what they are. Um, I mean, I, I slightly disagree with that now because there's a lot to
be said about being raised in a culture, uh, in influencing who you are, but how do you,
like, are you trying to raise kids as explicitly rationalist and how do you feel about that? Like,
is it at all weird to try to impose an ideology on someone who is too young to consent to that
sort of thing? Yeah, that, that's interesting. Um, that, uh, honestly, I don't know if I've
thought it through in those exact terms, but, um, I definitely, um, like if they were to
decide that they didn't want to be like ideologically rationalists, then I wouldn't mind too much,
because I don't, um, I don't feel like rationalism is a, is a concrete enough thing to even be, um,
something that I would feel comfortable imposing on them. There are certain like tools and ways
of thinking more like it is how I see it that I try to, I try to convey to them and, and, and,
and in a way where I'm never sure if it's even working, like, I'll offhandedly just be like,
well, it's good to find out that you're wrong because then you can fix your mistake, which is,
you know, not something that I remember being told ever, but it's super, you know, core to the
rationalist ideology that the whole, you know, it's called less wrong. Um, yeah. And I do,
you know, there's certain, there's certain ideologies, I guess, like, uh, last weekend,
so, so my daughter wanted some toy that was like really expensive. And I decided like,
well, this is an opportunity because she really wants it. She keeps talking about it.
So we're going to make a lemonade stand and she's going to earn this money. So we, we, I, I elided
all of the facts that setting up a lemonade stand costs way more than the toy that she wanted.
So I just, I just sprung for that. Um, and, and we, we, we set it up and put it in the front yard
and, and I was like, I don't know how this is going to work exactly because, and, and I can
probably spin this a variety of ways. Um, but she, uh, we ended up having a number of people drive
by and stop and, and by lemonade. And, uh, and so in terms of an ideology, that was just,
that's sort of like how I, I'm not going to give her any lectures about capitalism, for example,
but I'm just going to be like, if you want something and you're living in this world,
um, then this is how you, this is one approach for going about that is you, you make, you, you
provide something for other people that they want, you get money and then you buy the thing that you
want. Um, so because a five year old even is not going to understand any attempt, uh, like
lecturing them about, about ideology. So I use the lemonade stand as an example of just saying,
like, there's probably all kinds of instances where I'm imposing or, or communicating my ideology
to them through through actions like that, but not thinking of it as being an ideological
indoctrination procedure. Did she make enough for her toy? Uh, no. Um, but, uh, I'm, yeah,
and that was probably like a misstep on my part because I was like, there was actually no way
she was going to make enough for her toy in one, in one day. So I was like, you know what, I can,
I can trick them into basically learning more and more about how to like run a
tiny baby business, um, in the course of earning enough money for this toy. Um, and then, and then,
uh, I will have, I will have raised this set of entrepreneurs who can go on and be successful
at whatever. That's one thing I think about a lot is like, I don't know if the institutions of like
universities are going to be anything like what they look like right now when they're, when they're
that age. So I'm kind of thinking like trying to prepare them with some more, uh, immediately
actionable skills, uh, like, like, like, I didn't understand how to, I don't understand how businesses
worked until I was in graduate school. Oh, wow. And I mean, like, I didn't bother to think about it,
you know what I mean? Um, yeah. So, so I'm like, you know, this is one thing where I think it's
kind of important. So I'm just going to employ this in their lives. Is that common, do you think?
Like my, my dad had his own business. So I was raised from that from the very beginning and I
don't, I don't know, do you think most people don't know how, how the business economy works
until late? Well, I mean, I guess it depends on what resolution you're talking about. Like,
like I clearly, you know, as a, as a teenager understood that you, you know, you make money
and you bring it to the person and they give you a thing. But like in terms of, um, you know,
the fact that you, you, you have a lot of overhead and just details of, I mean, I basically, what
happened was I ended up taking like a introductory business course, like late in my undergraduate
and that got me, you know, that kind of injects a lot of ideas into your head that weren't there
before. And then you're like, oh, wow, this is actually more complicated than I realized. Um,
and, uh, you know, so, so just having exposure to like grocery stores and stuff, I don't, I don't
think that gives you, you know, an understanding of, of a lot of the economics concepts or the,
the micro economics concepts that are, that are central to, you know, running a business for,
for a certainty or even just understanding, um, you know, basic, basic ideas like,
like how is Amazon growing? If Amazon doesn't make any, any profit and it's like, well, they,
you know, they do that on purpose and it's a, it's a trick and, you know,
once you understand it, it makes perfect sense. But, uh,
I wonder if maybe we should have more sort of business and econ classes earlier in schooling.
Yeah, that's, that's, that's a, that's a great idea. I mean, I, uh, I think you should at least,
that they should at least teach how to like start, um, you know, start an LLC or whatever,
just, just enough to like be legally okay to be running a business. That's one thing I was
thinking about with the lemonade stand is I'm like, I had to make a few calls actually to be like,
can I even do this? Am I going to get, you know, somebody drinks my lemonade and has
food poisoning? Am I going to get sued and ruin my life? Like, this is the world we live in now,
right? So, um, it turned out that, uh, that, that, that doesn't seem to be the case. Although I can
imagine all kinds of terrible failure modes. Um, at least it's not gonna have some trust in your
neighbors. Yeah, exactly. Do you have like really good frontage on your road, or was it just a
few people in your neighborhood? It's on a corner and, um, and I guess we just happened to be doing
it at a time of day when people were coming home from, from errands or whatever. Um, did you make
or keep working like the next several days to, to make an F? No, so I mean, there wasn't really
any, like I don't have the ability to do that based on scheduling, but, um, I, I, uh, I intend on
basically kind of we'll do it whenever, like on weekends, whenever there's nothing else to be doing.
And, um, like I ended up doing almost all the work, obviously. So I'm going to gradually make
them do more of the work. So that's, uh, just kind of a training wheels idea, basically. I, uh, when
I was, God, when did the NES came out, come out? I think I was around nine or 10 years old and it
was $99 and my dad paid me a dollar an hour to work for him and I had to work a hundred hours to
afford that thing. It was, it was an intense lesson. The biggest lesson was I got up to the
counter with my hundred dollars and then there was tax and I was like, Oh God, no. My parents were
like, we'll cover it. Yeah. Yeah. I still remember the drop in the, the heart feeling. Yeah. Right.
And that was the day you became a capitalist. That was the day I became a true communist.
I was like, everyone should have these Nintendo's for free. Yeah. Right. No, I, yeah, it was, it
was an interesting upbringing. Yeah. That's sorry. Go ahead. Oh, go ahead. I was just going to say,
like, um, you know, the idea of allowance is something that, that, that is that a lot of
people try to use to, um, convey a sense of, of money, right? And I found like for myself
that, that didn't connect to like the reality of, of, of making money at all. Cause it's almost
like you just get passive income for doing kind of what you were expected to do anyway. And it's,
it's not connected to effort. You don't, like if you, at least the way it was set up for me,
when I was a kid, like it wasn't like, oh, you do twice as many chores, you get twice as much
money. It was just like, this is the amount of money that you get. Um, and so like that's,
that's yet another reason why I kind of wanted to try out the lemonade stand idea is just like,
I want them to see some connection between like what you actually are doing and, and what, uh,
what money you can make through that. Um, and I, I'm not, I'm not saying like everyone should
do the lemonade stand thing. It's just like this was, this, this was what occurred to me as being
a little bit more organic maybe than, than an allowance. Oh yeah. So how old were your kids
when you came into this rationalism thing? Not born yet. Okay. So you've been doing it from
the very beginning. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I was, I was, I think I, when, when the, when the first
baby was born, I, I like wanted to, I didn't actually do this, um, because of laziness mainly,
but I wanted to paint like an elaborate, um, rendition of, of, um, um, if there's a diamond
in the box, I want to believe this. I'm in the box. If, if there's not, I don't, uh, let me
not become attached to beliefs. I may not want, um, and various, you know, just those, those
various things I wanted to, I wanted to have those around the house similar to how like
God never closes the door without opening a window or, or in normal houses because I think
some of them are very beautiful sentiments. Uh, some of the rationalist, uh, um, litanese
or whatever are very beautiful sentiment, sentiments and also useful. Like they come up
a lot. Some of them come up a lot for me, like just as something that I can fall back on. And
it's pithy and compelling and makes me feel like I'm doing the right thing.
This, I think I feel I know the answer to this, but we've sort of got a little proto-rationalist
community in Denver. And I think, you know, hopefully we're going to try to, I don't know,
I don't know what we're going to do with it, but I was going to ask if having the
rationalist community makes any difference, but I'm kind of assuming it doesn't since,
I mean, I've never seen your kids or anything at any of the meetups.
Yeah. Well, I would definitely like want to okay it with people first, if I was going to
bring kids and I don't know, I don't know what a, I mean, honestly, what that would probably
look like. First of all, uh, that's probably too late for them right now. Well, like in terms of,
like their bedtime is, is essentially when our, when our meetings start. Um, and if I were to bring
them, it would probably be when they're old enough to have a conversation.
Oh, we don't really have any kid-friendly activities.
Yeah. Yeah. They wouldn't, I don't, I honestly don't think they would get a whole lot out of it,
other than maybe just more exposure to a wider variety of human beings. Um, but I don't think,
honestly, I don't think that's why people come to the rationalist meetings. I don't think they want
to have to like help raise your children through. Right. Um, I mean, it's a cool idea. And when
they're older, I certainly would, would consider doing that. I think that's basically all I had.
Okay. For follow-up. Did you have anything else you wanted to add?
I think, uh, I think I hit all of the points in my, in my notes and, and I, I'm, I'm sure I talked
about a lot of these things last time. Uh, I guess the, the only thing I don't think I've, um,
talked about at all is there was this biodeterminist guide to parenting that was in the rational sphere.
Um,
Oh, was that done by Guern?
Well, so, so I know Guern has said things about this. Uh, Scott Alexander said things about
this. Uh, Ozzy Mandius has said things about this. Um, and, and one particular point I want to
do address is that somehow, uh, it comes up a lot that, that it's the statements, statements of the
variety of, uh, parenting has 50% of the influence and genetics has 50% of the influence on, on
outcomes. And like that, that never sat right with me. And, and I did some reading about it
prior to this podcast. And, um, what, what kind of came out was that the like influence of parenting
term is usually, um, calculated in a, in a misleading way. Um, I, I unfortunately did not write down
the notes of what exactly that means. Um, but, but basically it's like, uh, it's, it's normalizing over,
over groups that are already similar, I believe. So like, you know, it's one thing to say,
like obviously you can, you can grievously harm a child's outcomes by treating them terribly,
and you can be responsible for 100% of their outcome if you do it that way, right?
So it's like within the narrow band of parents who are already doing a great job,
there's 50% variation in terms of the outcomes. That's, that's like a better way of saying it.
And, and that to me is a lot more common sense, like that, that parses a lot better than, than like,
um, really 50% of the outcome is, is, is genetic. Like I don't know if that's,
I don't know if that makes sense. Um, and I really don't think I'm just being biased as like a parent
who wants to feel important because obviously every kid is different in, in ways that very much seem
innate and nothing, nothing you did cause it or even they're manifesting personality traits at an
age that's way too young for them to have like picked it up.
Oh, the kids were kind of grabbing pieces off the chess board despite the parenting
you were trying to do on that board.
Yeah. Yeah, right. It's, it's, it's, it's a lot, it's a lot them, right? But like
you can clearly, you can clearly influence their environment a tremendous amount.
Like you can look at the Polgar sister's example of somebody. Like if I were really,
like if, if I were dedicated, I probably could teach them to play chess, right?
It wouldn't necessarily be pleasant for them or, or, or for me, but it could probably,
could probably happen. I don't know if I can make them grandmasters like that's that,
that does come in more like, okay, well, do they have the innate, you know, capability for that?
So when you say 50% parenting and 50% genetics, that seems to leave out the entirety of their
peer group and the rest of the community, wouldn't, isn't that also a very big influence?
Like I think even having you and your genes being raised here in Colorado would be
vastly different from being raised in someplace like China or, you know,
India and elsewhere in the world.
Yeah. And that's, that's where this is now completely out of my depth, honestly.
And I may even be misspeaking and like there's, there's the concept of, of shared environment,
which is basically everything about the, the environment that the kids, like for example,
if you take, if you take siblings and you try to examine their outcomes,
I believe everything, everything about their lives that is not due to genetics is considered
due to shared environment. I may be wrong about this. I mean, I'm sure, I'm sure the commenters
will correct me. So parenting is obviously a big part of shared environment because if they're
siblings, they have the same parents and then they live in the same house and they're exposed to
the same toxins and they probably go to, you know, if not the same school, then they go to
similar socioeconomic, socioeconomically, you know, calibrated schools.
It just, yeah, it's just one of those things where it seems to me like I don't think there's,
I think there's a level of, of, of not, not deceptive. And I don't think anyone's trying to
be deceptive with the way they're saying it. I think it's just like a term of art that has
gotten out of hand when people say only 50% of the outcome is due to, is due to shared environment.
Because it's like, well, like you just said, if, if you drop someone in a vastly inferior,
like talk about, you know, 1500 years ago in, in some place that's not doing very well,
I don't think they're going to end up being a quantum physicist. Like, and so how do you,
yeah, so that is everything I got. Cool. Yeah, me too. Okay, excellent. We're going to wrap this
up then. I will say that with the length of the prior episode, plus this edition, we are not
going to have any time for listener feedback. So expect more listener feedback in the next episode.
And now for our regular segment, where we thank one of our supporters.
This week, our thanks go out to Roman, who is supporting us and at patreon.com
and helps make the show possible. Thank you, Roman.
Thanks, Roman. That's awesome. We really appreciate it. Yay.
And also thanks to our sound engineer, Kyle Moore, who helps make a sound amazing.
Thanks, Kyle. Or at least, you know, oddly amazing, even if our content is
content isn't, isn't his fault. Exactly. Yes.
All right. Thanks, everyone, and we'll see you in two weeks. Sounds good. Bye.
