Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, I'm Jay Sticky.
And today we are going to touch on a number of small topics plus feedback that we have
been neglecting for quite a while, but first, as always, we are doing our, what's wrong
posts?
Just like we always do.
Yeah, just like we always do.
We've actually been doing this, this way for a while.
It's, I don't even know how long it's been, at least two years now, right?
Probably.
Yeah.
Time's been weird.
We'll get through them eventually.
At this rate, yeah, give us, you know, summer 2029, probably.
I remember when I was a Jehovah's Witness, they had a thing where every week they would
read, I don't know exactly how much, it was like three, four chapters of the Bible and
do a quick little Bible study on them.
And like, it just seems like the most long thing in the world, but you keep going for
like a decade and a half and eventually you get through the entire damn Bible.
And then you start over.
So it was the thing, because after 15 years, you've kind of forgotten the earlier stuff.
Yeah, for sure.
At least the boring parts of it.
You rarely forget the bears tearing up the children.
I don't remember that.
Yeah.
Okay.
There was a part where some kids were calling, making fun of one of God's prophets.
And so he was like, fuck you, kids.
And two bears came out and ripped them all up.
Bears.
Yeah.
So I guess when we get to the end of the sequences, we should start again in the beginning.
God, I don't know.
Start the Bible.
Or start Slate Sarcotics.
Oh my God.
That would take a long time, but I would love that.
There's that curated list of Slate Sarcotics posts.
Yeah, somewhere.
Yeah.
No, I mean, I've got a bookmark somewhere, but like, we could do that instead.
Yeah.
Because there's some that are really, I mean, they're interesting, but they're kind of
special interests.
Like, there's not much to talk about to a general audience about the neurotransmitters
of depression.
Actually, that's that was one of the more interesting ones that I was going to guess
is like, I know Jayz knows a lot about and is excited about that stuff.
And I know very little about like, yeah, some of the book reviews on, you know, esoteric
topics or something or like, here's, you know,
these are some of my favorite, you know, melatonin, more than you ever wanted to know.
Right.
How long would that take to take to cover other than you're all doing it wrong?
Take one tenth of what the bottle says and do it five hours before bed is the right way
to do it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Don't be like, I'm going to take 60 milligrams and go to bed.
And it's like, no, that's your that's apparently the wrong way to do it.
Mm hmm.
Despite what the bottle says.
60 milligrams.
That would be a lot.
Or maybe six milligrams.
I forget whatever.
The correct one is like 300 micrograms.
Exactly.
Yeah.
It tends to be about the amount that they have available like at pharmacies or like one
to like five.
I can say I've definitely seen five.
I've seen higher.
Yeah.
I, the ones I got were the smallest I could find when I went there and they were three
milligrams.
So 3,000 micrograms.
I, I bite them in half, but that's still one and a half milligrams.
Just crush it, put in a liter of water and like take a shot of it every night or something
or every, you know, with dinner or something, right?
Yeah.
Just micro dose.
I mean, that is what you're doing when you're taking it correctly, micro dosing, I guess.
Or correct dosing.
Correct dosing.
Yeah.
But I mean, it's a small, it's a small amount.
Right.
I don't know.
Never mind.
Let's talk about, let's talk about a sequence.
No one can exempt you from rationalities laws.
Sounds very ominous.
I'll kick us off.
Yeah.
Sure.
Cause I can just say, of course I can exempt myself or I try to think of a funny way to
kick this off.
That wasn't very good.
One of those mutants that can exempt yourself from rationality, right?
That's right.
Like Dr. Strange.
Yep.
Just like, I got a cube.
So no, it wasn't a cube.
It was a jewel.
Necklace.
Yeah, a jewel.
And a cape.
And a cape.
And a cape.
Very loyal piece of outerwear.
And a cape.
Oh man.
So things like that always kind of weird me out because like, it's like a dog, right?
You just want something that loves you forever and will always do what you say.
But then you think about that.
You're like, do I want a slave that's happy to be a slave?
This is weird.
I picture it's just like a single-minded consciousness that's like, protect the person that I've selected
or something, right?
Yeah, but is that creepy?
It seems to have some kind of consciousness.
Like I feel like it, I don't know, I'm trying to remember the movie because I haven't read
the comics.
It kind of sets off my creepiness alert, my, you know, you're doing horrific things to
sentient minds alert.
Yeah.
No, I'm realizing that we haven't even gotten past the title and we're already like, I was
relishing in it.
But God, I have a pet peeve and then I'll shut off about it is when there's TV shows,
especially for kids that have an animal that clearly has human level intelligence, it just
doesn't talk.
Or maybe even it's like, does talk and it gets treated like a, I don't know, second
class citizen.
Like Pokemon?
Yeah.
Pokemon is an obvious, yeah.
But like, I feel like this is just everywhere where like, even the Lion King, they were
all basically human level smart and yet they ate each other.
Yeah.
And the Lions were like, no, they're cool with it, bro.
It's the circle of life.
Of course the Lions would think that.
Yeah.
And the Gazelles are just like, sorry, we're going to have to throw Johnny to the Lions
or they're going to kill us all.
Yeah, what a weird world if you really think through the implications.
Oh, that would be good.
Oh, that would be good.
It's a talent-alistic horror show.
Rationalist Lion King.
No, that would be a horror movie.
Exactly.
Okay.
So anyways, the first thing that is said and no one can exempt you from rationality's
laws is that traditional rationality is phrased in terms of social rules with violations
interpretable as cheating.
If you want me to accept a belief from you, you are obligated to provide me with a certain
amount of evidence.
If you try to get out of it, we all know you're cheating on your obligation.
The point though, well actually before we continue, does that sound more or less right?
I don't know.
Yeah, the standard like extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence.
Less extraordinary claims require less extraordinary evidence.
Like if I tell you I have a bag of Doritos in my car, you might just be inclined to believe
because there's no consequence to it.
But if you were like, I don't believe you, I could go show you the Doritos.
But if I said I have Jesus Christ in my trunk, you'd be like, okay, I definitely want to
take a look at this, right?
Yeah.
I'm wondering what they mean by traditional rationality.
So when I hear that, I don't think.
When I hear that, I think of the days pre less wrong when the new atheism movement was
still a big thing.
And we would argue with theist a lot on forums and we would, you know, bring up things like
the standard A implies B, A, therefore B, you know, those or, you know, you cannot have
these two contradictory claims at the same time or things like Stephen said, where if
you make a really extraordinary claim, you need some extraordinary evidence for that.
And those were.
Traditional Stephen quote, by the way.
Yeah.
And those were things that like, I don't know, they started back from the Greeks.
I think they were refined a bit during the Enlightenment, but they were the traditional
rules of like, if you follow these rules on true statements, you will produce true statements
as a result.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I just, I don't know, I thought it was interesting that it's like traditional rationality and
it's capital T, capital R. And I'm kind of like, was there even a, I mean, that the
this was like the first attempt to kind of formalize rationality, right?
Except for, I mean, there's philosophy, but there wasn't a philosophy thing.
There was rationalism, right?
There was.
Which is distinct from rationality.
But there's like, when I think traditional rationality, I think science, like especially
science 50 years ago, where like, all you had to do was say, this is my false survival
claim.
But when you think about it, like it was phrased in terms of like binary switches, right?
Like this is the evidence that would disprove it, right?
This is the evidence that would strongly indicate that I'm wrong.
And people still used frequentist statistics like a bunch of cucks.
Oh, you're going to make people mad.
I know some people that still are really strong frequentists.
And there was a big fight at one of the solstices I was at.
Really?
I guess it was a debate.
Like it wasn't like people came to blows, but yeah.
It wasn't like one of those point zero, point nine, nine, nine is equal to one.
Why don't you come say that to my face, bitch?
It was a little bit like that.
I think it was Steven J. Gould when asked, like, what could disprove evolution?
He just said he said fossilized rabbits in the Precambrian.
Yeah.
But like that is that would definitely take a heavy blow, right?
But that on its own.
So like that that might be his scientific position or something, right?
I'm not sure what it proved time travel.
Right.
So like that time traveling rabbits that I think would be more likely or at the very
least, I don't I don't think that would overthrow everything we know about inheritance
and genetics, right?
So like now there's so much.
Yeah. So what I would say is that that would definitely take a hit that would
that would put a huge hit in my confidence in like the classic Darwinian model, right?
No, there's definitely something we don't know, right?
More likely like it's a fake sample, you know, bad carbon dating, something, something, right?
Yeah, or we're in a simulation and there was a glitch because that would just be fucking weird.
Yeah.
That all those sound way more likely to me than everything that we currently
understand about like just, again, the four easy premises of evolution being wrong.
But did you get to, I guess, going back to it, did you get to the feeling the feeling
that before you discovered Bayesian rationality, that it was kind of a enforced almost as social
rules, like you learned them in school or you learned them by reading about how valid
thinking works.
And you were like, yeah, these are the rules and we got to accept them if we want to come
to correct conclusions.
So I think of rationality now more as like social norms, less than social rules, so a
new non-traditional rationality, new rationality.
Yeah, I guess I would say, I guess I could see it like, yeah, these are the rules, right?
You know, that if you if you want to be a good scientist, slash, they didn't use the word
rationalist, but, you know, make falsifiable, falsifiable predictions, etc.
But like I said, a lot of there was no basically like Bayesian is number determined or like
decision theory in it, right?
So as far as, you know, I never got that far in science.
So before I discovered this stuff.
Yeah, I remember it being kind of prescriptivist.
I think that's the word.
It is the word.
It's like, uh, that's a damn good, yeah, way to put it, but it was more prescriptivist
thing than a descriptor.
Yeah.
So, okay, no, the first paragraph makes sense.
Yeah.
He says, viewing rationality as a social obligation gives rise to some strange ideas.
For example, one finds religious people defending their beliefs by saying, well, you
can't justify your belief, belief in science.
In other words, how do you, your religion?
Yeah.
How dare you criticize me for having unjustified beliefs?
You hypocrite, you're doing it too.
And if the rules of rationality are social customs, then it may seem to excuse behavior
acts if you point out that others are doing the same thing.
It wouldn't be fair to make demand evidence from you if we can't provide it ourselves.
I, uh, I invite everybody to YouTube search, uh, Mac, uh, or it's always
something Philadelphia evolution trial where it, I don't want to summarize the whole
sketch, but the Mac is basically trying to make the case that evolution is fake
because science makes you look like a bitch.
Sometimes I prove by, by, by you've been wrong about, you know, they used to think
the earth was round and then boom, he's an idiot.
And he's got like this whole board, took him three hours to put together.
Cool.
It's like a complete, you have to, if you don't have any vibe for the show
whatsoever, this will make no sense.
But if you have seen any of it, then it fits this perfectly.
I swear to God, my dad has used that argument before the whole like, you can't
really, I mean, scientists don't really know anything.
They change their minds all the time.
They used to think this and then they think that.
And you always see like, oh, it was, I forget the other analogy.
He's the earth is round one, but I've, I've had it on more than one occasion
with more sophisticated, argument, eventually retreating back to, I guess,
that science is your religion.
You have some axioms that you just take on faith and that you can't defend.
And that's no different than taking, you know, that God is the original cause on
faith.
So we're both religionists here.
At that point, I usually, like I haven't had one of those arguments in 10 years,
but I, I don't like clearly at that point, we're not trying to, we're
talking past each other, right?
And so it's like, all right, well, you know, yeah, I take like
parsimony, intellectual honesty and evidence as like my axioms.
And if you don't, then we have just different goals.
The thing is you do take all of those things and the rest of your life, you
carve out this one special exception and pretend like you're following the same
rules, but you're not like when you go to the grocery store and, you know, it's
on the left side of whatever the road, you turn left, you don't turn right,
thinking maybe this time, I'll be on the side of the street.
If I pray really hard.
Okay, I thought we were going to get a dog attack.
Should I continue?
Yeah.
All right.
To Bayseans, the brain is an engine of accuracy.
It processes and concentrates entangled evidence into a map that reflects the
territory.
The principles of rationality are laws in the same sense as the second law of
thermodynamics.
Obtaining a reliable belief requires a calculable amount of entangled evidence.
Just as reliably cooling the contents of a refrigerator requires a calculable
minimum of free energy.
If the rules of rationality are mathematical laws, then trying to justify
evidence-free belief by pointing to someone else doing the same thing will be
as about as effective as listing 30 reasons why you shouldn't fall off a cliff.
Yeah, I like that one.
Um, I thought I had something and it's not coming to me.
All right.
So if two parties in a contract both behave equally poorly, a human judge may
decide to impose penalties on neither.
But if two engineers design their engines equally poorly, neither engine will work.
Even if I'm doing XYZ wrong, it doesn't help you or exempt you from the rules.
It just means we're both screwed.
Yeah, I guess the, I like the, um, metaphor of engines.
I think they get more into that, but.
I think that's a, the, the, the primary thrust at this point is what, what Jay
said, you know, a little bit ago, that a lot of people think of the, these rules
as prescriptive, like you must follow these rules to get to correct thinking.
Whereas, or to get to a correct conclusion.
You got to follow these rules or you're bad.
Yeah.
Well, not necessarily bad rational or bad scientist or whatever.
Yeah, you may get bad answers or bad conclusions.
Whereas, um, Eleazar is saying, you don't have to follow anything.
You're just, if you don't, you're not going to run the engine correctly.
It's the brain is a thing that's trying to accurately model the outside world.
That is how it, you know, contributes to our surviving.
And if you, you know, use the laws in the same way that you use the laws of
gravity, you can do things with those.
Uh, and if you don't, then okay, you don't, but that doesn't change what
laws, uh, determine how more likely or less likely certain things are.
Yeah.
Or like, it doesn't matter how well you can argue, like why your engine
should work if you didn't build it, right?
It won't.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's why I like the, the analogy.
Like he's, he's, you know, the, well, you can, sure you can argue about how
bad your, your contracts are to a judge, but like it, that's like, that,
that's not the same thing as saying, but here's the actual thing you're doing.
Yeah, you can't argue with the universe.
Exactly.
The only way to argue with the universe is to, I guess, you know, arguing
with the universe, you're, you're understanding it and then manipulating it.
Right.
Yeah.
And there's, there's one, there, there, there's a correct way to do that.
And there are lots of wrong ways to do that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You can do it well or you can do it poorly.
It reminds me of the secret or like D-Pack Chopra or the, the various, uh,
what do you even call them?
Like philosophies where like people literally seem to think that they can
talk the universe into obeying their whims.
And like, like people are like, oh, don't jinx that.
I'm like, sure, like the universe is listening to see like, I hope I don't
get a flat tire on the, on the drive, you know, to wherever I'm going, right?
Like, like, and I mean, and I never, you know, it's never something like I
actually get, I sort of think more is like, don't tempt Murphy.
Right.
Yeah.
But even then too, it's like, because I said that.
So for example, uh, you'll all be horrified to learn if you don't know
the software that like, uh, apparently like hospital staff and nurses and, uh,
the associated, whatever, helpers in hospitals, it's a highly superstitious
bunch.
Oh, really?
Um, and not, not necessarily, I'm not generalizing to all of them, but if
you go to nurses station, like at a hospital and you're like, oh, it's a nice
quiet night, they're like, shh, don't say that, are you kidding?
If you say that, someone will hear you and everything will go wild.
And it's like, can I make a, not a steel man, but a, a partial defense of that?
Of course.
Like a plastic man, please do.
Well, cause this, this comes up a lot when trying to do large group
activities where you have a lot of people, you have very little control over, uh,
in, in my particular example, in case it comes up, uh, when raiding 40 man
dungeons, because that's just what I'm doing.
Now that's where my brain is, but like there's a psychology to it.
Like if everybody is on point and doing things well and focused, then things go
well.
And if people start to get demoralized, things get worse, even though like their
skill hasn't degraded in the last five minutes, you know, it's entirely a
psychological thing.
And like, as long as people stay on focus, uh, things are good, but like if
someone brings up this thing, they really want like a loot drop to happen or
something, if it doesn't, then everyone was thinking about like, Oh man,
I really hope that happens.
And then the psychology is damaged when that thing doesn't happen.
And then everything kind of degrades a little bit.
And that can lead to a snowball effect.
So people are, my officers will often say, don't jinx it.
Don't talk about that loot because if it drops great, everyone's happy.
But if it doesn't drop and you drew attention to it, things go downhill.
So it's more of a psychological policing than it is actual superstition.
Yeah.
If I knew that, and I didn't also know that, you know, like my wife works with
so many nurses and stuff that a lot of them are like into like astrology and
shit.
Oh, God.
But, you know, everybody, that's, I'm not sure what the percentage is anymore,
but I'm sure it's something like 30% of people are claiming to be astrology.
Yeah.
When I was working in research, I was amazed by how many scientists also, you
know, had completely irrational beliefs, like.
Typical toys.
They were talking about the office being haunted at one point.
And like everybody, I don't like, I was like joking along.
And then I realized, like, with just mounting a horror that the three people
I was talking to, yeah, like, actually, like, oh, yeah, I've definitely seen ghosts
before. Let me tell you about this one.
I was like, oh, no.
It's like, but you, you guys weren't we just doing science?
Did you forget about how science, if you guys live in ghosts, what the fuck are
we doing here?
Yeah, for real.
We just asked the ghosts.
Oh, good.
That was always, that was always my thing with ghosts and afterlife and, and, you
know, even heaven and stuff was like, I really wish it was true.
And so when I was going through my, my, I guess, modestly painful deconversion,
like I was really motivated to believe that this was, that this was the case.
And I, and partly it helps to the, or later on, I guess we're refined with the
tools because I've come to those conclusions before I discovered the
rationality community, but, you know, refining those, those thoughts with these
tools, I, I now reflexively, and it almost to the point where I can see it's
annoying. So like, I, I, you know, occasionally just keep my opinions to
myself on stuff, but where if I find myself wanting to believe something, I
immediately, like I hit at it way harder than if I find it, if I'm either like
not registering it as I don't, like if I don't care, then I'm not going to like
really invest in it.
But if I'm like, oh man, I wish this is true.
Okay, hold on.
Now I actually need to like be a hundred percent sure.
Right.
That reminds me, I, well, I guess, you know, you wouldn't know because you've recently
become lactose intolerant.
I'm looking for ethically sourced milk.
And I think I found some because it says like pasture raised on the side, but
it has two ampersands and it says according to, you know, whatever US
agricultural guidelines, I'm like, okay, so what does that mean?
Because I know that, you know, the dollar nine and nine gallons are horror
factories and I've, I've, I've been committed to this for years and I
finally actually doing it.
I'm trying to, you know, buy like nicer things that cause less damage in the
world.
And so now that I've bought two, two half gallons of this stuff and like, all
right, now I need to double che because if it's not this, I need to go find
some eight dollar gallons somewhere, or maybe it's just impossible and I have
to find, you know, I have to find myself tolerate a non-dairy alternative.
The best thing you can possibly do is find someone who you know that
owns a cow and buy milk from them, like assuming that, you know, they treat
the cow well, interview the cow first, be like, does he do bad things to you?
I don't know where I could find somebody that I knew in real life who had a
cow with enough to spare for Colorado.
I know, I know people, I know one person who lives out in Parker with, with, uh,
they have one horse and one mini horse, which is really cute.
Yeah.
I love mini horses.
Bojo, the horse, the little mini horse.
Yeah, it's very hard and it's not a scalable solution because not everyone
can know a guy that owns a cow and is nice to it because, you know, they're
just aren't enough people.
And if you wanted to get a lot of those people having nice cows, the milk
would go to $10 a gallon or whatever.
This sounds like more of an aside.
This actually is more of the point of me reflexively challenging
something I want to believe.
I was at Sprouts and it's like this, like whole food, whole foods times
two, more, more, you know, uh, hipster slash friendly, whatever.
It's there.
Sprouts and natural groceries are just like, it just feels so den-free.
Yeah, there is definitely, and it's like the most like, are they not nationwide
chains?
Maybe.
Probably.
I don't know, I don't know.
I'm not really sure.
Didn't have them in Jersey.
I'm just mentioning that it's this place that's like whole foods on steroids, on
liberal steroids, and it's great.
But there was, there was a thing of milk there.
It was like eight bucks for a half gallon.
And on the thing it said from like a single Amish farm or something.
And I'm like, there's, I, I'm calling bullshit that a single Amish farm has
the, has the technology to like, like carefully and rather like, uh, delicately
and nicely produce enough milk at scale to sell to an international, to a
national chain.
Like, so I mean, it was eight dollars for a half gallon.
Yeah, but maybe at 16 dollars a gallon.
Maybe.
So, but I'm just thinking like, okay, this firm is very large.
Yeah.
Like, all right.
Or maybe one guy, like technically it's all this one guy's farm, but it's, it's
like this dude and his wife and they're just pumping out kids.
So they have enough to milk all the cows.
I think they use machines, but I'll have to check and see if those cows are happy.
Anyway.
All right.
Uh, it ends with remember this, when you plead to be excused just this once, we
can't excuse you.
It isn't up to us.
So that was how it ends on to a priori.
Yeah.
A priori to basions.
The brain is an engine of accuracy.
If you violate the laws of rationality, the engine doesn't run.
And the type, I'm the type of text that I'm assuming to the previous post.
Yes.
Uh, this is equally true whether anyone else breaks the rules or not.
And like, I love this.
This is exactly what we're talking about, right?
And that's, you know, at a meta level, what I love about the sequences and like
the order, they were kind of just like, you know, spewed into existence.
Right.
Like he makes a good point and then like kind of refines it with another, like
another angle and that that's what this is doing.
And we like, so while analyzing the previous post, we hit some of these points
already, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Probably doesn't hurt hurt that we've both read both of these, you know, we all
read both of these posts before we started, but yeah, actually, like, I think
that there were parts of each that I was getting confused.
Like, I forgot which points were made in which I said.
Yeah.
Um, they blend together.
They blend together.
This is a good pair of posts.
All right.
Consider the problem of Occam's razor as confronted by traditional philosophers.
If two hypotheses fit the same observations equally well, well, I believe
the simpler one is more likely to be true.
You can argue that Occam's razor has worked in the past and is therefore
likely to continue to work in the future, but this itself appeals to the
predictions from Occam's razor.
Occam's razor works up until October 8th, 2007, and then stops working
thereafter is more complex, but it fits the observed evidence equally well.
Fucking love it.
Which is the date that this was written.
Yeah.
You think he knows he was being funny, like making some of these
exact points?
Yes.
Yeah.
I, yeah, it's just like, it's got a good sense of humor.
It's comedy, like, but it illustrates the point really well.
You missed the first sentence, I think, which was, uh, traditional rationalities
phrases, social rules with violations, interpretable as cheating.
If you break the rules and no one else is doing so, you're the first to
defect, making you a bad, bad person.
It seems there's no way to justify Occam's razor, except by appealing
to Occam's razor, making this argument unlikely to convince any judge who
does not already accept Occam's razor.
Yeah.
And then parenthetically, why are those, why are some of those words italicized?
Yeah, he italicized justify, appealing argument, convince, judge and accept.
And yeah, that's because all of those are words that you would try to use
when, um, making an argument when trying to convince someone of something.
I'm not going to be able to argue my, you know, you had that broken treadmill
in the basement, you're not going to be able to argue it into working.
You're using Occam's razor this way, right?
Yeah.
Look, but I plugged you in.
The other one, when I plug it in, it works.
What the hell's your problem?
Yeah, you got to manifest it though.
So I guess you just don't really want it.
Oh, this is that secret stuff?
Yeah.
I mean, that's the thing that really like, pisses me off.
But, you know, that technically, um, sounds like a thing that could be true,
that you can't justify Occam's razor without using Occam's razor, right?
The, the justified part is the key here, where the thing is we aren't
trying to justify anything.
Right.
Yeah.
And I, I was just thinking about the secret, like, I, no, no, you're good.
It's, it's like, luckily this came out right in the height of like my new
atheism, my new atheism, you know, uh, argument era.
And it was most like a courageous pop culture idea I'd encountered more
or so than like common religion.
Like cause, cause the, the obvious, uh, question that first comes up is like,
well, hey, why did I get attacked?
I didn't want that to happen.
Well, the other, you must not have not wanted it enough, which is a horrifying
thing to say, especially just a survivor of abuse or violence.
And like, there's, there's no way to, to get around that.
And so I don't, you know, this is why Oprah is number one on Skeptoids.
List of top 10 harmful promoters or promoters of harmful pseudoscience.
She seems like a nice woman.
I know that she does a lot of, of good work, but she needs to vet her, her,
and I'm not sure where she's at now.
This was 15 years ago that I was aware of Oprah.
Does she even have a show?
I think she still does.
Hopefully.
She definitely still has a magazine.
Alexa, does the Oprah show still exist?
Wow.
According to our robots, it ended in 2011.
Yes.
That was a really good answer.
I was surprised.
Me too.
Yeah.
Um, while you're doing that, I looked up the definition of justify because
I, they're talking about justifying Occam's razor.
And the point, I guess he was making what you're just talking about was, uh,
that these are words like you would use to try to like convince a human person
rather than, you know, the universe or, uh, physics that don't care about your
arguments, but I just, I don't know.
I was like compelled to look up at justify.
And so we've got verb to show or prove to be right or reasonable.
But then apparently the second definition theology declare or make
righteous in the sight of God.
Oh, interesting.
And now I'm wondering which meaning, I think because he was using other words
that have to do with law, he was using the first definition, but it's just, I
don't know.
It's a cool secondary spin on it.
You're really making me want to talk about a show that I just watched that.
You can talk about a show you just watched.
Before you do that, we just finish.
Yeah.
Well, I want to just, you know, jump in and say that, that I was trying to get to
the point earlier.
I'm not sure if I made it that, um, no one is, well, some people are trying
to justify Occam's razor to argue, to the person they're arguing with, but
like that is not really the goal.
We don't care about justifying it to people.
We just observed that Occam's razor works that when you apply it, uh, you get
correct answers and that's the same thing with the laws of thermodynamics.
You're not trying to justify to someone.
Look, if you heat one end, the heat's going to go to the other because of
these and these reasons, you're just like, look, bitch, we heated one end.
And slowly the rest of the thing warms up because it conducts heat.
You don't believe me.
Touch it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, no, that's, that's a good way to bring that point home.
And like, again, in the early days of my arguing with theists, you know, I'd
be like, well, here's the like the laws of logic and this, this sort of thing.
And they're like, well, you know, I just don't care about that.
Like, all right, well, I can't logic you into, into accepting the laws of logic.
Again, with, with the caveat of yes, you do, you just, you carve out this
exception for it.
Um, but yeah, it's like, all right.
Well, clearly then we're just, we're not, I mean, it's like arguing
whether or not you can move a night this way in chess, but you can't.
It's like, yeah, but I think I can.
It's like, well, then we're not playing chess anymore.
Yeah.
You physically can move it wherever you want, but then you're not playing chess.
Right.
Which is, yeah.
There's, um, there was this, uh, Richard Dawkins debate.
I remember it's probably still on YouTube.
If I can find it, I'll put a link if anyone cares.
But it was, um, he was arguing with this like creationist who just kept saying
it, uh, that there's too many gaps in the evolutionary record and like, oh,
we haven't really found enough evidence.
And he was like, well, actually we have, well, you know, in between humans
and apes, no, we have a lot of them.
Uh, and there's like, I don't know, she just kept saying like, well, there's,
you know, there's, there's too many get like, there's not this thing.
And when she would say specific things like, Oh no, we have tons of fossils.
They're, they're in the British museum.
You could go look at them and then she just kept repeating, well, you
know, they don't really, we don't have them.
And he's like, we do.
We have the right, you could go, go look at them.
Go, go.
I remember seeing this.
And it was like, she just broke.
Like she, like she couldn't engage with like, I don't know.
I guess she expected that to be a knockdown argument and had no ability
to actually think and it just kept repeating it.
It really annoyed me that people upon seeing that thought that Richard Dawkins
was an asshole, like that was one of the things they would like to like Richard
Dawkins is an asshole.
I'm like, what the fuck are you talking about?
Well, because he's right.
Well, and I imagine that the person he's arguing with, I only remember
this being vaguely recounted in the God of the gaps chapter from the God
delusion.
And that's what this, this phenomenon is called, you know, if they say, well,
what about the gap between, you know, this area of understanding?
Well, I filled it.
Oh, but now there's a gap.
There's two gaps.
I think what I imagine happened is that, you know, she was raised being
told this her whole life and then it's like, no, actually you're wrong.
We can go look at it together.
I'll buy your ticket to the museum and like.
I think he actually did say that.
Okay.
That's where he was like, I'll take you right now.
We can go look at them.
Be happy to.
And then at that point, you're like offering to pay her ticket, but he's
the asshole, but then I think it's like, from her perspective, it's like, well,
hold on.
Now I'm being, so like when he said, like she just couldn't think, I imagine
it was just like kind of a cognitive car crash.
And it's like, well, hold on.
I was told that that's where this road went.
And now you're telling me that it's not what, you know, just, and I'm making
bamboozled facial expressions as I'm imagining what was going on in their heads.
So I've experienced like a lot of just cognitive shutdown, usually with
like some kind of intense emotional trigger to use a, you know, a word that
we might raise eyebrows at, but, uh, I think it's a perfectly valid word.
Yeah.
That triggers are real and do exist, but like in the context of like PTSD, not
like I'm vegan and I saw a picture of me.
I don't know.
You know, we don't need to talk about that, but we're not going to respect that.
You need to trigger warning that picture of a pomegranate because it looks
like, you know, violent or something.
Anyway, if your fellow philosophers do not demand justification for your
unarguable beliefs, you will not demand justification for theirs.
As the symbol for your treaty, your white flag, you will use the phrase
a priori truth and that's truth before, uh, observation.
Okay.
Yeah.
A priori is prior observation, um, or prior to observation.
Our Latin listeners, uh, our Latin speaking listeners, uh, West will no
doubt build a more, uh, or cleanly articulate that than I just did.
Fucking lawyers and they're Latin.
He says the internet encyclopedia philosophy defines a priori propositions as
those noble independently of experience Wikipedia quotes, Hume, relations of
ideas are discoverable by the mere operation of thought without dependence
on what is anywhere existent in the universe.
This is contrasted with like a posterior, I, uh, beliefs, which is like this,
what I believe after looking at stuff.
And apparently one of the common examples of that is one plus one equals two.
And, uh, and in reply to that, Eliezer links back to his, uh, post on how
to convince me that two plus two equals five.
Because, um, I think he makes a good point.
If all the evidence consistently shows that adding two and two together makes
five, you kind of accept the evidence.
So this whole thinking about things to, to, to without any, any resorts of the
evidence is stupid.
Yeah.
It's like, then I, I mean, this just gets into like those things that are fun
for a couple of years and became less fun for me examples of like, well, I
can think of things like, uh, whatever all chairs by my definition of things
that you can sit on, I can sit on this, therefore it's a chair.
I don't have to, I don't have to know the definition.
Exactly.
Yeah.
But like, you know, if I, if I can say all A are this B as an A, therefore B is,
or therefore B has whatever trade A has, right?
Um, I can know that before observation, but you kind of have, I guess either
just believe what you're told about B.
Or like, go look at yourself, right?
So there's, there's, I, I don't have, uh,
like that, that one, um, God, I forget when the, what this example is from,
but, uh, when a bunch of people were told all elephants are pink, um,
Maurice is an elephant is Maurice pink.
And the answer was like, I don't know, I have to go see Maurice because they
were like, I'm not sure I believe your, your, uh, your sub positions here.
And it was just supposed to be a, you know, a strict test of logic and applying
just logic.
Yeah.
Of course, Maurice is pink, but, uh, they weren't willing to accept the,
the, the question givers word on this thing.
There you go.
They're, they're bad a priori arguing philosophers.
Yes.
Yeah.
But probably less easy to trick.
And they're good rationalists.
Yeah.
I don't believe until I see it.
Yeah.
Don't, sorry, go ahead.
Oh, no, good.
I was just going to read the last one that we have here.
Don't try to tell me that a priori beliefs are arbitrary because they
sure aren't, uh, generated by rent, rolling random numbers.
Brains evolved from non, non-brainy matter by natural selection.
They were not justified into existence by arguing with an ideal philosophy
student of a perfect, a perfect emptiness.
This does not make our judgments meaningless.
A brain engine can work correctly, producing accurate beliefs, even if it
was merely built by human hands or, or culminative, uh, or cumulative stochastic
selection pressures.
Those are bad ass words.
Um, rather than argued into it, argued into existence, but to be satisfied
by this answer, one must see rationality in terms of engines rather than
arguments, twight.
Did we want to touch on this thoughts thing real quick?
Yeah.
Okay.
I don't know.
I'm not sure how relevant it is, but this was in response to the thing that, uh,
a priori beliefs are discoverable by mere operation of thought.
Eleazar points out that thoughts exist in the universe.
They are identical to the operation of brains.
Oh, I skipped that part.
Yeah.
Material brains in the real universe.
Uh, so when you add one plus one and get two by thinking, those
thoughts are embodied in flashes of neural patterns.
In principle, we could observe experientially the exact same material
events as they occurred within someone else's brain.
You could see someone else's engine operating materially through material
chains of cause and effect to compute by pure thought that one plus one equals
two.
How is observing this pattern in someone else's brain any different as a way
of knowing from observing your own brain doing the same thing?
When pure thought tells you that one plus one equals two independent of any
experience or observation, you are in effect observing your own brain as evidence.
Checkmate atheists.
That like, I don't know, uh, if you actually use that, I don't think so, but
like it reminds me of the idea of armchair philosophizing.
Yeah.
Where?
Or any sort of philosophizing.
Um, I know, I personally just got a distaste for it.
Now there's good philosophy.
Yeah.
I think there's excellent philosophy.
Yeah.
I think you go that far.
I think there's good and excellent philosophy when you're not like, you're
not trying to use philosophy to generate beliefs about the world, but like, you
know, it, um, you know, virtue ethics is the philosophy about how to live, right?
Yeah.
Stoicism, another good example.
There's also philosophy that takes like evidence into account and.
Yeah.
I mean, what, what can we reasonably infer?
That's, I mean, I don't, I don't like drawing hard lines around what's
philosophy and what's thinking other of other kinds of thinking patterns.
But yeah, I think philosophy, any, any decent philosophy can be replaced
with a good enough Bayesian statistical model.
It's like, so this is why the philosophy channel in our discord is named
math for babies because it, once you apply enough math to philosophy, it
just reduces to, you know, math.
Well, that's just your philosophy, man.
If you don't know math, if you're doing math for babies, you're a philosopher.
I don't know.
There's utilitarian things that, that don't work great.
Like, uh, what is it?
Repugnant conclusions or whatever.
And that depends on which utilitarian arguments you accept, I guess.
Yeah.
And that does kind of come down to philosophy.
I mean, which is why philosophy is bad because it comes down to arguments
that you're trying to make other people accept as opposed to laws of statistical thinking.
Well, like if you're trying to decide what you should do, yeah, you know, I
don't know what laws is laws of statistical thinking I'm looking for.
And I'm deciding whether or not to buy cruelty free milk.
Right.
Well, I mean, when we're talking about the more colloquial sense of, ah, see
good and bad, I like good philosophy, then yeah, sure, that's, that's great.
But when I think of the philosophy, I dislike it's more about the armchair
mental masturbation that gets done in high level universities.
Or just, or, you know, philosophy 101 classes.
I mean, that was my, like, those are some of the most fun classes I had.
If you just sit there arguing this random shit, it's great.
Yeah, yeah, it's a lot of fun.
Yeah, like you're, you know, the first time I encountered like serious
arguments for dualism and stuff were like riveting, if not compelling, right?
I mean, once you have serious people discussing arguments for the existence
of philosophical philosophical zombies, that's what I'm like.
Okay, you've, you've, you've clearly lost your own head on your side, your ass.
I like that.
Do some spelunking.
Go spelunk your way for you from this, this weird belief you've got.
All right, so we have for next time priming and contamination.
And do we believe everything we are told?
Excellent.
And I haven't read that one a long time.
Does that touch on that research that like in order to understand a statement,
you have to tacitly believe it for a second?
I think that was Spinoza who said that.
Oh, maybe.
Yeah.
Like I haven't read it yet and I don't remember exactly what post that was.
So maybe we'll find out.
And if not, that was, I said experiment and then I mentioned Spinoza in the same
sentence, Spinoza was a philosopher, so careful.
This was less of like a, I'm just kidding.
So the word Spinoza, yep, there is Spinoza.
Great.
All right.
So we'll save it for next time.
Yeah.
Come back in two weeks to find out.
Next episode of the Bayesian conspiracy.
We need funny commercials.
This episode brought to you by Givewell.
I, rather than funny commercials, I would like, like existentially creepy
commercials like they had on, um, I feel, yeah, those were the best.
Yeah.
Speaking of a brought to you by Givewell, shameless plug.
So I finally, I started a new job with some caveats.
It's like the same product, but new company and, um, came with a pay bump.
So what I did, and then on the, whatever, first paycheck of February, not the
last one of January, I got finally paid out this bonus for my last job.
My last, like my first week or my last week of, of earned pay at the last
job, my PTO, and then my first paycheck from this job.
And so it was a great, yeah, great Friday.
And so what I did was I finally went to Givewell.com slash rationally speaking
and set up a recurring donation, which is matched the first month up to $250.
So everybody should do that.
And I'm humble bragging.
I'm not really bragging.
I'm just stoked.
I finally got, got off my ass and actually did this.
But everyone else can.
And if you go to, uh, I think, I think, um, Barry vett wizards also has the same
pitch, but if you go there to, like I said, Givewell.com slash whatever podcast,
make sure it, you know, look it up first, but I did rationally speaking.
And then you select it from like the dropdown.
I got an email a few days later saying, yep, your first donation will be matched.
So Tim Ferriss just, uh, plug that as well.
Perfect.
Yeah.
I mean, so lots of, lots of anyone, I guess it's matched by rationally speaking.
I think it's matched by some generous donator with deep pockets.
Um, I don't think, because I know that like apparently Tim Ferriss,
the show is doing it, uh, uh, very bad wizards is doing it.
I think it's just a promotion that they have.
Like, Hey, if you're referred here by one of these people, we'll match your
first donation.
Why did not anybody consider the Bayesian conspiracy for this?
We haven't asked, we haven't talked to Givewell yet.
Oh, do we have to approach them?
That probably makes more sense.
I mean, they have to build the endpoint for, you know, Givewell.com slash
Bayesian conspiracy, right?
So yeah, yeah.
Um, or at least have it leads straight to the same page of all the other ones.
So nobody donate anything yet in two weeks.
There might be something where you can do it through us.
I don't think, I don't think rationally speaking gets anything.
I just emailed them.
That's fine.
Just all I want is the mad props.
It's not about who you're helping.
It's about the props.
Yes, exactly.
Validate us.
That's the only reason I live or do anything.
So when I did check out though, I didn't get a thing that said your first
and the donations match.
So I did a reply because it was like, do you have any questions?
And I was like, yeah, did Julia Galef from actually speaking get like a, you
know, a tick mark on the board for referring me?
Cause I said that she did.
And they're like, yep, totally.
You'll get that email in a few days.
And I did.
So cool.
Yeah.
Just to be clear, Julia Galef is her, you know, give her credit for this.
She's, she's fucking awesome.
Yeah.
And I was like, yeah, she's like the best, like not professional EA activist,
EA activist in the world, as far as I'm aware, right?
And like, I'm like, why am I telling him this?
He knows this.
The guy I'm talking with at give well, I'm sure.
But I felt, I felt the need to justify writing my email in more than just a sentence.
That's true.
He's like, why do you think she's on our site?
Cool.
All right.
So we probably going to get through a bunch of feedback and some other topics.
Probably the other topics first, but I wanted to do this one thing of feedback
before we start in on that, because it relates to what we were just talking about.
Because just a second ago, we were talking about, hey, this post that we're
going to read next time called, do we believe everything we're told?
And I was like, oh yeah, I remember about this whole changing our minds thing
that somebody wrote in about.
So want to touch on that real quick.
Koi from the discord or the poster formerly known as Koi.
And now is two characters that I don't know how to pronounce, but apparently
they're pronounced Koi.
So still Koi, just in a different language, maybe.
I'm not even sure what characters, what language it is.
But yeah, maybe it's not even a language.
I don't know.
I mean, it has to be something deferred to be from build to type it in as a user
team.
That's true.
Yeah.
I'm looking it up now.
Great.
Koi said on the, when we were talking about we change our minds less often than
we think, there's a you are not so smart podcast episode, which we will link that
argues for the opposite.
New research suggests that the majority of the mind change we experience after we
update our priors, we delete what we used to believe and then simply forget that
we ever believed otherwise.
This can lead to a skewed perception of the world, one that leads to the
assumption that the mind change is rare and difficult to come by.
And that can lead to our avoiding information that might expand our
understanding of the world because we assume it will have no impact.
The truth, say Wolf and Williams, is that mind change is so prevalent and
constant that the more you expose yourself to counter evidence, the more your
worldview will erode replaced by a better, more accurate one.
It's just that you probably won't realize it until you look back at old posts
on social media and cringe, which is a fascinating point.
Yeah.
That reminded me of, well, no, this is a different point where I will write or
draw something and be like, oh, this is garbage or like my memory of my past
self's like ability to create things was like, oh, it's so, you know, the more
distance I get from that, the, and when I look back, I actually like appreciate
my own stuff better because I can separate it from the thing that I have
made to just think that exists in the wild, which just shows that I'm a really
harsh critic of myself, I guess.
But, um,
It also shows growth.
I've had a couple of examples of that of digging through.
Like one of the cool things about my new job is like our CTO is like the best.
He's not even hands on his right way to do it.
He's very like interested to be involved and he wants to get spun up as fast
as possible.
So he's like, Hey, if you guys are going to work on something like as a group,
call me in.
I want to watch.
And, uh, so I get, there's been a couple of cases where I'm like, God,
who did this?
Oh, me.
Whoops.
And so then you get, you know, that's growth, right?
If you can't look at something that you did before and if, you know, if you're,
if you're no better at doing something that you've been working on for five
years than you were five years ago, you're not making progress, right?
I know I've run into this talking with other people, uh, quite a few times,
maybe quite a few times, at least a few times though, because, uh, I'm one of
those weird perverts that really enjoys arguing with strangers on the
internet and, you know, they stop being strangers.
If you argue with them long enough, uh, but, um, there's been times where like,
I'm arguing with someone and I'm like, a few months ago, you had the exact opposite
position.
What are you doing?
Just like switching around on me and they're like, no, I didn't.
I've always thought that, I don't know, Ted Cruz is the Zodiac killer.
And I'm like, no, you fucking didn't.
I'm sure I can go back and find the logs.
And, uh, that's happened a few times.
And I was just like, what the hell is happening?
I'm sure it's happened with me too.
And I just can't remember it because you don't remember having that
wrong of a position in the past.
You don't remember what you forgot.
Yeah.
I mean, I know I used to believe in God a lot like that.
I can definitely remember, but maybe there's things that I think that I've,
you know, always just kind of assumed which were not the case.
Yeah.
I mean, there's definitely part of the brain that are, uh, what would you
call it a function of the brain where it's trying to make yourself feel consistent
with your past self.
That's kind of important for feeling like a unified, coherent person.
It's got those drawbacks.
Yeah, it's, it's really worrisome.
I don't like the idea that my brain is going around editing itself so that I
have a wrong picture of me.
Yeah, but as long as you're trying to continually improve your picture of the
world, you know, at least you have a better picture of the world.
And if you're, if you're throwing, if you're garbage collecting old pictures,
you know, right, at least there's that.
Yeah, I'm not a fan of this, having my consciousness edited, even by my own
brain, the world is a mess without the editing software, though.
I definitely, uh, broke that in a weird way one time by combining drugs.
I shouldn't have.
Oh, I was like, I don't know how to make, uh, it's the worst place to take new drugs.
Yeah.
And this was not even recreational drugs.
These were, well, it was like medaffinil and some peptide from Russia.
And I don't know, uh, I was, it was super weird.
I was fine until I had one beer and it wasn't even a strong beer, like later in
the day, and then suddenly my brain just broke and my filtering software broke.
And as I would like turn my head, I could see the saccades of what looked like
sort of, uh, individual, like, like if you took a bunch of Polaroids and then
laid them out where I was kind of like, Oh God, like the actual experience of
turning your head and feeling like there's a coherent, just like picture,
like, uh, sensory data was the same.
It was, it's really hard to explain, but it was like everything was these
saccades of just like little flashes of thing that I could see that my brain was
putting together into, uh, I mean, like there's so little that like we as humans
actually see and our brain is mostly just like using software to fill in these
big gaps in our vision.
And there's the expectation that like this, uh, a cup of coffee is still going
to be there on the table.
So like object permanence.
So it's putting it there, but yeah, you can't trust your own eyes.
Even if you're not moving your eyes, you still got that big blind spot that
your brain pretends to fit or does fill in, but with the middle of your eye.
Yeah, guesses.
Um, where's your, were your thoughts doing the same thing?
Yeah, it was where you could observe the, the, the leaps in thinking.
Mostly I was just, I was first of all horrified because I was like, um, man,
I'm going to have to like call an ambulance if this doesn't wear off.
It did wear off, but like, I was just laughing at like, Oh my God, how do,
how do we drive?
We drive cars.
How do we, how do we like, I don't know, it's, it just made me aware of how
little actual sensory data we're ever actually getting and how kind of, I don't
know, very impressive.
I guess our brain softwares that we can just walk or pick, pick up a thing.
It is, yeah.
I mean, I guess it's highly optimized, but it just makes me not trust the brain.
I feel more and more like a hero in one of Richard Watts's books.
So we're just like, I'm a weird parasite living on this thing that barely
functions and it keeps editing me and I don't like any of it.
Yeah.
It's kind of ex-extentially horrifying.
It is.
Such as life.
Damn it.
Fun on the bun.
I like a GSB.
This is another bit of feedback.
Okay.
Explaining, cause I think we talked about this some weeks ago about Mott, Mott,
Bailey versus moving the goalposts.
Oh yeah.
I wanted, before you get into that, it turns out, um, Jace, you were right.
Scott Alexander, not coined the Mott and Bailey thing.
It was around before him and he just popularized it.
Yeah.
I, so I apologize.
I remembered that or I thought I did because.
Are you sure you ever believed otherwise, Enyosh?
I accept your apology, Jace.
Yeah, that's fun.
No, I remember there was someone from my Philly less wrong group was mentioning
that they were kind of annoyed that Scott had popularized Mott and Bailey
because it was not intuitive and they thought that bait and switch would have
been better because people forget which is the Mott and which is the Bailey
since they're not worried that are in the common lexicon.
All right.
And like,
Jace, just be a little smarter.
I always forget which one's which.
The Bailey is the place everyone wants to be.
The Mott is the tower.
See, I had it backwards in my head.
All right.
So the Mott is the retreat.
Okay.
Then why is it first?
Cause bait and switch, the bait is first.
And that's, that's where you're having your first, first line of argument is
out, out in the, the Bailey apparently.
Yeah.
And then you retreat to the Mott.
No, yeah.
Sorry, sorry, Scott.
You should have switched.
You should have switched him when he popularized it.
But bait and switch doesn't entirely explain the phenomenon because people
come once, you know, they drive away the arguers.
They go back out to the Bailey, whereas you don't go back out to the bait.
And then when I was back retreat to the Mott, I was going, okay, back to the
Bailey.
So the moving back and forth is an important distinction that you don't
do with baiting and switching.
Just like the most like prime example of just like, no, God doesn't want you to
have abortions.
Well, you know, hold on.
How do you know, like, you know, what do you mean?
God, like the, your, your version of religion is real.
No, no, I mean, by God, I just mean love.
Yeah.
And by that, I mean, you can't have abortions.
Yeah.
Once you're done, you know, arguing, like, okay, yeah, we all, we all accept
that love exists, and it's a great thing.
And you can base your religion on that.
Okay, good.
The person goes away.
All right.
So back to no abortions because of God saying so.
So like, sorry, this was a long, it was at the very bottom of the members list
on discord, but that's Japanese.
Koi.
Oh, great.
That's Koei.
Oh, oh, you can read Japanese.
Uh, a little bit.
Choto.
And does it mean like the, the fish?
Um, this is the, that's just the, uh, what the hell do you call characters?
That, that symbolize the sound kanji?
No, um, I mean,
phony letters.
Yeah, it's the, there's a word for this.
But like when literally you're just using a symbol to mean a sound as opposed
to a pictograph.
Hmm.
Hieroglyphs.
I don't know.
Yeah.
Okay.
Anyways, back to the thing.
You were trying to sing something about GSB and Montabaley.
I like this distinction.
And I think you had some, some discussion about it, but I'm curious.
I just like, I like this one.
Uh,
Montabaley versus moving goalposts.
Cause I think we may have equivocated them or at some point some months ago, I
can't remember.
They both dismissed the evidence provided, but moving the goalposts means
demanding new evidence and a mot and Bailey means secretly modifying the
claim so as to run to the evidence, inapplicable to the claim that the
person who provided evidence slash criticism will seem unreasonable for
disagreeing with.
Right.
Like you can't disagree.
That love is great.
Right.
But then you had said, does it make more sense?
If I say that, uh, Martin Bailey dismisses evidence by modifying the
claim and moving the goalpost dismisses the evidence by modifying what
counts as efficient evidence.
Yeah.
It's like the same thing that was actually GSB earlier.
And then he, uh, wrote the second thing out to explain that in more detail.
Perfect.
Yeah.
Right on.
Cool.
Someone was asking, Hey, Stephen Zuber, I'm curious.
What was the conversation where you made somebody stop being transphobic?
I think I, I replied briefly in the chat.
Um, like very few people are on the discord compared to our number of listeners.
Yeah.
So I mean, it's, it's not as, as compelling as it sounds and this person
wasn't like transphobic in the real sense of hates trans people.
They were transphobic in the sense of Twitter would crucify them if they'd
said what they thought.
Um, so like the, so like they're ignorant.
It's great that there's that distinction.
But that's, that's, that's real transphobic and there's Twitter transphobic.
Right.
Um, no, like Jay said, they were ignorant about stuff.
And like it, it, it was really just a matter of like by patiently engaging them
with it and be like, well, hold on.
Like, what do you, what do you actually mean here?
Well, and I think it was something like street epistemologized it.
Yeah, kind of.
I mean, I don't know if it's interesting enough to get to the whole thing.
And it was a couple of years ago.
If I can remember at all, but it was like, yeah, basically, like, hold on.
What do you mean?
I think, and it was more about them saying that there were just two genders,
which might be transphobic, might not be.
It's definitely something phobic.
Um, and like this person's gay.
And I was like, all right, well, like, how is that different?
Like then someone, then some straight person telling you like, no,
there's just heterosexuality.
Like you're just, you know, going for attention or whatever.
Right.
And he's like, well, I mean, right.
Well, first of all, why the fuck are you going to do that?
Right.
Especially given for the attention.
Hey, do you want to be oppressed?
Right.
But, but this guy's upbringing as long as I get attention, he's got a religious
conservative family coming out to them was, was like really bad.
Not there's only worse stories, but it was bad for him.
Yeah.
Um, and so they actually accept him, right?
Yeah.
This is the same person I'm thinking of.
Yeah, I think so.
Okay, okay.
Um, yeah.
So I mean, it worked out, but there was a, you know, rough period.
I don't know exactly where they're at if they think he's going to hell or not.
But, you know, they're, you know, it's not like you can't come to Thanksgiving and
stuff.
So, um, but like it, it was kind of just like what eventually brought me around to
it because I, I don't have, uh, like, as far as I know, a sense of gender, the same
way that I used to have a coworker, it doesn't have a sense of smell.
And so like, I could tell him what things smelled like, but that doesn't mean
anything to him, right?
And so if someone says they have a sense of gender identity that doesn't match up
with their presentation or does or whatever, I'm just like, if you say so.
But like, I don't, I don't have that same sense that you have, but I'm totally
just inclined to take your word for it.
And just like to me, you know, whom I'm attracted to doesn't feel like a thing
that I can, I don't know, put my, like, put my finger on it.
Just, it's just a part of my cognitive experience, right?
Just like it is for him.
And so it's like, there, there's just another piece of architecture in
there for people and like, I guess, you know, and I don't know if he changed his
mind in real time with me or not, but I think it gives him something to think
about, but it was just like, at the end of the day, it's like, what, what do you
lose by, by seeding the fact that some people might be able to see more colors
than you do, right?
Like if they say they can, like, and that's my, my analogy for it, colors
or smells or something, right?
Like, because we can all imagine that unless you can't see colors or smell things.
Um, but you can also ask what you do for someone who says they can see spirits
and ghosts, like the colors thing might be the same thing.
There was a way to prove that you can see more colors, which was interesting.
Sure.
I think, well, the spirits and ghosts thing, there, there might actually be
some harm by acknowledging that belief, right?
Like if, if, uh, what was her name?
Sylvia Brown, uh, that TV psychic who would charge you $10,000, talk to your
dead uncle, um, like if, if she says that, uh, you know, if she says she can see
spirits, there actually is harm there.
But if, but if she says, I feel non gender normative and you grant that you're
not, you're not, I mean, you're not going to be, you know, huckstered out of your
money or not, you're not, so part of it, I wasn't trying to compare those.
I was trying to compare it to these seeing other colors.
Sure.
Sure.
Yeah.
But if I mean, that's the thing is, you know, so if someone, that, that is a
good example to bring up though.
Someone says they have an experience that you can't have or that you don't have it.
You don't observe in yourself and, you know, one question you might ask, like,
well, what do I lose by just saying, okay, sure, go for it, right?
Like I'm, I'm, I'm pretty, I'm pretty, I'm pretty much on one side of the
fence about whether people feel like animals or not.
Like I know somebody who said that they knew somebody who was a raven.
Oh, you mean like a couple who are like.
Animal kin, they called themselves back in the mid 2000s, right?
So like, I, I don't know if I believe that, right?
I think that they're people with fond imaginations and they're, they're
having a good time, hopefully, and they don't feel like, if they feel like
they're a raven, they're not actually pulling over to eat roadkill or something,
right?
So like, you know, I know exactly how that sign kind of person feels, but I
also think they're being dumb.
So, but the thing is like, you know, if they're not like, but as far as I'm
concerned, if you're being dumb politely to yourself in your head, like I, I
don't really have a huge, I don't have a beef with it.
I think that there, it does make more sense.
I'm not, I'm not saying that, that believing you have an animal spirit is,
is, is on the same level as saying you have a non normative gender.
What I'm saying is that I can't confer, I can't confirm or deny either about
someone's loved experience, but one seems way less unreasonable to me than
another, right?
Because I know people with masculine identities and they describe that
in themselves and they presented masculine, right?
So like, for some people, it's super obvious to them.
Shania Twain, I think, uh, was that a man, I feel like a woman song.
Oh yeah.
I'm pretty sure that entire song is about feeling a gender.
Nice.
That's the thing people have.
And so it's just not something that I really observe in myself.
And according to like, whatever the random questions that people ask, um, you
know, that you can help self identify, you know, like a checklist at the, if
you go to a visit a psychiatrist, they do make a new checklist to see if
you're depressed or a schizophrenic or something.
And, or bipolar is the other big one that they have on the side of the sheet.
So like I'm, I'm what people call cis by default.
And I'm like, yep, that, that checks out.
Apparently people have done this, this homework and that makes sense to me.
So very common in this community.
Right.
There's a neuro type.
Yeah.
I, I just don't really identify with my, my meat suit all that much.
And so like, there's a lot of question.
And I identify with mine, but what you're going to do.
Yeah.
I mean, like I, I, I, so like, I think there's some people that if like, you
know, they had a blackout and they woke up like, Hey, sorry, we had to put your
brain in a new body.
Like some people would be like, no, my body.
I'd be like, what do I look like now?
Oh, weird.
Okay.
I would want to be like, is this a better body or did you give me the
shitty knock off version?
Yeah.
So I'm, I'm of the mind.
Yeah.
Unless I got put in some, you know, ramshamble one, then I'd be like, Oh,
neat.
You know, stitched it together from three other bodies.
Didn't you?
I'm a Frankenstein monster now.
Perfect.
I think I was a much cuter girl than a guy, but it just feels more right.
Cool.
Uh, you made him stop being transphobic.
Well, I think it was mainly like what I, I brought it mainly, mainly in
contrast, just saying, fuck you, you piece of shit.
How dare you say this, this, this heretical thing.
I didn't do that, but I did was, was just engage him on it and gave him
something to think about.
And I, and I think at the end of it, I think we've both been drinking.
I don't remember if he had said, okay, fine, that makes sense.
Or I just felt like he's leaning that way, but whatever I did, it wasn't, you
know, I didn't cancel him from my life and, uh, you know, push him further
into the, the recesses of the dark side.
Right.
So you were saying, uh, man, I had a few thoughts and I kind of jumbled now.
Um, I was going to say that the, the joke that jumped into my head that I was
like, I shouldn't say that, but I was going to was when you asked, Hey,
Steven, what was like the conversation where you made someone stop being
transphobic, I was going to be like punched him in the face.
That's how you stop people from having bad opinions, right?
That's how it's always worked in the past.
Or if you're in certain communities, you know, canceling them out of
existence or out of, out of your lives is, is a solution.
Um, speaking of which, wasn't that one of the topics you wanted to bring up?
Yeah.
I mean, I was hoping we'd do more like lighthearted fun stuff because I
feel like that's going to be a bit of a bummer, but, and I, I was thinking
specifically, I'll never forget the term or hopefully I will, but it's still in
my head of cancel them out of existence because I'd seen somebody use that
before and I'm like, that's, you know what that means, right?
It means kill them.
Right.
Or, or, or cancel them like, you know, there was that porn star a few years
ago who didn't want to do a scene with a gay guy and she was harassed online
and she committed suicide.
Oh my God.
Like, and what, what is weird about that is like, no doubt it was, you know, it
was not the religious conservatives arguing her that she should do it.
It was the, the correct woke left folks.
Yeah.
And saying you have to have sex with someone you don't want to have sex with.
Isn't that weird?
That is so fucked up.
Yeah.
And I don't know what her reasoning was.
Maybe she thought, maybe even if she had some bad beliefs about like, oh no,
gay people are full of aides.
I don't know what, I don't know what she believes.
I don't care.
Yeah.
The point is, is that you, you guys harassed her and you canceled her out of
existence.
Well done.
Like, do you guys put that on the victory board?
Right.
I don't know.
But I just know people who, who've used that phrase.
I don't like it.
That God, that's so bizarre.
Like consent is the most, the one really important thing that all this other
stuff comes back to you and they're like, have sex with him, you bitch.
Or you're a bigot.
Yeah.
That seems weird.
There's a thing I dislike a lot.
Um, I think it's, I don't know if this is still a thing, but like, oh, it's so
bad.
So there's this thing they called the cotton ceiling.
Cotton ceiling.
Do you know this one?
No, I don't know this ceiling.
Uh, this is, uh, I think, like, particularly it was trans women
complaining that like, gay or, uh, lesbians, like they're lesbians that
don't want to have sex with trans women.
Okay.
Oh, that, that's the cotton ceiling.
Yeah.
It really seemed like a ceiling.
I was trying to figure out where it came in the glass ceiling.
Uh, yeah.
No, I mean, the glass ceiling is always like that.
You can only.
Oh, I thought the cotton was going to be tampons because that would be,
because you'd have to be, you're basically a genetic female.
If you can, if you menstruate, right?
So I understand how the ceiling comes in this, like the ceiling metaphor was
because you could only get promoted so high as a woman back in the day.
Well, you can't penetrate the cotton ceiling, I guess.
But are you getting promoted if you have sex with every lesbian?
I don't understand.
I think it's, it's obviously yes.
Oh, okay.
You got me there.
I'm going to just say yes.
Yeah.
I don't know.
There was this whole argument about, uh, that it's transphobic to not
want to have sex with a trans person of like, who identifies as the gender
that you're attracted to and there's a special carve out for sex where no
one should be feel pressure to have sex with somebody.
Yeah, it's like exactly, you know, um, whether your reasons or whatever.
Yeah.
Still like, what are you going to do?
Force people to have sex with trans people?
Like, I mean, you can, you can pressure people to do business with people
that they are bigoted against or extend them basic courtesies or whatever.
But like, when it comes to actually having sex with someone, you
don't pressure people for that.
Yeah.
There was a, hopefully not like as much of an argument or a thing anymore,
but I remember a lot of actually, like, although I can, the SJW friends of mine
that I had in the past, like, or friends of friends on Facebook,
complaining about this, like, you know, the transphobia.
And I'm just like, I mean, do you want to have sex with a transphobe?
If they hate you, like maybe don't have sex with them.
It's certainly a bummer to be attracted to someone and to know that
they won't sleep with you because of something about your body.
But I mean, I could totally see that being something people complain about
and being like, God, this sucks.
But and it's totally valid complaint.
And, you know, and it's fair to commiserate about that.
But yeah, like trying to shame someone is just awful.
Why would you want to have sex with someone who's being shamed into fucking you?
Yeah, exactly.
Or, you know, like they have a shitty opinion.
Yeah, whatever.
I don't know.
It's like it's like the reactive, you know, pendulum.
This is like the peak of it, right?
Where, you know, consent and and, you know,
what affirmative consent is, you know, the the standard that we should all like.
And like we swung past that to say, you have to have sex with some people.
Otherwise, you're a bigot. That seems weird.
That does seem weird.
I don't think that that's a sustainable position.
Even understanding this, you know, someone who like a white dude
that doesn't want to sleep with black ladies or something like maybe that's racist.
But the other hand, it's sex.
There's a special carve out for sex.
Yeah, but then you don't like force not discriminating against them.
In the workplace and in public and shit.
Right. Yeah.
I don't know.
Like, I don't know.
I don't know what the solution is to that.
It just baffled me that people were willing to argue.
I mean, you could overall just try to make people less transphobic
in a way that doesn't, you know, center the sex thing that doesn't involve
coercing. Yeah, like there's also, I guess, the beginning on every aspect.
I mean, being part of being someone who's like a member of the LGBTQA
plus whatever the hell acronym it has become now.
I think Wikipedia has 25 letters on it is kind of like your whole deal
is that you are you have like a certain orientation or preferences
or identity that is intrinsic to you.
And you're sort of trying to argue that other people shouldn't have that.
I mean, people have preferences and maybe some of them are just informed
by racism or transphobia or like fat phobia or whatever.
But like, but also like, it's so confusing.
I don't know.
You have to respect my preferences, but you don't get to have preferences.
Right.
Oh, here's here's one from Wikipedia.
LGBT, TQQ, IAP.
I feel like they're still leaving some out.
What's the second T?
Transgender, transsexual.
OK. Queer, questioning, intersex, asexual, ally, pansexual.
I think the ally in there.
I am not going to be happy until there's more letters in the acronym
than there are in the alphabet.
I think I think this is not the longest one I've seen.
So I thought I can find the longer one.
But all right, while I'm while I'm skimming Wikipedia
and we're just talking, you know, we're talking cancel adjacent questions.
What is pansexual?
I'm assuming it's not being really being into like cast iron cookware.
It's bisexual, but saying that there's more than two genders.
Yeah. Oh, so I identify as pansexual or bisexual,
depending on whether the person I'm talking to is older or younger than me.
But what if they're the same age?
Do you have to come out as both?
Oh, all right.
Another another let's get Steven Cantrell question I had was
so they're making this speaking of Mandalorian is a good segue.
OK. They're making a Last of Us TV show.
Oh, cool. Yeah. Sounds like fun. Hell, yeah.
And Pedro Pascal is playing Joel.
Oh, he would make a great show.
I'm looking forward to it. Meets.
And then they're having she was that little queen or princess
from Game of Thrones that was like on the little council in the last episode.
She she might have been a northerner, I forget.
She was like, oh, OK, I know who you're talking about.
The youngest one, the bear tribe lady.
Yeah, she was like super badass and she like shut that guy down at some point.
Yeah, so she's playing Ellie. OK.
And if you play the Last of Us.
So this is takes place during the first one. Yeah. OK.
So Ellie looks exactly like Ellen Page as a younger person.
Who's Ellen Page?
Elliot Page now.
Ellie. So that's right from Juno.
Right. Yeah. OK, OK.
And so I was this is my my serious question is if I'm talking about
Elliot Page sub 10 years ago, do I say
Elliot Page, formerly known as Ellen Page, because I'm talking about
the little girl that they used basically to model Ellie from The Last of Us On.
Yeah. And that that person was known as Ellen Page.
I think most trans people prefer that you use their current name and pronouns.
But like, but yeah, then you can specify that if you're talking about them in the past.
OK. I don't know. It's.
Well, I mean, it's particularly hard in Elliot's case because
he played a pregnant girl.
Like the whole point of the movie was that she was pregnant.
And that was a big issue for them.
I mean, I could get pregnant.
You know, yeah. Yeah.
I'm just I'm sure I've seen it.
But I'm thinking I think I've seen it.
I'm just thinking of Last of Us.
Oh, yeah, I know. Yeah.
And you know, that was like the plot thrust of the movie.
See, this came up because I was thinking of because I just when I was skimming
is there going to be more Mandalorian?
I'm like, oh, wait, Pedro Pascal. Last of us. What?
And then there's only two credited actors so far is Pedro Pascal
and that person who's playing Ellie. Cool.
The other just, of course, wrinkle from our brain is Ellie sounds so close
to Ellen. Yeah. And say that.
And because Ellie had been on purpose, probably since it was based on Ellen.
Yeah. I mean, I don't know if it was it must have been.
There's the likeness was too similar for it to be an accident, I'm guessing.
But I was telling I was telling my wife about it.
And I'm like, wait, do I say Elliot Page 10, 12 years ago?
I don't think anyone's going to cancel you for saying Ellen Page
when referring to the Last of Us character.
Oh, well, and the female actress back before transition.
Someone might.
But I was just curious what the what the appropriate way to actually do it was
when I'm actually talking about the preference would be to use their
current name and pronouns.
That's good to know. Yeah.
Some people have such bad dysphoria that they do actually find it upsetting
to be dead named or mis misgendered, mispronounced.
Yeah. No, I mean, that's totally reasonable.
But also, like for public figures, I think that is less reasonable.
Like, do you say that Caitlyn Jenner won the men's Olympics medals?
I think this is one of those things that, like, you know, because I know Caitlyn
Jenner is the other obvious example, and yet I don't I never knew who Bruce Jenner was.
And so, like, I mean, as a public figure or whatever, right?
I'm just I'm just grounding because it's like that's because Caitlyn Jenner sucks as a person.
Oh, didn't she kill somebody with a car?
What? Yeah. When did this happen?
Now, don't quote me on this. I'm pretty sure this happened.
OK. She, like, has conservative opinions, except managed to, like, hammer her brain
into this weird configurate, you know, like, when you have, like, gay people who are
Christian and they like, or whatever, where it's just sort of, yeah.
You can you can have.
I mean, that's the thing is I don't know a lot of Christian sex out there.
Right. But yeah, I was just thinking, because this is like the first time
like, OK, hold on, it's like me, sector, realize you meant S E C T.
I mean, there's a lot of Christian sex, too.
I was like, wait, what?
Yeah, I thought you said sex Christianity.
Yeah, yeah, I'd accept a lot of different things.
Sex. I think, yeah, you have to pronounce it awkwardly.
Another difference. I come from Colorado.
We don't pronounce our T's here.
Not in certain cases anyway.
Pictures into the pictures.
Oh, man, there was.
Oh, no, I'm going to start noticing that now.
Uh-huh. We did it.
So, yeah, no, you did you have any
another thing on this topic or do you want to just pass slide past that?
Well, that's kind of curious, because so we were just because the timing
lined up so well, because we were talking about
what's her actual name, the actress from Mandalorian.
Gina Carano. Gina Carano.
And I'm not sure I'm pronouncing that last name correctly, but I think it's.
I think you are.
She was also played by Cecily Strong
in the opening segment of Last Night's SNL.
OK. So they introduced her as Gina Carano.
Now I remember. Yeah.
So I think you said it right.
So I was thinking like, oh, yeah, great, because, you know, she had this
like a moment like I talked about where rather than Pedro Pascal
hitting her with the butt of his pistol from the Mandalorian,
he talked with her and apparently brought her around to being less of a jerk
about I think it was pronoun usage.
What I discovered what that was about, I was like, how was that even an issue?
Like she wasn't so I don't know what things were on set.
And maybe there was a much bigger thing on set.
But the thing that she got originally almost canceled
for that he had to quote, talk to her about was the fact that people
were harassing her so much to put pronouns in her bio that like she was
getting death threats and rape threats and all that other stuff.
And she eventually like put beep, bop, boop in her profile as her pronoun.
I'm kind of confused.
I'm not following any of this.
OK, so on her Twitter profile, OK, who?
Wait, Gina Carano. OK, so this is an actress.
She's an actress.
Do you see Deadpool? I've seen Deadpool.
Remember the woman who fought Colossus in the last fight?
Angel dust. That's Gina Carano. OK.
The hot chick from Deadpool. OK.
So she has a Twitter profile like a lot of other people do.
For some reason. Yeah, for some fucking stupid reason.
And a lot of like her co-hosts, I guess, or other people that she was around.
Maybe it was just like a movement on Twitter at the time that she started
being active on Twitter was that everyone puts their pronouns in their bio.
And she didn't. She was just like, I'm Gina Carano.
Here's a picture of me.
And I mean, she didn't even say that.
She said nothing.
She just like didn't put her pronouns in her profile.
And people started harassing her because it's the fucking Internet
and people are the worst on the Internet.
And I mean, that's that's just to be expected, I guess, right?
Compelling speech out of people almost seems like of a variant of, you know,
you know, making people feel bad for not wanting to sleep with you. Right.
And it's like, no, no, you'd really need to put your religion in your Twitter handle.
Yeah. Yeah, that's weird.
Put your race in your Twitter bio, man.
Yeah, jeez.
That I could I could actually see that happening before the religion thing, right?
Oh, yeah. Yeah, that's that's unsettling.
But anyways, she just refused to do that.
And some people started harassing her as they do.
And eventually as a I don't even want to call it a backlash because to me,
this is like a really classy and good-natured way to be like,
kind of slap back a little bit at people who are threatening to kill you.
She put beep, bop, boop in her profile as her pronouns as like, you know,
like fuck off haters kind of thing.
And that got her almost canceled.
Yeah, people are very interpretive about us.
You're making fun of pronouns.
Yeah. And I, I don't know.
Am I completely out of whack here?
Or is that a rather classy humorous reply as opposed to being raging transphobia?
I don't know if it's any classier than like, you know,
the quote, identify as an attack helicopter.
Like, I wouldn't call that classy.
That's, I would consider that more trashy.
And I feel like this is just of that brand, but less funny because
attack helicopters are hilarious.
I tend to find as an attack helicopter, that's just kind of being a jerk.
Whereas if you do that in response to people threatening to kill and rape you,
that's your, that is a de-escalation in my opinion.
Yeah, I mean, you're trying to joke and laugh off threats to your physical safety.
It's like when you apply for a job and they ask you for your race on the job
application, if you click other and type in human, that's like, I think that's
kind of a classy response to like not wanting to surrender, you know, race
information about yourself, right?
Oh, OK.
But if you put a beep, bop, boop, I don't know if that's, I don't know if that's,
I guess I don't want to get into a debate about what classy means.
But I guess in general, I like trying to de-escalate violent
situations by resorting to humor.
Yeah.
Although any sort of de-escalation to me is a move that I am happy with.
That, yeah, I can, I can agree that general sentiment.
So maybe it's not classy, but it's just something that I thought was cool.
I think it is hard to interpret humor kind of, I think last time the three of us
were hanging out or talking about how like with the right audience, like if
you're hanging out with some friends, I don't know, if it's like me and my other
trans friends, we could make like a transphobic joke, but we're laughing at
like the people who would say that kind of thing.
But if it was me and a bunch of strangers, I'd never say that because
the context isn't clear.
Yeah.
Like I'm very bad wizards.
One of them is Jewish and the other one, he's always pretending to be the other
one's anti-Semitic and the other one's always playing into the joke.
They do that unblocked and reported to where she's anti-Semitic and he's anti-lesbian.
So like among friends, you know, it's anti, it's counter signaling, right?
And it's fun.
But if I were to go up to, let's see, Tamler, wait, David Pizarro and Tamler,
whichever one is Jewish, if I were to go up to the Jewish one and make an
anti-Semitic joke, that'd be, you know, fucked up.
Right?
Yeah.
But we were all chums.
I don't think Beep-Bop Boop is transphobic though.
So that's dumb.
Like if you said attack helicopter, that's like, it's got a context of people
that are making fun of transgender identities.
Saying Beep-Bop Boop to me just sounds like I don't want to answer this.
Why are you bothering me?
So it doesn't bother me.
I guess my thing with Gina Carano was I, and I wasn't, I didn't know the
full details of that.
I know that Peter Pascal's sibling is either trans or non-binary or something.
And so, you know, he reached out and like, you know, I think, I don't know
how much time they spent together on set, but, you know, I imagine there's
some friendliness going on.
And like, hey, this is where, you know, this is where I'm coming from.
And she was like, oh, thank you for helping me understand that.
And I think, I'm assuming she changed it or something, right?
Like, so that's how these things should go, right?
He didn't threaten to rape her or kill her or something.
He didn't embody the internet.
Yeah.
So good for him.
And it, and it seems to have worked out.
And then, so I, it took me a while because I, you know, all my stuff I read
on Reddit and I use a dope ass app called Apollo for iOS that when you, when
you open a web link through it, it automatically ad blocks it.
You really got to contact this Apollo guy and get some kind of endorsement deal going, dude.
I think I said, I'm 20 bucks a year.
I love this app.
You're doing it wrong.
But, um, so the, uh, uh, the, the built-in web browser has ad block.
And so I had to like actually look for the article because whenever I clicked
him, it's like, you have ad block enables subscribe to the New York
Times to read this one.
Not fuck you.
I'm not, I'm never going to do that.
So I defined the thing.
And so, yeah, so she got fired from working for Lucas art, Lucas films, which is
a subsidiary of Disney.
And so, um, and she did this over a post that like draw drew an equivocation
between the treatment of conservatives now in the U S and the early treatment of
Jews, pre-holy costs in Germany, like, and so, yeah, I mean,
in the term, in the, in the, in the phrasing of the 21st, 21st century
philosopher, David, who for some reason doesn't give his last name on the
mind, last name on mind killers, even though I know his last name, David said,
they can put it in his profile.
Then, then we're some real bad tweets.
I thought that put it really well.
And so like, I'm thinking about this, but that is in bad looking.
Right.
Well, and, and stupid.
Yeah.
And like, but you know, I can understand that from her lived experience.
She's watching people get, you know, kicked off platforms left and right.
I can understand.
Just like they did to the Jews.
Exactly.
Kicked off platforms.
Right.
Yeah.
So I mean, I don't get it wrong.
I can see how somebody can be a not complete idiot and feel marginalized for
being a conservative.
I don't, I don't necessarily agree with it.
I certainly think the argument to compare it to, to, uh, you know, pre pre Holocaust
Germany is insane and is overreaching argument is that, you know, they stoked
hatred of neighbors based on group affiliation.
Right.
And, uh, that's bad.
It can lead to bad things.
And I see right now a lot of my neighbor's stoking hatred against each other,
uh, because also for group affiliation, in this case, political affiliation.
Right.
And that's the steel man.
And I mean, technically she makes a good point, but on the other hand, she does
it in the worst way.
She's not very good at internet.
Yes.
It seems like, yeah, that's, that's, uh, and so I think in general, conservatives
are really, really bad at trying to do the whole, um, I don't want to say
victim game, but they, they do a very bad job of trying to gain sympathy by
comparing themselves to other groups that have been oppressed.
They haven't been competing in the oppression Olympics as long.
And they said, and it shows.
Yes.
Exactly.
Give them another 20 years and maybe they'll figure out how to do the
oppression Olympics, but for now they should just not touch that, right?
Uh, with a, I don't know, long jumping pole since we're in Olympic metaphors.
And, and so here's my thought that I had with it though is like, it's, it's a,
it's a terrible comparison to make while I can see my favorite spray.
Is it really long jumping pole or high jumping?
Well, I don't know, man.
I don't watch the Olympics.
It's a bunch of athletic people being all chatty.
So I can see this deal man immediately.
And I did when I read it and I, it's just one of those things like, all right,
you're bad at internetting, but like that seems silly.
If it was in isolation, every one thing, I think, so here's the thing.
And this is why I'm kind of torn on it is like, she, she does represent Lucas
films in her, in her, in her public life, right?
Like, like a lot of jobs, um, I imagine would say, you know, uh, in fact,
there was that whole thing where I forget it was, um, that tire company
that's based out of, uh, Ohio, good year.
They had said, you know, don't wear politically affiliated masks for COVID
stuff and that's just part of job stuff.
You know, we don't want you, we don't want people coming in and you've got
a whatever fuck black people or, um, you know, or a black lives matter mask.
Like we, we want you to just, we, we want our customers to come in and not,
that that's, this isn't the place for that, right?
But their employees can still tweet whatever they want on their own time.
I mean, the difference is that Hector is a very public role.
That, that's exactly the thing.
So it's, it kind of sucks in that regard where like the company is going
to be affiliated with her somewhat.
And so I think that that's kind of just where like, I, I don't like the idea of,
of whatever.
Now, I mean, it's not like she's out of work.
I'm sure she'll find jobs.
Oh, do you want to hear where she found work?
Uh, sure.
Ben Shapiro.
Great.
She's going to movie with him now.
Ben Shapiro's going to get a movie.
Yeah.
Oh, I know.
It's a fucking bummer.
Well, this is going to be a train wreck and good for her.
I hope she gets paid well.
No, it's not good for her.
Cause first of all, she has so much fucking talent and it's being wasted
on some Ben Shapiro shit.
And you cannot tell me that like working with him on some bullshit Ben
Shapiro movie is anything like working with Disney on their.
No.
And, you know, so it, it does suck.
I guess so, like my thing is this wasn't like a tweet in isolation.
She also tweeted, you know, conspiracy theories about the election being a fraud.
Sort of.
She, she did the, the, the bullshit fallacy of the gray.
We, we should be totally sure as if we're not totally sure.
I know, right.
You know, yes.
Like, so she, she stoked the flames of that, that, that caught, you know, that,
that led to the insurrection attempt, right?
Like, I don't, I don't think it's fair to say that she didn't.
If like, if I played the middle and where the middle is completely unreasonable,
the middle sounds, the middle sounds like a nice compromise.
You know, you think the election was a fraud.
I think it wasn't.
Let's meet in the middle and just say, let's just be sure.
But I mean, that's like, you do that about anything else.
Vaccine safety, evolution, like, you know, the thing is like, I agree.
Thank you.
Teach the controversy.
I agree with everyone who was saying that she is, um, you know,
retweeting things that are lies, that the election was not, uh, a fraud.
They're, they're, and it, the people saying that it is a fraud are often
using that as a way to push through terrible laws to disenfranchise voters.
Right.
There, it's not true.
And it is being used to justify bad things.
But on the other hand, like, I don't think that she is spreading lies to justify
bad things, what she's, she's more like a, a, you know, a canary in a
coal mine or someone setting up a flair.
She is a person who is, feels disenfranchised and like a lot of Americans
feels that something shady was going on and people are losing trust in our
electoral system.
And I think the reasons for that are because they're being lied to by their
leaders and their media to stoke mistrust in the, in the system.
Uh, but well, and she's not doing that.
She's saying like, Hey, I, I don't have trust in the system anymore.
I would like that to stop.
And like, I feel like we're killing the message for things as like, I'm feeling
disenfranchised and I don't trust our system would have been like the correct
way, I think to phrase those tweets.
Absolutely.
But, you know, bad at Twitter.
So the crime is being articulate and bad at like writing original tweets.
Cause like I said, these are retweets of pictures, right?
So it's like the, the crime is being wrong.
And like, I absolutely agree with her that the system does need to change.
We need to make it so that people have faith in the system again and don't think
there's fraud.
We can't do that unless the people who are complaining that there is fraud
start just winning elections.
No, no, we can do that by addressing the complaints and also holding the actual
leaders and media personalities who are lying in order to spread, uh, distrust
in the system accountable for doing that.
How do we hold them accountable?
I don't know, man.
I'm not a lawmaker by, by, by kicking them off places by taking
more of their megaphones.
Maybe if they're like the people doing this, um, spreading of misinformation,
but that's not her.
She's just someone who is like feeling disenfranchised and saying it loudly.
I think she has a platform.
Like, like, you know, her Twitter account, but she's not the media.
She's not a newsmaker or a politician.
Neither is Jenny McCarthy.
Yeah.
But like a lot of people are anti-vax because of her.
Well, she, she, Jenny McCarthy actually is a leader of the anti-vax movement.
Right.
Or is Jenny Carano is just an actress who's tweeting about how she's unhappy
with what's happening.
It is actually upsetting how influential actors are.
Yeah, as opposed to, like, you know, doctors or experts in fields.
Yeah.
So I'm imagining some follower of like, oh my God, love Mandalorian.
Let me follow all of them on Twitter.
And one of them is like, you know, talking about elections of fraud.
And they're like, wait, she probably knows what she's talking about.
And you're suddenly swayed to the, the stupid position, right?
So like, and I'm not saying, you know, you should, whatever, fire people for
being factually wrong about stuff.
But when you're, when you're stoking, uh, you know, flames about things that
have real consequences when there's, when it's baseless.
So is, is anyone complaining in public about how they feel the last election
was mishandled, stoking?
Like, is the correct answer to say, shut the fuck up, you're stoking
flames whenever anyone complains.
Cause I don't think that's going to make them trust the system again.
I don't think so either.
So that's why I'm, that's what I was wondering what you meant when you'd
said, like, we need to, like, restore their faith in the system and, and get
rid of the people who are causing all this, you know.
Yeah, I don't think canceling people who are complaining and aren't
responsible for it is going to make things better.
And in fact, I think it's going to make things much worse because they will
trust things even less.
And everyone else will say, like, look, someone is complaining about how they
don't feel secure in the electoral system and they're being silenced and shut down.
Right.
And then the men in black came and took them away in a van and like this
keeps happening.
Definitely says this.
There must be something to it.
And now they work on sea lists straight to video movies with Ben Shapiro.
Right.
So I guess like what, what, what had me sort of like in the air about the
Gina Carano thing is like, I, it doesn't seem like she was fired in isolation.
Like this was, this was not like the only inflammatory thing that she had said.
She's been waving the red flag for as long as she's at Twitter.
And not, not merely saying, like, you know, I voted today, you know,
Trump Pence, you know, like it was things more inflammatory than that.
And so like, again, just like the bullshit, you know, people's parents
spread on Facebook or something.
Right.
Like not a very savvy internet, but like, again, JK Rowling, less, less in
cities than JK Rowling because she's writing original thoughts.
Right.
Yeah.
And so for whatever else about, we're just lazy.
Well, I mean, I think she's going to follow the same trajectory as JK Rowling
now where JK Rowling was basically a leftist liberal, liberal in the term
of leftist, I guess she was a strong leftist person and had some reservations
about trans stuff and.
You know, I have to actually like retract my original response to
JK Rowling said some transphobic stuff was who fucking cares.
Yeah.
I still think who fucking cares because like whatever, but she does have a big
platform and I did finally like not even I wasn't attending.
I accidentally like saw some of the stuff that she was saying and tweeting
and writing and was like, oh, no, that's actually kind of fucked up.
She's kind of a dick.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, that's what I was saying.
Like she started out just a general leftist with concerns and she keeps
getting pushed further and further right.
Yeah.
And I think that seems going to happen with Karan, especially now that like
she's been pushed to working with fucking Ben Shapiro.
Yeah, if she's that's just going to keep pushing her further and further
right if that's the people she's hanging out if she's if she's now stuck
hanging out with Lord, you know, with with not Lord Palpatine is too
nice of a moniker for Ben Shapiro.
If she's if she's hanging out with, but like he's not as bad as Palpatine.
I'm trying to think of Dark Side, right?
Yeah, there aren't a lot of like low key dark side figures.
In any case, like, right.
No, it's low deterred nowadays.
So it is some random death eater, right?
But like, yeah, I mean, like rolling stuff aside, I was going to say, at least
rolling has original thoughts, and that makes her more accountable than
just retweeting random shit now more more accountable, depending on how
wrong she is another conversation.
Well, the reason that I sort of am taking back, like, say, like who fucking
cares about JK Rowling is that I didn't realize how bad shit is for transgender
rights in the UK and her as a, you know, not politician, but but popular billionaire.
So yeah, celebrities do have a big platform and like they're heard.
Yeah.
And she's got so much money and so much influence that like you could be doing
anything with your time.
Yeah, instead, you're focusing on this.
Now, you could call people influencers, I guess.
Like, I know that that's a there's like web people that are influencers.
So like, I feel like there's a sphere of people that don't have official
authority, but definitely have cultural authority.
Elon Musk, a good example, right?
You know, like, yeah, I mean, he's not a politician, but he's got tons of authority.
I mean, oh, he has a juicy Game Stomp.
Oh, no, he took a two day hiatus from Twitter and then just did one tweet,
Dogecoin. Oh my God.
Price is like six X, so I mean, you know, when, when, when, just to see if he could.
I wonder what would happen.
I bet he bought $50,000 in Dogecoin and then just sold when he made, you know,
some, some theater to K on it or something.
Right.
But, um, yeah, my, uh, I guess.
So I've made a really, well, I think the tangents have been valuable.
But my, the main thing on, on Gina Carano is like, I don't know if I would
want to work with her if she like, I would be annoyed if my co-worker was,
you know, constantly like doing all, I got to know, I mentioned, I
complained about my manager who was doing the play the middle.
Let's, let's just be sure the vote was legit.
And like, I don't know what his actual position is because I don't think he
actually had one, but like it's, and that's just the one issue.
But if he's doing it on everything or whatever, like I'd find it annoying.
I wouldn't want to work with him.
Um, if like, I don't know.
I mean, if we had somebody, uh, who was still editing our podcasts and I
won't name our awesome guy, he used to do it because I don't want to pretend
like he's going to be the guy in my, my hypothetical here.
But if our editor who had a, who had a page on our website as thank you for
editing our show was constantly out there tweeting this random bullshit, would
we maybe not want him to work for the show anymore?
Depending on the shit he tweeted, like it's his personal life, but if we
linked to his Twitter bio on our webpage and, and you go there and you see
Jewish space lasers and, and, and, uh, evolution is false and all this stuff.
You're like, you know, would we say, Hey man, you're kind of, you work for, when
people come to the page, they see your stuff and that looks bad for us.
We might ask him like, Hey, can you knock that shit out?
And he'd be like, fuck you.
It's my free speech, which is a perfectly fair response.
Yeah.
Would we say, okay, cool.
We're going to find somebody else to edit our podcast then.
I mean, would that be unreasonable?
We'd have to discuss that as a group.
Like for me personally, it just depends on how offensive the thing is.
The thing I keep on, there's a certain level where I'm like, yeah, whatever.
And there's a different level where I'm like, no, no, you just said we should
kill as many people of this ill because we can get the fuck out.
So, sort of the thing that I'm using as an intuition pump is just like Disney is
a brand that I've worked for Disney.
Ah, God, they're, they're protective of their brand.
They have people that brand managers.
They were like, like the brand manager for Peter Pan and like an entire team of
people that are just like, their whole job is to make sure that if anybody
uses an image of Peter Pan, that it's like referencing the, you know, correct.
Yeah.
Like they're not getting his eyes a millimeter too wide or something.
And like, Peter Pan wouldn't have said that, you know, like it's, it's actually
hilarious, but, um, they, it's, it's kind of interesting because they have to have
this family friendly vibe to their brand, uh, since it, you know, is targeted
largely at children, although they're expanding that a lot.
Um, Deadpool and the MCU and lots of things, lots of things.
Uh, but like, they also have, uh, decided that they're liberal, which I guess makes
sense if like your marketing towards kids and younger generations tend to be more
left and your business, you can do whatever you want.
You know, Benjiro decided he's going to be an idiot and I guess he's free to do
that, right?
Like, I think they're just doing it because they think that's where the
majority of the, their audience is like back when their audience would not
accept gay people, they fired the, their actors that came out.
Disney had some super racist, uh, cartoons that they've tried to like,
they've tried to wipe off the internet, but, uh, you know, the internet is an
archive for everything for all time.
You can still find these.
The original song for Aladdin, the opening one was different than the current
one.
I was that you were, I didn't even know they edited that.
Uh, yeah, I was thinking a song in the South, the older stuff, but yeah.
Uh, that's before my time.
But like, I'm just, anyway, I'm just, I imagine if Disney were
conservative as a company, it's interesting.
Yeah, that's a good and this was some like person who was tweeting liberal stuff.
Like, I don't know, like re-tweeting black lives matter or whatever and then
got canceled over that.
Mm-hmm.
That is a really good intuition pump.
And I, that's some food for thought.
I guess, yeah, I, and I, I think that, you know, on the whole
canceling people is the wrong move.
I mean, I, like I said, I guess I spent, I spent some time trying to
steal man in my head and it was like, like, that's kind of where I generated
the smaller example, but we're like, we're a three-person company, right?
And if our, if 25% of our company, if we had one more person was doing a bunch
of stuff that we disagreed with or perfectly within our, you know, I think
it's much, it's a much different conversation.
And we also don't, don't yet have the listenership of Disney.
So, um, you know, we're not quite that big yet.
So, uh, you know, our listeners are in the mere tens of tens of millions, not
hundreds of millions.
So, um, yeah, I, I think that's about it.
I, I, I thought I had something else.
Oh yeah, this is actually the important part.
And this is the thing that like, it's really just the bummer about it.
And like, when you, like, you're not, you're not canceled by the opponent,
the opposing side, right?
You're, you're canceled by your side.
You're kicked out of your circles.
You know, like, I mean, was I, was I kicked out of theist circles when I was in
my, you know, fiest arguing stage in high school?
No, I was never in those circles.
Right.
So like, if they wanted to cancel me, it didn't do anything.
Yeah.
I just had fun arguing with people.
What you get canceled by your friends and the people that you work, you know,
that are in your circle and you're kicked out of your circle.
And like that, that's the really insidious thing about it.
Like, you know, I, I was talking with people, I don't know, like a year ago,
about stuff like this, uh, and thought that they were good faith conversations.
I was trying to engage well.
And it turns out it wasn't any of those things.
They were just trying to find any excuse to kick me off because they, a prior,
I didn't like me.
Yeah.
Um, so like, I thought that this was like an inclusive thing and we're, we're,
you know, we're working together, but it was never a together effort.
This, the general crown thing was, was not exactly that, but it's just the general
point of like, you're not canceled by the opposition.
You're canceled by your friends.
I think, I think that's easy to not keep in mind.
And like, that's what makes it suck.
Like if she was actually friends with, uh, it wasn't Carl Wethers, was it?
It was, yeah, it was, uh, the other guy in Mandalorian, um, I don't know.
The, he was the, it sounds like she was pretty decent friends with, um, Pedro Pascal.
Yeah.
I can't remember if it was Carl Wethers or if it was, um, shoot.
Yeah.
It was, it was Carl Wethers.
He was the guy, uh, that like, I assume some charismatic as Gina would have a
lot of friends in, you know, in her workplace.
Yeah.
And now if she has to be friends with them, it's like secret friends, right?
Like if they still follow her on Twitter, they have to use all to
count or they'll get, you know, they'll get death threats.
Yeah.
They can't go to dinner with her now.
Yeah.
And so like, that's the real terrible part.
Right.
And like, so, and as you mentioned too, like now, now her friends are Ben Shapiro.
Yeah.
And so what chance of, of coming back to the light side of the forest as she
have, like, uh, the, the future does not bode well for that.
So I don't know.
It's that, that's all a bummer.
And that probably took up way more time than I meant for it too.
Right.
Okay.
Uh, we took a quick break.
We are back now.
Uh, there was someone else in our recording studio listening as we were talking.
And she has a comment right now that I thought would be really interesting to
bring into the conversation.
This is related to something we talked about much earlier.
Uh, Charlie, please take it away.
Yeah.
Hi.
So, um, when, uh, Enya was making that comment about, uh, math for babies and
just basically, um, being a shithead, it's like one of the things about, uh,
rationalists that is really unattractive to someone like me.
Um, I am not good at math.
I cannot do college level math.
Um, but that doesn't mean that I'm less intelligent than him.
It doesn't mean that I'm less ethical or moral or interested in improving myself
or less capable.
And every time I hear, uh, one of those math elitist rationalists basically stroke
themselves, uh, about how much better they are than people that aren't able to
do math like them.
It's really discouraging and it's just unattractive as a rationalist.
I appreciate that feedback.
I don't, I don't, I'm glad that good math isn't a requisite for the, uh, for
the community because I'm medium.
I don't know.
Uh, I, I never, I don't know any advanced math and it's like a glaring weakness.
And my like right, right near like history, uh, like my, my lack of knowledge
in history, my lack of knowledge of decent math is, is glaring.
But yeah, I, I took it in jest, but it's those kinds of jokes that maybe.
Yeah, I did mean it as a joke, but like looking back on it, I didn't realize
that it was a mean joke because it was a mean joke.
And it was like, ha, ha, my out group, they, they don't know how to do math.
My in group is totally all about the math.
And I mean, to be honest, my math skills have degraded quite a bit since I was in
college.
I, I am not that great at them anymore either.
I forgot a lot of the math I learned in school.
Yeah.
And, and that was, that was, it was a bad joke.
It was like one of those bad tweets that we were just talking about.
I hope I am not judged for that particular bad joke.
Cause you're, you're right.
They're as, as much of a beef as I have with philosophy, saying that
philosophy is just a thing for people who are dummies that math is not a
fair thing to say at all.
And you can't really replace all philosophy with sufficiently advanced
math, no matter how funny that sounds.
So I'm sorry about that.
And I'm trying not to be a jerk.
Math is a language.
So I'm sure there is some way you could literally turn all philosophy into math.
That would be great.
But the thing is I couldn't do the math so we couldn't communicate.
So do you want to help people understand rationality and feel like it's possible
to become a rationalist?
Or do you want them to just be like, yeah, okay, I never got past algebras.
So I guess I'll go do something else with.
I think that's one of the important things.
Like there's, especially when I was getting into the rationality community,
there's definitely a sense of like, oh, these people are all geniuses and I
can't compete.
And then you realize that's not really like the point of the, the community.
Like there are people I know and really like who just stopped the ground with
me intellectually and that's part of the fun.
And there's, there's no sense of superiority that they're, that they're
exuding like on purpose.
It's just, uh, I almost want to name names, but I don't want to embarrass them.
So I'll leave them out.
But, uh, like it's, I guess what I'm saying is that, uh, yeah, there, there's
not like a requisite, sorry, you must be this tall to ride kind of, uh, entry
into the rationality community.
As far as I'm concerned, like I, I, I suppose you can be a better rationalist
if you can do the math of decision theory in your head or know what decision
theory looks like on paper.
Um, I don't know either of those things.
So like I am like, there's, there's probably room for improvement there,
but it's not like it's keeping me from doing a podcast.
Everyone gets stuck in.
No, I mean, um, I think the point of the sequences and, uh, whatever other
tenants of rationality there are, like, wasn't it, I think it was explicitly
laid out that like you don't have to be a math genius, uh, or like any kind of
genius, if you can understand these ideas.
And I admit, I also, I think any actual way for started communicating every
email that was sort of about that, where I had never gone to a rationalist
meetup because I was scared that I wouldn't fit in, uh, where again, I also
had them, I was going to say I was fortunate.
Actually, I want to say, like I was very fortunate actually to, um, the,
the rationalist group that I first went to Philly last year, I was the
stupidest person in the room and it was great.
It was like really good to get over that fear and realize that I'm not going
to be kicked out of this group of people because like, or as long as, you
know, I, I, nobody, yeah, like had any kind of superiority complex.
And I eventually like got over the fear of like looking stupid and was like,
wait, what's that?
Or like, you know, what does that mean?
Or can you guys slow down and explain that thing?
But like, I think those are the best conversations though, where, uh, I mean,
definitely like I learned a ton just from osmosis hanging around really smart
people.
And ideally that would be, like, that would be what people who joined
this community like could get out of it.
Um, I mean, like all, you know, maybe there's one guy who can do decision
theory in his head and maybe there's like some other person who knows a
bunch of languages and some of, you know, like we all have different
strengths and weaknesses.
So like together as a group, we're going to be smarter than individual people.
And I also don't really like the kind of, or I don't know, it's, it's,
it's weird and complicated.
Um, I think the, a lot of rationalists kind of are just like this group of
like the, the nerds who were bullied.
Yeah.
So there is this sort of resentment of, you know, we like to make fun of the
sports ball or like, you know, other like stereotypes of dumb people or like,
you know, non-intellectuals.
But yeah, I, sorry, go ahead.
Oh, no, I was going to say what you said is I hear that a lot, that people
are worried they're too dumb to contribute.
And so just never show up at less wrong meetings, despite how awesome it
would be to have them there.
And like, honestly, I've posted almost nothing on less wrong ever.
I think maybe like two comments and one post, because I also don't feel
like I'm smart enough to contribute there, but I managed to, you know, get
together a little community here in Denver, where I feel we all more or less
fit in, but I don't want to perpetuate that feeling that you have to be at
less, at least, you know, this good at math to join.
And we, we, I think everyone could benefit from having more rationality
in their lives, no matter, you know, if they know the math or not.
And quite frankly, the entire world would benefit from everyone being a bit
more rational, which is why we're trying to quote, raise the sanity waterline.
And, you know, by saying that thing that I said, I was obviously trying
getting, keeping a lot of people away.
And it's good for me to be reminded of that every now and then that I can be
the jerk too, and I got to watch that.
So at least you weren't being an actual elitist jerk.
It was just a joke.
And, you know, that is very easy to put in the bucket of like, oh, great.
Yeah.
I guess I don't belong, right?
So that's, that's being an elitist jerk though.
Well, no, being an elitist jerk would be meaning it, but I'll give, I'll give you
a pass on saying bad joke is not the same thing as elitist jerk.
But no, I think that's an important distinction to make.
And I'm glad that, that you brought it up.
I was pointing at Charlie.
Thank you, Charlie.
Oh yeah, no problem.
Um, I will say make this is my final statement.
Um, I am a lot more rational now than it was two years ago before I found the
community, but I am no better at math.
Folks did not happen.
Nope.
I don't think there's math lessons.
No, but, um, there's a lot of math formulae that's, um, used to explain
rational as concepts and I can't follow my eyes glaze over.
Like, I mean, I think that fortunately it's not taught in math books.
Like, like, you know, some of the posts have math in them and where they're,
I'm trying to think of any, maybe there's a couple that are super math heavy.
Oh wait for the quantum.
Yeah, there's definitely sequences that I mean, uh, Eleazar is an AI researcher,
but he was a mathematician, right?
Yeah.
So like, it makes sense that that was the language he would communicate in.
But I also, um, I remember finding Scott Alexander's posts to be more, I don't
know, like Scott would explain the same concepts sometimes in ways that like
made more sense to me because he was coming at things, like general, fun,
like a psychology or, uh, pharmacology perspective, which is just like more,
you know, my, my, my interests and my strengths.
And he has said specifically that he was bad at math.
So yeah.
Okay.
So he says that's because he's friends with Eleazar Kowsky, who's a math
savant, right?
It's like, yeah, you know, I'm friends with Usain Bolt and I'm really slow,
right?
But yeah, I mean, I think that that's, that's a valuable to have it, have
different, have some of the same techniques taught in different ways.
That's just good, good way to learn.
And it's also indicative of the fact that you don't have to excel in exactly
the same domains to have the same skills, right?
So yeah, it's awesome.
Thank you for helping us be better people.
Yeah, thanks for bringing up a good topic too.
I do think that, well, I don't know, maybe we should get back to feedback,
but like another time it might be interesting to talk about how ration,
like whether, I guess we think rationality has a branding problem.
I can add that to our topics list.
Yeah, we've had on the backlog for a long time, like a craft and community
episode and still looking to find the best way to put that together.
So, yeah, I also appreciate you guys indulging me for way longer than I
meant to talk about.
I felt like the digressions were valuable and interesting, but.
Well, that was a good topic too.
I mean, because it was the kind of the subject of the ethics of businesses.
More feedback?
Sure.
Do we want to touch briefly on how to eat nature balls?
Sure.
Okay.
So this goes back to an episode where I mentioned that sometimes when I'm
out hiking or whatever, see little berries, put them in my mouth, taste them
and try them out, see how it is.
Call those berries nature balls because they're usually small little
spherical things and they're found in nature.
Anyways, there is a, oh man, I didn't write down the user that suggested
this again because I'm a jerk and I don't know how to copy and paste.
But one of our listeners gave to us the universal, the universal
edibility test, which is a thing that actually exists.
It's considered a basic survival skill by the various societies that do
survival things, I don't know.
But yeah, there's a whole list of ways to find just about anything and
slowly find out if it's edible without killing yourself.
And it actually takes several weeks because like the first step is to just
rub it, some of it on your skin and then wait for a number of hours, eight
hours to see if there's a reaction.
Then after that, you rub it on your lip because that's a more
sensitive part of skin.
And again, wait several hours.
Then you just taste a little bit and spit it out and wait a while and then
you chew and then spit it out and rinse with water and wait a while.
Only after that do you swallow just a tiny little bit and then see if you
get sick and eventually you can get to the point of, oh, okay.
I guess this one poisoned me, but it takes days at least.
I like it.
The last time I was cooking.
Yeah.
Cause some things, yeah, safe until you cook them.
Yeah.
Or vice versa.
Uh, there, yeah, I'm glad that I like somebody posted a series.
I'm always glad when people post serious answers to like, are goofy
jokes because I'm always interested in just learning new things, but like, in
particular, something that I had always wondered about.
So like with some of the weird shit that we eat as humans, I'm just like, or even,
you know, like, uh, actually this is just maybe a Scout, Alexandria post, but what
drug is it?
Um, ayahuasca.
Yeah.
Where you have to, like in a rainforest, I guess, with like God knows how many
different species of plants, somebody figured out that it's like, you need this
part of this plant and then like this completely other plant.
And there's a really complicated chemical reason why.
And it's like, I was just wondering, like, how do we figure out what's
how to pull this is not like, we're ancient people just walking around
tasting everything and like falling over dead all the time filming at the mouth.
Like, we had a lot of free time.
Yeah.
Well, there's an actual algorithm that makes it pretty safe.
Apparently.
Oh, well, yeah.
I guess I, you know, the more things you add to this step, those eight steps that
like the, the, the time involvement grows exponentially, right?
So I mean, maybe eating this redberry passes all the tests, but you mix it with
this blueberry and on step eight, when you cook them together, you make the
perfect cocktail of murder, right?
Yeah.
Um, I also just like, you look at like a sea urchin or a crab and like the first
person to eat one of those must have been really hungry or maybe they watch
something else.
It looks so unadvertising.
Yeah.
I don't think crabs look bad.
Maybe it's just because I've eaten so many crabs.
No, crab is my, is my favorite food.
Yeah.
They look like a giant bug though.
They look like a giant horrible spider bug.
I don't think they look like a bug because they have the, well, okay.
I guess bugs do have an exoskeleton.
To me, they just look different than a bug.
They're basically a big aquatic bug.
They, well, I know they are, but they look like a weird sea creature and not a
bug.
Bugs are valid.
Bugs are grimy and disgusting and spread disease.
And I don't get the same feeling about crabs.
That's, that's the main thing I hate about bugs.
Bugs are a great source of nutrition.
And honestly, if we, as a species, could be more on board with it, we could solve
so many of our problems with agriculture and farming and feeding the world.
Speaking of, of eating ethical milk, does crabs feel pain?
I'm asking for a friend.
I mean, I'm sure they have to, yeah, sure they have pain receptors.
Otherwise they wouldn't survive.
Well, I mean, like a lot of things, I think might not, they just, they just, you
know, they lose a limb and they don't care, right?
I guess the question is, like, do they have a enough of a consciousness, a
brain to, to make that matter?
Like, obviously they're going to be able to feel that a limb is missing and that
neural feedback can't be pleasant.
I desperately want to justify my belief that eating crabs is okay.
Oh, I think it's okay.
Oh, good.
Then I'm done.
I think there's definitely a spectrum of okayness where they're like pretty, I'm
in, like, uh, what's the thing?
Some vegans eat oysters, I think, or, or mussels.
They don't even have a neural network though, right?
Uh, yeah.
Well, that's the thing.
They're like, it's sort of five valves.
Yeah.
Basically a plant.
Yeah.
And in the ethical ways that matter, not that biology, but yeah, yeah.
Right on.
But are we, we're privileging intelligence though.
I mean, yes, we are.
Like we just had Scott Alexander post about privileging intelligence.
Didn't we?
There's another great piece of feedback here from Zilla.
Hearing Inyosh say that Kellogg mutilated his dick made me very confused until
I realized he's talking about circumcision.
I was like, do their products have dick mutilator slots?
Did you try to fuck cereal?
And then correction, that was Steven that said that, not Inyosh.
Oh, good.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
It's gonna say that sounds like a funny joke.
I wish I had made it.
All right.
Um, so yeah.
That was literally you that said Kellogg's mutilated my dick.
Well, good, because they, whoever said that is a great sense of humor.
Um, yeah, go to, go to Kellogg's Wikipedia page.
There's a whole section on how he championed circumcision, like it was, you
know, the most important thing you could do with his life.
And it's kind of weird.
It's very weird.
I think I probably made the session some people have.
Yeah.
I probably remarked on the same episode that just carrying that much about other
people's dicks seems like you've got some strange priorities.
That's like the weird thing.
I don't know when we were talking about transphobia too, where, and, uh,
people who are like other kin or like, I'm like, why, why, why is this the hill
that you're going to die on?
Right.
Yeah.
I was really baffled by that.
But like, actually, you know, going back to J.K.
Rowling again, but I was reading some of the dumb shit that she actually said
and wrote and like, I was just like, why do you care?
But yeah, and that, that's my main thing with Rowling is, you know, if she's
some random, random internet or like, you know, fine, go nuts, say all the stuff
you want, and maybe, you know, maybe you're trying to get clarification.
Great.
In the, in ideal world, that's why someone goes to the internet and try and learn.
Right.
That's not why anyone goes to Twitter, but sure.
Um, she cares because she's scared and she's scared because she's been told
things that aren't true.
And, you know, then again, the, the responses to educator, but it's also one
of those things, uh, scared of what?
Scared of people being different.
No, scared of men.
Yeah.
There's, yeah, the whole turf thing where apparently nobody's really
transgender, it's just men dressing in women's clothes to go in women's
bathrooms and harass them.
Well, there's, there's certainly the, the branch that thinks that and they're
bad too.
And so like, well, that's the turf thing though, right?
Yeah.
Well, I mean, there's also exclusive radical feminist.
Yes.
Yes.
There, there's the less, less horrible, but still wrong version is that, uh, once
we don't have, uh, a norm against letting people that look masculine walk
into whatever bathroom, then there won't be a safe space for women to flee to,
which has issues of its own, to say the least.
It's got plenty of issues.
Yeah.
Also, trans men don't exist, I guess, or am I trying to harass men?
How dare you?
Maybe I'm actually taking hormones and considering surgeries and
so you can see their dicks while they're peeing.
Ah, I figured out if I, if I had, and I haven't looked into the rolling
stuff too, too seriously, I'm guessing the steel man is something like, you know,
right now, if I were to follow, uh, if I were to follow my wife into the
restroom at a restaurant, yeah, people would, people would up and kick you out.
They would raise eyebrows and like, what are you doing?
Why are you following her?
Hey, is he, is he following you?
Are you okay?
Yeah.
It's kind of the response that would happen.
Yeah.
I feel like people actually would just ignore it, but maybe that's just Denver.
Uh, it depends on the place.
I'm not, I'm not prepared to conduct the experiment myself lest I get arrested.
It's actually a, a legal or against certain, I don't know.
I mean, it used to be the case from what I've been told that in milk, they
didn't really have gender assigned bathrooms.
People just went and yeah, I was going to say, I think that it's actually
illegal to have like gender specific gendered bathrooms in Denver.
If you have single, like single rooms, if you have stalls, you can still put a,
yeah, well, they do have stalls in there, but like people just didn't really care
that much.
Most of them anyway.
Well, most people, yeah, like, I don't know.
And then the normie started coming to milk and then there was issues.
Uh, wait, milk, you mean the, I, yeah, the bar here.
Yeah.
Sorry.
I don't know.
Because Steven was talking about the dairy product.
Oh, I'm sorry.
No, I knew what you're talking about, but, but, but yes, they're both called milk
and one makes sense to call milk.
And I have no idea why the bar is called milk based on milk bar.
Oh, one time I was in milk and I was using the bathroom and there were three
people in the stall next to me, definitely getting up to some stuff.
And they did actually have to have a security person come in there like,
all right, okay.
Come on, get a room, come on guys.
People got a P.
Yeah.
Well, that was the thing.
There was a long line.
It was just like, I almost feel like nobody would have cared if it hadn't been
like, like, if you weren't using a stall, would you be okay with it?
And it was like two, two girls at a guy.
Like, I remember just like watching them walk in and laughing.
It's like, oh, that's, that's nice.
We should turn a little secluded closet area into the fuck room or something.
I don't know.
Well, I think that would technically be illegal in Denver.
Yeah, I think that would be unsanitary.
Oh, well, maybe that too.
People tend to not care as much when they're on drugs.
Yes.
But yeah.
Anyway, feedback.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We're such a good podcast.
Do the math regarding the sexual revolution.
Do the math says the podcast.
Martyr made, apparently Martyr made his name of podcast was critical of the sexual
revolution when it was discussed.
The problem was that instead of being about free love, the slogan free love was
instead used to pressure people who would otherwise not want to have sex to have
sex with you and your friends.
If you were a girl and someone asked you to have sex with you and you refused,
they would accuse you of being anti-sex and withholding your love from them.
So yeah, I wasn't around in the sixties when, you know, free love was a thing.
And that's why I have this idealized image of the hippies.
But yeah, it sounds like you can even use something as innocuous as free love
to be horrible and pressure people into having sex they don't want.
Like we're talking about earlier, like free love sounds all nice and friendly
until like you read under, you know, the, the amp, you know, it's got a little
Amperser star next to it.
What are you?
Asterisk, thank you.
And the, the fine, the fine print says, well, Ampersand is the fancy and lair.
I was just saying the word asterisk, asterisk, it's fun to spell.
Anyway, the fine print says, doesn't really mean free in the usual sense.
It means people who want to have sex with people, it gets to have sex with that
person and I'm not sure if that's exactly what Martyr made is saying.
But that's, if you, if you squint, you can almost imagine that that's what it
means. Oh, free, free for me.
You know, yeah.
And of course you could have sex too.
It's just because I want it.
Yeah, that's, that's, if that's the insidious version of it, then I can see
how that would be like, again, swinging too far on the, on the pendulum of, of
what's cool, right?
Yeah.
And when you think of like everything as a reaction to the thing before it, you
know, you, you quick, you can sometimes very quickly pass the, the, the reasonable
norm you're heading for and swing full on into insanity to where you have to have
sex with people you don't have sex with.
So, or insert whatever else.
Yeah.
The world was too.
No pun intended.
God damn it.
Yeah.
Man, I, my dad grew up in the 60s and like, I remember he would talk really
fondly about just being able to hitch a ride anywhere or just being like, like
people being open to talking to each other or like helping each other out where
they're like, no, my dad, uh, being a white male who is, I guess, middle class at
the time, probably more privileged than some of the other people who did get the
shit under the stick of that.
But it's not like, you know, nice things didn't exist.
It's just that some people had to ruin them for everybody.
So he's like, like one person that has really nice things.
This is why we can't have nice things.
This is why, uh, I think things do the math.
You know, apparently I've been lurking on the discord enough to see most of these
things come up as they did.
I just don't reply to stuff.
Usually I just skim it.
I lurk.
But Dan Z said, a quick point I've seen brought up, but I'm unsure how true it
may be.
Pride Boys being designated as a terror group allows intelligence sharing among
five, the five eyes that our domestic law enforcement can't do, uh, due to the
constitutional restrictions of monitoring citizens.
So I think what, I'll just read the rest of the thing before I guess what it was.
So our law enforcement can get a better info from Canadian intelligence infiltrating
our supposed domestic terror groups.
Then our law enforcement has the rights to get by themselves.
Hopefully I phrased it in an understandable way, but that way it could be the real
reason Canada designated the proud boys as a terror group.
USA wouldn't really see much of a benefit in doing such a thing.
Cause we monitor everybody now and just kidding.
I think that makes sense.
I think you phrased it clearly.
And so if there's a special status of this is a terror group, now we, we have special
privileges due to the patriot act or whatever to pry.
Um, then it, then there's definitely benefits.
And I, I could even see definitely benefits of, of designated the proud boys as
terrorists, even if I don't give them the same street cred as Al-Qaeda.
Also, isn't that like totally fucked up though?
Like, I mean, couldn't the government just declare anyone a terrorist group because
they want to monitor them?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Like rations could be a terrorist group if they think that we're spreading
whatever transphobia and, and they want to monitor us.
Sorry, I can't hear you all from all the way at the bottom of that slippery slope.
I, I know, I know.
It's not necessarily slippery.
I'm just fucking with you.
I'm saying you should have a good reason for calling someone a terrorist group rather
than we want to see what they're saying in their emails.
Right.
I totally agree.
And I don't know what, when this happened or what the justifications were, but
assuming it passes some important process, it does make sense to wear like, Hey, you
know what, these people have been enough to enough, these people have been up to
enough shit lately, we should take a look.
And these things should have, uh, expiration dates on them.
And unless you can justify renewing the expiration date on keeping them on this
list, my terrorist license expired, I need to renew it.
I mean, I think they can just get a warrant that go to a judge for, for a warrant
and, and spy on them, but they would have to actually prove that there's some reason
to spy on the warrant for searches.
But yeah, you want me to warrant for you a wiretapping for reading emails for any sort
of that kind of that's considered search.
I'm not sure what the rules are, but if the emails cross state lines or if it's a
discord server that goes, you know, transnational or, you know, transatlantic, you
know, do you need a, you can't, I don't know, you know, the LAPD can ask, you know,
Scotland Yard is the only British, uh, police agency aware from Sherlock, if they
can ask them for a warrant, you know, to monitor this discord channel, right?
Well, I mean, that's the thing.
You can, there are legal ways you can monitor people by asking for a warrant,
but that means you have some constitutional protections.
You have to prove that this person is worth spying on, or you can do an end
run around that by saying, Oh, they're a terror group.
And now you can do whatever without a warrant.
Would it be even possible to get a warrant to whatever track?
I remember like at some point, some terrorists were using a PlayStation chat.
Okay.
To, to talk.
Would it be possible to get a warrant?
Because you can't just ask PlayStation, I'm assuming.
And because it's, because it's a global network, right?
Like, is, are you seeing, is it possible to find that information at all?
Would it be possible to get enough judges on a list to where they could all sign off on it?
You only need one judge, I believe.
No, no, I can't, I'm sure there's some rules to where like the LAPD judge can't
let me spy on a, on a European citizen in Europe.
Well, if the data is in LA, you ask the LA judge.
If the data is in Europe, you'd have to ask a European judge.
Where's the data live on a Discord server?
Yeah, that's a good question.
I don't know.
Space.
So like, there's, there's a server somewhere, it physically located on the world.
You, you'd probably, is it physical?
Is it the location of the physical server?
Cause then like, you know, AWS hosts half the internet.
Their servers are around the globe.
It may be where the company is a headquartered.
Like a lot of companies have their headquarters in Vermont due to Vermont tax laws.
It could be, you go to a Vermont judge and say, you know, your company is registered
in Vermont.
We want this information that your company has access to, give it to us.
This sounds like probably why they doesn't know the nearest cause this sounds
like a pain in the ass.
Well, sure it's a pain in the ass, but it's supposed to be a pain in the ass
to spy on your own citizens.
Yeah, I can see, I can see both sides.
I mean, I, you know, I do want it to be not basically impossible to spy on somebody.
You, you have very good reason to think it's actually dangerous.
Right.
Like I think, but.
Proud boys are probably someone to keep an eye on, but there's a way to do that.
Like I'm not a fan of the Patriot Act and it should be gotten rid of.
And I guess technically it is, but they still do everything.
All right.
Was that, was that our last feedback?
I believe that was it.
Yes.
I have one quick question then.
Sure.
You have more exposure to David than, than I do is, is what's happening in Texas
right now, like a libertarian wet dream.
Like, yes, this is how it should be because there's no regulations.
So this is how this is what you would expect or is, or is this a bad example
because real examples don't exist because they're impossible.
I mean, we'll have to ask David and I guess I will ask him next week.
Uh, I don't think it's a libertarian wet dream though.
I don't think so either, but it's like, Hey, we have no regulation.
I own the monopoly.
I get to auto draft from your checking account that you pay your electric bill
with at 10 X your rate, uh, because I decided that there's a surge.
Like that all sounds like all the great things you get when there's no regulation.
You sign the piece of paper because no one else wires electricity to your house.
I don't think you have to decide there's a surge when suddenly a third
of your capacity goes down.
That's, that's definitely a restriction of supply.
Sure.
But then I guess I wonder, is that in fine print or like if you're just
flexed because say you live in Texas and let's just type with that, I
hypotheticalize Texas to where they, you know, there is, there's no public
infrastructure, quote unquote.
And so the only people piping electricity to your house get to do literally
whatever they want is that, that it kind of sounds like the point.
I guess my, my, to steal me on it would be like, and I'm not like, I, it's, I
don't think it's necessarily libertarianism versus capitalism, whatever.
But like, I think the thing would be, well, no, of course, there'd be competing
markets, right?
But in the event that there's not like only Comcast delivers internet to my
townhome complex, which means I get, I get about a third of the internet that I
pay for and I have no other options.
Right.
Yeah.
So like, I don't really, yeah, this is the whole other thing.
I don't understand, I don't understand libertarianism.
I, well, let me, let me correct that.
I understand what it's supposed to be.
I don't understand how it could ever, whatever it's supposed to actually be.
Okay.
If there's this anarcho-capitalism bullshit, then I want someone to
convince me that it's not bullshit.
I can give.
I think it's the person to do that.
He's absolutely correct.
Yeah, exactly.
I can give a guess as to what his answer is likely to be.
Okay.
I would guess it's something along the lines of, um, if that is not a truly
deregulated market and there were constraints put on, um, put on the system
by government that have made things worse.
And in a more free market, there would be possibly more people providing
this service or something.
Um, that would be my guess.
I don't know.
Fair enough.
Also, you know, you, it's Texas.
You generally don't need to winterize things in Texas because it doesn't freeze
there more than once a decade or something.
And are people willing to pay all the extra money they would have to pay for
their energy to winterize all their infrastructure?
Or is this just something they'd have to bite the bullet and accept once a decade?
If, uh, if they don't want to pay slightly higher prices.
It does freeze though.
Like they were cold and sheltered for people that were freezing to death.
Like, uh-huh.
Ted Cruz is flying to Cancun has been widely made fun of, I think appropriately.
Yeah.
You know, crossing the border to flee bad conditions.
You know, who would, who would ever do that?
Um, which we're not sending our best.
None of these jokes are mine.
I wish I was that funny.
I think most jokes are recycled or stolen, but, uh.
So yeah, I don't know.
We'll bring it up on the next mine killer, which is the other podcast I'm on
where we talk about a lot more news and, you know, culture war, mine,
killly stuff that we usually avoid on this podcast, not avoid, but we don't
touch on it as much.
We try, we try best.
We just don't focus on politics really.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So we have other interests as well.
Exactly.
All right.
Well, we are, I think we're up and up here, but we're not quite done yet.
We have a patron to thank.
This time we're thanking Marie, maybe.
Or is it maybe Marie?
Or maybe it's Marie.
Yeah.
Uh, maybe it's Maybelline.
I don't know.
Now I'm confused as to what the actual name is.
No, that's the name.
It's the name is maybe Marie.
Marie, maybe.
Marie, maybe.
Okay, okay.
That's how it's written.
Sorry, I was trying to make it.
I'm guessing it's not the real name, but it would be cool if it was.
But, uh, thank you, Marie.
Yeah, thank you.
You're welcome.
Maybe, definitely.
And reminder to all of our patrons.
I know our, when this is something that's been on the backlog that we'll never
get done of like give actual like reward tiers that, you know, people might enjoy.
So what I just do is I message everybody that if I missed messaging you directly,
that's on me, just ping the, you know, message me on, message us on Patreon.
And we'll get back to you.
Anything we can do for you, let us know.
Um, within reason, we'll, we'll do whatever we can.
Cause I know like we don't, we don't put up that much additional content.
You do get access to like some of the pre-episode chatter stuff.
Um, I don't remember the last time we did a patron exclusive episode.
If ever it's been a long time.
It's been a while.
Um, I don't know if we ever did one.
So we must done at least one.
So in lieu of us having actual like bonus stuff we put out, just let us know what
we can do for you.
Yeah.
And, uh, we're, we're happy to try and accommodate.
So.
And thank you to everyone that listens and everyone who, you know, gives us money.
It really does mean a lot.
It keeps the show going.
And thank you, Marie, specifically today for doing this because you keep us going, man.
Maybe.
Or ma'am, or non.
For damn it.
Cut all this shit out.
Fine.
Marie, thank you.
You've, you've, you've helped bring the show to everybody and we're all
grateful for it.
Y'all rock.
Appreciate it.
Yeah.
Yup.
All right.
That's it.
That's it.
That's all we got.
Okay.
Goodbye, everybody.
