Anyways, yeah, uh, yeah, but no, the, the, the, the sweetest thing I've ever done, I've
Yeah, uh, yeah, but no, the, the, the sweetest discord going. Yes. And in the discord, like some people want to start a book club, which is cool.
I like book clubs. I go to a book club myself, right? And apparently they're going to be alternating fiction and nonfiction and stuff.
And there was a big old vote as to what the first book would be. And like, I mean, I don't know. I was kind of hopeful that at some point, somebody would be like, Hey, we should read.
Let's write what, what lies dreaming. But it was the very first book picked. And I was like, Holy shit.
Out of like eight on the list at one enormously.
Yeah. So I guess starting when this episode airs is when the book club begins. So go to our discord if you want to be in on that. And they're starting with the first four or five chapters.
And then I don't know how frequently they'll be discussing and reading and stuff. But yeah, that's the first one. There's a special channel for it in the discord, if you're into that sort of thing.
Yeah, online book club sounds like much more my vibe too. I think it encouraged me to read more like dedicate actual like, that's probably part of the reason that you do a book club that like it actually forces you to read stuff.
And like the social commitment, right, rather than just like a personal commitment to finish a boring book.
Yeah, well, I mean, if it's a boring book, I don't finish it even if it's for book club. Well, that's not entirely true. I'll sometimes hate read a book.
So I can talk about it in book club.
I hate reading books is pretty fun sometimes. It's what it's not being fun for me for doing it solo but doing it when I know I'm going to talk about it. Like the reason I go to book club is because I really love reading.
But then when you're done reading, you have like this whole thing you've gone through, and you can't talk about it with anyone else because no one else has gone through. I think you can try but like you could just bore the shit out of one of your friends like hey, let me tell you about this fun book I read.
Okay, so in chapter one, there's this guy. And they're like, uh huh.
That's why I think that's why popularity is so big because you can talk about other things. That's like why when the Harry Potter train gets rolling like everyone gets on higher pot because you can actually talk about it and the Marvel Universe stuff.
Once you know other people are doing the same thing, you can share the experience. And so yeah, the book club is like, I read a lot more books than people then get popular in a year, you know.
And so having this other dedicated core people that will read the same books and we can all talk about it afterwards with this really cool.
So there are like five things that I want to touch on. I'll try and be as fast as possible. And I'll probably forget at least one or two. So one, this is the fastest and least, least relevant.
Like how, you know, when things are popular, you want to talk about them. So Netflix, when they do a series, they do all the episodes at once, which means go home and watch all of Stranger Things in one weekend so you can talk about it with your co-workers on Monday.
I can't either.
Many people can. And so that's hard for that. So Disney, when their thing launches in November, they're doing episodic weekly releases for their original content.
Thank God. I really think Netflix should go to that too.
They hopefully need to make some changes. They're losing money.
You know, because I mean, Binging was really big when it was introduced, but now it's like people want more content every weekend because they've gone through all of your season eight or season whatever in a more come out of a few hours.
Yeah. I think Netflix has been down in profits and new customers for the last quarter or two. So they're going to be updating their model if they want to stay in business.
And there's like actual healthy competition now, right? So that's fun.
Reading things and boring people by talking about them when they haven't read it yet.
So I'm going to do that to you two and to the listeners.
Oh God, real time again.
I finished Draco Malfoy in the practice of rationality, which I think I plugged. If I didn't, I meant to believe you did.
So it was fun. I enjoyed the whole thing. I do recommend reading it, although I am not as like vehement to my recommendation as I was in the first third of it.
It changes kind of what it seemed like it was going to do a bit.
And then disappointing.
It is. And he opens the book with like, you know, heads up people complained about the ending and like, how can they complain? This is going to be great. I'm loving it.
And this isn't a spoiler, but the author said that it was a deliberate artistic choice to make the reader feel as ambushed as the characters because the end is confusing.
There's this complex plot that comes together and you're like, what the fuck is happening? And he's like, I wanted you to feel that way too.
And I'm like, okay, well, he succeeded.
So there's that. And then there's a semi satisfying three chapter epilogue that he apparently released like a year later.
But since this was three years ago, it was all at once for me.
So I do recommend Draco Malfoy in the practice of rationality. It picks up at year two.
And it's just a continuation thick of methods of rationality. It's not another diversion of this and that.
So let's see a few other things you mentioned.
Oh, I didn't mention that apparently some of the people in the discord don't like, I mean, they do audio books.
Like most people do, especially people who listen to podcasts, because this is our preferred medium.
And there's a bunch of people who are just like, or at least one person might be expanding out.
It was like, sure, I'll read this into a microphone and upload it.
So yeah, if you wanted what lies dreaming in audio form, I guess you can get it on the discord.
And I'll probably be putting it up at my website as well so people can get it there.
Oh, sweet.
One chapter at a time. Yeah, I think they've recorded the first four chapters now.
Yeah.
The fifth one is coming up.
Cool.
Where are you going?
Yeah, I believe so.
I mean, that part's going in episode two though, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, all right. So this is it. We're in it.
Oh, we're in it.
Welcome to the Bayesian conspiracy. I'm Niasz Brotsky.
I'm Stephen Zuber.
I'm Jess Dickie.
And guess what we're talking about today?
No, you guess.
Goddamn it.
Wait, I'm not sure what we're going to talk about again.
Leave a long pause so the listeners can guess amongst themselves as to what today's topic is.
That'd be really dumb.
Topics can be almost anything.
Yeah.
But what I was trying to do is set up a conflict and then a mistake where one of us got it wrong.
And all right, sorry.
So what we're talking about today is Scott Alexander's conflict theory versus mistake theory post.
And I feel kind of guilty about doing this.
It feels like we're leaning on Scott a little too hard because just like three episodes ago,
we talked about one of his posts too, but this one is like a year, a year and a half old now.
And we kept meaning to get to it and we never quite did.
And it's just really good.
So it was important to cover it at some point.
It's been on the list for a while.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And it was fun.
What I liked about it, well, we'll talk about it as we go through it, but like the general overview is that he paints caricatures of both sides.
And it's fun because neither of them are obviously the wrong one.
And if I mean, at least when I was reading it, I found myself liking parts of both of them.
Right.
And there was one that I definitely liked a lot more, but I did see the other side as well.
Yeah.
And this isn't to trip off David Spearman's joke about like, well, on Mondays, Mondays and Fridays, I'm an anarchist.
And on the other two, I'm this.
But for me, it's like every five seconds, I can totally see, you know, in half my moods, I'm a mistake theorist, half of mine, I'm a conflict theorist.
And in half of them, I think that that dichotomy is missing part of the point.
So we'll get into that.
Most people are probably somewhere along a spectrum of mistaken conflict.
Do you see that post about the bisexual lady who was like bisexual in the fact that she was male attracted January through June and female July through December?
I've never seen that post.
It was really cool.
Apparently this girl asked her out and she was like, no, I'm bisexual.
And she's like, that's okay.
She's like, no, you don't understand.
Come back in July.
And she did.
And then she dated her for six months and she was like, all right, it's January.
I'm sorry.
We got to break up, but we can get together again in July.
I think a really stupid rule to impose on yourself.
I don't know if it's a rule or maybe that like actually is her attraction pattern.
Attraction patterns are weird.
I'm also bisexual and I've gone through periods of being like, I think I'm actually straight.
And then like two years later, oh man, I'm actually gay.
It's like not 50.
I don't know.
I think the idea a lot of people have of buys just like you're just about like, you know, attracted dog guys and girls equally in the same amount all the time.
It fluctuates.
Well, I didn't, I certainly agree that it fluctuates, but I, and it can be, you know, no, I'm, I'm mostly straight or I'm partly whatever.
But like to say that it, no, July 1st is when my clock shifts.
I don't think that your body doesn't know what month it is.
Right.
That's definitely self-imposed, but I thought it was kind of cool.
It keeps you from getting stuck in a relationship you may not necessarily want.
It also keeps you from sticking in one that you might want.
Yeah.
But if you want it, then you can come back to it again in six months.
Yeah.
Something they're willing to wait around for you.
Oh, so this was this person's like they were doing this intentionally.
Yeah.
Not, uh-huh.
Yeah.
That's, that's a thing.
I mean, I assume it was intentional because again, your, your sexuality doesn't shift on a dime on June 30th, midnight.
Yeah.
You don't wake up suddenly and be like, Oh, this person next to me repulses me.
Like, or I'm not interested in them.
Right.
It could be more like of a sine wave and you're like, all right, I know it about the time summer starts.
I don't want to start being attracted the other way.
So I'll just set this cut off for myself.
Oh, then that actually makes more sense if you're thinking like wardrobe wise, right?
My winter clothes are much nicer than my summer clothes.
And so if she's attracted to guys in the summer, in the winter, that makes more sense to me.
Like a little more people have a little, you know, facial hair to stay warm and, you know, heavy, like awesome coats.
And then of course, tight clothes and bikini weather in the winter in the summer.
That's, that's, you know, you can more enjoy the female form that time of year.
Gotcha.
But I had not considered that.
That's the only way this makes sense to me.
I got it.
I mean, follow me and do whatever you want.
I'm not shitting on it.
It's just like, I don't, I don't think it makes sense to have that rule imposed for yourself if like it doesn't actually make you happy.
I'll link the Tumblr post.
It was really cool.
There were jokes about Persephone from the old Greek artist, Greek myths.
Okay.
She was the one that had to go down with Hades for six months out of every year.
Oh, that's right.
Yeah.
It's been a long time since my Greek mythology classes in high school.
So anyway, mistake theory, conflict theory.
Wow.
We got off a topic right away.
That's all right.
We'll get it out of the way early.
Do either of you want to jump into this or should I?
Um, let's see.
Let's do like a brief overview of what they both are.
Yeah.
I would say mistake theory is the kind of, the kind of a caricatrized version that Scott describes is this kind of Vulcan who is just trying to find the best solution for the state.
Or I guess it could be whatever other kind of conflict they're trying to manage.
So they're just weighing the options.
They're doing the math.
They're being utilitarian about it.
There's obviously a right answer and we just have to find it.
Yeah.
And there's like open and honest communication amongst all people.
And it's not that one side is bad and they're doing things for bad evil reasons.
Just like they have an idea about how things should be.
You have an idea and you're all going to get together and try to find the best idea.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think this makes more sense in the context that it focuses on of like political problems or like, you know, state solutions.
I don't know if this would make, although they talk, I think he makes an example of like, you know, arguing with your boss.
Yeah.
So, you know, that's also a politic situation kind of.
I have something to say about that a little later, but let's do, uh, does somebody want to tackle what they think conflict theory is?
Yeah. Conflict theory, I thought was much more of the, the more traditional narrative of, uh, well, I always think of Marx with the class conflicts,
but the idea that there's two different people with, uh, or two different groups of people with different goals and they are mutually incompatible.
And there can only be conflict.
The only way to resolve this is by one group dominating the other.
And it's not like that there is a mistake that someone thinks that this policy will help the nation, but they're just wrong about that.
It's that this other person wants this thing that will help them and will hurt me.
And there's no way to resolve that aside from forcing them to instead implement this thing, which will help me and hurt them.
Which is, you know, the traditional proletariat versus, uh, bourgeoisie proletariat versus capitalist sort of conflict.
There's also, I think the, the kind of high level view that like the mistake theorist thinks that the conflict theorist is just, you know, making a mistake.
Right? Like not only you're actually, you're kind of framing this wrong.
Yeah. And if you could just explain it to them, then they'd understand.
Right. And the conflict theorist, theorist says, no, you don't get it. And this isn't about like them not understanding it.
They, they understand exactly what they want and they're doing this to get there.
And the person powerful are going to keep pushing their way through or, you know, your boss is going to continue to fuck you over and he knows exactly what he's doing.
This isn't like, if they had the information that you had, or, you know, we could all agree on a solution.
If you guys are trying to do it, you're missing the point.
This is an actual fight and you're not going to talk your way out of this.
Yeah. And there's stakes, I think, is one of the, uh, if I were to be charitable to the conflict side, which I am to some extent.
I think that there is value to the argument that there are actual stakes here.
Like you can stand there and like be like, oh, you know, uh, genocide or not genocide.
Well, let's, uh, let's really discuss this for the human race overall.
So, and I think, uh, personally, the feeling that I get from everyone I know and everything I've read is that rationalists are very much on the mistake side of things that they think there is a optimal solution.
If we could just find it and implement it and that, uh, it's better to do that than do violent things.
But is that the feeling you guys got?
If that wasn't the intended reading of it, then I'm not sure what, what it was. Yeah.
I mean, that's the, there aren't, in my understanding, a lot of pockets of rationality that are like pro, you know, violent revolution, right?
I don't know about violent revolution. I know there's a few people in the rationalist community that self identify as conflict theorists.
Sure. And there's some, I don't find anarchists and stuff like that too.
But I think, um, the, maybe it's just the, the, the insight that we wouldn't win a con, a physical conflict.
There aren't enough of us and many of us don't want to fight people.
So I would also really hope that even if we, you know, managed to get AI with killing murder bots on our side, that we would still stick with mistake theory.
Like our ideal is that we would still want to convince people rather than being like, oh, we're more powerful now.
Let's impose our ideas.
We had our robots hold them down and fix their brains for them, right?
Well, no, that's the thing. Like I, for a long time, uh, I was very much a liberal and big part of that was that the liberals were on the side of free speech, that, you know, anyone can say anything, no matter how offensive it is, how much the, the other people might consider it obscene, because people can say whatever they want.
I don't remember when that was the liberal position.
It was when I was a kid and it was, this was the 80s when conservatism was really big and everyone was straight laced in the moral majority had political power.
And then yeah, like the reverse happened, the liberals got a lot more power and now all of a sudden they were the ones being like, yeah, I'm not down with this whole free speech thing.
There's some speech that just should not be allowed because it is harmful for society.
And now the right was the one saying everyone should have free speech.
I'm like, you motherfuckers. Well, just 20 years ago, you were the one saying that free speech is, you know, this plague on society that will bring us all down.
And so now I just kind of hate them both for being like, we're for free speech when we are the weak people who need it to protect our speech.
But, uh, once we get power, we're not.
I mean, I think that's just how power goes.
But to be fair, the conservative side isn't pro-free speech in every aspect, right? They prefer blasphemy laws and, you know, you can't, you can't tarnish the name of the president or something.
I think the only time they're pro-free speech is when they're being censored.
I think what's going to change is that the left has now some positions where, or some people have some positions where they're like, no, free speech makes sense except for these things.
And now that they're putting any marks at all on free speech, now it's not that the move has shifted to the left of being anti-free speech.
It's just like now they're actually raising some things up.
Yeah, but I mean, the right before was like, yeah, we're all for pro-free speech except for this awful pornography thing that is turning our children into degenerates.
Or, you know, sex education or telling them that gay people are real or like that abortion is an option or that...
Atheism.
Yeah.
Comparative religion classes.
And they still want all those things.
Yeah, the only time someone is for censorship is when they think that the stuff needs to be censored because it is harmful for society, right?
Right.
Yeah.
But I was saying, you made it sound like they'd switched sides, like they had switched their stance on free speech.
I'm like, no, the conservative side is still against free speech, but just all the things that they still have been against in the past.
Right.
But now they are vocally for, oh man, you're suppressing free speech, man.
Whereas before it was the opposite.
What about the grey tribe or the intellectual dark web people?
I feel like they genuinely value free speech.
Yeah.
I think they're a tiny minority, but I love the fact that they actually do seem to care about actual free speech.
Yeah.
Like, I like the fact that I think right up until just a few months ago, the ACLU was willing to defend anyone on free speech rights no matter, you know, what they were doing,
was Larry Flint with, with, um, huss, not hustler.
Was it hustler?
I think it was hustler, the big really bad porn mag from back in the days when, you know, showing your ankles was scandalous.
They're still around.
You know, I know, to, to the, the almost Nazi-ish people, the, I mean, they, they, they defended Fred Phelps when he was picking gay funerals.
They were like, you know what, if free speech is free speech, no matter how much we hate these people, and I really respected the hell out of that.
Yeah.
And there's just not very many people like that.
What's the sense?
Do they not do that anymore?
Uh, I heard that they recently had, they went, they dropped one of their free speech cases just because they were getting so much pushback from basically everyone.
And they were like, we probably won't be able to continue as an organization if we don't drop this.
We're going to lose too much.
I mean, let's be real too.
I don't imagine there's a lot of, uh, like, you know, rich conservatives donating to the ACLU, right?
So if they're going to spend all their money defending Nazis, I'm going to stop giving them my money to, you know, defend Nazis with, right?
No, I mean, they were using the money to defend anyone.
Yeah.
It's not just Nazis.
They were defending the principal.
Right.
No, I get that.
And I totally endorse that.
But as like the person who's writing a check, I'm like, okay, who are they defending now?
You know, fucking this guy.
No, forget it.
Well, then, I mean, then you didn't really believe in free speech.
That's, I guess that's fair.
If you stop writing that check.
Yeah, that's true.
Or rather, it's not true that I don't believe in free speech.
That's true that that's what someone would say.
So as it is, I don't think I've actually given money to the ACLU, like other than, you know, whatever.
They were on my yearly list.
Yeah.
Nice.
That's awesome.
I need to put together a real one right now.
It's hodgepodge.
So anyway, anyway, I pulled up like eight dichotomies that he put in, which I thought were really
interesting.
We could maybe like cover them as examples and also possibly comment on them if we feel
like it.
Cool.
Alrighty.
Well, since I started this thing, I grabbed the first one.
Make sure.
Okay.
Which, uh, I mean, for the most part, I, I am on board with one because I think that,
it's much better to have a world where we're all working together, trying to find a diagnosis.
But I also read like a lot of cyberpunk and pretty much all the fiction that you read
when you're younger is about the elites being assholes and how the people have to rise
up.
Right.
So I have a very big emotional root in that still.
Yeah.
I think it's important to differentiate between this isn't like what you want the world to
look like.
This is how the world is.
These are questions of like, this is what I want.
This is the question of like what's actually out there.
Yeah.
Is, is this a, is, does a mistake theory explain what I'm seeing or does conflict explain what
I'm seeing?
Not what I, what, not what I, not which philosophy would I like to go with, right?
And so.
I think it also determines a lot of what you see though.
Yeah.
Like recently one of the Koch brothers died and I saw a lot of people, you know, cheering
about that.
And yes, I think they've done a huge amount of harm to the earth with their, you know,
global warming isn't real bullshit.
And, and to civil society by, by like what was the, um, United.
Oh, Citizens United.
Citizens United versus the FEC where it's like, no, no, of course, you know, corporations
are people and we can give our money to put anti campaign ads, you know, right before
the debates against the politician.
We don't want to win.
Yeah.
It's like when you get to buy elections through through manipulating people because you're
rich, plus me and puts me in my, picks me, makes me ready to put on my conflict theory
hat, right?
A lot of good things that they did too, because they were, they were less socially conservative
and more along the lines of fuck the government sort of conservative.
They, they, they funded a lot of things that I actually think are good things.
They, they were very, uh, pro free speech.
For example,
Are you saying that they were complicated humans and not just cartoon villains?
That is unfortunately what I am forced to say.
Yeah.
They did a lot of terrible things, but they also did like some things.
I'm like, wow, that's, that's exactly what I think on that issue.
How are they on my side on this?
You know,
Because it benefits them personally too.
Uh, no, there were things that didn't benefit them personally.
Like what?
So, uh, they are in a support of same sex marriage, uh, in support of withdrawing the US military
from the Middle East and cutting defense spending in general.
Uh, they are in support of massive, uh, criminal reform where a lot of things are decriminalized
and where, uh, people are given their due process instead of being forced to plea bargain
everything.
And people aren't given excessive bail, keeping them from, you know, getting back to their
lives.
Uh, there's, I know you're probably going to be surprised by this, but, um, they are,
I assume we're going to be surprised.
I don't know.
Maybe I'm wrong about this.
God, I'm sorry.
Uh,
No, you're good.
After the first three.
Okay.
The first three did surprise the hell out of me.
They're very against, uh, business and government mixing and, uh, are trying to get subsidies
like just gone entirely.
So businesses fail or succeed based on whether they're good at the business, not at how well
they can lobby and get Congress money diverted and get taxpayer money diverted to them.
Uh, they want to get rid of all the special exceptions and tax codes that politicians
give to whoever they like best, you know, why do they lobby for senators that give them
these tax breaks and stuff?
Well, because they, they want the actual senators in place and some of the tax breaks
are things other people push, not they push.
Like you only get a choice between two senators and they have to pick which one is they think
is more on their side and in a particular seat.
I did see a tweet on Reddit that was screen capped and it was like, when a Koch brother
dies, who inherits their senators?
And then someone of course replies, Oh, they should bury them with them.
Like, you know, the pharaohs and their cats.
Nice.
And then also very much for digital free speech, like we've been, so those are all things
I'm super for.
I'm not sure stuff makes up for how much damage they will do to all the poor nations through
global climate change over the next 30 years or so, or the, you know, again, the corporations
as people thing in 2003 wasn't, I don't think that was a good move for the country.
And that doesn't seem to jam with like keeping politics or business out of politics.
But maybe in the way that you clarified it, it did.
So, um, yeah, that's interesting.
So you're right.
That is a more nuanced position and it's, it is nicely refreshing and super annoying
that somebody can be, you know, it's like, Oh, you're not just a fucking villain.
You know, they're, you know, that's, that's, it was much easier when I knew I just hate
the Kochs.
Yeah.
And I'm not a Koch historian.
I'm sure there's, you know, people that like, Oh, no, if you look at their track record,
it's 95% bad.
And these five things that you just mentioned are the only good things they've ever done
in their lives.
But well, I mean, or vice versa.
If you, if you look at it in conflict theory terms where it's basically reds versus blues,
they were pretty consistent in most elections being like, I mean, we hate both these guys,
but the red guy is better than the blue guy in this case.
And so they would generally always fund the Republican side of things, which, you know,
kind of fuck that shit.
But um, it's, it's not like they were supportive of all this, you know, make all the drugs
illegal criminalized being gay thing.
They were just like, in our list of priorities, we think the red is better than the blue overall
for this thing.
So they were complicated and possibly mistaken about where the money should go.
But they were where the, like the pro gay marriage stance was that like just a thing
they said, or they donate money, like, do they put their, I mean,
I don't think that their initiative was pro gay marriage.
Like I don't think that they have a specific organization that they used to fund a lot
of things.
I don't think that organization did anything with gay marriage.
They have been supportive of it, like vocally, but,
And that's better.
That's a lot better than nothing.
Right.
And, you know, throwing money at it is better than saying something.
You know, when you're a billionaire, it doesn't cost you anything to go against the party
line when, you know, you literally, you've got a billion dollars, right?
So it would be,
I think it would cost you something to go against the party line.
I'm sure it does.
I meant that in a way that like, you know, you might go from, you know, 1.7 to, you
know, 1.6 billion.
That's obviously doesn't cost you anything in terms of money, but I think in terms of
social capital, the more you are opposing your group, the more the less people want
to cooperate with you.
And then of course, then of course being, I'm going to put on my conflicts, my conflicts
theorist hat for a second, which is like, sure, I could signal my allegiance to supporting
gay marriage for no, for no cost to me to show the blue tribe that I'm not an evil
person, but I'm not going to actually do anything.
So I'm going to just try and get people to hate me less by just making some noises.
Yeah.
Kind of like when a Starbucks like donates a bunch of money to some cause like fair trade
coffee, but they're actually putting money out, right?
So if they just, if all Starbucks did was say we're pro free trade coffee, no, but when
the companies do it generally, it's so they can get tax breaks, right?
Or, or like, yeah, have like a good public image.
So more people will buy their coffee, like they're self interested, like, yeah, corporations
or profit maximizers, literally everything they do is because they think it will increase
profits.
But I think that it would actually, I mean, a blue tribe person is not going to think
that the Koch brothers are any less evil just because they're pro same sex marriage.
They're like, okay, you said that.
Well, but most, I mean, you literally also just said that, oh, I'm going to say this
so people think I'm less evil, but I'm still going to be evil.
Right.
Yeah.
Whereas, you know, so they're not really buying any or much goodwill by that, but they're
kind of alienating people on their side that they need to coordinate with by their side
in quotes.
Yeah.
That makes a compelling point.
And I, you know, certainly I think speech is free when you're rich, right?
So like, if you're, if you're struggling to get by, unlike you, like you, again, if you're
a struggling corporation, you need to like make sure you're not losing friends by saying
things.
And so you're, in that sense, that's what I mean by speech being free.
If you're a billionaire, then it's like, I can say whatever I want.
I'm going to stay a billionaire.
I see what you're saying.
I think once you get that level of rich, I mean, yes.
Speech costs you more when you're not like Davos rich, that then you actually have to
be concerned about money.
But once you get to a certain level of rich, it's not about the money anymore.
It's about the social influence, the power that you have through that.
And then speech starts costing you in other ways.
Yeah.
You're playing a different game now with different stakes.
Yeah.
I guess what I'm saying is that they're not risking anything other than like, again, I
guess losing social capital against the people that they're typically allied with at that
level in the game.
That's all that matters.
People will ever not have mega mansions, right?
That's my point.
Kind of.
I think we're talking about each other a bit.
Like my thing is they could lose all their allies and still be set for the next five
generations of their whole family line.
They don't have to worry about being fired from their job and then starving on the streets
because they needed that job to make ends meet.
Or, you know.
But I mean, that's assuming that the end of the game is to be able to be set for multiple
generations.
Because at that point they're playing a different game where now it's like actually trying to
influence the world.
And that's, I mean, higher stakes and also not done with money nearly as much as it is
with other levers of power.
I mean, you could do a lot with a hundred million in dollars.
Yeah.
And if you're not, if you're not writing a $5,000 check to some pro game marriage lobby
group, then you're saying something doesn't mean much.
But I'm getting hung up on the one example.
Okay.
It seems like, yeah, there were some redeeming factors there, and that's, uh, five.
That's a fun, that's a fun convoluting detail to their existence.
And I just, just to make it very clear, I am not pro coke at all.
I think they've done much more harm in their lives.
No, your pro honesty was just dope.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, this going to the second point.
Let's do that.
Uh, mistake theorists view debate as essential.
We all bring different forms of expertise to the table.
And once we all understand the whole situation, we can use wisdom of crowds to converge on
the treatment plan that best fits the needs of our mutual patient, the state.
Who wins on any particular issue is less important than creating an environment where
truth can generally prevail over the long term.
Conflict theorists view debate as having a minor clarifying role at best.
You can debate with your boss over whether or not you get a raise, but only with the
shared understanding that you're naturally on opposite sides.
And the winner will be based less on objective moral principles than on how much power each
of you has.
If your boss appeals too many times to objective moral principles, he's probably offering
you a crappy deal, which puts me, I don't know, the first example, I'm leaning pretty
hard mistake.
And then this example, I'm kind of like, nah, kind of kind of conflict.
That's why I like the post is it's not, he clearly wasn't picking aside and he goes on
at the end to say this is that I've been doing, but maybe I've been viewing things
wrong.
Like he doesn't paint a nice rosy picture of the mistake theorists and this dumb character
of the conflict theorists.
I think he does a pretty balanced job.
Yeah.
I'm not sure he does.
I think he does a somewhat balanced job.
I felt like I felt in almost every example.
And maybe this is just me being very pro mistake theorist myself, but I thought in almost every
example, the mistake theorists felt very reasonable and the kind of people that I would want to
have around me and be in power and the conflict theories felt almost like caricatures of dumb
people.
Yeah.
I think you weren't modeling the conflict theorists, which is weird because you described
to me that in your teenagers, you were like a, you know, Bernadette Annanarquist.
Yeah.
I thought you'd be more conflict theorist side when we got here.
I knew, I knew, I think we can guess where we're all at, but like, I think their thing
isn't like that we're dumb and we feel like just, you know, everything, we need to kill
all these bad people.
It's just like, no, things are really this bad.
This is the only way to fix it.
Yeah.
The problem is that now I think of my teenage self as wrong rather than evil.
So it's, I'm still looking even at my past as in the mistake theorist format.
If I was, if I was still feeling, if I still agree with my teenage self and all my stuff,
I would be a really stupid person.
So yeah, I'm only kind of a dumb person because I disagree with most things my teenage self
believed.
So I mean, they're objectively, there are many times when conflict is what's actually
happening, especially when you have a shitty boss, like when you have a good boss, it's
not that big a thing.
But when you do have one of these people that are just assholes and are trying to squeeze
as much out of their workers as they can before they ditch them, that sucks.
Yeah.
And then it's, it is much more like an actual conflict thing.
Yeah.
And again, it's not that they're missing the facts.
It's not that they're, that, you know, we just need to talk this out and we can come
to an amicable, amicable solution.
They're like, no, I've got it figured out and I hold the cards.
So I had a good example of that.
My last boss, I had a shitty boss who just liked to go on power trips.
And this was the type of person who would make up arbitrary rules just so like she could
have power over people, like which things you are and aren't allowed to wear to the
office, which were really arbitrary.
There was the headphones policy where even if you're like in your room doing office work
all day long, you can't wear headphones because it's a safety hazard.
Even if you're not dealing with patients at all, like there was a bunch of things like
you can't use your computer for anything other than work related stuff.
And if I catch you for one second Googling something, then like you're in trouble.
And like it's the weird kind of, if somebody were actually aiming at trying to get like
value out of their workers, there's been a lot of studies that show first of all people
have about four hours of productive like work time in them.
And these eight hour work shifts end up just being people dicking around for four hours
or working very slowly and inefficiently throughout the eight hours.
I think it depends by industry as well.
Yeah.
I mean, I think that it applies more to knowledge work probably, but then there's still like
physical exhaustion if you're doing manual labor or whatever, but like, and then stuff
like open offices.
There's a different boss that I had that was like insistent upon, we got to open up the
office space.
I want everybody collaborating, everybody talking to everybody all the time.
I can't work like that God.
That's why I wear headphones.
I talked to my current boss actually, I just got a new job and I was like, what's your
headphones policy?
And he was like, headphones policy, you can wear them, I mean, and I was like, no, like
is it a safety hazard?
He's like, what?
It's like, no, I'm telling you this because I like the alarms are loud enough.
Yeah.
I'm like on the spectrum and I can't deal with lots of voices.
Like I need like some quiet in order to read and be able to work in process that he's like,
no, you can wear headphones.
I mean, obviously, like if someone's trying to talk to you, you got to take them off.
But like, and then like the other thing, the previous boss had said that the FDA was going
to write us up if she came in, it's all the people wearing jeans.
That's yeah.
I think the thing I hate most about conflict theorist people is that they force everyone
around them into the conflict.
You can't like have a reasonable discussion about God, I think it was an NPR article or
heard recently about a guy who was working as a fruit picker, right?
As a young man and he was like really fast, he got to the end of the row and everyone
is still like two thirds of the way working through there.
So he's like, all right, I did my work, I'm going to rest.
And the boss was like, no, get over to the next row and start picking.
And he's like, no, everyone else is working at that speed.
I got done faster so that I could have a break now.
And he like got in his face and he was like physically threatening him, you know, he's
like, I don't care.
I'm the boss.
You do this, or I will have someone come over here and beat you.
And like, what do you do at that point?
There's there.
Yeah.
There's no argument version of this where say I was working at like a retail store and
I finish all the work that I have to do.
And then like, I feel like I deserve to read a magazine until a customer comes in or until
there's a mess or until I need to make more food or whatever.
Right.
But like, I've worked at jobs where I had a boss that was like, yeah, sure, if you finish
all the work, read a magazine.
And I've had bosses that were like, oh, if you finish all the work, you got to just basically
they tell you you got to fake being busy because if I see you looking like you're not doing
like the work that I'm paying you to do, then then that makes me upset.
Yeah.
You got to like go like Windex everything three times and shuffle all the stuff on the shelves
around and count all the receipts and then recount them.
And I think a boss physically threatening you like he did is literally illegal.
I'm assuming he's a fruit picker.
You might not have legal recourse.
Right.
You don't have legal recourse.
Like at that point I would have been like, I bring a knife to work next time and stab
him in the gut.
But then of course I would be killed by the mob or whoever it was that was employing him.
So yeah.
And also you wouldn't receive your paycheck anymore and just the money on the guy that
you killed.
I expected that you're working as a fruit picker because you need to.
Yeah.
But it was just it was so infuriating.
It's the more conflict people there are, the worse the world is because they draw everything
else into a conflict rather than into something you can talk about.
Well, I think that a go ahead, Stephen.
Oh, sorry.
Yeah.
The other side of that though is that like there really is a conflict here and reasoning
with the guy wouldn't have worked.
We need to just, you know, what if all of us workers, there's more workers here than there
are enforcers.
Let's just all grab, you know, whatever fruit something heavy and let's let's let's solve
this problem.
Right.
But that seems like a very reasonable solution to the other one being, you know, stepped
on.
Yeah.
And if only like, if all those fruit pickers just like killed their boss and we're like,
we're the fruit pickers now, then like they'd, they'd get in trouble with the law.
And that that's the stuff.
They wouldn't have to kill the boss if they all rose up and we're like, no, he got to
the end of the road.
Like they protested.
Yeah.
If you want to beat them up, we'll fight back.
But I mean, there is not that level of coordination and it's, it's hard to coordinate people to
say, will you stand up to, you know, get smacked down so I can rest because I work faster
than you.
And it's funny, you know, Jesse with the previous jobs where it's like, they're not, they get
frustrated.
You use the phrase, they're paying you to work, right?
Or something like that.
Like not, they're paying you to work when they see you not working.
Yeah.
So it's like, the thing is, yes, you're paying me to do these jobs.
I did them.
Like, let me, let me keep doing that.
No, no, watching you just stand around getting paid those eight bucks an hour really pisses
me off unless you're doing stuff to earn it.
It's like, but I did the stuff to earn it.
I just did it faster.
Yeah.
If you've never had a job where your boss said to you, if there's time to lean, there's
time to clean, then, then maybe you don't quite get where it's like to be on the bottom
rung.
But yeah, it's like, no, no, I worked my ass off for two hours.
It's like, yeah, but you're leaning on that counter and like, not even like taking a break,
you're like just, you know, physically resting for a second.
So if you got time to lean, you've got time to like grab a fucking mop.
Yeah, these are just bosses that don't fucking understand incentives because you want your
employees to be efficient or you want them to be finished fast and to do the job right.
And then you want to reward them for that by letting them read a goddamn magazine.
The bosses that do the opposite of that just generate lots of hostility.
And then I'm just going to work slower.
I'm intentionally just going to do a shitty job.
But before McDonald's or a fruit picking farm, you've got an endless supply of labor
of people that will continue to do exactly as you say.
Even if all of them did unite like that, they just wouldn't get invited back to work the
next day because there's three times as many waiting every day than can be employed.
Yeah.
You'd have to literally like unionize every single guy in that town or that city or that
state because more people would be happy to take their place if you didn't already have
an agreement like, you know, we all stand up for each other when this happens.
Yeah, that's hard.
Coordination problems are, you know, famously hard.
And it's one of those things like I always put in mind of like handling a I don't know
why I always put in mind of this, but handling like a terrorist violent situation.
You know, somebody with a handgun or a box cutter wanted to take control of a plane.
It's like, there's like 150 of us on here, guys.
Let's just swarming.
Like, sure, some of us will get stabbed, but we're going to win.
But you can't convince your, your, your seat partners, you know, on the plane next
to you, like, do you want to risk getting stabbed to take this guy down?
And so, I mean, even though you couldn't in the past, when the hijackers would have the
plane land and then like make demands for money or something.
Now that everyone knows if the plane is hijacked, we all die anyway.
They do.
They might.
They probably would.
I mean, I think that's happened at least once.
Yeah.
Well, that happened in flight 93.
Yep.
So things like that are better coordinated in the air, maybe, but maybe not.
That's kind of mutually assured destruction.
Yeah.
Like, uh, it's harder when, you know, you have the bystander effect.
Somebody gets hit by a car and then everybody kind of looks around like, oh,
man, who's going to do the thing?
He's going to call 911.
What do we do?
What do we do?
Or who's going to rush towards the burning vehicle to pull them out?
Cause we need six people to get this guy out, but one of us can't do it.
So who wants to get burned?
Right.
Um, you can't pick people out in the crowd.
Be like, who wants burn wounds?
Right.
Well, actually apparently that's what you're supposed to do.
You go, you, you and you, come here.
Yeah.
But it's, I think in that situation where there's more people to choose from,
and like they're not, they're not going to die of this down the sidelines.
But yeah, that is how you solve the bystander effect.
You call people out and be like, he's going to die if you don't come up here
and help me, then people are like, well, now it's on me.
And getting that ownership on them, I think is the, is the agreed upon solution.
Yeah.
Number three.
Number three.
All right.
Mistake theorists think you can save the world by increasing intelligence.
Most techno, excuse me, you make technocrats smart enough to determine the best policy,
which this is how, you know, that the mistake theorists are the, the rationalists.
Increase intelligence is like our, you know, one of our buttons.
It's one of our dopamine buttons, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, conflict theorists think you can save the world by increasing passion.
The rich and powerful win because they already work together efficiently.
The poor and powerless will only win once they unite and stand up for themselves.
Now, those are both compelling.
And the thing is, I don't think they're mutually exclusive.
Um, I can see how they're on the opposite sides of how to handle a problem, but you
can kind of do both, but he goes on to elaborate on that a bit where it's like, no wrong
people can be just as passionate as right people.
And so passion isn't, isn't the solution here, but it is.
If you think like, look, this isn't about like making the smarter, making the smart
people smarter.
This is about like, this is about getting enough food pickers pissed off to all say, we
won't let you bully us.
Right.
Yeah.
Ideal world would be people are passionate about figuring out what the truth is.
Yeah, exactly.
Like I keep coming back to the example that I used of the, uh, the doctor and the patient.
You know, uh, it's weird that we treat politics different than like, because in a way,
like you're saying, we're trying to, our patient is the state and we're trying to
save them.
And it's like, if I am thinking about this as a cancer patient that we need to save,
I would hope that all the doctors would like stop fighting over, well, I'm, I'm
right because I have this many degrees.
Oh, well, I'm right because my grandmother told me that this is the way that you cure
cancer or whatever.
You're like, like, no, I would actually hope that they would talk about it, maybe fight
about it, but in a productive way.
But like, why don't, why do we see politics so differently?
Well, that's, that's kind of the, the rub of the first point, right?
That like, if you're viewing it as, as a problem that we can figure out by just
understanding it better and thinking about it, maybe even testing it and doing, you
know, uh, investigating results and stuff, then you're thinking about it the wrong
way, like the, the people who hold all the power right now aren't, uh, they're not
going to listen to your study, right?
As they don't.
Well, we don't all have the same, we don't have aligned goals.
I've heard stories of, uh, God, I don't even remember countries that would, there
were like developing countries where, uh, people do actually think of much more
things in that conflict mistake theory and where doctors, if an underling saw that
a doctor was, or someone lower on the wrong saw that a doctor was doing something
wrong, they wouldn't say anything out of fear of like, you're challenging the
doctor, you can't do that.
And people would die.
Oh yeah.
Simple things that.
Unfortunately, that happens in the civilized world too.
Yeah.
Well, yeah.
In Japan, they have to have their, um, token in the American world.
That was fucked up.
Oh, well, I mean, it's a term, the first world or whatever, the developed, developed
world.
It sounds majority, but it has a meaning that makes sense.
Um, it can be used majority, but it is, I think it's useful distinction,
useful term to have.
Um, no, I actually think I misspoke.
I think it just suffers from, um, term inflation like anything else.
Like, uh, it used to just mean what we mean by developed and developing, right?
Civilized and uncivilized.
And then people kept using uncivilized to, you know, mean these lower people
until it became an insult.
So now you can't do it.
Bet you 20 years from now, we won't be able to say developing countries
anymore because that'll be an insult and we'll have to use some other term.
Yeah.
I, that seems like it'll slow, like then who do you send your, who do you send
your charity money to, right?
I mean, they'll have a new term.
Yeah.
Like now we have, what is it, developmentally disabled or something?
Yeah.
Yeah.
People will take whatever the politically correct term we've decided upon and make
that into the new pejorative.
Right.
Like the word pejorative is actually mean.
Yeah.
Something rather than just being an insult that you can't say.
He used to be an actual diagnosis.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And it's, I think it's, I guess I'm just thinking like if, if, if
the developing world in whatever link that we have in 20 years sounds just as
good as the developed world, then it's like, oh, there's nothing they're doing.
Okay.
They don't need our charity money.
They're the, they're the early flourishing world, right?
Or something like that.
Well, then we can be the postflourish world.
Obviously the early flourishing world needs more, more contribution money.
More flourish.
Yeah.
All right.
Got one more example.
Oh, I guess it's me now, right?
It's you.
Number four, for a mistake theorist, passion is inadequate or even suspect.
Oh, I think you were just talking about this one.
Wrong people can be just as loud as right people, sometimes louder.
All that passion does is use pressure or even threats to introduce bias into the
important work of debate and analysis.
For conflict theorist, intelligence is inadequate or even suspect.
It doesn't take a super genius to know that poor farm laborers working 12 hour
days in the scorching heat deserve more than $9 an hour minimum wage when the
CEO makes nine million.
I didn't like those numbers.
I think, you know, you're making six bucks a day as a, as a strawberry picker,
right?
Something like that.
Yeah.
And it depends where, and you know, if you get a nice, whatever, I guess,
trying to think of a nice word for slave owner or, but it's not exactly the same.
Sort of the same.
It's like, all right, who wants 10 bucks?
Cool.
Go work for me for 10 hours in the heat.
It's, you know, nine bucks an hour sounds great at that point, right?
To some people, they say that's enough to live off of.
So.
I mean, for some people, it is enough to live off of.
Sure.
Just not very well.
Not a great life.
And nine million is different than like 90 million.
You know, that's like a $9 million Christmas bonus, right?
So the numbers, I think could be more disparate to better illustrate that point.
And that seems like he's kind of, uh, straw manning the conflict theorists.
They're a smidge.
That's a minor quibble I'd have.
Well, I mean, but this, the conflict theorists would also make that point about
nine an hour and nine million as well.
And as far as straw manning it, he did say in like the next post, which was the
aggregation of the best comments that he was intentionally trying to straw man
both sides in order to kind of point them out at their, their most extreme edges.
Good point.
And that's a technique that I like a lot.
You make things as absurd as possible with, while still being reductio out of
certain, yeah, but the productive version of that where it's like, this is the bottom
of the slippery slope that you're talking about.
Are you still on board?
Okay, cool.
And that's the edge of, that's the boundary condition of what we're talking about.
Right.
So I like that technique too.
I'm not sure if it was in this part of the essay, but, uh, when he was talking about
wrong people being, it can be as loud as right people or sometimes louder.
I remember there was an example that I just thought was hilarious where he was talking
about the doctor patient analogy again and said, if, uh, the patient hired his crazy
aunt to stand outside the room and yell its lupus repeatedly, like, I don't think
that that's actually contributing anything.
And I just love that mental image because I can imagine someone doing something
like that, like people are nuts.
And then getting their Facebook group friends to come, you know, pick at the
hospital and scream its lupus and like they're super passionate, but they're,
but they're super wrong.
Right.
Um, that, that does sound, uh, counterproductive and dangerous if you're
trying to make the well-being of the, of the place.
Of course, then he goes back with another example with like the fake drug or something.
And then it's like, this picketer would have been right to like, say, no,
don't use that medication.
Was that the, is that the best of comments?
Or is that later on in the post?
I think that was, I think it must have been in the comments.
I was it, huh?
Or at least it's not in the snippets that we pulled out, but the
example was something like, you know, it was like a Pfizer drugs or there's a
company owned by Pfizer and they're only like prescribed Pfizer drugs.
And then you find that out and you're like, yeah, the hospital is
understandably annoyed by this.
Yeah.
And so then when you're outside picketing, that makes perfect sense.
It's like, they're trying to give you these drugs, not because they're the
best for you, but because the CEO owns the hospital and they make money every
time they prescribe these drugs and the doctors get fired if they don't prescribe
them, this isn't medicine, this is a racket.
It's a good thing that never happens.
I think we can skip five because we already covered it.
Um, yeah, that was the free speech and open debate part.
I don't know.
Do we not have anything else to say about that?
Oh, about the first one?
About, uh, number five, um, the free speech and open debate.
Yeah.
Yeah, I guess we covered that one.
So, uh, six, when mistake theorists criticize democracy, it's because it
gives too much power to the average person who wasn't very smart.
When conflict theorists criticize democracy, it's because it doesn't give
enough power to the average person.
Special interests can buy elections or convince representatives to
betray campaign promises.
I'm pausing here because I totally kind of agree with both sides.
Yeah.
And so this, this was a good example.
Like I've, I've probably said the exact same words before.
It's like, you know, why does, and it, it's, sounds uncharitable, but why
does the uneducated idiot get the same amount of, of vote as, you know,
political scientists, right?
The reason this is hard for me is because I think that I wish there was
some system where people could have power over what they decided to do with
their own lives and not affect everyone around them.
But this is the kind of thing where like you're letting parents not
vaccinate their kids and they feel really passionately that vaccines
cause autism or that like diseases are healthy and help you develop a
strong immune system and you're just wrong.
Yeah.
But like if, if that person were making that decision about their own health,
then I think they have the right to do that.
They're still wrong, but that's their life.
And I kind of think that everyone should have the ability to vote because
if they don't, then you can say, well, those people who don't get the vote
were voting for a lot to make them slaves or something.
Right?
Yeah.
No, totally.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I think it'd be much better if it was just very hard to pass laws that
affect other people.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, the other, the other side of the conflict isn't just like, uh, I mean,
but that's like a stupid thing to say.
Letting, well, no, no, I mean, it's, it, it, like every law does affect
other people.
That's the point of laws.
That's why this is, that's why this is a hard thing to solve.
Right?
That's why politics is different.
And so we solved it.
Like just knocking, just knocking this down, like knocking the system
down doesn't make things better.
It might keep the police from hassling you for using drugs or something
because there's no police force anymore.
But like it doesn't, you know, the, the infrastructure of the state is gone
and everyone depends on it.
And so like to put it untargetedly, you know, we let dumb people vote
because it's the best system that we have to give everyone the same voice.
And the, if the, I can't think of, and it's not just me, I'm sure people have
tried and I haven't tried very hard, but like there's, it's hard to think
of a better system that isn't easily manipulatable that no, no, these
people's votes count for 500,000 and yours counts for one, right?
Um, other than, you know, buying a lot of ads and convincing people on TV or
something, um, or Twitter bots or whatever you can afford to do to pump
your message out there.
But giving everyone the same amount of voting power keeps that in, is ideally
to keep that in check rather than just say, no, you know what?
We've determined somehow we, not you, because you didn't get to vote.
We've determined where smart enough to vote.
And that's why we get to vote and not you, right?
It, you know, it's like, no, no, because we're, uh, I'm trying to think
of just some stupid metrics.
Like, no, no, if I earn this much money that I'm allowed to, I'm allowed to vote,
right?
Or if I own land or, you know, whatever.
Yeah.
Um, yeah.
So all those solutions of only letting some people vote all sound terrible.
Yeah.
They always get abused.
Maybe the key here is that voting is a bad idea.
Ah, we got to install a benevolent overlord.
Right.
I vote for me.
Or, or.
Or, you know, just a random number generator.
Okay.
Yeah.
Or anarchy.
Yeah.
I'm also bats.
Whoever bats the best.
I, I'm also slightly less, um, convinced about the whole money can buy elections
thing anymore as, as far as I can tell, money doesn't really do much of anything
except show who's willing to spend the most.
It feels more like a tax on people with a lot of money.
They, they use their money to fund.
They use their money to fund our entertainment by buying a lot of, by
buying a lot of ads that do nothing every four years.
And I'm like, I'm okay with that.
Well, what about the last election?
I mean, the last election was influenced a lot, I guess, by Russian, but Russian
bots and things, increasing social strife, which cost them almost nothing.
And was really, I want to do an episode on this, like in the next two or three episodes,
this, uh, this book I'm reading called white shift, but was much more a referendum
on culture and, uh, people who feel that the culture is changing in ways they do
not like, and it was more of a backlash.
I mean, yeah, that's, I think part of it.
But I mean, like you said, the rest, did anyone buy the last election?
I think the, I mean, the bots weren't doing it for free, right?
Well, I mean, sure, the people in Russia were being paid by the government, but
it didn't cost them a lot.
No, but it was like peanuts compared to what our super PACs put on the TV.
That's, that's true.
I think, you know, commercial time probably costs more than the average,
the average, uh, bought salary, but it's, it's, it's one of those things.
Like if it wasn't necessarily money, it was power that bought it then, right?
Sure, but that's a different thing.
Well, it's, you can still leverage it in the, in this sense, like, I'm not a
political theorist if that's not super clear at this point, but you get
a large amount of political power by that, by having large amounts of money.
Yeah, the two tend to be correlated.
The thing that really, the one good thing about the last election in my opinion
was that it showed that our democracy is still, um, not completely controlled
by entrenched elite powers because the elite powers would have never let that
happen and they tried not to let it happen.
And the fact that a populist uprising was able to install their own leader
as the president, I'm like, okay, that, that shows me that at least our
government isn't completely in the puppet strings of elite masters when
you can fucking throw a Molotov cocktail into it and have this effect for four years,
which is shitty.
I'm, I'm not happy that a Molotov cocktail landed in my country.
But, uh, yeah, chaos, president.
Yeah, exactly.
But the fact that the elites were unable to keep them out, I think means that
we still are at least somewhat on the democratic side of democracy.
I don't know.
I think it kind of proves the opposite.
Like nobody wanted this person to be president and he's president.
Well, nobody in power wanted him to be the president.
Nobody, nobody in power here.
It means that like that, that power bought the election, not, not the people, right?
No, I think it's the opposite.
The powerful didn't want him and yet he got in anyway, because he got in out of the
populace.
The people to wield power.
I'm talking the Kremlin, the people that employed the, the, the misinformation
farm that, that convinced people to vote for him.
I don't think the Kremlin has that much power.
The Kremlin was here to like, enrage people and stoke passions, but.
They stirred shit up, but the shit was already stirred beforehand.
Yeah.
I mean, it was ultimately the people voting with ballots that decided who,
who was the president.
Sort of despite the fact that he lost the popular, that's always my
complaints about it.
And it's like, yeah, except they didn't, I, I, I mean, so you still have the,
the, again, the rich and powerful conflict theorist version of it.
It's like, no, yeah, it doesn't matter.
Our votes don't even fucking matter.
We can be, we can win by hundreds of thousands and our, and our candidate still
loses because they've gerrymandered the fuck out of, out of every area that they
can, right?
Yeah, but even with all the gerrymandering to control shit, they
still lost control of it a few years ago.
I mean, the people kind of use that thing against them, right?
Well, which people know the people that voted for Trump.
I guess.
Yeah.
I think.
Yeah, there's a whole thing.
So number seven, number seven.
And I think it's you, Stephen, or.
Oh, no, maybe it is me.
Yeah, that's right.
All right.
Mistake theorists think revolution is stupid.
After the proletariat obscures power, they're still faced with the same set of
policy problems we have today with no additional options.
Conflict theorists think technocr- excuse me.
Conflict theorists think, think a technocracy, technocracy?
Technocracies, technocracy.
That doesn't sound like a word.
Conflict theorists think a technocracy is stupid.
Whatever the right policy package is, the powerful will never let anyone implement it.
The only, the only way around this is to organize the powerless to defeat the
powerful by force.
And that's sort of, you know, like I'm saying, you can get together and vote all
you want, but it's like, no, we're just not going to do what you say.
Or, you know, well, yeah, technically they won.
But because of the way that we, not you have drawn the lines, they, they lost.
So that.
That's, that's literally why the Democratic Party has super delegates.
Because in 68, I think it was populist got swept into power because they just
had, you know, the, the open, open voting or whatever it was.
And, uh, lost terribly and was not at all who the elites wanted in there.
And so they're like, all right, from now on, like 40% of our votes are going
to be these super delegates who are delegated beforehand by the powerful,
you know, forces in our party.
And that's why that's there to overrule the, the rule of the will of the people.
And the Republican Party didn't have super delegates, which is why they got hijacked.
So I think, I think they're definitely trying to, uh, to never let anyone
implement something that isn't right for them.
They just didn't manage to do it.
I can.
But I do think revolution is stupid.
I used to think revolution was awesome.
I think there's a point where you can argue that things are so bad that
a revolution is probably what we need.
Yes.
I think it rarely is that bad.
Um, but definitely like most of the revolutions in history kind of make
sense, considering the context that they started in.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, the reason I was all pro revolution when I was a teenager, looking
back on it now, uh, this is obviously not what I would have said when I was a
teenager is because as a teenager, I don't have jack shit.
I'm in a society where I get no respect.
No one likes me.
There's, I have, I have literally nothing to lose except my own life.
And, you know, I'm a teenager, so I don't care that much about that.
You know, you're mortal.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, I didn't think I was immortal.
I just didn't care that much.
Right.
Yeah.
Like either I win and I get the society I want or I die, which is probably not
any worse than being in this shit ass slavery society we live in anyway.
And, uh, now that I'm older and, uh, I actually have a few things to lose.
I'm like, you remember what happened last time there was a revolution, right?
All the, all the mass starvation and death and everything.
I mean, not in this country.
We got pretty lucky with our revolution.
No, it was pretty bad actually.
Oh, was it?
Well, um, I think the civil war was pretty bad.
The civil war was actually much worse, but the word war is not great.
No.
I think the big thing the revolution had going for it is that they already had a
powerful group of elites that ruled the country more or less by fiat and just
needed to kick out the occupiers.
And don't get it wrong.
My, my defenses on all of these at the conflict there, it's just because I,
I am really in that camp.
What I am, I think is I, I can very much sympathize with like the, like, no,
look, the time for talk is done.
Right.
Like, you know, and there are people like that on both sides of the political
spectrum, right?
Well, and teenage me would look at now me and be like, you're just saying that
because you're an old white guy who got his and you want to hold onto it.
You don't care about all the poor oppressed people who are being
ground into the dirt.
So fuck you.
You deserve to have your shit burned and maybe lose a limb or your life because
you're helping empower the system that does all this.
And then you could be like, listen to your little shit.
Like what, you don't realize how bad this would be for everybody.
If we just, you know, burn down all the expensive buildings and kill all the
rich people and younger me would say like, you know what, it'd be better
than what we have now.
We can start over again from the ashes.
And I mean, if a teenage me survived the revolution, I'm still young.
I'm healthy.
I have a lot of labor.
I could probably survive, you know, just everyone else in society who was
not as young and physically gifted at as physically privileged as I am at
that time would have a much worse time.
We're just like lucky enough not to die in one of the fires.
Yeah.
You know, I think I was much more into this also because I was very isolated.
Like if I had elderly relatives that I cared about, I probably wouldn't
have been as pro-revolution because I would have seen that could harm them.
But since it was just me and my fellow peer group, plus my parents, which I
really didn't like that much, there weren't frail people that depended on
society continuing.
I didn't have young nieces.
I didn't have old relatives.
I was like, fuck it.
Yeah, I can, but yeah, there, I, as a, as a stop to me younger self.
Yes, there are definitely times like when slavery was a thing in the
American South where there's literally the best thing to do is burn down the
society because it's just that bad.
Yeah, I, that's, that's essentially my position.
Or if you're living in Nazi Germany, things can theoretically be bad enough
where it's like, no, you know what, let's deal with the five years of chaos,
fires and famine.
And, you know, if that's the, if that's the cost that it takes to knock this over
and then whatever we build can't be this bad.
And cause we just, we won't do the same things.
You know, we won't have concentration camps and slavery and like that's
already going to put us ahead of where we were.
So I can see where it could be that bad.
I don't necessarily see it being in conflict with a mistake there.
I mean, you can still weigh the pros and cons of revolution versus not.
And then make an informed decision.
That's mistake theory though.
Conflict theory would not, would not be weighing those pros and cons.
They would say even the idea that you're trying to weigh the pros and cons is a
tool of the oppressors.
Yeah.
And that's what I can't get behind.
I mean, uh, yeah, I would be behind a revolution.
I guess this still makes me a mistake.
There's been, because I would want to, okay, but let's like actually crunch some
numbers before we flip the government on its head.
Yeah, that's got a great example of that at the very end, the article.
And that's where I'd come down to.
And that's, I wonder if maybe that's a way to think about it, a conflict
there is to somebody who's already done that calculus to their own satisfaction.
And that's where they've arrived.
Right.
Maybe, I don't know.
I know people that are completely guided by their gut.
Uh, there's like, it's instinct driven people and kind of like slow deliberate
people.
Um, I'm not even sure if that's entirely what this is describing.
Yeah.
I, there's some people I know as conflict theorists who are, you know,
very smart people and I wouldn't say they're instinct driven, but they already
know that the other side is immoral and is just in this for themselves.
And so they don't need to look at the enemy propaganda, trying to confuse
them into not fighting for their side anymore.
They know what's right and what's wrong.
I even know people to her like in privileged positions where like they
could go in and get a loan, they make money.
And they're like, no, this is all terrible.
We need to burn it down.
Sent for my iPhone eight, you know, like it, those are the kinds of, uh, that's
like, that's like the, those are the walking straw people, right?
Um, I guess I'm trying to figure out, and that's the end of the point.
I guess maybe that's the end of the, the article where like, is there a way to,
yeah, in fact, I'll bring that up later.
So like, is there a way to steal man, uh, the conflict theory perspective?
And I'm not actually sure either, but it's worth thinking about.
So I think there is, because I think I'm a conflict theorist to the extent
that I think that people can be bad actors.
I'm not saying that I think they're always bad actors.
Like it sounds almost like mistake theorists think that people are genuinely
just mistaken about what is true and that nobody is like out to screw anybody
else over and that doesn't seem to be the world we live in.
I mean, there's definitely bad people out there.
There's bad people.
There's that, yeah, there's that boss at the, at the, for the fruit picking thing.
There was the, uh, heard another article recently about a guy who infiltrated
one of those, um, scam calls where they call up elderly people and scam them
out of all their money slowly by like, no, your computer is being frozen.
You have to send it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There was, there was this, the story about this one lady they had on the phone
who had spent her life savings, like $40,000, I think, and she was crying
and on the phone and like, why did you do this to me?
What, what, and they put her on speakerphone and everyone in the office
gathered around just to laugh at her.
Like, look at the sucker that we managed to get all her money.
And it was fucking disgusting.
Yeah, there's some gross people.
And, you know, it's not even just individual level things.
Like if Donald Trump is an example of a, of a, of a quintessential bad actor,
you can imagine, he is in, I guess I'm talking to the audience.
So if he's not, you can imagine a worse one.
And it's like, no, no, I'm only here to serve myself.
I really don't care what your facts are.
Your facts are not true.
Facts aren't real.
I'm in this for me and me alone.
I think a lot of Donald Trump can be explained by, he's a conflict theorist person.
He's like, I'm in this for me and my interests.
And I know everyone else is just in it for their interests.
So screw them before they can screw me.
I think that's giving it too much credit only because like, I don't think
that he's worried about, you know, I'm, I need to get ahead of the, of the other
bad actors and the other people are out, you know, the bad people are going to try
and get me. It's more just like, no, fuck you.
I got mine.
I want more.
I think if you're in that mindset, because I was married to someone in that mindset,
everyone is always hostile and no matter how much you have, you are always on guard
and you always have to be aggressive.
That's what makes them so toxic.
That's why you don't want one as the president.
Okay.
Because there's, they never feel safe.
All right, I can.
There's only one Donald Trump.
There's seven billion people out there in the world working to try to screw him.
On the plus side, on the plus side, that's a miserable existence.
Yes.
So there's, you shouldn't, you shouldn't, I shouldn't feel happy that I'm, you know,
by, by all reports, he's miserable being president.
He's never been under scrutiny before.
The fact that like, he can't just, I mean, this is like his first time, his first
tenure in public service is president of the United States.
And he can't just walk in and be like, no, no fire that guy.
It's like, you can't just do that.
Like, what do you mean?
I've always been able to do whatever I wanted.
I've been able to, you know, slap servants and rape my maids and nobody's
given one fuck.
And it's like, yeah, but now there's rules, now there's cameras on you.
It's like, well, this sucks.
And while reports, he's unhappy about that.
So while I shouldn't feel happy that he's unhappy with his current lot in life, I
sometimes can't help myself.
So, but yeah, you know, so like you said, I think that maybe that is the
resolution, Jess, that you can, that's why you can wear kind of both hats at once.
Like, if you're, if you're a mistake, the rest of the point where it's like, no,
no, they're just, you know, they're just misunderstanding.
They just need the right facts.
They need the right education.
They need the right training.
It's like, no, they, there are seriously bad people.
And you'll spend forever trying to debate somebody who's not interested in
debating you in good faith.
Yeah.
Or they'll just kill you.
Or yeah.
And so it's like, if that's where you're at, then that's the, if that's what,
if that's what it takes to wear the mistake theorist hat, then, then that's
not the right way to do it either.
Right.
So there is a somewhat balanced there.
This, this works.
Well, like I said, that I was going to say, this works in the context of, if you
think that, uh, things are still in a position where we can talk about them,
like things aren't that bad yet, then you can be a mistake theorist right up
until like, you decide that, nope, they're that bad.
Or if you can figure out if your values align with your, uh, opponents, I don't
even know if I want to use that word.
Um, the other doctors in the room, like, okay, like, you know, I get a
feeling that we're all actually trying to save this patient here.
And then now I'm, let's actually like listen to each other's point of view.
But if it is a hostile situation where it seems like this one doctor just
wants to push this one drug that Pfizer is paying him to push.
I guess it's a good to be suspicious.
Uh, that sounds paranoid.
No, it, it sounds exactly right.
It sounds exactly paranoid enough to the point where it's like, yeah, that's a
bummer, but yeah.
Did we have another thing to keep us going to get us off this bar now?
We have one last one.
All right.
Mistake theorists naturally think conflict theorists are making a mistake.
On the object level, they're right on the object level.
They're not smart enough to realize that new trade deals are for the good of
all, or that smashing the stage would actually lead to mass famine and disaster.
Conflict theorists naturally think mistake theorists are the enemy in their conflict.
They've become part of a class that's more interested in protecting its own
privileges than in helping the poor or the work or working for the good of all.
Conflict theorists aren't mistake theorists who just have a different
theory about what the mistake theory is.
They're not going to respond to your criticism by politely explaining why
you're incorrect.
Which, yeah, I think that's kind of where we just were.
Yeah, right.
Damon, I want to dig us out of that sad hole and now we're just still in it.
But well, you got the main talking point here at the bottom.
Yeah, I think we kind of talked about it though.
I was, there's a line in there, uh, towards end of the article where Scott says,
I'm pretty sure it would be wrong to steelman the conflict theory into a nice
cooperative explanation of how we all need to join together, realize the conflict
theory is objectively the correct way to think and then use this insight to help
us cure our mutual patient state.
I think we've kind of hashed out that maybe there isn't a way to do that or, you
know, if it is, it's just at the point where they're, I mean, I could imagine a
point like, I mean, if I lived in Nazi Germany, I'd like, you know, I was who I
am and I wasn't raised by the propaganda state.
I would like to think like, no, I'm not going to engage with them and talk with
them like, no, it's time to grab my rifle and, and, you know, let's free these
people, let's, let's knock the shit over.
Um, the conversation is passed.
And so at that point it's like it's done.
And so some, some people are already in that position or if they feel like they
are, I get it.
They're not, they're not going to hear it.
At that point, you know, the, you know, if, if my, my, uh, I don't know what
you call them, my, my squad of people have already taken this town and they're
like in the Nazis, like, no, let's meet.
Let's see if we can come up with an amicable, amicable agreement.
And they're, you know, and it is an apparent meeting of good faith.
They're not going to just bomb us or something.
And it's like, you know, I'm not going to sit down and talk with you.
I've, I've, I'm done having conversations.
We're going to keep pushing the line, right?
So I, I get that mindset when I don't, when I'm not convinced to
watch over us that we're there at all.
Um, things are, you know, yes, things suck for a lot of people, but they're
pretty fucking good.
And I say that knowing who I am and where I'm from, but I mean, just
from a historical perspective, the presence, the best time to have been alive.
Yeah.
Certainly if you like, you know, eating food and not dying of illness, right?
Um, which we all appreciate.
I think reception, there's like germ theory of disease.
Yeah.
If you value those things that absolutely, if you value like meaning in life, I
think there may have been other periods in life that were in the history that
were much better for that, but you generally died a lot along the way.
I like, I think you define meaning however you want.
My, I define meaning as like advancing human knowledge.
And I think that this is a better time for that.
But if you define meaning as like your, your, your ability to
individually contribute to the well-being of society.
That's not how I define meaning.
Oh, and that's what I'm saying.
So yeah, meaning should be tabooed here and we can just use the, the long
versions, but if you, if what gets, if what gets you out of bed in the morning is
like, I'm going to, I'm going to do something today.
Then yeah, that was easier to do before probably, especially in a smaller society
where it's like, you're the guy who makes chairs.
Not really.
I don't even think so.
Like I, I'm curing cancer now.
And like if I were born in any other time period, I'd just
probably be popping babies out.
That's fair.
Yeah.
That's a good point.
It would depend on who you were back then too.
Um, certainly if, if you were born in the wrong part of the world now, and
like you weren't allowed to learn to read, then certainly your ability to
contribute to in any meaningful way would be in a way that you would find
meaningful would be hugely stunted, right?
Well, how would you be able to cure cancer if, if it was a crime for
you to become literate, right?
Um, yeah.
What if I wasn't born because I forget what percentage of babies just died.
Oh yeah.
I think half of people didn't make it to age five.
Yeah.
That makes the parents a pretty good picture.
The things are pretty good now, but, uh, you know, a revolution didn't
solve, a violent revolution didn't solve the infant, the, uh, infant
mortality rate problem, right?
Yeah.
That was, that was, uh, uh, what's that big mistake theorists like framework
called science.
Um, so I think a large part of the problem is that conflict theory really
is useful when there is an actual conflict and sometimes there are, and
it's just depending how much, how much conflict theory you need to use
depends on what society you're in.
And oftentimes how much conflict theory you actually use is based on what
you learned as you were growing up about the society you're in, which is
not necessarily the same as where you are now as, as an adult, because most
people have moved and, uh, a lot of people's society was determined a
lot by their parents, which once you get away from your parents, isn't
really that much of a thing anymore.
Whereas back in the ancestral environment, your society was your society
for your entire life.
So, uh, I think a lot of people are still in conflict theory mode.
Once they get into wider American society where they don't need it.
Um, although there's still places in American society where you do
still need it even as an adult.
Yeah.
One thing I liked about this post too, on like a meta, meta note is that
this wasn't strictly reds versus blues.
I mean, I know, I know blue conflict there is absolutely.
And so, and I know, I know red mistake there is.
And so it, this isn't just, I identify more with red mistake
theorists than I do with blue conflict theorists.
Yeah.
I would have to, cause I, I, I don't feel like the solution right now is let's
just burn it down and see what happens afterwards.
I think that's what drove me away from the blue tribe was the prevalence
of conflict theorists that I saw in my local blue groups.
Yep.
Me too.
Yeah.
We need something more chipper.
Right.
Somebody in the comments, uh, had said that, and, and Scott did address this,
but, uh, I think that this is kind of, you're trying to describe screw
theorists versus nail theorists when it comes to building a house without
realizing that generally you're going to be using both for different things.
And then Scott kind of replied, yeah, I know.
But I mean, I'm trying to point out a thing that I think exists and make a
ridiculous version of it to try to distill it down to its elements.
And, but I think that, yeah, like in the real world, generally people do that.
They're kind of two different tools that you can use.
It's just that maybe some people tend to lean much more towards one end than the other.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I, I read large, or most of the, um, the highlights from the comment section,
which we'll just link to in this one.
There's not, I think much time to go into it.
But it is, it is a nice, if this is what all, you know, engaging for you, the
highlights in the comment section is a nice conversation to have, uh, I guess,
to read the conversation of and, and see some factual back and forth on that.
So, yeah.
Yeah.
Um, I mean, to spice thing or to lighten things up, we could go on to
user comments, user feedback.
Unless you had any final thoughts or anything.
Uh, I kind of just wanted to liken this, I think, to the, what was it?
Bayseans versus barbarians, where I feel like ideally, uh, you do try to rationally
debate until you reach a point where it's like, okay, it's time to go to war.
And then you switch to the conflict theory, but like, you've made the choice.
You're, you're a barbarian now, cause that's the best strategy.
And then hopefully after the fact, you can switch back.
I wonder if that's the goal of a conflict theorist is like, once this is done,
the war is over, then we can have the conversation again.
I don't think we have that level of technology.
I think it's a much deeper seated kind of personal thing, which
takes either many years to change and work out.
Like, I don't, I don't think that there would be like a revolution and then
afterwards they wouldn't be conflict theorists anymore, which is also generally
what we see.
There's, you know, the French revolution and now the conflict theorists are in
power, but now there's, you know, different people that are the
enemy of the people.
So you start guillotining people and it spirals because it takes a long
time to get out of conflict theory mindset.
And if the conflict theory people take power, they're going to not have that
time before they start seeing more enemies.
You can't solve everything by defeating enemies.
Eventually you have to like create scientific inventions and cure diseases
and like do other things than have fights.
You can't solve a lot of things with fights.
I mean, the same thing happened in Russia, right?
I'm installing rose to power.
I don't know.
I don't know as much about the Russian revolutions.
Yeah, not a political scientist over here.
But I mean, that's probably the way it went, like with everything, right?
You, you, you don't come to power.
I'm like, all right, cool.
Now, and now that I've got this power, you guys all need it too, because
that's the way the things will go forward.
It's like, no, no, now that I've got it, we're safe when now I can keep us safe.
The American Revolution was really remarkable.
Yeah, it seems pretty rarely that there's a, there's some kind of uprising and
they've got this like very charismatic leader or a group of charismatic
leaders that end up taking power, who actually have these ideals that they
really believe in and try to push more often.
It seems like some military who takes power or some dictator, things
end up much worse and naturally as bad as they were.
Yeah, getting an American education and public school.
That's the American Revolution is the one that I'm most familiar with.
And that is what happened basically.
There were, there were people who put the idea.
It's like, what if we just like kind of put in like new kings and stuff?
And that was shot down.
It's like, no, we got away.
We were trying to get away from that shit.
And granted, it took a while before everyone got to vote.
But that was, I think the goal, you know, and if it wasn't, if it wasn't
the explicit goal in the minds of the founders, it was the coherent
extrapolated volition of what they wanted, you know, this, this was where
they wanted to want to be, even if they didn't know they wanted to be there yet.
I think it was specifically not their goal to give everyone the vote.
They, they were trying to push people out to the West to everybody
doesn't have the vote still.
So they still got what they wanted.
Wait, do we have disenfranchised classes?
I guess we have felons, convicts and illegal immigrants.
Well, Robert, they're not citizens.
Well, that's, that's either other classes of people that don't get to vote.
I mean, one might argue black people, children, they get to vote, but.
Oh, but it's suppressed.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
If you, if you jaymander the fuck out of a black neighbor or a black town
and then close the only DMV where they need to, the new registration is to vote.
Yeah.
So it, but the idea, they're not legally barred.
They are systematically barred by assholes, but the goal is like, no,
your vote still counts, at least in the minds, at least according to the system,
at least in the ideals of the system, which is a cool system to set up.
So, yeah, I mean, that's, that's one thing that, yeah, I mean, I'm not one
of those, you know, flag loving patriots, but I'm also not on the, on the camp of
like, no, America's the worst.
And I'm like, I get it.
Like I got a very rosy education and I know that America has done a lot of
terrible shit, but the, like you said, the, the founding of the country was a
really cool thing that happened.
The fact that the constitution was written in a way that like, no, no, let's leave
in caveats on how to actually amend this thing.
Cause we don't know everything.
That was a really cool idea.
And I don't think a lot of like drafts for like, this is how we're going to
run things, have that caveat in it.
Um, but that was written into the, into the, into the, the law.
So don't get me wrong.
The, you know, I'm not, again, not worshiping the founders.
They made lots of mistakes.
They were, a lot of them were dumb, dumb, they were all dumb people.
They didn't know what Germans were, but you know, in the, in the sense that,
you know, they somehow pulled this thing off without all the, without
most of the really horrible things that usually come with it.
One civil war, but yeah, but no, it was a cool thing.
So, but the man is to delay that civil war for about 80 years.
That's something.
That's pretty dope.
All right.
Let's, uh, let's lighten the mood here.
Okay.
He's got a good user feedback.
Uh, let me scroll down here.
This one came from our discord.
Uh, this was after we talked about my crazy neuroses that maybe I'm in a simulation
and it might be Jesus or Hitler later on.
Uh, please choose Jesus.
Right.
Uh, why we Kerr asked, isn't this, isn't the simulation argument basically
a Russell's teapot?
Like what evap, elevates it from every other single hypothesis about the nature
of reality?
What makes it more worthy of privilege?
Oh, what makes it worthy of privilege more than saying we live in the matrix
or solipsism?
If we assume there's another real reality superseding this one, then how could
we possibly be assigned any probability to what it might look like?
Before we answer that, this was a fun conversation that I actually got to
watch happen and to watch these conversations happen is the joy of
discord.
So if you like these things and want to engage them in real time or even just
read about them, you know, after the facts and your lunch break or something,
that's what I usually do.
Check it out.
It's a lot of fun.
Yeah.
I'm having, I didn't not anticipate having fun at the discord, but I'm having
more fun than I thought I would.
So it's, it's cool.
I told the people who both listened to the show and are on the discord, I read
probably at least on the, some of the threads that I read, at least half the
stuff and I enjoy reading a lot of the stuff that I don't say anything about.
So yeah, I'm totally lurking the discord.
Lurking is the word I was looking for.
Perfect.
Every now and then I try to chime in, but yeah.
Yeah.
I, I have times where like, I'll, I'll say, I'll go to chime in something.
I'm like, no, I don't have time to like commit to this.
Like keep the conversation going.
Cause I gotta get back to work.
So that looks fun.
Have fun.
Yeah.
Anyway.
So yeah, why, what, what, what, what privileges the, the simulation hypothesis
over any other.
So partly the fact that it is not physically impossible from what we know of physics,
but also just that in terms of numbers, solipsism is basically the idea that I may
be the only thing that is actually conscious that actually exists in the
universe, right?
And there's only one way for that to actually be the case.
If you actually are the only conscious thing in the universe, that's a unique
condition, whereas, uh, if there is any possibility of there being simulations in
the far future, and if we get to the far future, there will probably be lots of
simulations.
So in terms of numbers, that is much more likely, uh, in my opinion.
Fair enough.
But, um, as to what you can infer about actual physical reality, if we're in a
simulation, yeah, probably nothing, the real reality could be almost anything.
It sure doesn't feel purposeful.
Oh, this reality mean?
Yeah.
I mean, that's my argument against, well, you know, one of many arguments against
like theism, like the, if you look at the universe, does it look like it was designed
for any purpose?
No, it looks pretty random.
You could maybe say that somebody's just creating a bunch of random simulations to
see what happens, like playing spore or whatever, but like,
I heard a decent argument that the universe seems to be a fine tune to
maximize the amount of black holes.
Yeah, somebody really likes black holes.
Yeah, I don't know.
Um, I just don't know how I could know.
And I don't see a lot of evidence for it.
Uh, I do think that you do make a slightly more compelling argument for why it's not
a Russell's teapot there, but, uh, I don't worry.
I don't stay up late worrying about it myself.
Yeah, you guys are as real as I really need you to be.
Like I'm, I'm pretty sure you're as real as I am.
And that's good enough for me to like try and, you know, a, enjoy a friendship and
be like, be a good person.
So yeah, that's my, so yeah, it's, it's, there's not much more reason to think
this is real than solipsism.
I just reject solipsism much more hard than I do the simulation argument, but
that, that is just me.
Yeah.
I mean, the solipsism thing is, I don't, I don't, I'd like to hear somebody
steal man that, I guess, because from what I can see, there seems to be a lot of
other intelligent creatures that experience sentience.
Like I see evidence for this.
Unless like any, like, what are you going to say?
I think solipsism basically comes down to that you can literally not trust any
of your senses for anything.
So the only thing you can really know is that you exist.
Cause any of your senses can be fooled in any number of ways.
So, uh, good luck thinking that reality is real.
Fucking Nihilist, man.
Fucking solipsists.
Nihilists are different.
I had, I had to inject a big Lebowski thing to.
I was also thinking of big Lebowski.
To insert this unnecessary tangent in that I'm being, uh, my wedding is being
officiated by an ordained minister of the church of the dude, which it takes 90,
what, 30 seconds to officiate yourself on your phone.
And you said there's like 250,000 of them now?
I think 450,000.
450,000.
Nice.
On their website.
I think Wikipedia had a smaller number, but it doesn't matter.
My aunt, uh, officiated herself in the church of the dude to officiate our wedding.
So, excellent.
Yeah.
Should we go on?
Yeah.
I think this one actually somewhat relates to what we were just talking about.
Uh, Rom, Romkansk also from the discord says, uh, when we talked about the,
are your enemies mutants, uh, the thing that was confusing to me ever since I saw
this post first is that evil is very imprecise term.
That means different things to different people in different situations.
The example with nine 11 is pretty clear.
I can understand that the terrorists believe themselves to be good guys,
but I have many other examples about people.
I'm much more, I'm much more likely to meet in real life.
They're muggers, rapists, and just people who enjoy inflicting violence on those
weaker than themselves.
It's tough imagining some kind of worldview where they can justify that.
And even if they can, and probably do my imagination just isn't good enough.
It simply means my values are incompatible with theirs.
Doesn't it mean that they are evil from my point of view?
Yeah, I guess I don't know what, um, like, unless you're trying to salvage the word
evil, and I guess that's a good shorthand for like the people that I
necessarily can't cooperate with.
That sounds sounds like a good shorthand.
I think muggers for me are the easiest ones to justify there.
Like, you know, if you're the, the mugger robbing the, uh, the wanes coming out of
the opera, the Bruce Bruce Wayne's parents, like you're mugging them because
they're rich people who go to the opera and you're probably like, you know, have
some story in your head where it's like, you know, justifies it.
Yeah, it justifies it.
You could even be for really good reasons.
Like that pearl necklace could feed my family for six months.
It's like fucking give me that thing.
Or I could even imagine like I am not a vegetarian.
Uh, I wish I was, uh, people who commit rape or murder just don't see other
people as people.
They see them as having the value of a chicken or a pig that you might eat at
the supermarket.
And that's unfortunately really easy for humans to do to completely
personalize somebody.
So yeah, that makes those ones are harder for me to paint a happy backstory
for them that make them okay.
I'm not trying to make it a happy backstory.
I'm just saying that like it makes it not evil if the person doesn't like think
that they're killing another person.
Like this, this is a thing.
Right.
They aren't even in, they aren't evil in their own eyes.
If they see the other person as not a person.
Well, yeah.
What, what, what I was saying was that my backstory for a mugger gives the
version where like I can imagine the person mugging me being like a person
who's on hard times.
It just needs this more than I do apparently, but the person who murders
me for fun, uh, I can't paint a backstory for them that makes it, uh, that
makes them an okay person.
Right.
They are imagine them being very mentally ill and having been horribly
abused and traumatized their entire life.
So their values are skewed.
Yeah.
And I think the, the commenters point is that, you know, does it necessarily
matter if they would view themselves as evil or not?
If they're doing things that we personally consider evil.
I think in the context of like, and just to nitpick, like the mugger example,
presumably wouldn't be a mugger if they didn't have to, right?
The, the rapist murderer would probably do those things and do the more if they
could get away with more.
Like that makes sense to model those people as evil because there, there's no
way to, to save them basically without, you know, non-existent interventions.
Kind of sounds like what the commentator was trying to say is just that evil is
a word we should taboo.
And I kind of agree because I find it, it's an obnoxious word.
It's this dualist idea that like there are good people and there are bad people.
I think there are good or bad actions and that everything else is very complicated.
And we don't have any like free will anyway.
I think in general, evil is a term I would like to use as little as possible
because that is what actually allows people to do evil things.
Right.
It's like, I'm not, I'm not doing an evil thing.
I am protecting my society from this evil race of Jews that are trying to
destroy it or whatever.
The evil allows you to dehumanize other people and do things that's awful.
And so terrorists do terror because they're evil and they hate freedom.
Right.
Right.
But they actually do it because they view us as evil for whatever reason.
Yeah.
And I would prefer that we live in a society where everybody kind of understood
that we're all complicated and we have backstories and nobody's evil or good.
I think that does make for a better society because then you can't demonize
and dehumanize the people that you dislike.
So I think for pragmatic reasons, it's good to not think of other people
as evil as much as possible.
But to this person's point, yeah, when someone is calling all their friends
over to laugh at the grandma whose life savings they stole, who's crying
on the phone now, that feels fucking evil to me.
And I honestly would have loved to eviscerate all those people myself in that moment.
Yeah.
Someone like they don't deserve to keep breathing.
Someone stole hundreds of dollars and wasn't what was the substantial
money amount of money for her.
But luckily she stopped after one thing.
It was either like 160 or $360 on the same, you know, computer virus bullshit.
And I think we were able to get some of it back from the bank or something.
And then the rest was just gone.
My grandma a couple of years ago.
And I got not a violent person.
Like I don't, you know, I can enjoy a good violent thing on, you know,
the big screen or something, but I don't get any real satisfaction out
of imagining in a real way, like being in a violent situation myself.
And yet, like I thought about all the nasty things I do to this person.
Like you dare take money from my fucking grandma.
Like if I had you in a room, you would, you know, you wouldn't have fingers.
Yeah, like it would be.
Well, no, you leave them the fingers.
You just leave them with pulped bones so that they're useless, but hurt them every day.
You get creative.
Yeah.
And it's like, what was it?
Uh, yeah, from method of rationality were, you know, Voldemort's like, it'll be
eternities that they'll, or the list, they would be dead for eternities
before I'm through with them or something.
Right.
It wasn't quite that bad, but it was more just like, I would, I would beat the fuck
out of you.
Like, what the hell are you doing?
You're, um, it's, this is a good time to actually plug a podcast that I enjoy
called, uh, beating the fuck out of strangers.
That's right.
Uh, available for it.
No, it's, it's called, uh, um, hacking or excuse me, that's not the one.
It's a, yeah, hacking humans, uh, by the cyber wire is a couple of cybersecurity
guys and they get, it's like, you know, tight 25 minutes.
They have a nice little routine and they usually do like a catch up.
They like, as every episode they do a catch of the day where it's, you know,
they read some spam email that's like, got the broken English and it's funny
and it's whatever.
Um, some of them are like real events and then they'll have like sad stuff.
But then every episode they have like an interview with a different random person
in the field, whether it's like a physical penetration tester, like
somebody who will sneak into a big branch with a fake ID and get as far as
they can, but they've got like a letter in their back pocket saying this is
from the, I work for your company.
I'm, uh, contracted to like walk in here and show you how dumb it was to leave me
in a room with the vault, with the safe password written on the wall and that
sort of stuff or, um, people who have done, uh, you know, like white hat hacking or,
uh, anyway, they all, they all contain some little thing about like cyber
security and so, and they're all, it's a fun entertaining way to do it.
So hacking humans podcast is fun.
I've been listening to that, uh, it's short enough that I can listen to it from
when I leave my house to when I arrive at the light rail station to go to work.
So it's a nice little plug there.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Excellent.
Awesome.
Um, I have two more feedbacks that are related, but I don't think we have time
to hit both of them in one.
So we want to save those till next time.
Uh, yeah.
Okay.
Let's go on to some sequences.
Yeah.
All right.
You were about to say?
Uh, nothing.
I forgot that we do sequence sections and I didn't read these ones, but I will play
the part of the audience and I don't, it's been a weird week for me.
I'm getting married on Friday.
We're recording on Sunday.
So you have a damn good excuse.
Well, kind of.
I mean, it was on like, I have an okay excuse.
You're getting married.
I've been distracted.
Good excuse.
I've been distracted.
Okay.
Um, I mean, it's not as good an excuse as like someone you love died and you're
planning the funeral, but that's true.
On the plus side, both of these are posts that I've like memorized because I love
them, so I'm ready to rock and roll.
Okay.
Uh, so less wrong posts.
The first one was called professing and cheering.
And in this one, Eliezer relates how someone on a panel in a conference was, uh,
on a panel about whether science and religion are compatible, gave a big
along explanation about her, uh, pagan belief that a cow licked the
universe into existence or something.
And, uh, he says that, first of all, it was absolutely just mind bogglingly
unbelievable, but when she was speaking that she spoke with pride, self
satisfaction, a deliberate flaunting of herself, that strange pride satisfaction
flaunting clearly had something to do with her knowing that her beliefs were
scientifically outrageous.
And it wasn't that she hated science.
She professed that religion and science were compatible.
Uh, should I just keep going then real quick?
Yeah.
Okay.
She didn't recite her creation myth with the fanatical faith of someone who
needs to reassure herself.
She didn't act like she expected us, the audience to be convinced.
If you had to profess a religious belief to satisfy a priest or satisfy
a co-religionist heck to satisfy your own self image as a religious person, you
would have to pretend to believe much more convincingly than this woman was
doing as she recited her tale of the primordial cow.
She wasn't even trying to be persuasive on that front.
Wasn't even trying to convince us that she took her own religion seriously.
Her recitation of the creation story wasn't about the creation of the world
at all.
Rather, she was cheering for paganism, like holding up a banner at a football
game, but it wasn't just a cheer like marching, but an outrageous cheer like
marching naked.
That's why it mattered to her that she was, that what she was saying was
beyond ridiculous.
If she tried to make it sound more plausible, it would have been like
putting on clothes and I did a lot of editing to shorten that down so that we
wouldn't be reading forever.
Yeah, that's a weird thing.
I've, I've, I've run into that sort of thing before.
I have to.
It's a, I, I don't get it.
Does someone explain the psychology of this to me?
I mean, we can because that's what the next post is about.
But yeah, that was just, I've seen that too.
And it's when people don't even pretend to act like they believe what they say
they believe is a crazy thing to see.
Do you have any examples?
You had one that you mentioned, like maybe several months ago, but you knew
somebody claimed to be vampire.
Oh yeah, but I'm not sure if they took themselves seriously or not.
Like, I don't know.
They, the point where like, if they had a compulsion, like if they were, you know,
it was some like sex play with consent, like fine.
Okay, that's, that's your cup of tea.
They were literally expecting to die if they reached the age of 30 without
finding someone to feed off of.
Or are they just saying that?
I don't know.
It's such a weird belief.
Right.
It's hard to, maybe even they don't know, right?
Yeah.
Um, like I had dumb thoughts when I, like when I was a kid and, you know,
when make believe was really easy, but I can't imagine what it would be like.
I don't know, at the age of like driving a car and having a job where like I
still was able to entertain stuff that seriously.
Yeah.
I, but I'm trying to think of that's the thing.
Like she didn't, you, you could tell us, you didn't actually believe it.
She was just saying that this is what she believed.
I'm trying to think of a, of something that outlandish I've ever seen in real life.
I've definitely seen, um, beliefs as attire.
And then like the next one is like a pause lights, right?
But that's next episode.
I've, what I have seen, no, it's a different one.
Bleed, plus lights comes later.
Uh, what I have seen is since I've, you know, met some Satanists and gone to
a satanic mass, uh, they're for the most part atheists, right?
Or, or at least the ones I met, atheists, agnostics, people who are like,
don't really believe in any of this stuff, but they say they believe it.
They're kind of doing that more as a joke.
Like, I mean, these people were, it's, it was a weird sort of joke where
it's kind of a joke, but it's kind of not.
Like they know it's not real, real and it's sort of tongue in cheek.
But on the other hand, they're also like, but this is still my religion.
I've never been to a satanic temple, but I imagine that it would also
attract the real Satanists if any actually exist.
I don't think any actually exist.
And also the satanic temple was a, you know, the little community room
that they rented out once a week.
They brought in folding chairs and that stuff.
Yeah.
There's an episode of, uh, there was no black altar.
There's an episode of Silicon Valley where one of the characters is a
Satanist and they just, they're just at one of the masses and stuff.
And like there's a person sitting there naked with a goat head on.
And then like at the end, it's like, okay, guys, that was a lot of fun.
Well, our catered meal today, or our meal today is Chick-fil-A.
I know the whole gay marriage thing.
And don't forget the parking is limited for two hours.
So like, it was similar to that.
Yeah.
I mean, the ritual involved a naked person and I'm picturing that I'm assuming
that the writers had somebody go to one of these things or, you know,
one of them actually was a regular attendee or something.
Cause it seemed like just too spot on.
But I, yeah, maybe that wouldn't attract a real Satanist.
There's got to be somebody out there.
Like if there's people out there who, you know, believe in paganism or who,
you know, I, I have people who, who overtly claim to believe like a Norse
mythology.
Me too.
And so like,
They can't literally believe that.
There's just no way.
I feel that way about all religious people.
And yet I'm willing to give like the Christians.
I'll say, okay, they actually, they say they actually believe it.
I'm willing to give the Christians the benefit of that because they were
racing it from childhood and had it like drilled into them.
Right.
Yeah.
You don't discover a religion as an adult and be like, oh, that's,
that makes sense to me.
Right.
That said, I had another thing.
I forget who I was, who we're going back and forth with about, um, like,
whether or not religious people actually leave abortion is like murder.
Like we use murder in real contexts.
Um, in the, my, I, oh, you know what, I'll, I'll get the data later, but I,
since I've already started, I'll just finish the number of people who claim
to who claim to be like, who claim to believe that the Bible is the literal
word of God, I'm pretty sure is lower than number of people who've actually
read the Bible.
And like, oh yeah, no, that's, that's of course a divinely inspired book.
It's written by the creator of the universe.
Oh, I haven't read it.
It's kind of, it's kind of a lot of boring, you know, so like, if you really
believe that the, that the creative universe, you know, was, if not a
published author, a, a ghostwriter or how to ghostwriter for his book, you
would, you would slog through it, right?
Yeah.
But you can't, you can't say that you believe that and you can't actually
believe that and like not trouble yourself to read this book.
Right.
I would, I would, I submit.
I, I don't think that.
Well, you think people can't be lazy?
I, if you thought this was pretty straight, it gave me the cliff notes.
If you think this is the most important thing in the universe, like if, if I
build, I don't know, maybe I'm, maybe I'm modeling the most important thing of
the universe was understanding really high level mathematics.
Would that, would you be able to learn those things?
If it was as easy to do as reading the Bible, then yes.
For some people, yeah, for some people reading the Bible is as hard as doing
high level mathematics.
I think maybe high level mathematics is easy for you then.
Like, no, no, it's not easy at all.
I'm just saying some people have a really hard time reading.
If you're literate, you can get through it.
It sucks, but not everyone is, I'm, I think, I'm, I'm contesting the analogy,
not saying that it doesn't make sense.
I'm sure you could read the words, but you would probably think I'm too dumb to
understand these because they can't really mean what they're saying.
Right.
Which is the problem.
Yeah.
Okay.
That's, that's, that puts a good point on it.
I'm willing to, to concede the point there to like come back with numbers.
Yeah.
So someone reading who doesn't have like a world class education sees that God
came down and was going to, God came down and met Moses at an inn and was
really pissed off at him because he didn't circumcise his son.
They'd be like, God couldn't have really met someone at an inn and been pissed off.
Let's, let's, let's, I'm reading this wrong.
The priest's got to tell me what this really means.
And, you know, I suppose I did it with other important things.
Like I haven't gone and done primary research on, you know, evolution or
anything, right?
And yet I'll take the scientists at their word for it.
Right.
And you could literally read all the evolution textbooks if you wanted to.
Yeah.
I mean, I guess at that point though, but that just because you could read the
words doesn't mean you could understand the science.
Right.
But I guess the main difference there is that I don't think that's the most
important thing in the universe.
Yeah.
Right.
But if you did think it was the most important thing in the universe, do you
think you could read the science well enough to be at scientist level?
I feel like I'd make, I feel like I'd make it a priority in my life.
Right.
Yeah.
Like I think if I really believed, and maybe I think I'm modeling like a very,
I think I'm modeling like a rationalist religious person where it's like, if I
really believe that, that the religious worldview is the, like the actual correct
way the world was, I'd be like, this is super important.
Like I'm going to theology school.
Like I need to, I need to understand this on a very important level.
This is, this is the fucking world.
Right.
Um, I guess not everyone can go to theology school.
And so the people who do go to theology tell people like, yes, this is the most
important thing in the world.
And the really important part of it is that you should have kids and, you know,
tithe to God and not kill people.
And then you're covered.
Yeah.
If you say so, Mr.
Priest, you know, right?
I mean, you can't, who do I make the checkout to?
All right, cool.
Um, all right.
So if someone tells you what the most important thing in the world is telling
you to do, if you trust them, good enough.
Yeah, I suppose so.
I, I, I suppose I'll give it some more thought.
Meanwhile, uh, onto the next one.
Yeah.
Belief as a tire.
Uh, you want to grab this one?
Yeah.
So, uh, another form of improper belief is belief as group identification as a
way of belonging.
Robin Hansen uses the excellent metaphor of wearing unusual clothing, a group
uniform, like a priest vestments or a Jewish skull cap.
And so I'll call this belief as a tire.
It is very easy for a human being to genuinely, passionately, gut level
belong to a group to cheer for their favorite sports team.
Identifying with the tribe is a very strong emotional force.
People will die for it.
And once you get people to identify with the tribe, the beliefs, which are a
tire of that tribe will be spoken with the full passion of belonging to that tribe.
So this is just where I'm sorry, go ahead.
Oh, no, you got it.
I mean, so this is just where, uh, you'll chant the party line to
signal your affiliation to the party.
Yeah.
Um, I don't think like any comical examples from real life that I've seen
this, I wanted to be applause lights when I might have told the story before.
I'm sure I have, but it was just like, it, it was like, I'm sitting there
like this, I'm watching the lights.
This is crazy.
But I mean, the primordial cow, I think is a good example of that in real life.
Yeah.
Um, I think that I would call that almost, I was thinking about this.
It's almost counter signaling in a way.
Um, I think I'm using that phrase wrong, but, uh, it seems more like what
that particular woman was trying to do by being at a science conference and
then talking about her crazy religion and kind of having everybody laugh at her
laughing at herself is to be a little bit shocking, like to, to be subversive.
Like, look how cool I am.
I, I believe in this thing or like, look how crazy I am.
Woo.
Yeah.
Well, I think it's very much a, I believe I identify so strongly with my tribe.
I'm willing to say this patently ridiculous thing in public.
Yeah.
Or it's just like, or I think it'd be just fun to be super weird and I'm
going for quirky points.
Well, I mean, it could be that too.
Yeah.
But I think that's, that's a good explanation for a lot of crazy belief
that people will say, even if they don't act like they believe them.
So what's a real example that we see of people doing believe is attire?
I mean, is that where like rationalists go around, you know, saying, I guess,
no, it's not the same as thing as like running around saying buzzwords,
like singularity or something.
Um, it's, it's going to be maybe more like, uh, I guess, like saying, oh,
you should give your money to Mary.
Might, might be a belief is attire kind of thing.
Maybe picking a rationalist is not the right way to pick at this,
but there should be a way to do it.
Cause it will look, it could look the same, right?
Yeah.
Um, as, uh, I'm trying to think.
I think a good example is believing that three different people are one person,
but that are also three different people.
Like, I mean, something that is literally, literally logically incoherent,
but you say it anyway, and you say you actually believe it.
What you're saying, that's a belief as attire.
Yeah, the Trinity.
If something is logically incoherent, how could it not be?
Um, maybe I'm missing what belief as attire is then.
I thought that that was, uh, deliberately wearing something or like wearing
in kind of a metaphorical sense.
I, yeah, I guess I actually, I think I see what you're saying.
Like if, if you go around saying, yes, I believe in the Trinity, uh, then that
it feels pretty similar to the previous thing actually.
Yeah.
Maybe, maybe an easier one is just pick any political stance, right?
You know, like if, if you're having lunch with coworkers or something,
and they're talking about how, you know, messed up the, uh, the drug war is,
if you'd be like, yeah, and those fucking billionaires, am I right?
And then I'm like, yeah, you know, like just, I mean, that's, that's, yeah.
I actually think anytime you are in a political discussion and you feel
reluctant to disagree with people on your own side, that's a sign that it might
be a belief as a tire because you disagree with them on this, but you
don't want to say it out loud because that would mark you as not part of the tribe.
And I have those moments all the damn time.
Or if you just go around the circle and all chime in on how much you
agree with each other, that would also be, that would be an example of beliefs
as a tire too.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But you might actually believe that.
Perfect.
But you might actually believe that thing.
But that's not a prerequisite for beliefs as a tire, right?
Or rather, that's not an exclusionary factor of it.
Yes.
You know, you can, you can either, it's just, it's more obvious when the
belief is ridiculous.
You can either profess the belief in that counts, or you can actually believe
the belief and profess it and that counts too.
Yeah.
Yeah.
All right.
I don't have much else to say on that one.
No, me neither.
It's fun.
It was, it was interesting.
And when I first read it, quite the revelation, which was, you know, why, I
read that this sequence is to be like, Oh my God, that explains this thing that I
never could quite figure out.
Yeah.
Like, and at this point it's been out for like, what, 15 years?
So it's not nearly the revelation that it was when you first read it or when I
first read it.
But it does explain it.
People will spend 60 bucks on the football jersey to wear around, you know, or, you
know, maybe the modern version of my daily life is like people's laptop
stickers and it's like, why do you have, you know, an AWS sticker on your laptop?
It's like, Oh, you want to tell me that you know, or that you worked for this.
You went to a conference or something.
Okay, cool.
Well, let's not believe it as a tire.
That's just a tire as a tire.
That's true.
All right.
I don't know.
There's some like, you could say the corporate cultures of belief or a corporate
of if you buy it, what's the thing where you identify?
Maybe it's just brand identification.
What's the thing where you identify with the brand?
Oh, um, yeah, maybe like owning Apple products and being really like Gung-ho
about Apple products.
That's like, in general, tribalism.
I think if you were like convinced that Apple is always superior and the best.
Oh, I've met people like that.
Yeah.
Then that would be more of a belief as a tire thing.
No, like I knew someone that owned every new Apple device as soon as it came out
and went shut up about how great and visionary Steve Jobs was.
I wonder if Steve Jobs was pretty amazing.
I wonder if they still feel that way or if they've jumped off the train
and that Apple stopped innovating.
I don't know.
Yeah.
Um, maybe you're just too entrenched and you just got to keep
saying that that would be just belief as a tire professing.
You know, now they're at the point of just, uh, you know, professing and cheering.
Right.
It's like, now they don't really believe this stuff anymore.
But if they're committed, they've got to say it.
Um, that's actually not really the point of that post either.
I'm kind of trying to think whether, uh, Robin Hansen's writing about signaling
has kind of superseded some of these sequences at this point.
I feel like they're a bit more targeted, like in a, in the sense of.
He definitely explored them more and was a lot more academic and
thorough about them.
I guess, um, it depends on how much you love evolutionary psychology, but.
Okay.
Here's like, not only, I guess an evolutionary psychology
explanation for this behavior, but like game theoretic explanations.
Um, it makes it a lot more coherent for me where I can look at people doing
these crazy behaviors and like, why are you doing this?
This is ridiculous.
And it's like, oh, this actually was adaptive.
Kind of the whole, uh, cultural evolution thing all comes back together.
And the, uh, the mental model, the press secretary, you know, like, it
doesn't matter if you actually believe this or not.
You'll say you will convince yourself and believe it.
Right.
Um, press six area of the, of the person to bring.
I'm also a little distracted at the sequence part of this whole episode
cause I am out of a bit of a time crunch.
So.
Oh, well, that cause we should wrap up.
I think so.
Sorry.
Yeah.
No problem.
Sorry about that.
No, no, it's, yeah, I didn't, I didn't mention it.
You guys didn't know, but I'm never too busy to thank our gracious patrons.
Oh, I got another easy one.
All right.
Well, John Clark, this is your, your episode.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, John.
Yeah, we really appreciate it.
This I, I now I'm at the point where like I'm meta commenting on how I always
do the same thing.
Just because we say the same thing every, every episode doesn't mean it means
any less.
And, uh, today's, you know, we're calling you out.
This is awesome.
Thanks, John.
Maybe next time you wanted a good way.
Yes.
Maybe next time we'll work on our thinking, talking thing.
I've heard other podcasts where they do this every episode and there's no
that I found gracious way to do it.
Okay.
Unless you just list the names.
Yeah, but that seems lame.
Yeah.
I want to tell you how personally important it is.
So.
You have made a difference for our lives and our self-esteem and the
esteem of our podcast in our own estimation.
Yeah.
Perfect.
Wow.
That was good.
Okay.
I thought it was terrible and awkward.
You made it.
You tried to do a thing and I value that.
Good job.
Cool.
All right.
Well, thank you to everyone who listens to us and makes this possible.
And to John Clark and specific this week.
Yep.
Yeah.
Once again, plug in the discord.
We'll have the link in every show note going forward.
Yeah.
Um, come by, do stuff, say hi, and, uh, or lurk like I do.
Yeah.
And if discord's not your thing, we also have the subreddit.
That's right.
R slash the Bayesian conspiracy.
Exactly.
Reach out to us directly via email at Bayesian conspiracy podcast at gmail.com.
And I guess comment on the website.
Yeah.
Leave a review at iTunes.
That helps me know more people find the podcast.
Yeah.
Tell your friends, coworkers, parents.
That actually works a lot better than reviews on iTunes because, you know,
then you'd hear it from someone you actually trust to have a good taste.
Tell your enemies just for fun.
Let us know how that goes.
All right.
Thanks everyone.
Cheers.
Bye.
