Welcome to The Basin Conspiracy, I'm Imiyash Brotsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, I'm Jay Sticky,
and for the first time since July, we don't have any guests.
Yeah, we checked.
It's, I think July 15th was our last episode without a guest on, so back to the trio.
Just gonna be us bullshitting in your ears for a while.
No, it's gonna be fun.
Come on.
Yeah, it'll be fun.
Before we start in on our topic, do we want to do our normal reading the sequences thing?
I think we have to.
Contractually obligated.
Damn, those contracts are harsh, man.
At least this one's fun.
So yeah, first one was radical honesty, which at a quick overview is that he's much harsher
of it than we were on the episode that we talked about.
Well, actually, I was not on that episode, but when this podcast covered it, we had proponents
of it, and I think that I was interested in his take on the idea.
So let's dive right in.
We'll link our episode as well.
Or you can just search radical honesty.
Yeah, that's true.
Oh, I haven't updated our archive page in a while, though, I should do that.
So yes, the radical honesty post, he starts out basically just saying, Crocker's rules
are great.
They're a mirror image of radical honesty, where you, rather than telling the whole
truth to people, you always strive to allow others to tell you the complete truth without
being offended, which I just bring up because I know you, Steven, are a big fan of Crocker's
rules and tried info come often.
Yeah, we've talked about it here on the show, too.
I think I haven't, I don't think I mentioned it to anybody, but maybe it would be something
to bring up.
I think I mentioned an episode or two ago when David messaged me and he's like, hey,
you're misusing the word, I think misnomer or something.
And he's like, would you mind if I, you know, would you be offended if I corrected him?
Like, no, fuck no, tell me.
I should, you know, I could just have like as my status or like my reply to that could
have just been a link to the Wikipedia page for Crocker's rule.
Yeah.
I actually, I liked what you said about that, where you were like, other people would be
like, oh, you're trying to make me look stupid and get all mad about it.
And you're like, no, I already look stupid.
Now I'll look less stupid if you like, tell me what the correct version is.
And I'm like, yeah, that's like, basically how I wish everyone would respond to criticism
where it's just like, oh, am I doing something wrong?
I would like to be better, please help.
Right.
And you know, the thing, Crocker's rule is the kind of thing that works with certain
kinds of relationships.
Yeah.
Like assuming the person was trying to do that in good faith and not like, exactly.
It's there.
It's not an invitation to be an asshole, but it's like, do you want, do you want feedback
on this and not have me spend 30 minutes dancing around it?
It's like, yeah, totally.
Just give me the five second version.
So kind of wish more of the world invoked Crocker's rules just because I have a lot
of anxiety sometimes, like trying to tell people something that I don't think they're
going to take well.
And I end up just not doing it and living with, you know, this thing about them that
keeps grating on me or whatever.
And it's just, it's not great.
Oh, yeah.
And like 90% of the time, once I do actually bring it up, they're like, oh, yeah, that's
that's fine.
Thanks for telling me.
God damn it.
This whole time.
Yeah.
All right.
So next thing where you said that he's rather harsh on radical honesty, I, the pull, the
quote that I pulled that I think is what you're getting at is he says, I wonder whether
practitioners of radical honesty tend to become more adept at self deception as they stop
being able to tell white lies or admit private thoughts to themselves, which is a hell of
a take which I wish I had thought of myself because if it becomes really uncomfortable
to tell people the truth, but you have this, this philosophical commitment to only say
the truth, maybe you start lying to yourself without knowing it.
This is, I should mention, they're talking about Blanton's take on like the original
person that coined the term radical honesty.
And that's the one that I disagree with too, where it was literally just like brain to
mouth, whatever random ass thought pops into your head, say, you know, like you go up to
Starbucks and you're like, Hey, I'd like a lot say nice ass, by the way, like, that's
obviously not the type of radical honesty that I practice or endorse.
Yeah, I want to, I'm glad you reminded me of that because I feel like that's almost
a straw man.
And like rent, even if it is the original, that it's still like, all right, cool.
Yeah, your original was straw as fuck, because there's a difference between being able to
be forthcoming with people in a way that you feel good about, and just not having no filter.
I feel like even makes you almost like slightly less human to have to literally remove the
filter between your brain and your mouth.
That's like, that's part of where your introspection and your inner life comes from is the
Yeah, of your own thoughts.
I've done a lot of work towards being able to say like, kind of what you're saying a
minute ago, and he asked it being hard to give people criticism or like admit certain
things.
But I've had a lot of good progress towards being able to say like, I have this thought,
I don't endorse it, but like, I have this anxiety thought that's like saying this, can
you tell me something, you know, that counters this so I can stop having this thought.
And that's the kind of thing that you need to have that level of, okay, like stop, notice
you're having a thought, do you endorse this thought or not, where is it coming from like,
this is, yeah, this whole like skill that will help improve your self knowledge or relationships
with others.
I think it's an interesting social experiment to try to do this sort of thing.
And like, but yeah, I would never try to do this as like a life philosophy.
It's a great way to get your ass kicked or slapped or something, right?
He suggested only being radically honest with others who have also taken the valve radical
honesty.
Essentially, just like two people who have openly said, we can apply Crocker's rules
to this conversation, which I feel like is basically what Jason's version of radical
honesty entails.
Yeah.
You want the consent of the other person, like, I don't think the other person has to
be practicing radical honesty or whatever, but like, I at least like try to like, if
I'm, you know, real with you, is that going to offend you or like, do you want to hear
a possibly a thought that might be hard to hear a difficult thought, you know, like
it feels a lot like radical body acceptance.
We're like, yeah, it's a good thing, but there's social rules against walking around
naked.
And if you have accepted your body, body that radically that you're comfortable walking
around naked, you still got to remember that other people are not in that space yet.
And we have laws.
My main thing is that I just think it was fun because this was the first time I'd heard
about it.
And I feel like the concept has evolved to a much more like likable and defensible position
rather than just word vomit.
Like what was your phrase, Jay's brain to mouth, perfect.
That is not how anyone ought to conduct themselves, I think, in real life.
So the version now seems to be like the grown-up version of it, and I'll get more.
He ends with saying that, or I think it was near the end, that maybe radical honesty would
be best reserved for matters that are sacred to a rationalist.
Then he points out in some domains, this is already the case.
We believe that scientists should tell the whole truth about science in italics.
It's one thing to lie in everyday life, lie to your boss, lie to the police, lie to your
lover, but whoever lies in a journal article is guilty of heresy and will be excommunicated.
First of all, I love that concept and up until maybe a few months ago I would have cheered
and now instead I made the crying eyes emoji after this because first we have China with
their literal, blatant paper mills where they make up fake science to get a publication.
And then just a few days ago, Wes posted in our Discord a thing, which we'll probably
bring up in the next Mindkiller, about the replication crisis.
A guy read over 2,000 papers and came to the conclusion that most scientists kind of know.
They have not been misled by p-hacking.
They kind of know their papers probably bullshit and everyone else cites papers without even
reading the papers.
They just look at the title and say, Yeah, everybody in the industry knows about it.
It's like the replication crisis was pointed out by people in the industry and it's probably
like, I'm glad that at least it's something that is talked about openly and people are
trying to address.
And I think even like the Chinese paper mills, which it sucks, but on the other hand, it's
like, Oh, good, this is going to like make it necessary to do replication.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There's a lot more application because right now it looks like pretty much everybody is
guilty of some level of heresy and no one has been excommunicated.
And this makes me sad.
I think a few years ago, there was an episode of the Julia Galef on rationally speaking,
I forget who their guest was.
So I couldn't cite this, but it was talking about the replication crisis and this person
was involved in a project to like basically say, I will, I commit to publishing this paper
before I do the experiment.
And so whatever the result is, I will publish it.
And that will help not necessarily just with their application, but with a P hacking.
And then they were like, yeah, what our goal here is to get like a little badge on every
site where you go look for stuff and says, yep, this has the badge of they committed
to publishing this.
Yeah.
Pre-registering your hypothesis.
This is already.
It's already a sacred value of science, but like actually saying it's already being done.
Oh, good.
A lot of like in clinical research.
Nice.
Yeah.
This was, this could have been almost 10 years ago when I heard this episode.
So don't most journals not publish negative results though?
Yeah.
I think that's part of the problem.
But like any online repository of journal articles or of art of findings, I guess.
Yeah.
I mean, that's, that's what an insane incentive there would be one thing for some lesser domain,
but for science to say, no, no, we're only going to publish the interesting positive
stuff.
It's like, what are you fucking talking about?
Finding there's nothing there is very valuable at the very least it'll save other people
from digging in there unless they find fault with the way we did it.
Right.
Absolutely.
God.
Yeah.
Like, honestly, discussion went a number of places.
I had originally pitched like we should just skip this since we did an episode on it, but
I'm glad we didn't.
It was all new stuff.
Yeah.
This one was kind of fun.
We don't really want your participation.
It sounded condescending as hell at a glance.
And I think it's, it's defensible, especially with like the last sentence in the post.
Yeah.
I think it's a deliberately inflammatory title, which I don't know, I actually sort of love
those.
I forget what it was like Buzzfeed or something.
There was one of those like major online publications that for a while was doing this trolling
article style of actually like the truth is that pickles are terrible and people who
eat them are bad people and here's why or something like that.
Like it was just like excessively like one person's pet peeve that they like wrote as
that.
Okay.
Look, we all know that this is.
Anyway,
Mike, Mike Rubickley does the thing like that when he's talking about late people.
Oh yeah.
And then he's like, you know, and they're so racist.
That's the other thing about them too.
People are so racist.
He just keeps horns affecting everything onto people who can't be on time.
Anyway, who wants to sum this one up?
Well, I suppose I could do it.
All right.
Somebody has to.
All right.
So there was, he was at the Singularity Summit.
These next two posts are about this conference of people working in AI stuff.
And a question came from the audience at the end of a panel and they was an artist asking,
what can we do as artists to help in this process?
Yeah.
Well, that they were saying a bunch of speakers had were like, oh, we should reach out to artists
and poets and get them to participate.
And then a woman stands up like, hey, I'm an artist.
What can I do?
Yeah.
And then he says, no, you misunderstand.
He didn't actually say this, but he's like, this is what my thought process was because
there was just sort of an uncomfortable silence after that question.
He says, we're just calling for greater participation by artists.
We can get plenty of credit for being enlightened just by issuing the call.
If we really cared what artists thought, we would find some artists and ask them questions,
not call for artists to participate.
We don't actually want to hear from artists.
We think your opinions are stupid, which it's kind of mean.
But on the other hand, you know, if you're an artist, there's not much input you can
give directly on issues of programming and AI.
And like, so in a way that makes this not condescending, look at it from the other side,
if there was a panel on advancing some mathematical domains and they are like, Steven, what do
you think?
You'd be like, why the fuck are you asking me?
You don't want my participation.
Or just like someone from a completely different domain, like if you imagine there's some kind
of art theory, like, I don't know, like it's a Monet Appreciation Conference and they're
like, hey, AI developer, come over here.
What do you think?
Is this like the impressionism?
Yeah, they definitely don't want my opinion on that.
I went to some art walk a few years ago and I was just offendedly aghast at how expensive
everything was.
And then I went to the, you know, like real museums with real art are fun.
I went to the Museum of Modern Art in New York and it's like, there were black and white
pictures of like gum melting off the edge of a table and I'm like, squint, like that's
not art.
Like is it?
If this is art, then what the fuck isn't art?
Like art, we know what art is.
It's cool shapes and colors.
It's not like sure that meant something to somebody, but like, I feel like there's some
railing on art later in the sequences, but I have no grasp of it.
So anyone who wanted my opinion, they don't want, they don't want really my, my participation
in the conversation.
I think the reason art, one of the reasons art is so expensive, I mean, there's many
signaling reasons and stuff, but I think one of them is just that like people almost never
buy art.
So for an artist to make any sort of a living at all, they have to charge in a outrageously
high price so that one of the few times someone buys something, they're like, oh good, I can
eat for three weeks.
Well, often it's also actually an hourly wage plus the materials used.
I don't realize how long it takes to do an oil painting or how much work it is.
Like I have a friend that is a professional oil painter and sort of like almost sells her
stuff at cost.
If you consider an hourly wage and the amount of the materials and like it's paintings that
range from like 300 to $700.
Nice.
And not just that, like the years of practice it took to get that scale.
Yeah, that too.
I mean, like I'm always reminded of the lock picker who comes over here, opens your lock
up in a matter of under a minute and he's like, that'll be 60 bucks.
And you're like, for one minute of work, he's like, if you want to spend 10 years learning
how to pick locks, then you also can get paid $60 for one minute of work plus 10 years
of learning.
And yeah, art is very much a thing that takes a long time to master.
I don't think that that gum picture took that much time or money to make.
Probably not.
But what about that picture?
What about that urinal?
There was like a yeah.
And it's like when you stole a urinal for a urinal or for a gum picture to be considered
art, it has to be framed by someone who already has a huge name as an artist.
And that takes a lot of effort to get.
I think a lot of the art price, too, at least at the high level, is just money laundering.
Yeah, yeah.
Hey, once you get to the really high levels, yeah.
Hey, you took a picture of whatever a drawing of yourself.
Great. I'll give you $10 million for it.
Oh, man, what was that?
I tried to remember the name of it.
There's a movie on Netflix that I want to recommend.
It was about like professional visual artists.
And it's like a murder mystery.
But the thing is that it's like the friend I was talking about,
he's an oil painter and I'm like technically an artist, I guess.
We're watching this and just laughing our asses off because the point of the movie
is everyone is just so incredibly pretentious and like living in their own
weird art world that even though there's like murders and weird shit going on,
like it's sort of is in the background of the other drama that's going on in their lives.
For for for anyone who is not familiar,
Jace made the logo for the base and conspiracy,
but he's just technically maybe sort of an artist, he guesses.
I mean, I don't do professional art currently.
I guess that it's called Velvet Budsaw.
It's not like you stop being an actor just because you were only in one movie.
Fair. OK.
You professionally made this art and everyone loves it.
Anyway, this movie is called Velvet Budsaw.
It's very weird and funny.
I recommended it.
But right on back to the post.
Yeah.
Yeah, I don't know.
I guess that's sort of the whole point of the post where it's just sort of
we don't need people from like cross genres coming in and giving their opinions.
It's not like maybe zero value, but what I think was trying to point out
is that like we were doing a signalling thing.
And then like, I think that this sort of leads into applause lights.
Yeah.
Did either of you have more to say about participation?
Pretty much all I had. Yeah.
I mean, he mentions how like bizarrely
not condescending, but how uncomfortable it would be for someone to show him an art
and be like, say something and be like, oh, it's beautiful.
I love the cemetery.
No, no, say something mathematical.
You're a mathematician.
And it's like, I don't have anything unlike that to say.
Like, what are you asking?
What are you soliciting my opinion in that domain for?
Just so like, even if you reverse it, that's I think he put that in there.
So it's not just seeming like he's just merging one area.
He's saying this does work in reverse.
Like, you can't just like ask somebody for a token opinion.
I didn't think this is a dig on at all.
I just, yeah, I think that was he was trying to make sure that he wasn't
like being misrepresented that way, either.
Totally. I kind of like how he gave an example of them doing
applause lights by saying we call an artist participation.
And then the very next post is called applause lights.
Yeah, I actually forgot about we don't want your participation,
but applause lights is one of those ones that once you hear it, you'll never forget it.
This is another one about the Singularity Summit.
And one of the speakers called for a democratic multinational development
of artificial intelligence.
And so Elias are asked for some more details, outline some specific scenarios
like with more like this or more like this.
And the speaker was like, I don't know what.
Yeah, I think the two the two scenarios were almost worth laying out.
Let me I want to find the whole thing.
Basically, it was like, would you rather have an AI that is built by everybody?
Like they all get to vote on how it's made or once every human in the world
is given a cell phone number where they can answer some questions or something.
And that was the second option where like just everybody on the planet
gets to vote on how this works out.
And the first option was more like a committee of representatives.
He actually says, suppose a group of rebel nerds develops an AI in their
basement and restricts the AI to poll everyone in the world, dropping cell
phones to anyone who doesn't have one and do whatever the majority says.
Which do you think is more democratic?
And would you feel safe with either?
Yeah, and the first option he gave was something like a United Nations
Yes, come committee, something designed by committee.
Always a great idea.
And the guys like excellent products.
Yeah. And the guy basically had no answers for him.
And then Eliezer says in the post, look, the substance of a democracy
is the specific mechanism that resolves policy conflicts.
If all groups had the same preferred policies, there would be no need for democracy.
We would automatically cooperate.
The resolution process can be a direct majority vote or an elected
legislature or even a voter sensitive behavior of an artificial intelligence.
But it has to be something.
What does it mean to call for a democratic solution
if you don't have a conflict resolution mechanism in mind?
I think it means that you have said the word democracy.
So the audience is opposed to cheer.
It's not so much a propositional statement or belief as the equivalent as it is.
As sorry, it's not so much a propositional statement or belief
as the equivalent of the applause light that tells a studio audience when to clap.
This case is remarkable only in that I mistook the applause light
for a policy suggestion with subsequent embarrassment for all.
Yeah. And if just in case you don't get the reference
often like live action TV or I don't know if they do this anymore, probably.
But like they will instruct the audience when to react in the way
that they want them to react to whatever the speaker is saying.
So they're used to actually just be a big like was it a neon sign that just said
applause and they would light it up and darken it?
That I mean, I guess they they probably still have applause lights
for shows like the Colbert.
That's going to say for late night shows, audiences after well, no,
they do they still film in front of.
Yeah, they'd film in front of a live audience.
Those types of shows, the the whole David Letterman Jay Leno style shows
where they bring people on and interview them and have comedians and shit.
I don't know very much about that, but I do remember recently
I was watching a show about the creation of a show.
It was meta and they had like it was actually I think like six people
sitting in a row like in front of the stage.
But like and I guess the rest was CGI dinner.
They only ever like just turned the camera slightly.
So you saw sort of the backs of the first people's heads.
But it was supposed to look like there was a studio audience when they're like,
yeah, weird. Cool.
It's weird that like the whole idea of a studio audience is weird.
But anyway, I'm getting off topic.
It's I mean, I'm glad we're not doing this in front of people.
So the I like his Drake just like sit here and watch.
Every now and then we'll flesh an applause light and he claps.
Hold up a sign.
I like the reversal test to see if this is like to check
with something is an applause light.
And it's like just put if someone says something
and you just reverse the intent of the statement, is it completely pointless
and ridiculous? If so, it's probably an applause light.
So he goes, for example, suppose someone says,
we need to balance a risks and opportunities of AI.
If you reverse the statement, you would get we shouldn't balance the risks
and opportunities of AI.
Since the reversal sounds abnormal, the unreversed statement is probably normal,
implying it doesn't does not convey new information.
It's just an applause light.
I've seen applause lights in real life.
And I think I probably brought this up years ago when it happened.
And I mean, you see them all the time.
But I was after reading this article, something like that everywhere.
I was I was just at a party at someone's house years ago
and we were playing like Cards Against Humanity or something.
And people would just say things that were like if you asked.
It's all applause.
Yeah, and it was so like kind of anti applause lights.
If it's Cards Against Humanity, it depends on the group you're playing with.
Yeah, they would be like, oh, yeah, not in America or something.
It was like, you know, like prison, something.
And then like everyone laughs and some people might have literally clapped.
Maybe that was made it so seem so surreal.
And it's like this.
That's like the easiest pot shot joke.
And it's you're not you're not like, again, you're not trying to do this.
Wasn't like the same thing as like a reversal test.
This this wouldn't pass that.
But like it was just so weird.
Just like it was like really cheap.
Cards Against Humanity.
Yeah, like I it was apples to apples originally.
Like there's so many parties I went to that like everyone's like, oh, my God,
let's play this. It's the funniest.
Then I was just like, it's not it's really not.
I've grown to unhate it now because when you only play it,
like maybe once every couple of years, it's pretty good.
It's the fact that like it seemed to be some the only thing
everyone wanted to do for the longest time.
And like any gathering would devolve into playing cards against humanity.
And I was like, oh, God, I'm so sick of this.
How many times can you make Hitler jokes?
The one time I did find it really funny is when I played it with my parents.
Because they were just so insulated from anything that like they're like,
what is a bigger black or dick?
Yeah, it was funny seeing which things they didn't
like recognizer didn't know what to do with and then also having them
like sort of aggressively play a card.
And they just be like, oh, my God, yeah.
That actually sounds like a lot of fun.
Next opportunity I get, I'm going to play with my family minus my grandmother.
I won't I won't expose her to maybe apples to apples for grandma.
Yeah, we've done that before, but I feel like cards against humanity
just be really funny.
I'll put some horrifying shit out and they'll be a gas and it'll make me.
Every time you draw cards, my parents would cringe and go,
oh, no, can I put this one back?
No, I don't rush Limbaugh's soft, shitty body.
That's mean. That was one of the cards.
I know. Yeah.
I mean, it's mean, but it's like a lot of them are mean.
Yes, they are like a windmill of corpses like just random bullshit.
Perfect.
All right.
I believe that is all the things we have.
And yeah, people who were not familiar with the applause
lights concept before now will probably start seeing a lot more of it.
And read the post. It's funny. Yeah.
All right. For next time, we have the episodes,
rationality and the English language and human, evil and muddled thinking.
Those sound fun. Hell, yeah.
Everyone buckle up or the laundry deliver.
You know, I don't remember the I probably remember the content.
It's one of the titles of either of these subtly fun cool beans.
All right. Was there anything else that we want to touch on
or are we going into our topic?
I think I'm ready to go into the topic.
OK, so you're kind of trying to like before recording,
we're doing our usual pre like pre recording bullshit chat.
And we kept sort of being like, oh, wait, I'm talking about this topic.
So yeah, let's we got this listener mail
titled wire human mind so frustrating, which is a good question.
Does anyone want to summarize it?
Yeah, I'll summarize a bit.
So an anonymous was it Sweden?
Yes, Swedish listener wrote in person from Sweden, person from Sweden,
wrote in and basically like in a sentence,
what are some good mental health tips?
But I don't feel like that encompasses the bulk of the emails.
So like this is what I replied with and I totally agree.
Like with covid currently, but also both
intelligence and depression is overrepresented in our community.
This seems like a permanent problem and like a pertinent one right now.
Like given how depressing the fucking world is right now, I think pertinent is what they meant.
I think so. Yeah.
But in any case, like just to touch on that, Colorado has been smoky
for the last six weeks or weeks. I have no idea.
And yeah, so like we haven't been able to go outside and get fresh air.
We haven't been able to go do anything socially in six or eight months,
however long it's been.
And it's it's a great time to be depressed.
Like I mean, well, let me take that back.
It's a terrible time to be depressed,
but it's depression is very much in vogue right now
because everything's super fucking depressing.
I saw that puppy sales had doubled.
That's actually a positive.
That's something they're getting from like rescues.
Well, they're like it was said like puppy prices from breeders
has doubled because of high demand for dogs during lockdown.
It worries me that after the lockdown is over, maybe the puppies won't have as much, you know,
that's what I'm worried about, too.
I'm always worried when people suddenly like animal sales are up,
like, oh, it's Easter and like bunny sales are up and I'm just like,
great, everyone's going to buy their like kid of bunny.
And then they're going to realize that this isn't actually a stuffed animal.
Bunnies are mean.
I love I love bunnies there.
And they live so fucking long.
They're incredibly like, I don't know, psychologically complex, socially interesting.
But like they scream, they make these like growling noises.
They will bite and kick you.
They are strong.
They aren't potty trainable.
So they just kind of poop everywhere with that with their cage up.
Yeah, although luckily their poop is like, yeah, it doesn't smell.
And it's these like little babies.
It's a bit more poop.
So yeah, it's pretty much fine.
But still, it's annoying.
I know that some places don't sell bunnies around Easter, which is nice.
My thing with the dogs, I just assumed because I'm just too
rosy eyed about the world of that once you have a dog and you've known dog love,
you'll never like start neglecting it because who could ever do that?
Well, also, I recently read a post which I would like to share at some point.
I'll put a link on if I can find it again.
That said, basically most dogs have been bred throughout human dog
co-evolution times to have a job, like they're supposed to go outside and do stuff.
And a lot of dogs that are bought nowadays are bought from those breeds,
but they're kept in houses and so they get neurotic.
They don't get enough exercise.
They don't have a job and they have anxiety their entire lives and it's terrible.
So it's actually great.
Like if you don't have a large property, like a ranch or something,
you should probably buy a lapdog breed of dog, the kinds of dogs that are bred
to lay around the house and be social rather than shitsies do things.
Yeah, shitsies are the best lap dogs.
Shitsies are great.
They're so dumb.
I love them.
Yeah, that also helps that they can't get neurotic or bored because they're just
too stupid and we had a shitsie growing up.
But my brother has a border collie and yeah, it's got some neurotic.
The border collie is like the worst dog to have as an indoor dog.
Oh, God.
And they go outside every day, but she is a little neurotic and she is obsessive
about reflective lights on the ground.
Like if there's prisms or like a cell phone reflecting, she goes for the carpet
like hardcore.
Like she has the need to like hunt and herd whatever she just saw,
but she never gets to hone that urge because she's a herding animal.
But I think that she's, you know, she's had a good life.
It's just she hasn't had.
She hasn't been able to maximize what she's been built to do.
Not to say that people shouldn't like if you're prepared for the responsibility
of having whatever dog you want, then like by all means do.
I'm just like talking shit on people that, you know, like, oh, it's Cocker Spaniel.
Look, it's got the puffy ears.
Or a dog to cat.
If you can't take your dog hunting regularly or doing whatever it was meant to do,
it's going to be and not simulate those activities.
You know, like you could take your dog to the bark and have it like and throw a ball
for it to catch like for a couple of hours.
As long as you're going to do it at least like twice a week.
Yeah. Otherwise get, get, get a dog that is meant for being indoors.
I'm just saying cats are fun too.
We've got a cat in December.
Yeah, cats are perfect.
Yeah. What's the the dog that the queen likes?
Those are Gorgies.
Yeah, corgis are.
Oh, I got it.
I actually think that they're really intelligent and get bored really easily.
Yeah, they are. They are among the smart tier of dogs.
You wouldn't think that is adorable and cute.
Their faces are. Yeah.
But they're that's the dog we would plan to get eventually when we have a yard.
But like right now we we have I mean, we have access easily to greenery,
but not just somewhere for it to go run around and run circles in the grass.
You know, so what were they originally bred for the corgis?
Anyone know? I should know.
Because I've watched a lot of stuff about corgis.
But it's not coming to mind.
Weiner dogs made to like chase down ferrets and other burrowing creatures.
That's why they're so long.
I think all dogs had a purpose when they initially like separated them
into distinct breeds like that dogs were tools for most of what tools
and companions. Yeah, but this is the tool that we use to turn grass into meat.
Yes. But as Eddie has pointed out, like animals also have mental health issues.
Yes. So we are still on topic.
That's right.
I was actually just reading.
It was a book called Animal Madness and I'm only a couple of chapters in,
but it's talking about how structurally similar,
especially a lot of mammals brains are to human brains and the animals
mirror many of the same mental illnesses that humans have.
Anxiety, depression.
There was a series of books that the nurse at my work keeps in her office.
And it was like all birds have anxiety.
All dogs have ADD. All cats have autism.
And they had like an excellent picture.
They're like children's books, like board books.
So there's just an excellent picture on the front of each one.
Like the old birds have anxiety was a picture of like a snowy owl
with like its eyes really wide, just like a comical sort of like wide eyed face.
But yeah, like.
I love it.
You said at the very beginning that like our community is particularly
prone to depression.
I was I've always wondered about that.
Like we certainly say that and I think we're more open about our depression.
But now we build it.
But like I wanted to bring up the Slate Strike Codex.
I kind of always assumed that everyone has these same mental health issues
and they just don't admit it.
Now, there's distinct trends, like at least like Scott pulls
a pretty large number from his Slate Strike Codex community surveys
that he does yearly.
And there's a lot of things that are overrepresented
and underrepresented in the rationalist community, more so than like if you compare it
to just like numbers of polls of the general community.
A lot of mental illnesses, LGBTQ.
But if the general community, the general population is basically always lying
about how happy they are, then that would be reflected in polls, too.
They'd be like, yeah, no, we're totally great.
Like I've never gotten to know someone and talking about diagnoses.
I think they had actually, I think, distinguished or differentiated in the poll.
Do you have a do you have, you know, ADD?
Do you have a diagnosis for ADD or you want to ADD medication?
Do you not have ADD, but do you self diagnose?
And then also they had like take the test.
And there were the various diagnostic criteria tests that they actually use
in psychiatry that actually diagnosed me with ADD before I was officially diagnosed.
Yeah, I wanted to move on with this to kind of get more into the meat of this.
So I like the the the person who wrote in said, to be clear,
I'm not asking you to solve everyone's problems.
Well, thank goodness, because that'd be hard.
But and I agree with the sentiment.
That's why I really wanted to cover this in the episode.
But hearing about others' experience could definitely help with the parts
of the community like me who feel isolated and can't handle talking to people
who frankly just don't want who just don't want to get it.
And like that that's the thing is especially now where everyone's at home all the time.
I'm not sure what the situation is like in Sweden.
I think can't be worse than here.
But yeah, we're closing in on 200,000 deaths in the US from covid.
And like so where, you know, I haven't been to work since the last week of February.
It's weird, you know, you can do video calls
and stuff with the coworkers, but that's never the same because it's just so easy
to not you don't have to engage.
So all that social engagement goes completely to crap.
I like this.
He says, or they say rather, I'm a physicist.
And when I've studied some psychology, I've gotten so frustrated
that they hand away the nature of it.
Damn it.
Why is it too much to ask that we clearly define problems and find solutions?
Why must our monkey brains be less intuitive and consistent than quantum mechanics?
Because they're built on quantum mechanics.
Bad news psychology is when compared to physics, like almost crank science.
But I mean, don't get wrong, it's science.
It's scientific, but like physics is the the gold standard for me.
Especially if you were talking about p-hacking earlier,
like the, you know, p values in psychological studies are like 0.05.
And I think in physics, it's like 0.0005, I forget.
But like a one in 20 chance of this being a chance in physics would be
you'd be laughed out the door, right?
But you're allowed to publish a paper with saying, yeah, there's a 20,
but there's a 5% chance that this is a, you know, complete randomness.
It's like, what are you fucking kidding me?
Get back here with real numbers.
So that said, we have made strides in the the field.
And it depends on, you know, what subfield you're looking at, too.
Yeah.
You know, social sciences are harder because you can't do random,
you know, experiments on large populations that involve like, well,
what happens if you improperly nourish somebody from ages, you know,
0 to 5, like you, so those, those sorts of things,
you just have to look at the data that is available.
That's part of what makes up psychological science and social science
harder is that you can't do the proper kinds of experiments.
And before we continue real quick, you actually have a degree in psychology.
Yeah. Oh yeah, I suppose so. Yeah.
So you have some relevant knowledge here.
Yeah, I went more for the cognitive stuff, not the psychotherapy stuff,
but you have to take all the things to get a degree because that's how degrees work.
Oh, they would make it take like the old Freudian bullshit stuff.
The what? The old Freudian bullshit stuff.
I'm not sure what that is.
Oh, Freudian. I think he said 40 and.
Yeah. I mean, you hear about Freud.
I don't think I was ever.
They didn't make you like seriously study his stuff.
No, I don't think so.
I mean, like you become familiar, kind of like my why.
History of psychiatry. Yeah, exactly.
You learn about Freud and Young and.
Yeah, I learned about him more in history of psych classes
than I did like an actual psych practice stuff.
Now it's all about cognitive behavioral therapy, which I think is the
if we have anything like a silver bullet for this, it's that.
And I know Jason knows a lot more about CBT
because cognitive behavioral therapy is a lot of of syllables than I do.
And I want to get into that at length at some point in here.
So yeah, although we're not going to try to solve everyone's problems.
No, no, no. And I may be promising a silver bullet is too much.
But I do think that like, in fact,
this I'm glad this brought to mind, I was listening to an interview
with Jonathan Haidt on the drive over and he wrote or co-wrote a book
called The Happiness Hypothesis, which might be worth reading.
I haven't actually read it, but the way he sells it, it sounds very valuable.
He talks about like the values of meditation, CBT and Prozac.
And like the these all work for different, you know,
populations across different cases and the combination of them
probably works for many people in many cases. Again,
the combination intends to be what works best.
Right. Yeah, exactly.
Just like with with most any sort of ailments, you know,
like what do I do to fix my sore ankle?
Well, you take anti-inflammatory meds and you do physical therapy for it.
Like, you know, the more things you're doing to make it better,
the more chances you have of it working. But yeah,
many of those compliment each other as well. Exactly.
So we'll get into that.
But I did have a recommendation for something that I haven't read personally,
but it was sold to me very well by its author who stands to make money
from it being sold called the Happiness Hypothesis by Jonathan Hyde.
For what it's worth, I think he's a sane guy who didn't write this to make money.
He wrote it because he was very interested in it. So at least there's that.
Anyway, I don't know where to go from here.
Well, what the person, what our sweet friend was asking for is a conversation
sort of about mental health with like hearing others' experiences.
So I think something funny that happened was that we were trying to record
this a few days ago and all of us were too depressed to do it.
So yeah, it's like cancel it and then put it off.
Well, there's also like technical difficulties and stuff.
But but we could have gotten around those.
But like definitely can relate.
I mean, I am not to say that I was like happy to get this email, you know,
of like someone struggling with depression.
But at the same time, it's sort of like, yeah, this is really relevant,
especially right now, I'm dealing with a lot of like stuff myself.
I love a lot of my friends and partners are and they're like, you know,
stuff exacerbated by covid, but it's lifelong stuff too.
I'm just like starting to finally get diagnosed properly and seek proper
treatment for things that I've had my whole life because I was raised
in a family that did not believe mental illness was real.
And I guess the religious thing or no, like it was, I don't know.
My family is descended from Puritans.
We're actually like offshore of a couple of like dry towns where you just
they don't even let you bring alcohol there.
Alcohol is illegal.
So like very much like stoicism, hard work, self sacrifice,
like sort of whether or not they're tying it to religious beliefs
because my mom is super religious, my dad's not.
But like they both have this sort of cultural beliefs.
And it's also about like no whining, no complaining.
Basically, no, no, like asking people for help because that's a sign of weakness.
And essentially toxic, toxic masculinity, toxic boomerism in a nutshell.
It sounds very much like a very masculine kind of thing.
There's like, yeah, they also don't believe in science based medicine.
So like we never went to doctors.
Very rarely got anything stronger than aspirin, regardless.
Luckily, like me and my siblings never got like seriously injured or ill.
Although I do suspect at that point, like my parents would have gone to the doctor.
But maybe it's because of all your ancestors that had gotten seriously injured
or ill died instead of reproduced.
So now you've got the no illness genes.
I mean, it does. It kind of works.
As long as you don't mind all the death along the way.
Yeah, or like you're unlikely to die in the 21st century right now from like, you know,
measles or whatever.
Again, if we had gotten sick enough that we required hospitalization,
I'm sure my parents would call an ambulance like they're not.
They're not fanatics.
Yeah, my mom still goes to the doctor for, well, it was two.
She has a certain, well, she has a hyperthyroidism.
I wonder if my parents would have gotten any of us kids a blood transfusion
if we needed it to live.
Oh, yeah. You had a whole trial as a witness thing going on.
Yeah, like from what I know of them now, I think they probably would have been like,
no, fuck it, give them the blood transfusion.
But it's weird because when I was a kid and I really believed the stuff,
I would have been like, no, I'd rather die.
Don't give me the blood transfusion, you know, which is kind of.
Also you would be in my heart and you'd be subject to whatever they decided though.
Yeah, exactly.
But it kind of reinforces the whole, the way you get people to convert
is they don't have to actually convert.
They just fake it for long enough that their children and grandchildren
don't realize that they're faking it and really internalize those things.
Like the church plays a long game.
I remember what a mind-wame it was for you, what, five years ago or whatever
when you learned your dad didn't believe this shit.
Then like a year later, your mom said something similar.
And you're like, then what the fuck?
And wasn't the answer something along the lines?
Like, well, we wanted just a community to fit in when we got here.
Yeah.
It's like, then pick a less crazy one.
Come on, guys.
This could have been a lot easier on us.
Of course, the more crazy the community, the harder the tighter the community it is.
That's what I, yeah, I have to say, the new place I just moved into,
there's a ton of Mormons that live there.
And they just seem like the happiest, nicest people, if I didn't know.
That's my experience with Mormons too.
Same.
They might be the only people that don't have depression in the United States.
I mean, again, they're humans.
There's variants in their population, I'm sure, but they seem to be,
you don't hear a lot about Mormon aggression or the Mormon war on this or whatever.
They seem to just chill as fuck.
And like everyone that I've interacted with, the families are all nice.
They're very welcoming.
They're very like, as far as neighbors to go, it's hard to think of better.
If I had to pick a religious denomination of neighbors,
I think I'd pick Mormons in a hot second.
It depends.
Like in Salt Lake City, apparently gay couples would be attacked by like church elders.
If they were on a park bench holding hands or something.
Fair point.
Let me caveat that and say, depending on who I was, that'd be my favorite neighbor.
Obviously, yeah.
I don't know how much power they have.
Any other group, when they're the minority, they're nice.
When they suddenly have the power, it's like, oh yeah,
being a different religion is against the law.
Yeah, I think 50 years ago, Black people weren't...
We're going to limit how many Opaques you could have.
Black people weren't recognized as human by the Mormon Church until like 1974,
76 or some bullshit.
They had a new revelation that, oh yeah, it looks like Black people are human after all.
Not just like inferior human, like every other brand of racist asshole,
but like literally non-human.
Okay.
And it's like, okay, yeah.
So don't get wrong, there's the magic underwear and the craziness involved.
But as far as just polite neighbors, I don't know, maybe I'm being too general.
I was saying, yeah, like specifically from the outside,
if I didn't know what a Mormon was.
And I was just like, man, there's all these very well-dressed young white gentlemen here
offering to help me carry groceries and saying hello,
and seeming just very wholesome and playing ping-pong together and being like,
hey, come play ping-pong with us.
And I'm like, yeah.
Literally every Mormon I've met in real life has been great.
But again, I've only met them in context outside of Salt Lake City where they were not the ruling
majority.
The reference to the Opaque thing is when Phoenix and I went on a road trip one time,
we stayed at an Airbnb that was also an Opaque farm and we found out the family.
It was a bunch of former Mormons who got in trouble with the local Mormon government
because there was some power struggle going on between the two different sects,
and the one decided to punish this group by trying to limit how many Opaques they could have.
And that was the straw that broke the Opaques back.
That's awesome.
And so they rallied together all their friends and overthrew the government
so they could have as many Opaques as they wanted.
That's how shit gets in the Bible.
Do not mix clothes of two different fabric types because those assholes over there were
trying to grab power.
So you know what, it's part of our religion now.
I love it.
I feel like one of the things that helped me confront mental health issues in my own life
is the writer wrote about the sense of isolation.
And if you feel like you're the only one with these problems, it's really easy to think that
there's not an avenue towards resolution.
And that's why I'm a big fan of just being open about it and talking with people about...
There's a difference between just shoving it in people's faces, but not hiding it.
If anyone asks me, I'm very forthcoming about it.
Yeah, there's a lot of stigma against mental illness.
Less of less now, I think.
Yeah, if I don't know.
Certainly our parents' generation, the ones who didn't believe mental health was a thing,
we don't want their participation in this conversation anyway.
My peers anyway seem to be more willing to talk about it.
Yeah, you work with a bunch of programmers that are your age though, right?
Oh, I didn't mean my coworkers.
I meant my peers.
Well, in my age group community, et cetera, I have a pretty small monkey sphere,
so maybe that's part of it.
But in any case, I think I'm trying to actually just deliver something actionable
that is generalizable to just about everybody.
And the main thing is that especially if it's depression, it's so easy for you to...
Especially when you've had it for years.
I've been clinically depressed for something like a decade.
And when it first set in, I'm like, this fucking sucks.
I need to fix this.
Tried some medication, didn't really work.
It also set in around the same time as my chronic pain,
so I'm assuming there's some causal error there.
Your issues are in your tissues.
Well, I just remembered that.
I was trying to remember that all day yesterday.
That's hilarious.
It's a good line.
I mean, I assume the fact that like, oh, suddenly now I'm physically limited
and tired all the time, that probably played a big role.
But I tried something for...
I tried antidepressants for a year.
It didn't really work.
So I went off it, and then I was like, I'll just try and muscle through it.
And then it wasn't until this year in January where I'm like, you know what?
Let's just get back in there, start talking to people.
And I went to a psychologist who I didn't like.
And so that's going to be another thing about seeking treatment.
If you're not vibing with your therapist, get a different one.
Yeah, shop around to start with too.
And I think, even for me, knowing this,
it still felt a little awkward breaking up with the guy,
saying, you know, I don't think this is working out.
I'm going to look for another practitioner,
because they have a different billing code for last visit.
So you kind of want to tell them it's your last visit,
because they'll ask you.
And it feels like you're dumping them.
And it's like, it's not you, it's me.
But the thing is, it's their job.
They get it.
And if they, if they're good at their job, they'll say, you know what?
I think I know somebody who'll work better for you
on the point you in the right direction.
The guy I was seeing was not a cognitive behavioral therapist.
He was just a sounding board.
And the way I, you know, and I was, yeah.
And like I told him very politely, I was like, you know,
I haven't had a conversation in here that I haven't had by myself already.
Like I want, I want this to be something where I'm gaining something from it.
I, you know, again, this is all conversations I've had,
either with my friends or by myself.
And like I need, I need like steps.
I need a device or whatever.
Are you an anti-depressants right now?
I am.
Yeah.
I started at the beginning of August.
I actually just went to my primary care physician telling him,
like, this is what I want.
And it helps a little bit, right?
Yeah, I want to get to that too.
But if, you know, it's probably better to do a combination of therapy
and drugs if you're going to do them.
But right now, I guess virtual therapy would be an option.
But I, you know, whatever, I'll get around to that.
But yeah, I'm doing virtual,
uh, actually doing internal family systems therapy with, uh,
psychologists that I just see on Zoom or one of those things.
It's a, like, medical, hippocomponent Zoom.
Interesting.
Yeah.
I mean, so that's, that's an option.
I think, um, I've been, I've been on anti-depressants for more of my life than I haven't.
Like the first 15 years, no anti-depressants,
the next 25 years on anti-depressants.
And, uh, so I'm definitely a proponent of they help.
They, they take the edge off and they make other progress possible,
but also like you can't just do anti-depressants because that does nothing.
You need other things in combination.
Cause I mean humans aren't just the brain chemicals.
Like, yeah, you need the brain chemicals to work,
but if you're still like not doing anything with your life
or not getting socialization or something,
then it's, it's, you're still going to be feeling bad all the time,
even with anti-depressants.
They're just going to correct some basic biological issues
without all the other stuff that needs to be fixed.
Yeah, and they're not even necessarily correcting some biological issues.
Our understanding of mental illness is shifting quite rapidly.
Um, so like I'm actually undergoing neurofeedback
where they will target specific areas of the brain
and apply current to them
and do an exercise where there's a reward signal sent
when you are able to bring your brain waves in line
with what the healthy pattern is
or the one they're trying to encourage.
They're able to tackle multiple issues.
They're working on ADD, anxiety, and sleep
by targeting like the thalamus, uh, the other parts of the brain
that I can't currently remember.
It's, it's a process.
But I can see it working.
And I could also see the brain maps that they scanned.
I, we went over them.
I went over them with the technician.
And it's just, uh, in a way, it was very affirmatory.
Um, just to see, like, okay, like, so here's your brain's attention center
and, uh, you see the big orange dot right there?
That's a deficiency.
So here's the, like, typical ADD pattern.
And it, like, look, see, I can overlay them.
They're almost identical.
I was like, yeah, cool.
Okay.
So that's not just me, like, being lazy.
I had such a, like, inability to admit to myself that I had ADD, too.
And I don't know where that came from.
Probably it was just, like, the upbringing thing that I just absorbed.
But, like, part of it was just that I know I already have anxiety and depression and OCD.
And now, like, transgender stuff going on.
I'm like, I can't have another thing on top of that.
That's, I'm not that much of a special stuff, like, or something like that.
I was like, it's also, like, pretty clear that my dad has undiagnosed ADD.
And I was, and I, like, most, I'm sort of like a mini version of my dad.
I seem to have gotten a lot of my dad's side genes.
And like,
all right, that's too many flaws.
Where's the bonuses that I get to compensate?
Well, I do have bonuses.
My high beta is good.
Well, it's actually funny that the part of my brain that controls drive, motivation,
vision, et cetera, like the ones that like, oh yeah, a lot of like artists and entrepreneurs
and stuff have like this, what's actually a low beta.
And but like, they're like, but then you've got all this blockage here in the part of the
brain that actually like, so the executive function part of the brain's all fucked up.
So I'm like, oh, okay, that like accounts for a lot of my like,
I have lots of highfalutin goals and drive and wanting to do this, that and the other
thing. And then I crap out halfway through all the time.
So yeah, this, this explains basically all my issues.
It's right there. It's in the brain maps.
Before I interrupted you to do the quick digression on anti-depressants,
you, you're in, are you in therapy again right now?
No, no, because I've, I've done therapy multiple times throughout my life.
And like a couple of times it helped me to make a big decision that I was reluctant to make.
But in general, I've never found it to be very helpful.
So I've just kind of stopped even trying. Is that a bad idea?
Like, was I just doing it wrong? How does therapy work? So it is good.
I'm not an expert on that. I think, I mean, part of it is like,
you want to find somebody who can't in my, it's people want different things.
Like talk therapy is a thing where just for somebody needs somebody to just
untangle their brain. Also like a lot of people just don't even know
that the way that they're thinking and behaving is pathological or unwilling to admit it.
And like some people just need someone just to talk to or just, you know,
somebody who won't tell their friends or their family or whatever.
Like for me, what I want is like actionable steps.
And so the reason I'm not in therapy now is partly because the world is on pause,
but also like I have already a lot of the techniques that I would want to learn from a
therapist anyway, basically the cognitive behavioral therapy techniques where I mean,
and that's, that's again where meditation comes in as well.
Like just being aware when my mind is spiraling and like most people,
I mean, this is just the high level thing of mindfulness, but most people go,
most of their day not realizing their brain is running through thoughts all day.
And, you know, once in a while, you'd be like, oh, I've been thinking about that for a long time,
or somebody will point out like, you seem anxious and you're like, oh, yeah,
I've been anxious all day. I've been thinking about this, but for the most part,
and I'm not saying I'm perfect at this. I think it was something that I had like an early
aptitude for because I had to be physically mindful of my body since I was like 14, 13,
I don't know, whenever I hurt my, hurt my neck when I was a kid. And so like I needed to make
sure that I wasn't like in a good posture. So I'd be kind of doing like constant mindfulness
check-ins of my body. And there's just another step there to checking how your brain's doing.
And so like I went through like a very mild trauma in like August. And I, my mind like continues to
race on those thoughts most like several times a day. And it's nice just to catch those thoughts
and like, oh, yeah, you're doing that thing again, just think about something else. Or,
you know, do you want to finish the thought and then get it out? Because sometimes just like
grabbing the wheel and shoving it doesn't quite work. But saying, all right, last,
you get your 90 more seconds, then you're done with this. Do people, I think people's approaches
are different. And that's not very like actionable. But like, so the, when I wanted to do medication,
this was first week of August, I think. And basically, I had just contacted my primary care
physician and asked if I could just do it over the phone. And they were like, no, I need to come in.
I'm like, are you sure? Because this is something that, you know, I've got a pulse oximeter and a
blood pressure cuff here and a scale for all my vitals that you guys are going to take. I can
give you those over the phone too. But I didn't end up going in and said, look, I want Adderall or
I want Wellbutrin. I know both make me feel more awake. And that's mainly my main complaint. I
resolved the, oh, I am ameliorated the, my poor ability to sleep like a year ago. So I'm sleeping
better, but I'm still fucking tired all the time. So I want to kind of tack this from the other side.
And Wellbutrin is, first of all, it works because I'm depressed, but also, like it's, or rather,
it's an SDRI, selective dopamine and serotonin reuptake inhibitor. Yeah, it's dopamine one.
But the main feedback I'd heard from people who had it is that it makes you feel more energized.
And so far, that's been the case for me. It sort of does by backdoor routes what Adderall does
directly. Adderall adds more dopamine to your system. Wellbutrin prevents you from reuptaking
the dopamine you're already making. Great. Yeah, I mean, it works for me. I mean,
you did mention the sleep thing just now. I guess, I mean, we've mentioned this before, but I get it
since this is on topic, it would probably be good to hit real quick, like the very low hanging fruit.
Get plenty of sleep, like get your sleep schedule on track. That is a big thing for mental illness.
And get some exercise, like exercise, diet, meditation, sleep.
We were just talking about how like dogs need their exercise, they need a job if they're the
right breed. I mean, humans are also of the mammal breed and we need some exercise, which
a lot of us don't get in the modern day because our jobs consist of us sitting at desks.
And it's hard, you know, as far as like why I felt like this was a topic I wanted to hit so
immediately was because this is super pertinent. You know, I can't even, I used to go for walks
at lunch. And I can't even do that now because the air is complete dog shit. Yeah, right now,
there's a hint of blue sky, but it's the second time I've seen blue sky this week.
Like I, it, my throat's been, you know, you wake up to, you know, scratchy,
throat, water, you know, itchy eyes and stuff because there's smoke in the air constantly.
I mean, this is a very local, oh, a mostly local issue, but like California's got it too.
That's why Phoenix moved here originally because the smoke was too bad.
Phoenix brought the smoke here.
They're burning giant walk thing.
But it just, it just seemed like even now I can't even do like the, the exercise stuff that I
like to do. Like just the light cardio, just being out and enjoying the sun, walking around.
But like, like I said, I think the main thing for me, and this, this only happens when, in my
experience and from people I've talked to, when you've been in it for a long enough, when you've
been in a depressive state for long enough, where it stops feeling like a state and it just feels
like the way the world is. And you're like, well, there's nothing there to fix. This is just me.
I finally just, you know, come to my senses. This is how reality is. It's not. I'm lucky that my
depression didn't set until I was like 20 because I am able to remember not always feeling like this.
And I want to argue with you about that a little bit at some point. Let's do it. Well, I mean,
when you say it's not like this, I know. Unless you don't feel like it's appropriate to do it.
No, okay. So it, someone mentioned recently that they had like a psychedelic trip and afterwards
they kind of felt like, sort of down about it, because the after effects were like things seem
to have lost meaning, like nothing's really all that important. And I was like, that's, isn't
that just normal? I mean, that eventually you just have to come to grips with the fact that
nothing means anything and we're all going to die. And, and you said that's like not normal. But I
think isn't, I think, isn't that just deluding yourself and the practice of becoming human is
realizing that none of this matters. But we go on anyway, because there's good stuff too. And that's
it's worth it. You're talking specifically about meaning, which I don't think is the same as things
like depression. You don't think I think they're related like types of depression that are just,
for example, I get an hadonic depression, where I just lose any motivation to do things even
that I love that I have interest in. That's my style too. This is going to be, of course, because
with Steven, everything always goes back to the Marvel Cinematic Universe. When Endgame came out,
I was nonplussed. I was stoked for months leading up to it. Then like in the months before that,
I'm like, yeah, I'll see when it comes out. It sounds like a stupid thing.
Something's wrong, right? Sort of feedback. It sounds like a stupid thing because it's a movie,
but this was a part of an experience I've been enjoying for the last decade and been hyped
about. And then I'm like, not excited about something I should be excited about. I'm like,
wait a minute, I should be happy and excited about this. And really making myself have to,
and again, it wasn't just about the movie, but it was me realizing like, oh yeah,
I haven't played video games in a year. I haven't like, I don't enjoy the parts of my job I used
to enjoy, like all the things. It was kind of just like,
Yeah, you don't have a looking forward to a thing feeling anymore.
Well, I think,
Or even enjoy it. Yeah, exactly.
Or enjoying it when you're doing it.
I am strongly of the opinion that humans do have to feel like they're doing something that matters
and not having that leads to great depression.
Some people do.
You can be on antidepressants, but if you're just like kind of playing video games all the time
and not doing anything else, you still get super depressed.
And like one of the best times in my life was when I was doing the Harry Potter and the Methods
of Rationality audiobook, because I felt like I was doing something and contributing something
to the world and other people appreciated it. And now one of the things that keeps me going is
like having these other two podcasts, because they feel somewhat meaningful, but it's, I mean,
if you don't have some kind of project that you're doing, or that you think your actual day job is
contributing to human welfare, it's really hard to not be depressed.
I think you're typical minded. I was just going to say those exact words.
Although I can completely relate because I have the same thing, but that's from my upbringing.
Yeah. And to be clear, that might be, it might be typical among 70% of people or something,
but like I can be happy. Like yesterday, I played God of War for like five hours and I had a great
day. Yeah, no. I mean, and so, you know, like, but the other thing too about being productive and
having that add to happiness, one of the things I was talking to my therapist about was like,
you know, he's like, well, what have you done that you've accomplished lately? I'm like, well,
I helped overthrow my old HOA board and we're turning the community around high five, whatever.
Like, yeah, but like, and then, you know, I've got these two podcasts,
you know, like, so what'd you do this week? I'm like, well, I recorded this one. Oh, well,
how many, you know, that podcast, how many listeners and oh, you've got two of those. Well,
you must be feeling pretty accomplished about that. And I was like, no, I'm not.
I feel nothing about it. Like, I, yes, I suppose if I were telling my younger self about like,
hey, these are the things I'll be doing. I shouldn't think about it. Like,
my younger self might be like, oh, that's cool. I used to think that I wouldn't be able to like
drive a car or have a job. Like, I was just like, how do people do these things? I don't,
I don't think I'm going to be able to handle all that. I think if I went back and told my past
self all the shit I've done and I'm currently doing, I'd be like, wow, I'd grow up really cool.
But in my like current state, I'm kind of like, man, I'm not doing anything,
not living up to my potential. I told you about my, my theory of the,
what causes the hedonic treadmill, right? I don't remember this. Let's go over it again.
But I wanted to finish my thought on the, um, like my, my issue wasn't that I like,
well, I guess what I was getting at is that doing things might be part of the solution,
but it's not the whole thing. Cause like I was doing stuff and I just wasn't feeling anything.
And like, I'm not, you know, a hundred percent better, but I have noticed an improvement. I'm
on a low dose of well butchering and it's helping. Yeah, you know why that is? A dopamine is actually
the reward chemical. Yeah. So if you're low in dopamine, regardless of what you're doing,
your brain's anticipating getting your reward signal for having done it. When you keep not
getting it, then your brain done regulates your desire to do that thing. And that, that's part
of why I selected it too. Why one of the dopamine one rather than the serotonin one. Um, like,
it's experiment for sure. Uh, but yeah, I mean, obviously with like medical supervision, but
a lot of people have been on just whatever SSRI or whatever they got prescribed. There's a lot
of newer ones. Um, there's a lot of other types of drugs that aren't SSRIs. Um, Madafino treats a
lot of people's depression. Um, it's a wakefulness agent, but the thing is that it elevates
Erexin and histamine. Just having sometimes that boost of extra energy is what people need to like
get up and start doing things. And then once they start doing things, the feedback loop kick
starts itself. Doesn't the histamine also give you more allergic reaction type stuff though?
Histamine just, it's a neurotransmitter like serotonin or dopamine. There's actually, like,
there's a bunch of different serotonins. Serotonin is responsible for nausea. That's why, uh,
when you take on Dance of Tron, it's blocking, what is it? It's blocking one of the serotonin
receptors, um, HT3, I think. So like, I actually am a little bit, um, frustrated at the neurotransmitter
model of various mental illnesses because there's a lot more going on than just neurotransmitters.
And we don't even like have a proper understanding of what they do. Again, like dopamine, the reward
chemical, but like people think of dopamine as being like the happiness chemical and serotonin
is like the calmness chemical. And no, histamine can give you an allergic reaction, can calm it
down, can make you awake, can regulate your sleep. Yeah. Anyway, pet peeve, um, tangent.
I hear you. I was going to say too about just like the, um, you know, meaning and mattering,
like a lot of the words you're using about happiness. I think, I mean, that actually might be
where some of the happiness hypothesis that book has mentioned comes in. Like, I think he pulls
every chapter from like, quote, ancient wisdom. You know, like Boethius wrote his, uh, meditations
the day before he has executed. Oh. And I think that's in the book. Um, he was laying and he
was sitting in prison and he, I'm, I, who knows how much this is, you know, uh, allegorical or not,
but like it is possible, I think, in principle for a human mind to be happy, even knowing that
you're going to die in two hours or, um, now I don't know if that'd be possible for my human mind,
but like it's allegorical. Did you mean not necessarily literally true? Yeah. I think you
might have meant to use apocryphal. Thank you. Yes. Um, thank you. See, yeah. Appreciate it.
How dare you correct me? Fuck you. Um, uh, I knew when I said it, it didn't sound right. I think
that's why I said the word slowly. Um, yeah. So I, but it might be true. I have no idea. But the
point is like, uh, it, I think it's tough because like it, I don't want to like just push past the
meaning and mattering and saying you're asking the wrong question, but it might not be the most
useful framing. Cause like if you're saying, Oh, well, I need to have a meaningful impact on the
future light cone of the entire universe. It's like, well, then good fucking luck. So like,
if that's your goal, um, manage your expectations a little better, but also just why I need to live
forever. It's very hard to impact the future light cone when you're not around for not impact the
future. That's true. Just by existing, you're changing things. But, um, uh, sorry, go on Steven.
No, sorry. I was just going to say like, for, for what I do, like what actually like helps
to make me happy is like making other people happy. Not at the point where I'm making myself
miserable. That's the lesson I learned a decade ago where you're stretching yourself too thin.
I'm still working on that one. I'm the worst people pleaser. I, I'm not much of a people
pleaser. More of like, I just try to like, you know, like you give all your spins away.
Well, no, not even that. That's, that's, that's the, that's the bad part. Like,
you know, um, pass a downed car on the highway and it's like, Oh yeah, you need to push the gas
station. I'll get out and help you push. Like little things, you know, if I'm not, you know,
if I say if I'm in a rush or something and I can't, but like, that's the sort of thing where
like if someone did that for me, it makes a big difference. And it's like, I know that, you know,
the little things I do, I try to make that I try to do for people that those experiences
hopefully impact them in a positive way for the rest of their lives. And that makes the world
literally a better place. Um, granted, granted on a smaller scale, that doesn't necessarily impact
the cosmos at large, but like it, that, that is the scope of my ambition for now is just to like
try and make the, the world I interact with better. Um, but I just, I just see we're coming from with
the, the larger existential question nihilist, you know, uh, uh, that the crushing hammer of
nihilism looming above you, but we're, we're gonna say about hedonic treadmill. Um, we got
derail. Sorry. Uh, that someone once said that, uh, happiness is what it feels like from the inside.
Uh, the algorithm updating to, uh, I expect a greater reproductive, uh, outcome in the future.
Like this will help my, my reproductive chances, uh, going forward, at least in the ancestral
environment. Someone does not understand happiness. I don't know. Like every single time I've done
something to be happy, like when I look back on it, I'm like, in the ancestral environment,
this would have either brought me more resources or more status or just more lovers. So I guess
all these things do technically increase my, uh, my potential for reproductive success. And,
and, uh, since it's an actual predicted increase in reproductive success, that means eventually
you're at the level of reproductive success you've reached. And so you drop back to normal to be
happy. You need a predicted increase in success in reproductive success. So you always need to
chase more to get the happy feeling, but I don't know if any of that is true. It's just my own
little bullshit thing. Can I say something about that? Yes, please. There's a phenomenon where
if you, um, survey people in developed countries versus like what they used to call the third world,
um, and people living in hunter gatherer tribes, uh, people are much more depressed and much more,
um, undergoing like different kinds of psychosis. There's, you know, more anxiety, depression,
uh, mania, so forth and so on, gambling addiction in developed countries, um, with the more
connectivity as well. So like you're correct. I mean, we did evolve to live in small, like,
familial groups or small tribes. It was where the things you did mattered. Yeah. Like you wouldn't,
um, that like strangers weren't really a thing. Uh, you sort of know everyone's status in the tribe.
And yeah, exactly. Like you, you contribute because you had to. And if you did, then you
were doing your job and you're a good human, you know, kind of like the dog needing a job. It's
like, yeah, humans also have this feeling of needing a job. Um, the job quote unquote, you
know, in parentheses doesn't have to be literal working for the man. But like it feels like
you do need to do something maybe for others. I mean, specifically, I think you would get like a
big reward signal from doing things for others because you're advancing the goals of the tribe
and that would increase everybody's like survival and reproduction, uh, resource rates. So a lot
of people are now able to compare their lives to everyone's lives on Instagram, where everyone's
lying about how happy they are and everything anyway. But like, you know, we're like bombarded
with visions in the media of perfect bodies and, you know, like unrealistic, unachievable, uh,
perfect lives. So it's like literally there's there's unachievable goals that are sort of
being presented as the norm or the thing everyone's trying to achieve. So yeah, that's a recipe for
misery. But there's also just so much more like feeling of not belonging that people have. You
don't have a tribe. Um, dear actions matter to like the world at large. No, it doesn't feel like it.
So that is really isolating. And we're like uniquely bad at dealing with that hunter-gatherers,
even if, um, well, not even hunter-gatherers. Let's talk about like agrarian societies. They
live kind of miserable lives comparatively. Um, if you think about just like, you know,
backbreaking labor from dawn till dusk, eating simple foods, having shitty clothes, not having
like really any sources of entertainment. But a lot of people in those societies are,
they suffer from mental health, much less mental illness, rather, they have much better mental
health because they're just living in more closely to the environment that they evolved to be in.
So part of, I think the issue here is just going to be like some kind of brain hacking.
Well, right now, until we can hack brains, I think one of those other low hanging fruit that
everyone needs to grab is to see some other humans regularly, like have them be the same humans. And
I mean, ideally see other humans in person at least once a week for a few hours, which I know
is harder now with COVID. But I think there's some level of health, mental health that you just
absolutely criers that. And like, we, we meet up for this podcast in person now when we can.
And I think that helps a lot. We have our monthly less wrong meetups that we started up again
outside. And that helps a lot. Like I just think we're social, we have to have some social interaction
or we start going crazy, like, like the dog that's never let outside. Yeah. And I, I'm fortunate to
have, you know, a cohabitator that I love living with. I have a coworker who actually I have two,
but I only mainly talk with one because we have opportunities to collaborate once in a while.
And it could be a 10 minute collaboration, but we'll usually stretch it out. Like just the
time we're on the, on the call together for like an hour. And that's mainly because I'm mindful
of the fact that he lives alone and he's probably going insane. And so I'm like, you know, hey,
let's talk, let's talk, let's hang out, like what are you working on, what are you doing? And,
you know, it helps that we have a lot in common stuff to talk about. But like as long as far as
like the work specific stuff, we can knock out in a few minutes, but then we'll just stay on and
chat while we're both doing something separate. And yeah, I mean, right now it's, this is not a
good atmosphere for mental health, you know, flourishing, but it's never a bad time to think
about it and what steps you should take to try and make things better. I thought I had a thought
on like the hedonic treadmill or something other than like, that's not how I experience happiness,
I think. I mean, it could be, you know, if I feel happy when I do something nice for somebody,
that to my apish hindbrain could be like, aha, you've curried favor among your tribe,
and you're seeing as somebody who is valuable to the community, therefore you'll get laid. Well
done lizard brain. But like, I mean, that's the thing. It's like our, now Wes would be making fun
of us for evo psych. Right. And like, it's one of those funny things like we're not,
our brains are shaped by evolution, but our, our, our modern minds aren't even aware of it.
Like otherwise, I think this, this sounds like a Stephen Pinker quote, where it's like, otherwise
the most fulfilling activity any man could do would be donating sperm to a sperm bank. Right.
Right. And it's like, since most of us never do that, like we're clearly not driven by our
evolutionary impulses in a way that actually increases our fitness. Well, there were no
sperm banks in the ancestral environment. Right. Otherwise, maybe that'd be all we're doing.
But now intellectually, we know that like, Hey, I could sire offspring that I want to
take care of. You know, where do I sign up? But none of us really give a shit about that.
Right. No, not even. Yeah, your brain doesn't actually track the like,
you know, that's the whole like, we're reproductive fitness maximizers, but there's all
these like, we're adaptation executioners, not fitness maximizers. Yeah. Like, you know,
you can sit there and eat like four candy bars. And the stupid reptile brains like,
yeah, all those cheap, easy calories, man, we're going to have so many babies.
And yeah, no. Obviously, there's parts of our brains that are unsuited for the modern world.
I had one more thing and this might dive us into CBT a bit, because I want to talk about that for
sure. The our Swedish friend wrote in and said, well, I will read the whole thing. It says,
I'm a pathological liar, both to myself and closest friends, promissor and underdeliverer,
permanent procrastinator. I don't know what much to say about that. But I wanted to dive
into the next sentence. It just didn't make sense of the previous one. I don't know how to handle
it. And it mostly feels like I don't even have the energy to start. That is the one I identify
with a lot. And I think that that's the sentiment behind a lot of like, just getting the ball rolling
on tackling mental health stuff. What was funny, and I might have mentioned this on the air before,
when I made the appointment, my first appointment with a psychologist in January,
he called a few days in advance, and he was like, hey, do you still plan to keep
appointment on Thursday or whatever? And I was like, yes, that's why I made it,
I would have called to cancel if I didn't. And I was just confused that he had, you know,
even check, like, otherwise, people just do that, right? Like they just show up or they
tried to non showing up fee. And then he's like, okay, cool, I'll see you then. Then when I had
a couple days to think about it, I came in and I was like, you called to ask because I imagined
a lot of people say yes, or say no, and you call and ask that, right? And he's like, yeah, exactly.
I think because for some people, when you decide to take charge, that is almost like that,
for some people that is the shove they need just to actually start taking charge, they don't need,
they might need to do some more stuff on top of it. But that decision to take ownership of it,
I think actually helps a lot of people just by itself.
Such a positive hypothesis. I think often people just who, you know, suffer from depression and
have executive function things and just don't show up to their appointments, and doctors offices
or well, psychiatrists and et cetera are booked really tight. I know my neurofeedback place,
if I'm like five minutes late, then they have to put the next person in and reschedule me for
another day. Yeah, you're probably right. It's probably more the sad interpretation. I was thinking
that kind of thing probably does also happen though. Yeah, maybe I'm just still too rosy about
stuff. But you know what, if that keeps me happier all to the point where I'm not, as long as I'm
not violating reality and, you know, distrusting the truth, I'm going to stick with my optimism
to prove it otherwise. That's kind of CBT actually, like forcing your brain to start having an
optimistic pattern instead of a pessimistic one. Right. So let's talk a bit about that. And I think,
like I said, I think you know a lot more about this than I do. I want to talk about CBT at some
length as much as you want. But I think, correct me if I'm wrong, in broad strokes, the approach
of it, and you can go to Wikipedia and look at like psychotherapy or something. And it'll show
you the seven modern approaches, the 15, you know, historical approaches or something.
I think most of those were just made up by one or two people, you know, 150, 100 years ago or
whatever. And it's like those were in the wee early days of the field where no one knew what the
fuck they were doing. Cognitive behavioral therapy to me is like, okay, let's identify what thought
patterns are going on in your head, and which ones are healthy, which ones are productive,
and which ones are like actually accurate, and teach you to be perceptive of them, and how to
address the quote, the bad thoughts when they come up. Like a lot of people will catastrophize
about something like, Oh my God, if this happens, then I'm gonna, everything's gonna be terrible.
And then my partner will break up with me, and I'll just be homeless bum on the street, and then
I'll die in a trash can. Right. And these p in my head. And these these spiraling thoughts that
catch you all the way, like catastrophizing turns out to like almost never pan out in the way
the things actually happen. Like you lose your job, and you get another one is how, you know, life
often works. So every time. Yeah. So like, it's just one of those things where catastrophizing is
one example, like black and white thinking, like, Oh, it wasn't perfect. It was bad. And like not
just being able to enjoy the part you like, there's a whole list of cognitive distortions.
Let's let's take the wheel. Yeah, gestures to chase because no one can see that. So one thing I
do want to point out is that there's a lot of different forms of psychotherapy that are science
based and have been developed for a long time and have efficacy for different purposes. Like
right now I'm doing internal family systems. That's the one where you have like, Harry has
all those different houses in his head. Everyone has different parts of their brain that like,
how does that work? I mean, how has it been working for you? I guess is what I meant. Is it
effective? Oh, really? Well, because I have a lot of sort of different brain parts that have formed
in isolation or like, in opposition to one another. And sort of it's like play acting these parts
talking to each other or just like talk having the therapist talk to a part, analyzing like,
okay, what like caused this to realize I'm talking about IFS and CBT. So either way, whatever works.
That's what I care about. I'll talk about IFS some other time. I really like the concept behind
IFS. I just feel like I would feel silly trying to do it. You probably won't. I mean, you're a
writer. So you already are used to kind of thinking about characters. It's sort of like you're
writing a story. Yeah, but these are characters too. I mean, there's an extent to which you're
like, okay, this is just me. This is just the part of me that lectures myself when I like, eat
sugary things. You've never done that thing where like, not to sound insane, but like,
where in methods of rationality, Harry like, bifurcates himself into parts and let's say this
is what this is literally how brains work. I love reading those sorts of things. And that's
among my favorite fiction where people do that. Or just, you know, due to science fiction reasons
actually have multiple people in their head, like, face. Yes. Yes. Oh, I love that stuff point
to Christian society. Yeah. But no, I've never actually done that in my real life. It might be
worth trying next time you feel anxious about something. And so, you know,
well, I don't know exactly how to tell people to get started with it. But for like, for me,
especially when something is very stressful, part of me is able to do my regular life, you know,
make breakfast, do dishes, etc. Well, part of me is screaming in my head. And so, like, just spending
five minutes or more, but like just actually sitting down and kind of separating my brain out
into different versions of myself and letting that one just like, say what it needs to say. And the
rest of me, like, visualizes listening and looking at that version of, see, it sounds like I'm,
it sounds, it sounds hokey. Don't get me wrong. But like, oh, it sounds even hokeyer when I say
that I do this. This is actually scientifically how brains work. You can take parts of the brain,
like, physically and separate them from the other parts and the person will like speak from the
different parts individually. No, I totally, it sounds crazier when I say I do it in the
council room at High Harathkar from Skyrim. No, like, Matt has, Matt Freeman has, like, talked
about this a number of times. And like, it is super convincing. And it's how I try to model
other humans as having various competing drives in them. And I know that I also work that way.
But like, I've gotten so really good at being like, no, there's just this one unified me that
it's, it's, it's like a foundational myth of my inner society now. And if I were to deny that,
who knows what could happen? There'd be chaos, dogs and cats sleeping together in my brain.
Can't have that. The dog part of me says wolf. The cat part.
Yeah, we'll, we'll, we'll dive into that at some point. Yeah. I actually almost want to say that
IFS is like sort of more advanced CBT was where I got started and had like the most success with
because it does really feel, it feels very rationalist. You do have a list of thought
distortions. It's like the, I don't know, the 20 most common thought distortions, those are your
catastrophization, the black and white thinking, blaming, magnifying negatives, minimizing positives,
which is the opposite of that over generalizing that sort of stuff. And so like, what you do is
you realize, I don't know, like you're ruminating about something. Say it's your word, you're going
to lose your job since we talked about the one earlier. And then there's sort of a grid where
you go, okay, like you sit down and you're like, all right, what thought distortions are going on
right now and you identify them and say it's like catastrophization is the main one there. And you're
like, okay, so let's actually look at this catastrophization. What do you think is going
to happen? And then something like often it got to the point of me just like, actually following
the thought all the way to the end. That's why I was kind of like, nodding when Steven was saying,
well, sometimes you just have to get the thought out. And I'm like, well, actually, yeah, I mean,
sometimes you have this sort of like ball of tension in the back of your brain that you're
just trying to not look at every time it comes up, you try to not look at it. But then when you
really look at it, you're like, okay, what do I think is going to happen? You're writing it down,
you're like, well, I'm going to lose my job, my partner's going to break up with me. And then I
will run out of money and I'll be a hobo living in garbage can to cattle pee on my shoe. And you're
sitting ahead last time. That's much worse. I mean, like, I think just really, you know, like,
then you look at it and you're like, that's absurd. And like, when you're actually looking at it,
instead of just constantly trying to shove it away, then like, you can see, oh, that seems more
improbable than I had been thinking. Or you can, if it doesn't seem improbable, you know, like,
it seems pretty likely I'm going to lose my job. And then like, I, you know, my partner has told
me that if I lose my job, they're going to break up with me. So like, but you can be like, okay,
well, like, you count what's the likelihood that this will happen, you look back at previous times
when like, you've been in this sort of situation, like what happened then? Was I okay? Did I make
it out of it? Okay. What are my options? Like, you really can dig really deep into these things.
But it's actually just taking the facts of the situation and looking at them objectively. And
from there, you can actually like the part of the technique is doing that and just like sort of
calming down. Part of the technique is then reframing towards a more healthy view, like where
you can say, I'm doing my best right now at my job, I'm doing all I can. If I get fired, then
like, there was nothing I could have done and probably I needed to get a job, a different job
anyway, that's more suited for me. If my partner really does break up with me, then like, that
sucks. But oh, well, they're not supportive. So, and like, you sort of, that's not even like a very
good example. That's sort of just a, that's like a realistic look of things as opposed to the
catastrophic view. But then you can sometimes be, okay, my thought is, my coworker hates me.
Okay, how do I know that? Well, they didn't say hi when I said hi this morning and they gave me
dirty look. And it's like, okay, you look at past interactions you've had with this coworker,
they've all been neutral or positive. What are the chances that this one negative one,
like, is happening? Why would they hate you? Like, and you can reframe as, I'm sure they're
just like having a bad day and probably where, or like, you know, maybe we're just completely
spaced out thinking about something else that they're upset about. I'm sure it has nothing
to do with me. And I predict that next time that I say hi, I'll be like, oh, hi, yes, sorry.
I was just having some bad thoughts about something. So basically cognitive behavior
therapy is a great tool. Yes. And I have a quick anecdote actually about that last one. And so
at a high level, like, part of the CBT thing about like reframing things,
it almost sounds like lying to yourself. Like, well, let's just look at the positive side.
But while that sounds like, when especially when you say it in that tone of voice,
wishy-washy and pointless, like, there actually is a positive side to things.
Yeah. And if you're predisposed to look at things negatively, then sometimes bumping it
in the other direction is where you need to get to be to like be normal and
Yeah. Disqualifying the positive is actually one of the main, what were we calling them,
cognitive distortions, where it's like, you don't get to appreciate the positive thing because
it's not perfect or something, right? I think that is one like, what was it, rejecting the good
for the perfect? Yeah, don't let the perfect be the enemy of the good. Yeah, I think that's actually
more of a pithy saying than a cognitive distortion. But yeah. Well, I think disqualifying the positive
is on the Wikipedia page. And it's something that I've definitely noticed. And man, I could
actually go on at length about a tangent that's related to this, but related to the coworker
thing. I have a similar example. And this is how it pays dividends in real life. So like,
at my first job, I had a very smart coworker who loved to like, you know, jump in and help you
learn something and understand something. At my second job, I had a very smart coworker who never
did that. And I'm like, maybe he just doesn't like me. And then I thought about that. And I was like,
well, hold on, let's think about another explanation for this. Maybe he just doesn't
like volunteering to teach something. And so the next day, I tested this empirically
by asking him to show me something that he was working on. And he very enthusiastically
showed me and explained what he was doing. It was awesome. Probably just never occurred to him to do
it. Exactly. And so like, it's the sort of thing where it's not just like putting, you know, shiny
bow and string on this on the shitty reality that actually is, you might actually uncover that
reality is much better than you thought it was based off your first and first thought. And
what were you going to say a minute ago in Yash? Oh,
um, real quick, they might have also been another reason that he I'll get back to that in a second.
Another reason that he might not have wanted to jump in and explain things is like, I personally
am much less likely to explain things nowadays because of the fear of being called out for
mansplaining things. And I don't want to take this cultural or stuff, but it's just like, you know,
that doesn't have to be a cultural or thing. Like I could see that maybe this is a nerd who's been
trying to like talk to his brother about like programming and just like, Oh, shut up, dude.
Like you're always talking about functions and whatever I've got. I'm just breaking that up
because I've gotten that from like my sisters or my peers growing up when I would be excited about
an animal fact. And they're like, Oh my God, shut up about the alligators. Yeah, it could well be
that he didn't want to come off as kind of sending or something too, which is which is valid. But
when I anxious or shy, yeah, but when I expressed an interest and, you know, gave him an opportunity
to talk about it, he was enthusiastically responsive. And so yeah, there's all kinds of
reasons why he might not have done it. But the point is, is that the reason that he didn't
didn't appear to actually be my first thought, which was he doesn't like me, right? Right. Okay,
so I was just kind of looking over your shoulder and I wish I'd pulled up the email myself, but I
saw this line near the bottom. It says he the writer says, like my mind is a tangled ball of yarn,
and I accidentally fused the ends when he's talking about like how complicated all this these problems
are. And for a physicist, you're very poetic, which I really appreciate. That's awesome.
I doubt that English is his first language. And this is really, I'm always really impressed by
I think it was actually there was a Swedish person that was friends with who spoke like,
I forget if it's six or eight languages. And I would not have known she was not an
native English speaker. Very impressive. The guy who wrote the Quantum Thief is Swedish,
I think. I'm very impressed with recommended that a few times. It's good. Anyways, so I really
feel that because there's sometimes you get in these situations and like,
maybe it's a bad relationship. And you're like, I just fucked this up so much. There is,
there's no way to recover from this. And brains feel very much the same way where it is so big
and so complicated. And so many things have gone so wrong. There's just, there's, you can't,
it's too big. It's overwhelming. You can't fix this thing. But what I want to say is that's true.
Brains are big and complicated, and you can't fix that thing. But like, maybe with a, with a help
of a therapist or CBT or drugs or just implementing low hanging fruit grabbing, you don't want to
fix the whole ball of yarn. You're just going to pick out one little thread, you're going to pull
it out, you're going to straighten out that little thread. And that's going to be your project for
the month. And afterwards, you're going to have a big old complicated messy ball of yarn with fused
ends. But there's going to be this one little piece that's nice and straight and that piece will
be nice. And that's all you really want to do. I was also really poetic. Well, thank you. I like
that. Yeah. And maybe over time, you can do another little piece in some other month. And
maybe at some point you get something that is approaching some decent order that you can
torture analogies as a past time of mine. It's like, I've ever untangled a pair of headphones.
And like, you do it one small piece at a time. And what was originally this impossibly convoluted
mess? And maybe this is overly ambitious to say you can straighten out everything in your whole
life. You never can. But you can get many of them manageable. Where right now it's this disgusting
spaghetti mess. And it's like, well, you start with one thing. And depending on the state of
depression, I have a friend or whatever. I know somebody. And part of their... I actually don't
if he would say he's depressed or not. But I think he is. Like, one thing you could benefit
from and this is something I try to do, you keep your house clean. You know, and this is like...
Jordan Peterson. I know. But it is really a big deal.
Have you seen my house? Like, I'm a CD about...
I'm not a Jordan Peterson fan, mainly because he first came to my attention under like the
insane religious bullshit that he was talking about on Sam Harris' podcast.
There's something lobster transgender.
Yeah. I never got on board with any of that stuff. But I think from my limited
understanding of having read the synopses of some of his books on Wikipedia,
he seems competent at the area of his actual domain, which is like psychopsychology.
Yeah. I shouldn't have brought him up.
Oh, no, it's fine. Well, but as long as he's up, I think his sentence is like, clean your room.
And it's like, you know, this is where you spend your time. Make it livable, make it manageable.
And when it looks better, you'll feel better. And that just turns out to be the case.
Yeah. I think you phrased it more strongly, which is like, oh, you have all these ambitious
goals about how you're going to be CEO. How are you going to be CEO if your room's dirty?
I forget if that was him or someone paraphrasing him. I just find that anyway.
I like that, though. It almost makes sense. Like how, you know,
Pick up your socks.
Yeah. And I mean, as far as that, like the procrastination thing is real, too.
I have a thing where like my kitchen and living room are all downstairs and my bedroom and office
are upstairs. Every time I go downstairs, I bring something downstairs that needs to go
downstairs like dishes. And every time you do upstairs, do the same.
If there's anything I need to bring, but like, I never be like, I'll get on the next trip.
And it's like, no, no, get it this time. And it's always go somewhere with empty hands.
And it's a small thing. And it, but it really, it adds up. And it's just like, it's,
I think that's the step is like it, there isn't going to be a fast track
past to like the end of the line. It's just every step along the way. Right?
Yeah. Yeah. I actually wanted to say two things. One was the thing that Yash was talking about,
the, the tangled bowl of thread metaphor. A really important thing to get a handle on is like,
and I'm working on this, but like, be kind to yourself. I am the biggest dick to myself in
my head. I'm still really bad at it. I've gotten a lot better at it. But I used to talking about
parts. I used to have a part that was just in the back of my head being like, you stupid asshole,
get up, you know, like, lazy bastard, pick that thing up. Come on, like, we got to, oh, look,
like people are going to laugh at you if you see that. Like, it's just the meanest, like,
possible drill sergeant voice. And I felt like that was the thing I needed for the longest time
in order to, because I had this mental image of myself and some of it's like from my parents
and upbringing of just being like, you know, lazy teenager, you can't do anything right and always
fucking things up. A lot of that really pushes down on your ability to cope though. And if your
motivation is driven by like guilt shame anxiety, that's not good. Even if it does help you.
I was like, I did find that to be helpful. A lot of people have guilt motivations. That's
actually why I want to like plug replacing guilt again, which goes much deeper into that whole
idea of having extrinsic or intrinsic motivation and using that to replace guilt driven motivation.
Yeah, like, it's rough having mental issues. And beating yourself up about it is going to
just make things worse. So the other thing I wanted to talk about was this last line about,
I have no idea how many stop procrastinating videos I have saved in a watch later folder.
That's always the top comment on the red at the right about like, hey, look,
there's this great TED talk on procrastination. Great. I'll watch that later.
I don't know how often I fail with the Pomodoro technique, knowing there are solutions,
and I fail even when using them sucks. If your efforts aren't working, go deeper,
but where is that? Where do you begin? Which I also want to sort of say, first of all,
there's all these like stop procrastination tools. Pomodoro is one getting things done. The GTD
system is one. I started doing the Atomic Habits system, which is a book that I recommend.
Yeah, you can watch all these videos, you can learn all these techniques, but the thing is you
have to apply them and applying them is hard and applying them consistently is really hard.
And everyone who does this stuff, the people who are the most obsessed with these,
like me, I have a special interest in these kinds of life hack type things,
usually are people that have executive function issues. That's a really common thing. Again,
if you look at the Slate Star Codex, polls of trends in the community, there's a lot more
people with the crazier or executive function things, which probably comes from there being
a lot more people with mental health things, which probably comes from there being a lot
more people with higher IQ than average, but that's a hypothesis of mine that I'll shove into a
drawer for now. I think having social support systems makes this much easier. One of the reasons
I signed up for the Guild of Servants, which we had a two episodes back, I think, was because
they do have a social support system and a community, and I would recommend getting into
something like that, if possible. I know I've said this before, but I think the military
is one of the best institutions for making functional people out of fuck ups that there is,
because they not only show you what you need to do, they will consistently give you a series of wins
throughout the training process. They tell you to do a thing, they show you how to do a thing,
you do the thing, and you're like, oh my god, I did a thing, and yet it may be something simple,
like go dig a hole or whatever. Make your bed. We're biological machines, and we just keep getting
that feedback where we did a thing and it worked, and you realize it slowly gets hammered into your
brain. I can do things which will have an impact on my life, and they work, and I'm good enough to
do stuff, and it's really a fucking tragedy that the one institution we have that really teaches
people how to do this well, also teaches people how to kill other people in other countries,
because that's really fucked up that you have to make that trade off to get that. I would like
there to be an institution that does the same kind of thing, and it has the same sort of like
boot camp, no bullshit, you have to do this thing, but that doesn't also require you to
risk your life to murder others. That is a tragedy of how that worked out, because I'm
ideologically opposed to doing something like joining the military, but the other aspects of
it all sound great. It's just the goal of it, it's not what I'm going for. I can't tell you how
many times I've considered joining, doing boot camp, and then dropping out and being like, yeah,
thanks. Thanks for the life skills. But like, oh, I was still talking about the procrastination
thing. The tools to go back to that thought for a minute, and I kind of want to go to your
boot camp thing. The stop procrastination tools are like meant to, or rather like everyone who
does them successfully for a while, and then you like crash. A funeral happens, and you've got
like this big project coming up, and then like your sleep gets interrupted because your dog was
keeping you up on it, like whatever. And then like, or just depression hits, and you can't keep up
with it. And you have to just learn to forgive yourself, be kind to yourself, do self care.
That's another important thing that should be part of this whole like, you know, the basics,
the low hanging fruit self care, like get a massage. The whole date your issues are in your
tissues thing is like, actually, I have like chronic pain in certain areas that are, it's just
from stress. Or maybe it's not just but like, I have like neck pain and lower back pain that is
from tensing my muscles because I'm anxious. And being able to sit and meditate regularly and like
push down the anxiety and the tension alleviates the pain in my body. You can also sort of do it,
you know, the other way where if you get regular massages, it eases the anxiety and tension just
because the you're relaxing those parts of your body. There's a feedback loop.
And that's that's part of biofeedback, right? Is that the
yes. And so that is another aspect that I think I got like a head start in from like having to
manage to our wasn't you know, clenching muscles and something because then I'd be crippled with
headaches or you know, whatever. So, you know, it's a bummer that it the lesson had to come into
me informally through that process. But on the on the plus side, like, I notice when I'm clenching
my jaw, I notice when I'm, you know, flexing my hands or, you know, my shoulders are tense or
whatever. Like because I'm not constantly but frequently doing just a quick head to toe check
in on my body to see how stuff is. And it turns out that like, flexing uncomfortably leads to
like actual physical stress, which leads to mental stress. And I think what do they call it
wagging the dog's tail, where like, you can't wag in the dog. Yeah. So like, exhibiting the
behaviors of a happy person actually makes people happier, I think. Yeah, fake it till you make
it. I mean, that was how I have managed to get over imposter syndrome in the different like,
I've changed careers a bunch of times in totally different fields. And I always struggled really
badly with imposter syndrome. And I realized like, what you do is you just, okay, I'm a librarian.
This is my job. I'm doing my job as a librarian. And like, I'm doing the same thing as all these
other people who are also librarians. And I like, I'm confident and I know what I'm doing. And if
not, I can ask someone for help or I can figure it out. And you sort of just have a mantra. I
actually had to when I was like, walking into the library, I would like, there was a tap, which is
a thing from like, CIFAR strategies is trigger action plan. But basically, it's like, when X,
I will do Y. When I would get to the front step of the library, I would smile. I would like,
straighten my shoulders, smile, and then like, walk in and try to like, make eye contact with
some of my coworkers or some of the like, patrons of the library and smile and wave and say hi,
and just like, project an air of like, I belong here. I am happy. See you guys. And like, we're
gonna have a good day. And like stuff like that, you know, it does sound incredibly hokey, but
but it worked. It works. I think I read a book back when I was first dealing with depression
by Richard Wiseman called Oh, I can't think of it. I think it's only book on happiness or that's
where the thing that he wrote. So I could probably find the title, we'll put it in the show notes.
But like the he talked about like the experiment where they had people hold a pencil between
their teeth while working on something. And then other people like were to hold a pen
with pursed lips or something. And at the end, they asked people how happy they were. I think
on average, the ones who held the pencil between their teeth, thus forcing a smile, smile,
facial facial structure. But like, yeah, but it pulled the lips back like this.
Like they seemed to have enjoyed whatever stupid task they were doing more than the people who
had to hold kind of the scowl to keep the thing in their mouth. And they're both holding things
in their mouths. So like that they controlled for that. But I don't know. Okay, I think those
have because I remember that there's been a bunch of different studies along the same lines about,
well, hmm, actually, you know what, I'm not going to go out on a women's say that that has
replicated because I think I remember one about like power posing, not replicating.
That's always the first thing I got to ask now whenever I see a psych study, I'm like,
oh, question number one, anecdotally, I've noticed that if I'm in a bad mood, and I smile,
it actually makes me it actually perks me up. I get I notice a jolt of positive feeling in my
brain. Whether or not that psychosomatic or not, it works. Yeah, it's definitely like a somatic,
but I mean, that's the point. Yeah, whether or not it sort of like, if it's purely placebo or not,
I always have this thing of like, Oh, it's all in your head. Where like, this usually comes up when
I'm trying to like explain my thing with my parents where like, it's like, Oh, you don't have ADD,
it's all in your head. And it's like, I mean, like, where else would it be?
You're like, no, it's my kidneys.
We are, we've been going on for a while. Was there things that you guys wanted to
mention before we wrapped up? This is a really good topic. And I am, again, like sorry to hear
about the original posters struggles, but I'm glad to have gotten the question because I feel
like it's a good time to talk about mental health. And I'm sure there's more that we
could get into as well. This is definitely, you could probably tell like a special interest of
mine and I'd go on forever about whatever details. So thanks for letting me rant about my special
interest. And I hope some of this was helpful. I knew you'd be eager and equipped to talk about
this better than me. I was eager, but less equipped. I think I just wanted to say,
to say thank you for the listeners for writing in about this. I think reaching out and talking
about it is the hardest step. And then the next step is taking action. And, you know,
if you want to, if you want to talk more over email or something, I'm open to it. I can't
there pies for you, but I can give you the nudge to go get therapy. And, you know, whatever it is,
like the, and again, therapy might not be a magic bullet, but it's something that just
talking to a professional and, and this is, I always equate it to like, you know,
physical ailment, you know, if your leg is bothering you, you know, you can try to look
up a YouTube tutorial on, you know, what do I do? What do I do about a sore knee? Yeah,
leg stretches, et cetera. But there's nothing wrong. In fact, it's almost nonsensical to say,
I'm not going to go see a doctor about it. It's like, well, why not? Especially if you're in
Sweden, you've got medical access. So like, sorry, people from the US. But, you know,
in a pinch, sometimes seeing a doctor in the US is worth the visit. But well, I'm being tongue
in cheek. It is like it, you can try and fix it yourself. But like, why not just get a professional
opinion on it? And if they can't fix it for you on that trip, they can at least give you some
nudges in the right direction, right? And more often than not, hopefully. So I think just, just
reaching out and seeking help is the, is the only major piece of actionable advice I can give. So
I'll take that a step further and say just take an engineer's approach. If you find a bug, throw
everything at it, like attack it from all angles, get a checklist, sort of. Checklists are huge.
Yeah, okay. Feeling depressed. What can I do? You know, therapy, medication, regulate your sleep
better, wear like, you know, blue blocking glasses at night, cut down on the caffeine,
exercise, like try all the things and try the things like, in combination with each other,
because generally it is a combination, you know, of stuff that you're doing yourself,
like the diet, exercise, meditation, sleep, a drug and therapy, it's going to be like,
probably the most powerful combination until we get legalized psychedelic therapy,
which is, I had to throw it in there. I don't want to talk about it for the entire episode,
but maps the psychedelic research Institute is their studies of curing mental illnesses or
making significant progress with a specialized combination of psychedelics and therapy has
shown remarkable results and I'm super excited about it. And I'll stick some info in the notes,
but I'm not going to just start talking about psychedelics now, because that'll never end.
I would like to point out that a lot of people say, and this is true, that like just taking
the action is very hard, like taking that first step is tough. And I want to point out to the
writer of the email that like, they've already taken the first step, they've moved into action by
writing us an email, that is doing something. And like, now just keep that momentum going and
take that next step with the the movement you've already started. Oh, yeah. And I did, I forgot,
in the beginning of the email, they had mentioned that they're not on the discord,
but might join soon. Yeah, I'd recommend them. If you have the time for it, join the discord. And
I'm sure that like, you'll find there's a lot of people with this interest, the there's people on
the sort of sister discord, the, what was it, Institute of Bays? University of Bays. University
of Bays, yeah, who talk about this stuff a lot more too, but you definitely can find people to
compare notes with or to vent to or maybe help other people with some of their problems if you
happen to have a solution. And yeah, community is great. And just have a community when you're
stuck at home. Yeah, and a community of like rationalists, because you had mentioned, I'm
so tired of talking to people who don't want to get it, which was well phrased. And yeah, no,
I feel you. There's times I want to go off on things. And like, they just, I restrain myself
from doing it on Facebook. And then I come to the discord and I talk with people who are actually
saying I'm like, Oh, that felt so much better. I didn't have to go on a rant or anything. It was
just a nice conversation. Although I will say, as nice as the discord is, and sometimes it can be
a lifesaver, it's still not quite a, it's not a true substitute for face to face physical
interaction with humans. Right. And I guess, so last thing, I know we're kind of doing our wrap
up thing for 10 minutes, but on the path to progress, there will be stumbles and back steps
that doesn't mean failure. It just means pick yourself up and keep going. Pretty common two
steps forward, one step back is the pace. Yeah. And but every step back feels like, Oh, this
isn't working. Or Oh, I might, you know, might as well just give up. And I'm not saying this as like,
this is how you will feel listeners. I'm saying this is just how it feels from the inside in my
experience. And apparently what the textbooks say, like, it's pushed past that. It that that is
the anticipated experience of like the process here. And so when there's a stumble, just say, Oh,
that was one of the stumbles I was told to expect, I'm going to keep going. It does not mean failure,
just like, you know, like Jay said, you were saying the people who practice procrastination
techniques stick to them for a while and then stop, you know, maybe they've then up their
for their ability to not procrastinate a bit in the time that they were practicing the techniques
deliberately. But like tapering off or giving up on them doesn't mean necessarily failure.
And it just means like, maybe you got to take a break for a while, do some self care. Yeah.
Was it the Dave Allen, the GTD author actually has this surfing metaphor where he's like,
think of it like surfing, it's fun, you ride the wave, you crash, you fall off, you pick your
board back up, you get back on. And like that falling down is part of the process as well.
Just try not to get stressed out by it. Awesome. Thanks for vindicating me. Like I said,
I know you're the expert. So I'm an expert, but it's special interest. Yeah, that counts. Yeah.
All right. Well, I don't have, I think that's about it. But any further conversation anyone
wants to have, you can, you know, hit me up on the discord or write us in at the email at the
I always get confused because the website and email don't match up. The email address is
basingconserviercypodcast.gmail.com, I think that's the one. Yeah, cool.
So yeah, perfect. I think that's all I've got to say for now. But thanks again for writing it. I
really appreciate it. And we do also have in addition to the email and the discord, a subreddit,
which is not used nearly as much now because most people may migrate it to discord, but every
every now and then there's still something that shows up at the subreddit that you can check out.
Or you can write and review us on any service that you use to listen to us. Yeah. I mean,
that that's not a way to get in contact with us, but it is appreciated. Right.
That reminds me one more thing. I, as far as a quick technique that I got a lot of value of
that took three minutes to read and implement was post on less wrong by friend of the show,
Matt Freeman, more dint of mail on less wrong spamming micro intentions. I, it was like a
it's this bizarre little brain life hack that I got a lot of mileage out of very quickly
where you're thinking about, oh, I got to do this thing. And then you just,
you think of that thought and then just kind of ignore it or try to suppress it.
Or like you subconsciously just, but like this other thing is attracting my attention. I should
think about that. Right. So the idea of spamming a micro intention is just to keep telling your
brain, you know, like, you know, raise your left hand and like you think the thought and then
eventually you kind of just want to do it. But the idea of just spamming it over and over and over
really quick for a few seconds is usually all it takes. And then you finally just do the thing.
I mean, I use the technique to finally like start doing like, I think in the, in the post
he gave the example of doing pushups. So I've been doing pushups every night for like the last year
as just like a way to prove to myself, to continue to prove myself that this works.
And the cool thing about it is that like once you've been spamming micro intentions for a little
while, you get like this even faster track to like achieving whatever he's trying to do because
you know, at the end of spamming micro intentions, you're going to just do the thing anyway.
So the idea occurs to to spam micro intentions, you just skip straight to the end and start doing
the thing. I might as well get it over with. Right. I have an addition to that too, which I
forget where I read this, but it was really useful when you're having a lot of trouble getting started
on something and feeling a lot of resistance to it, along with trying just spamming the micro
intentions. It's really helpful to ask yourself, when will I be ready to do X? And sometimes
like framing it that way will calm my brain down because it's like, I think there's usually the,
Oh my God, I don't want to stop whatever I'm doing right now. I don't want to do this right now.
There's this like anxiety about, but like you could be like, okay, in 10 minutes, I'll go get a
shower. Cool. And then you can stop having the like repetitive thought, or like the repetitive
aversive thought rather. I hadn't heard that one and I like it. All right. It's helpful if the
micro intentions thing, like if you've tried that and you're stuck, or yeah, if you're finding lots
of like aversion coming out. Anyway, and that's the thing too, I should mention that maybe spamming
micro intentions work abnormally well for me and it won't work abnormally well for everybody else,
but with a lot of these, your mileage will vary, which is why it's nice to have a community slash
navigator through the in the form of a therapist that helps navigate this terrain. So anyway,
what was the thing you want to talk about in the ash before we wrap up?
So a small piece of follow up from an episode several episodes ago, which is very timely right
now due to the wildfires that are happening in California. I am harkening back to the episode
where I said that the Black Lives Matter movement is not doing themselves any favors by painting
all police as like death squads that are roaming the streets hunting down black people because,
yes, there's huge problems with the police and they need to be reformed and the black people are
adversely not adversely disproportionately affected by this. But but giving people the
impression that there are these death squads makes things worse because when people who didn't know
about it find out about this and then later find out that there aren't death squads and this isn't
what it's like they are turned off because they were lied to. I think a similar thing goes down
with global warming and the fires that we're having right now because as I'm not sure how many
people are aware I think it's been being yelled a lot recently that the primary motivation the
primary cause behind the wildfires is the land policy that has been in effect in the U.S. for
about the last hundred years where it's been we must suppress all wildfires that happen anywhere
and that is unnatural for the west coast because they have a fire-based ecology and so a lot of
dried kindling has built up over the past hundred years and yes global warming is bad yes global
warming will have bad effects on billions of humans and does change the climate as well but
the wildfires aren't because of global warming and when people find out that easily find outable
fact by hearing about the hundred years of land use policy and also see all these people saying
look the wildfires are happening because of global warming and find out that's not true then they might
go well is global warming not even a thing then should this be something I don't need to worry about
because obviously people are willing to lie and say anything in order to get me on board
and that's that's a problem like you lose credibility when you lie even if it's for the
greater good even if you think this will motivate people to address global warming which really
is a real issue yes it really is a real issue but lying to people to motivate them always backfires
and like don't don't do that that's shitty I think that's a good point I um I think it's under
the impression that wildfires are worse now because of global warming than they were 10 years ago
well I mean they're worse but it's not because of global warming it's because of the
yeah that's what I think so I had the wrong impression there um like
it can exacerbate global warming uh or global climate change but like what was it I feel like
I cut Steven off I was going to say I just there was a great tweet that I saw screencapped on
the reddit somewhere it was like the sky is literally the wrong color and you're telling
us you don't have the money for a new green deal or something and which is hilarious and you know
devastating at the same time but it gives me an impression that like you're saying a you know
clean energy bill would actually solve this problem and no it turns out it won't yeah we need to
change how we manage land on the west coast that would solve the problem yeah that's what I was gonna
say uh I took a picture where I had been walking on a nature trail and some kid had like taken a
stick and written no more fires and I just posted that on Facebook because I feel bad about never
posting anything on Facebook and uh David from Spear David from the discord and other podcasts
the mind killer uh edited the picture like it's to say like no more wildfires more controlled burns
just posted the edit and I was just like yeah actually like but like yeah exactly you know
I kind of I don't like the controlled burns solution even though I know that's the most
natural solution because it still puts smoke and shit in the air but at least a like regulated
amount of it yeah I would much prefer like paying some company to go in there and clear out all this
but I think that we're talking about millions of anchor acres yeah that would be using lots of
equipment that burns like fossil fuels and probably yeah that's not a good solution and also the trees
as like you pointed out there is a fire-based ecology yes a lot of evergreens need fire in
order to germinate their seeds yeah just clearing it out would fuck the ecology up yeah so that's
probably a good place to stop talking about this for now okay but I'm glad you brought that up
because I had the wrong impression about it and I imagine I'm I imagine I'm not the only one so
um yeah I can't say I've lived in Colorado for my whole life and this seems I think this is the
worst fire season I've ever lived through here it's also a few years ago there was a really bad one
I know in the early 2000s I don't remember exactly what year I think maybe 2004 it was after 9-11
but it was before the financial meltdown in 2008 so somewhere in the early 2000 uh there was a
really bad fire season where like you could just smell smoke everywhere and I had I I think two
days I woke up and there was a fine layer of ash on my car because it just literally fallen out of
the sky uh I'm not sure if the season itself was worse that could have just been because the fire
was closer proximity to Denver like I don't I don't have data maybe this is the worst fire season
I I know that it that some of these have broken records in size anyway yeah we've broken records
for the hottest summer day um and also the earliest snow yeah there was this weird thing uh the first
week of september where it was 90 degrees on sunday and then I think 80 something on monday
tuesday high of 50 or high of 40 and we had snow on the ground and we had some snow I was outside
and I was just like feeling the temperature drop by like 10 degrees 10 degrees 10 I was just like
this is because I heard I heard the um weather reports and I was just like I need to experience
this so actually I spent that night like out like I was trying to be outdoors as much as possible
and just being like there's no way it's gonna snow yeah so oh my god it's gonna snow should I
post the picture the little snowman may drake me yeah yes please it's itty bitty but it's cute
that's perfect um yeah so I mean climate change definitely a real thing that is happening
yeah but don't lie about that and I think I mentioned this every time but Dan Dennett has
that quote that I should get above her sticker of and so I can just stop saying it but it's nothing
I just like more than a bad argument for a position I agree with yeah and and related to that there's
nothing I like more than than like fake evidence for a position that I agree with and it's like yes
this is actually a problem but every time you lie about it you're making us look wrong that the
truth doesn't need you to lie for it yeah all right think a patron yeah oh this is an interesting
one okay so the patron we would like to thank that helps us bring the all these things that we've
talked about to everyone here and have this sort of community for all of us is the pointless one
thank you the pointless one you are uh fantastic and everybody who is listening here should like
give a little cheer for you right now you're not pointless at all no thank you again pointless one
I was looking through our numbers in the last couple weeks and even a supporter for I think
two years which is remarkable and uh we really appreciate it that might be as long as we've
had a patreon it's something close to that yeah I like that so thank you so much we really appreciate
it and I may have messaged you on patreon desk but literally anything we can do for you let us know
I feel like we owe you one at the very least beat up your bullies we will deliver you donuts
from voodoo donuts the voodoo donuts are not good everyone in Denver keeps saying how great voodoo
donuts are you go there they're fucking sugar bombs you wait in line that's the point you have to
pay with cash and then it's like this this nasty like I got the Homer Simpson I know
this is derailing but it was awful yeah it was soaking wet from all like the that's the sugar
that they pour in it and over it and oh I mean I guess if you're if your taste buds have been so
numbed by a a diet of American pop which is just ridiculously sugary maybe and then it's good but
like I couldn't eat more than a couple bites it was yeah I think that's the point I think that they're
just excessively decadent it's not decadent it's like getting punched in the tongue yeah I will say
I found them overhyped and and I was underwhelmed when I got to finally have their product so this
episode is brought to you by the pointless one and voodoo donuts one of them is pointless and
that's the donuts they're too sweet they've got a great logo though yeah they're really fun like
and what they named them and all this like the decor in that place is awesome I see why it's
popular yeah anyway cool thank you everybody and we'll talk to you again in two weeks awesome thanks
buddy bye
you
