Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Iniar Szpracki, I'm Stephen Zuber, I'm Jay Sticky,
and I'm Gray.
Gray, nice to have you back again.
It's good to be back.
Last time you were on, what were we talking about?
I think my last appearance was the Radical Honesty episode back in February.
Okay.
Can't believe it's that long ago.
I know, it feels like an entirely different era, because we could still not be worried
about the plague back then.
So it wasn't an entirely different era.
Yeah.
But welcome back, we are gonna be talking about something completely different this time,
but as usual, we are first going to do our sequence posts.
Yay, sequences.
So let's jump right into that.
As soon as I can pull up the right document, geez.
Who wants to start us off on this?
I'll go, absurdity heuristic is the first one, and absurdity bias.
So absurdity heuristic was, started out describing that heuristics aren't bad, per se.
Usually they're actually pointing you in some direction, like, okay, all of my experiences
have led me to believe that this cause will create this cause, will create this outcome.
So.
Very briefly, it's a mental shortcut.
Yeah.
A lot of things tend to be better quality.
Yeah.
Like, that is one that's obviously exploitable, but it's a general truism to the point where,
like, you can glance at things on the shelf and be like, oh yeah, this one on the bottom,
ten bucks, and then this one on the top, ninety bucks, I'm betting that one's better than
the ten dollar one.
Yeah, it's kind of the thinking fast and slow thing, where you have your heuristics that
do a bunch of mental shortcuts for you, and generally they actually work pretty well.
But sometimes, because you do use all these mental shortcuts, they can cause you to have
biases, is just what he meant by the absurdity heuristic versus the absurdity bias.
So when people say something is absurd as just a sort of knee-jerk reaction to a new
idea, or something that sort of pattern matches to things that seem like they might not be
probable, but maybe this person's not operating on, they haven't sat there and done the math
and been like, oh actually, no, physics say that this probably could happen, or whatever
other examples he brought up.
Yeah, but that's not a bias rather than just a heuristic.
And he was railing against that, like, probably because of people saying that AI is absurd,
or maybe his quantum gravity stuff.
I don't think he started railing yet.
He spoke against it.
I believe the railing will come later.
Oh yeah, okay.
But I don't know, did you read it more as railing?
No, I think I was just exaggerating.
He does seem to be trying to not be exactly evaluative in this first one.
He's just saying, yeah, there are heuristics.
We use them all the time.
They're good, and as Kahneman said, there is a fair amount of content overlap between
the sequences in Kahneman.
Those heuristics are good so much of the time that we don't even notice when they're
right.
We're using them so often on at least daily, or they don't even register as common sense.
They're down to the level of reflex.
That's a good way to describe it.
They can brightly call a pointy animal, get away.
Even though there is a response in your brain from the ancestral environment that gives you
those ideas, you will not be aware of them having happened.
You can, with practice, identify when those heuristics are operating, but that takes some
exercise in mindfulness, and for the most part, heuristics are defined by being things
that we don't see happening, that we aren't aware of executing in our brains.
There was the example, actually, that I think you were maybe talking about Kahneman.
I think he brought this example up of if you see something that looks like a tiger, obviously
there's an evolutionary advantage to just running the fuck away regardless of it's
a tiger or not, as opposed to being like, okay, so it's a big cat, and it's got, I think
it's got stripes.
Is it looking at me?
This might be a Marat, like now you're dead.
So he gives a few examples, well, he speaks about three major circumstances where what
is the absurdity heuristic turns into an absurdity bias instead, where instead of being a good
rule of thumb, it's more of a problem.
And the first one is that he says, the first case is when we have information about underlying
laws which should override surface reasoning.
The example he gives is, if you know why most objects fall, and you can calculate how fast
they fall, then your calculation that helium bloom should rise at such and such a rate
ought to override the absurdity of an object falling upwards.
So there's cases where, even though something sounds really absurd, if you have really good
information about underlying laws, you should not think of it as absurd.
Yeah, although when hot air balloons first became a thing, I remember people thinking
they were like, well, I don't remember, I wasn't there, but I've read that people were
just baffled by them, because here's a very large heavy object, and all you do is you
make a balloon, and they didn't have helium, they were just using heated air.
That's the name.
Yeah, hot air balloon, but it is pretty hilarious thinking about what people's reactions must
have looked like to just seeing this gigantic thing just floating.
This, Eliezer's made a point kind of like this, I don't know if it's actually earlier
in your read order, because most of my sequence reading has been out of the edited rationality
from AI to Zombies, but there's another essay where he's talking about how you weigh arguments
from authority, where if you're actually in a completely unexplored domain of science
at the turn of the 20th century, maybe Lord Kelvin saying that this heavier than air flight
thing isn't possible should carry some weight.
Once Otto Lilienthal has built as a measured lift, and once the Wright brothers have built
a wind tunnel to measure lift in their own way, you've got experimental data that points
us in that direction, but when you actually see the plane fly, Kelvin's authority isn't
something that even factors into your calculation anymore.
I see the way that he's suggesting it, like this should override surface reasoning, it
seems like a good step from this how to stop making this mistake into how to actively not
make this mistake.
One thing I can think of is the Wright brothers looked at birds quite a bit, like diagramming
the wings, and birds are heavier than air, and they can fly, so you've already got evidence.
They have heavier than air though?
Birds are heavier than air, but they do have hollow bones and light feathers, but no, they
have weight.
Dead ones fall out of the sky.
We could do an Archimedes sort of experiment, you know, to figure out the mass of the air
displaced by the bird in a plastic box.
Trying to think of a rhyme of the ancient Mariner joke about the albatross around the
neck, but can't make it work anyway.
He has a second case, which he doesn't give an example for, says, attending to surface
absurdity in the face of abstract information that ought to override it.
If people cannot accept that study show that marginal spending on medicine has zero net
effect, that is a bias because it seems absurd that violates the surface rule that medicine
cures things, but the abstract spending on medicine has zero effect is not quite the
same thing, so their absurdity bias is leading them astray there.
Okay, yeah, sort of like, I guess, global warming, where you can, like...
It's absurd that you could change the temperature of the entire earth by something you're personally
doing.
Or like my dad, who's like, well, the temperature of the earth is always changing.
It always goes up and down.
We're not doing it.
It's just going up.
I'm trying to say every time you fart, the summer comes around.
Come on.
I've actually heard people explicitly make that argument, though, with respect to climate
change.
Like, it's arrogant of man to think he could alter the climate.
And you know, everybody knows that the beliefs held in arrogance are never true.
Absolutely.
Never once has an arrogant person been right about anything.
Certainly not the hero of a certain fan fiction.
I was hoping someone would mention that.
All right, third case.
When the absurdity heuristic simply doesn't work, the process is not stable in its surface
properties over the range of extrapolation.
And yet people use it anyway.
Like the future is usually absurd, scare quotes.
It's unstable in its surface rules over 50-year intervals.
And yeah, it gets more into that.
And I think, I forget if it's the next post or the third one, but we'll get into that.
Yeah, I have an example, but it'll make more sense when we get to why is the future so
absurd?
Okay.
He ends with, over the last few centuries, the absurdity heuristic has done worse than
maximum entropy.
It's ruled out actual outcomes as being far too absurd to be considered.
You would have been better off saying, I don't know.
And the example he gave was a certain person being accused of fraud for selling stock in
the radio telephone company claiming that he could send human voices across the ocean
using radio waves.
Nonsense.
Yes, exactly.
And I believe the Lord Kelvin saying that heavier than air things will never fly is another
example from previously.
And the next one was availability or the availability heuristic, which is judging the frequency or
probability of an event by the ease with which examples of the event come to mind.
So yeah, kind of self-explanatory there.
Yeah, we're all pretty familiar with this one, right?
Or at least we talk about it a lot.
Do we?
Yeah, the more you hear about things happening, the more it seems like that's a thing to
you.
Yeah.
Which is why the constant harping about the sins of a subgroup that someone hates tends
to be extremely bad and toxic because it'll make everyone around you think that those
people are evil when, you know, out of 100 million people, you can easily find the bad
ones and keep highlighting all their bad stuff.
And it'll twist your priorities on what evils you actually want to fix because you will
have a gr...
If that kind of complaining is going on constantly, you'll have a greatly exaggerated, potentially
a greatly exaggerated impression of how influential the outgroup you're dunking on actually is.
He gave a slightly less political example, too, in saying that people thought that accidents
accounted for more deaths than diseases.
When it turns out that diseases are 16 times more likely to kill anyone than an accident
because there's just a lot more of them, but you don't hear about the diseases because
they're not, you know, spectacular newsworthy events.
Yeah.
Or bringing absurdity back into it, I think it was in the Camden Aquarium.
They had a plaque talking about sharks, and they said that, you know, you're supposed
to guess how many people die per year of shark attacks, and then there was a little thing
that you could pull up.
And I forget what the actual numbers were, but it was considerably lower than you would
expect, and they compared it to, like, they said more people are killed by coconuts falling
on their head than shark attacks.
Is shark attacks from the single digits, right?
Shark attack deaths?
Shark attack deaths?
That sounds right.
They're not into triple digits.
And just the whole, like, that's a perfect example of availability because you would,
like, when you're thinking about common causes of death, you'd never think of coconuts.
No.
Actually, I just thought of this, but there is a way that an availability bias can be
literally hazardous to your health, at least in the short term.
It's known among people who've taught medical school classes as medical student syndrome,
where all these people who are tired and studying constantly and reading about a bunch of diseases
they've never heard of will develop the apparently symptoms of the diseases that they've been
reading about.
And this is so, this is so common among this group and so specific to this group that there's
really no other good name to give it.
Yeah, I think it was the, like, WebMD syndrome, too.
I know my mom's doctor has said that there's nothing more dangerous than a patient with
an internet connection.
That's a good shorthand.
Yeah, I think, for some reason, I have the number six in my head is shark attacks, although
it has to vary more than one every year, but anyway, that's a good average.
I think the availability heuristic, like, I can't remember if it's another Yudkowsky
post or somewhere else, but, like, the sell of earthquake insurance goes up right after
an earthquake.
Yeah, that was in this, except they were talking about flood insurance.
Okay, yeah.
And in this post, they might have talked about earthquakes.
I think specifically of earthquakes, because it makes, like, with a flood, I don't really
know how often, like, if one flood influences the next flood, but one earthquake does influence
the next earthquake, in which, like, when the tectonic plates are agitated and settling
and that's what causes the earthquake, it tends to, like, not happen again for a while.
So right after an earthquake is when you shouldn't be buying earthquake insurance.
It should be like, it's been like five years since our last earthquake.
I should probably buy some of that nice, cheap earthquake insurance.
Yeah, well, this one with the floods, they had this sort of interesting take on it where
when dams and levees are built, they reduce the frequency of floods and create a false
sense of security, leading to reduced precautions, but, like, ironically, well, building dams
decreases the frequency of the floods.
If it floods, the damage per flood afterward is so much greater that average yearly damage
increases, because all that water that's been held back, I guess, I'm just picturing
the scene from a brother where the dam breaks and then there's just houses floating by with
people sitting on top of their, like, roofs of their houses and sort of still talking
about the same bullshit, the husband fighting with his wife while, like, a cow flits by.
That was a fun movie.
Such a good movie.
Yeah.
At the risk of annoying west with evo-psych, Eliezer says that selective reporting is one
major source of availability bias in the ancestral environment.
Much of what you knew, you experienced yourself or you heard it directly from a fellow tribe
member who had seen it.
There's no reason to believe that, Inyash.
That's complete conjecture.
So if you heard of something, it was likely that it happened recently and to someone
in a very small sphere of your circle.
No way.
I mean, you might have read it in a book or watched it in a movie in the ancestral environment.
There's no way to prove that you've heard about it from your tribe's people or experienced
it yourself.
That first-hand thing is important, like when you're talking about a population that lives
in tribes of 150 or scattered over a wide area, there's only so far you can get from
representative human experience and you have, as he says, direct access to even if you're
an outlier, you're going to know a lot of people whose experiences are much more representative.
So there's only so far astray that you can be led by this sort of thinking until you've
got a 10-digit human population scattered over the entire planet in so many different
environments, none of which we evolved for.
And in which all of them can communicate with everyone else instantly so that the most outrageous
thing is shots.
I should keep this for the Mindkiller podcast because it's kind of Mindkilly.
If you want one less Mindkilly, XKCD did a comic about how, because tweets travel at
a large fraction of the speed of light, a few hundred kilometers from the epicenter
of an earthquake, the tweets arrive before the actual earthquake does.
Oh nice.
That's cool.
Yeah.
That's like...
If you heard something extremely outrageous in the ancestral environment, you probably
knew who did it and you could have some effect on it happening again, whereas nowadays if
one person out of five billion does something crazy and stupid, you feel the same way when
you hear about it, like, how could this happen?
We must do something, but no, no, you don't have to do anything.
I often try not to comment on things if I don't personally, you know, know someone who
has experienced it.
Yeah.
About ancestral environments, one of our major benefits as a species is that we keep our
elderly alive and around because they're able to remember past events like they did
have the ability to actually see things happen and that gave them better predictive power.
I remember this thing about elephants, too, where they did a natural experiment where
they were studying two different groups of elephants and in one group of elephants, the
elders had died off of disease or something and the other, the elders were still alive
and there was a series of droughts and the elephants that had the elders, the elders
had remembered where the reserves of water were when droughts had happened to them in
the past, but the other elephants were, you know, just like the parents and the kids,
they didn't have those experiences, so they were much more likely to die off of thirst.
Yeah, I remember reading about that.
Yeah, I feel like that might have come up in some rationalist context or something because
the odds of that are increasing because I also remember that anecdote or that story.
Maybe somebody is, it sounds like something that's probably in Slate Strike Code X, actually.
He has an example in here which at the time was not political, but times have changed,
so now it is somewhat political, I guess.
He says, in real life, you're unlikely to ever meet Bill Gates, but thanks to selective
reporting by the media, you may be tempted to compare your life success to his and suffer
hedonic penalties accordingly.
The objective frequency of Bill Gates is 0.00000015, but you
hear about him much more often, and I, you know.
How is that political?
Well, I, lots of times, are you, if you want to make it political, you can just use Elon
Musk instead.
Yeah, I was going to say, a lot of people are like, why don't we take all the rich people
money and redistribute it?
And like, that makes sense in a tribe of a few hundred people.
When you have one person who's super rich, you're like, he's being an ass.
We're all contributing to this tribe functioning.
How does he have so much?
He could share it with us.
Whereas in this case, he's not being an ass.
And that money split over 300 million people is like $20 or something.
It's not a lot of money.
Well, and I guess my thing is, like, yeah, Elon Musk is maybe, I mean, even he's
doing cool shit, I would pick the Koch brothers or some, some asshole group.
Like, you know, Elon Musk is going to get us to fucking Mars.
Bill Gates is going to cure malaria.
So like, I, those, those to me are the, like the prime examples of like how to be,
you know, an ethically rich person.
I'm not sure what awesome project Jeff Bezos is working on.
Maybe he's a better example.
Hi, isn't he working on like Seastead and yours at someone else?
No, that sounds cool.
I think just yesterday saw a meme about Batman where someone pointed out that
instead of giving his money to the poor to help them out and reduce crime, he
puts on a mask and goes to fight criminals in the streets.
And the reply was he has 10 to 11 billion dollars and pointing a source to
like DC comics, right?
And dividing that by the population of Gotham means that he can give everyone
in the city $75 a month for one year and then he's flat broke.
And that's, you know, assuming he sells all his assets.
I'm like, yeah, see, that's, it's just not that much money divided up by the,
you know, what he could do is sell the patent to his self-driving cars and save
33,000 deaths in just America every year.
Does he have self-driving cars?
He did in the movies.
The Batmobile self-driving.
He has all kinds of like future tech things that don't really make any sense.
I think Batman is a really terrible example of that though, because when,
like that criticism implies that that's the only thing that Bruce Wayne is doing
with absurd amounts of money, as if he's not also doing like a lot of stuff
that sounds very effective, altruistic throughout Gotham.
Like his Batman thing is kind of an effort to trim the other tail of the
distribution.
And I'm not sure what the marginal, the value of the marginal dollar of
Bruce Wayne charity actually is, but he's spending a lot of them.
And, you know, he also needs a hobby to stay sane.
And if that is beating up bad guys, as long as it lets them give more money
to charity, so be it.
Just like Tony Stark.
I don't, I'm not in favor of any argument about how much good you're required
to do that says that once you win at the point where you start making
yourself miserable, you're still obligated to do more good.
Right.
Anyways, getting off of superheroes and villains and such.
On to why is the future so absurd?
Lack of Iron Man and lack of Iron Man and Batman.
When people look at historical changes and think I could have predicted X or
you could have predicted X.
If you looked at factors one, two and three, then they forget that people did
not in fact predict X perhaps because they were distracted by factors four
through 117.
I think this is much less relevant nowadays because we have all recently
lived through nobody thought that Trump could possibly win.
And yet he did.
And so I put a 40% on him.
Okay.
I, you know, I, that was my big moment of everything that I know is up in the air
and the world is in chaos.
And at that point, I really had a good sense of the, you know, future is absurd
kind of thing where a lot can change because I just didn't see all these factors
that I don't know.
For me, it was COVID becoming a problem after swine flu and bird flu and Ebola
all didn't really turn into things.
Oh, we were so over due for a pandemic, though.
But like we've had things that should have been pandemics, except that they
were handled properly.
I just had not updated.
I did not realize when the political situation changed how much that would
alter the way that diseases were responded to.
And I certainly would never have anticipated that denying the existence
of the disease would become a matter of tribal identity.
So Chinese house.
Yeah, that was weird.
Um, we live in weird times.
Our intuitions about the future linear, we expect around as much change
as occurred in the past.
But technological change feeds on itself and therefore has a positive
second derivative.
We should expect more technological change in the future than we've seen
in the past.
And in so far as technology drives cultural change, we should expect
more cultural change too.
I do think that that's funny.
Um, I'm reading Stranger in a Strange Land currently.
And I was written in, I think the sixties and, uh, telephones were like
the big deal invention that they thought we're going to have in the future.
Like, uh, in the 1960s, it was, uh, they still weren't in every house then.
But it was like a type of telephone that I think also had like a video
screen or something.
So basically like Skype was like what, I don't know.
And there's this one, like I can't, I kind of classic character who hates phones.
Everybody else is like totally like all about phones, but he's just like, I
hate the thing.
I'm throwing out the window.
He's like, you know what?
Sometimes I don't even answer my phone.
And I was just like, yeah, me nailed the future, man.
Oh, but this is also a story about a man from Mars.
Uh, like a human that had been, what was it?
Raised by Martians.
He was raised by Martians.
I forget how he got to Mars.
Um, I think like there was a group that went up there and they all
somehow died of an accident or something.
So for him, he was a kid and the Martians took him in.
It's been a long time.
It, yeah, but like, I don't know.
I just find it funny that the culture though is just, like they didn't
really anticipate cultural change that much at all.
And you see that a lot when you see a sci-fi book, like read sci-fi books
or watch sci-fi movies that were written a while ago where they will
often extrapolate flying cars.
But the culture is still, like people are still like wearing hats.
Well, cause sci-fi is always written for their hats off indoors.
And yeah, sci-fi is always written for the current audience to help help
them think about the future.
So we'll just change a few things.
So bad at designing aliens too.
Like I, I get so annoyed at terribly designed aliens and movies.
But they didn't have much money back then.
No, it's not even the like, you don't have to, like the culture of an
alien species can be like enough to offset the fact that you've got
like a dude in a suit.
I've actually been refreshed on that a bit recently.
Uh, my own podcast, We Encultured Swine.
No, we decided to go back to uncultured swine since there was no
risk of confusing it with the other uncultured swine, but, um, it's
covering the first of E and M banks as aliens that I really like the design of.
There's no analogy whatsoever to human morphology.
They're kind of like octoblimps.
Um, the culture is, no, their culture, because when I just said the culture
that would confuse the series, uh, their culture is just this continuous
fest of testosterone poisoning, like it would be, it would not do toxicity
justice to call it toxic masculinity.
This is like dimethylmercury masculinity.
It'll dissolve through a latex glove in the inside.
Uh, but there, you can sort of see some bear parallels to a human culture,
but they're alien, they're comprehensible, but alien enough that
you never confuse them with people.
They're not as early as it refers to badly designed aliens elsewhere,
humans in funny suits.
Yeah.
What was that movie with, um, the big squid aliens that communicated
by squirting ink in circles?
Arrival.
Arrival.
Those were good.
Like some people are getting better at this and that makes me happy.
But yeah, then that you, for every arrival, there's still like three or
four movies where it's just a human with face putty or it's a big bug.
Yeah.
Arthur C.
Clark's drama series had some really cool aliens that the humans
dove octose fighters whose main, like, uh, individual to individual
communication, uh, involves this bioluminescent patch that can flash
different colors, kind of like actual cuttlefish.
Yeah.
I mean, like if more people just drew inspiration from things that
actually exist, like mantis shrimp, like there's so many weird things
that do actually exist that would freak people out.
If you made like just a bigger version of that, that has spaceships.
The mantis shrimp has the strongest punch of anything on the planet.
It has to use its own skeleton as the, as the energy storage because muscle
can't contract fast enough to deliver that punch.
So like it uses muscle to stretch its own exoskeleton and then it sort of
hooks it in place and the punch occurs when it releases the hook and the whole
plate of exoskeleton springs back to its normal size.
It's insane.
They are beautiful and they are made of rage and their eyes.
They can see all the colors.
They can see all the colors.
Anyway, um, like some hundreds more, uh, kinds of receptors than we have.
They're terrible.
How many more?
Like they can see 12 different wavelengths and they have six distinct
images formed by their eyes.
So their depth perception is preposterous.
Nice.
They need this so they can like find things to punch.
Yeah.
They're, they're, they're punch is it, it lands.
No, they're more like one punch.
They're, they're punch lands in a really specific area relative to their
body every time.
So they need an extremely precise sense of their own location.
I just want to get one as a pet and then like name it Saitama and put a
little one punch man, but name it.
Can't you?
But like I'll see keeping one as a pet means you have to have like bullet
proof glass tank, get a, get a polycarbonate aquarium.
If you can figure that out, they will effortlessly smash glass.
I think the ones that have a little tiny bit of plasma when the, uh, thing,
that's, well, them and pistol shrimp both do that.
Pistol shrimp.
That's what I was saying.
Yeah.
The, the acceleration is such that they actually create a vacuum in the wake of
the earth at the, like wavefront water.
The universe gets out of the way and the vacuum, as it collapses, actually
generates a tiny infrared pulse that you can see with a camera.
With an infrared camera.
This is why I don't think like mankind was created in God's image.
Cause why, you know, there's, there's a whole way of shit that we can't punch
ultraviolet.
God gave like the coolest abilities to like shrimp and it's in octopi.
And I don't know if they gave us the ability to take over the world and
possibly fix a aging.
So I think that's a pretty good one.
That, that is a good one.
But then there's also jellyfish aging.
Yeah.
Well, they can fix it.
They just never fell into that age trap.
Can they make computers?
Right.
Yeah.
Why do they need computers?
They're more where, how else would you get porn?
I don't know.
Do they even have fingers to jerk off with?
I'm sure.
Okay.
So obviously we're severe here.
Like dolphin communication does appear to have like some, a lot of elements of
actual language and given that it can be transmitted over a lot of miles.
And they, and they're like almost human level smart.
They probably have something like an oral tradition.
So there probably is a dolphin analog to the song of Solomon or some other
erotic fiction.
Nice.
Buried in the porpoise corpus.
How long have you been waiting to drop that?
I didn't.
That's like 50 years old and it came out of the Illuminatus trilogy.
Oh, nice.
Cool.
We're so off topic, but it's, it's like really enjoyable.
As long as we're talking about that though, that example I said I would get to.
Um, people don't just underestimate like technology directly impacting their
lives.
They, I think just because of how unintuitive the scientific process is,
people don't realize how bad the precedent is.
Even when, when examples are pointed out for saying, well, science will never
discover this, uh, in like 2008, 2009, when I was totally an internet atheist
stereotype, uh, this one Catholic person that I argued with was very sure that
aliens didn't exist because for all of our looking, we haven't found any other
star with planets and like at that exact moment in time, people were developing
the techniques that we've now used to map the locations and estimate the masses
of, we're probably into five digits worth of exoplanets now.
They were also wrong in 2008.
We had been finding planets, I think since the nineties.
It may be the two, maybe the early 2000s.
Um, but it was, it was emerging.
And back then it was in the, at least low hundreds.
My numbers might be a little off, but I know we had exoplanets pre 2010.
That's possible.
I guess part of it is the techniques we had at the time were completely
inadequate to identify any in earth like exoplanets.
Right.
Yeah.
That's fair.
We, we were able to detect the, like the wiggle of a sun that you would see by
indicative of having a nearby non-sun.
Like a Jupiter sized thing.
Right.
Yeah.
Apparently the first exoplanet found was one of those big gas, gas giants in 1992.
Yeah.
I knew that because it was brought up in the like re-release of Carl Ziggins
cosmos.
I should have just made it sound like I was smart, but no, I saw it on TV.
Uh, this was one way to get smart.
Some of the updates from the original release of cosmos.
And then when they're like, you know, the preamble to the, the one that you can
find now online, um, it used to be on Netflix.
Uh, I think it was maybe just Andrea.
I think for some reason I'm saying and talking about it too.
I can't remember, but, um, like in the original cosmos, dinosaurs being wiped
out via asteroid was one leading hypothesis or like one contending hypothesis.
Maybe like this wasn't, you know, like you mentioned 2008, you know what
else happened in 2008 that seems like forever ago.
Like we can't imagine without it.
The mortgage crisis, the release of the iPhone.
Oh, doesn't it feel like they've been around for like our whole lives?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I remember, um, being in kindergarten, we were talking about computers and they
asked, um, like who, how many of you have computers in your houses?
The teacher is sort of proselytizing about technology, which was great.
And then they did an exercise where they had blue and red blocks and you had to
put like your red or blue block on a stack.
If you had a computer versus not, and when was the one that tipped the scale?
Cause it was about 50, 50, but my house did not have a computer.
And then the teacher's like, I predict that I forget.
I wish I could remember what like timescale her prediction was, but like,
she was like, definitely someday everyone's house is going to have a computer.
Definitely someday everyone's pocket will have a computer.
Other wrist.
Well, you know, for a weird, definitely someday everyone's body will have a computer.
I like if, if everyone currently sitting in this room, isn't carrying
around more computing power than existed on earth at the end of World War
two, there's certainly within an order of magnitude, but I'm pretty sure that
yeah, any of the cell phones here has more throughput than all of the computers
that had ever been built combined at that time.
Oh, at that time.
Yeah, totally.
They were still using vacuum tubes back then.
They're still, I mean, there are good reasons to use them for some things.
I know they figured in like Soviet military electronics for a long time
because unlike solid state stuff, they won't be disrupted when a nuke goes off.
Unless the tubes break.
Yes, but this is just like the argument like, no, vinyl just sounds better, man.
Last badly enough to, for the tubes inside a tank to be broken, your electronics
continuing to work.
That that's not your limiting problem.
Completely valid.
Yeah, anyway, I was sort of talking on the drive over here about we're talking
about this one and about people's intuitions about the future being too
limited, but I was just saying, like, I mean, I, okay, I remember the birth
of the internet and then like the whole, you know, maybe everybody will have a
computer in their house to the point where people now have like, you know, a
phone and a Fitbit and a smart watch and a laptop and a PC, maybe, and like
probably, you know, some some kind of computers in their cars and like I've
watched you just machine learning get to the point where now there is a there's
a machine learning program that can draw unique anime girls.
Yes.
The waifu generator, that's not what it's called probably, but I believe the
sign that the site is this waifu is not real.
Yeah, this waifu does not exist.
That's the website in the form post.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, I there's one little generate feet pics.
If you send it texts.
Oh, great.
Yeah.
So like, this is this is the like world that I grew up in.
So like, I'm going to be very difficult to surprise, but like, that's what we
all think you might be surprised.
Exactly.
So this is, I guess, a good intuition pump.
Um, when he was talking about how people don't like imagine things being
weird enough, he said, what, just try to imagine like time going in reverse that
like, maybe you just revert back to being a peasant farmer, except like, maybe
it's a better future, but it's still going to feel about that weird.
I think that variance issue that I brought up with like how far you could
get from a representative human experience is part of the reason that
people's intuition about this is bad.
Like imagine you're in that tribe of 150 people and someone actually
invents the first bow and arrow you've ever heard of.
That's a giant instantaneous leap.
But in that tribe of 150 people, there aren't so many people that you're
statistically going to come up with intuitive leaps like that constantly
scale the population up to 7 billion with millions of people going through
STEM programs constantly and like a ridiculous like meta industries that
exist just to serve the people who try to come up with these insights.
The, the absolute number of insights gets so much larger that we now think of
it as a continuous process, but the intuitions that we have recalibrated for
a world in which the bow and arrow might be the most revolutionary thing
invented during your lifetime.
Yeah.
So that one ended with, I suspect that when people try to visualize the
strangeness of the future, they focus on a single possible change of no
greater magnitude than the largest single change they remember in their own
lifetime.
Yeah.
As opposed to all the various changes that are all going to hit.
I really want to interview, like I should actually probably just talk to
my grandmother, but like it would be just so interesting to get the
perspective of, uh, you know, my grandmother is 87 and just, I just
want to like show her the waifu generator or something.
It'd be like, Hey, guess what we've got.
Do you think she'd be that impressed by a waifu generator?
I don't know.
Maybe not.
My grandfather would have been.
Show her one of those voice deep fakes.
Like Ben Shapiro sings rap god by Eminem.
Yeah, I feel like some of like the technological advances that we have are
just like, they probably just seem like magic though.
Uh, oh, there's a, I'll link to this, but there was this, uh, interesting
video of GPT three, just kind of being good at everything.
And it's kind of freaky.
Uh, but like, I feel like if I showed, you know, my grandmother, you're like,
Hey, look, this, uh, what is it?
An association engine basically can now do all these other things.
You gotta save that video from we have our episode on GPT three.
Oh, we're going to do an episode on that.
We absolutely should.
It's GPT three, man.
I think I think explaining why the waifu generator or GPT three is amazing
to somebody who isn't the least bit tech savvy would be really hard.
I know it's like, there's so much inferential distance, just explaining
why this is important.
You're like, you're showing like, Oh cool.
It helps write paragraphs.
And it's like, but, but look at how, look at, look at how it's doing it.
And then like, so that, that's the magic under the hood, right?
Yeah.
All right.
I think you might have an easier time, uh, showing like the GPT two chess game
or Guerns GPT two composed folk music and explaining why that's cool.
Because GPT two obviously and only works on text, but just by finding a way
to represent folk music as text, you can teach it enough about folk music.
Like by, it'll watch other people do folk music and sort of figure
out what the rules are.
Oh yeah.
Remind me to link this as well.
There's a, uh, what would you call it?
There's like a cyberpunk zine that I subscribe to.
Um, and the person who writes the zine fed it into GPT three and then had GPT
three write a post for him and then analyze the things that it was doing.
Like, so he had little assides in italics that was like, here's where I
definitely thought it was going to get off topic.
But look, here's where it noticed it was getting off topic and then brought
itself back out of that.
It was really interesting.
Yeah.
I, I really want to read that link.
Okay.
Um, we can just make more Scott per slate.
Sarcotics posts with GPT three.
Yeah.
I wouldn't trust them to be accurate.
I want to try that though.
What I want to do, what I really want to try is like, we're basically there.
Like, you know, get every physics paper, get every publication, cause you
know, there's more papers being published than any one human can keep up with
than any team of humans can keep up with.
Just have GPT three read all the paper, all the physics and paper, you know,
all the up through 2000 and then all of them sense and all of them every day.
And then write some new ones and then just check them.
Yeah.
No, I wonder, like that's the same principle as folding at home where they
were having people fold proteins into different unique shapes because
these are all excellent ideas for our GPT three episode.
All right.
Yeah.
Okay.
People hold off, but today we're not talking about GPT three.
We're talking about something much more money.
Wait.
First, our posts for next time.
Right.
Sorry.
They will be anchoring and adjustment and the crackpot offer.
Alrighty.
Uh, now something much more mundane.
Yeah.
I was just going to lead into with that.
So whoever wants to tell us what we're talking about.
Oh, sure.
Um, it's guns.
It's guns.
So, yeah, thanks for pulling the trigger on that.
So I, um, I don't know.
I remember a old Robin Hansen post where he was talking about, um, how do various
people talking about, uh, survivalist strategies and like, you know, how many
calories you got to save up and where you should live to maximize your ability
at clean water and, uh, and grow enough calories or find calories in your
environment and all that.
And he said, look, this is by the time things have gotten that far, we've kind
of already lost the game.
My primary plan for survival is making sure civilization does not entirely collapse.
And that's where I'm putting all my effort.
And for the most part, I agree with him.
I think like extreme survivalism is, uh, is kind of missing, um, the, the goal
for, for it's shooting for a goal that for what's we're shooting for that.
We've already lost the game.
Unless you're just doing it for fun, which like, yeah, so like, but that's
the thing is if you're doing it, you're like, well, now I'm ready.
And it's like, shouldn't you try and like not be ready for this scenario?
Right.
Right.
But there are certain scenarios that sometimes you do have to be ready for as
we found out with the, uh, COVID, uh, catastrophe.
If we can call it a catastrophe, I think it's probably fair to call it a catastrophe.
Got a pandemic.
Okay.
Yeah.
Where, uh, you know, you really should have at least, um, a month's worth,
could maybe three weeks worth of calories stored up, uh, and three weeks worth
of any medication that you are really dependent on because sometimes things
happen in cities, uh, get knocked out of their regular supply chains and it can
take a few weeks to re, um, to reestablish those supply chains.
Could be a natural disaster.
It could be a man made disaster.
It could be a pandemic, but whatever it is, just the ability to know that you
can, uh, live for two to three weeks without having cannibalized your neighbors
is, uh, a great thing.
So, uh, so I remember, uh, because cities are not self-sustaining or sustainable.
I remember this art or, I guess it was an article, but, uh, it was titled
something like, uh, one of the top search, one of the top Google search phrases
was how do you make toilet paper?
How to make your own toilet pad was just like, Oh my God.
Oh my God.
This is what I mean.
If you're dedicated, any paper can be toilet paper, but I don't think that's what
the, what the searcher was inquiring about and you shouldn't flush
non-toilet paper, paper down.
Oh my God.
No, don't do it.
Um, I had my previous house, I had a bunch of housemates who apparently
had been flushing things like paper towels and tampons and, uh, it was really
not fun when we had to like cut the pipes open and then like months of horrible
food, grease and tampons sound particularly awful.
Like those things expand so much.
I've heard of them being used like for bullet wounds, they're great for bullet
wounds, actually.
Like they're packaged sterile.
So that actually seems like an awesome idea.
Uh, if you are worried about being prepared for the long tail of bad things
that can happen, you probably should include a box of tampons for that reason.
Yeah.
Like clout powder tampons, you know, it's one of those things like, I mean, like
toilet paper didn't make my list of top 10 necessities because I always use my
hand and wash it if it comes to that.
Right.
Like, and that's why it blew my mind that this is what the shelves were
out of, but there was, there was plenty of canned food.
Right.
And I'm like, okay, well, I'm going to let them on canned food.
You know, when it comes down to it, yeah, you could use your hand.
You could use a paper towel or excuse me, just a rag and wash the rag.
Like I've got a detachable shower head.
Like, you know, like, I guess what I'm getting at is I do enjoy having toilet
paper as a luxury, but if I had my list of things I need to have at home for a
month, like that doesn't make the top 10, I think that in the same vein as I
think it's cool that like, or it's not cool that like schools are phasing out
home, I think it's pretty important that kids learn how to cook meals and like
repair basic things around the house.
One of them was writing a check.
I don't know how relevant that is anymore, but like basic finance stuff, but
like survivalist stuff should also be taught in school.
Just like, first of all, just in case, you know, you do end up lost in the woods.
I only recently found out that it is not the optimal way to cook to just put it
on the highest heat setting and hurry through the cooking process.
Yeah, sometimes you can cook part of the meat and not all the way through the
meat and then you can make your meat very dry that way.
But like, it was a better lesson if you do that with bacon, you're doing
bacon wrong and you'll never get it properly crispy.
The other thing is also really quickly before we get off the top entirely, I
wanted to interject those things that are, say they're flushable on them, the
flushable wipes, not at all flushable.
It's a complete lie.
There should be a class action lawsuit against them.
Don't know why there hasn't been.
You cannot flush those things.
Don't do it.
Yeah, agreed.
I mean, you, it's physically possible, but it'll end up having the same effects.
They will not buy it.
There was a thought.
Oh yeah.
Uh, the other reason that it would be cool if kids were learning basic survival
skills is that it gives you an appreciation for the shit you have.
Like if you ever tried to build a fire, where did I read this?
I forget where this came from, but somebody said, okay, go, go outside and build a
fire.
Like if people think that it's easy to build a fire, you know, like, or that the
discovery of how to build fire wasn't that big of a deal.
Like it was like literally go outside, try to make a fire.
You won't be able to, you, it, it's really difficult.
And the fact that, you know, you can turn on your stove top and then there's
flame or flick a lighter, uh, or, you know, then, um, maybe go try to like hunt
something and butcher it.
That's still something I want to do, um, since I'm, since I'm a meat eater, uh,
which I would really like to eventually convert to veganism, but I just have my
three week supply of boxed calories.
I do not plan to ever butcher and kill something.
Well, I feel like it's important to really face like emotionally that what
it's like, cause it's hard to, I don't know.
I don't want to watch those years of slaughter house.
I understand this, this, this line of thinking entirely though, there are a
lot of people, like I've never understood people who think of hunting as cruel,
but also casually eat meat, right?
Who seem to think of the meat of like a hamburger patty as something that as
just a particularly messy fruit that's picked off a tree and has to ship to
you, uh, in ice.
Yeah.
There's people that are even like, you know, when they get the chicken breasts
that are already cut and sterilized and everything from the grocery store.
I remember when my sister was young, she, if she ever found a piece of fat or,
uh, God forbid, a vein, she would like not be able to eat the rest of the food,
get nauseous and like, and it was just horrifying.
She didn't ever want to think about the fact that steak was a cow.
If someone started bringing up jokes about that, she'd be like, stop,
don't talk about that.
Oh my gosh.
Dude, the first time you see a little kid, um, learn that their chicken nuggets
or their chicken wings are made out of a chicken.
That's, that's an interesting time to, to see the kid working, processing stuff.
They're like, what?
No, what?
Like, yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, like, I guess I was gifted with the experience of having lots of animals
die.
Like, uh, I was like super interested in animals and I just collected them.
I had a whole bunch of animals.
Uh, and, but like the thing is that little kids don't know how to take care of animals.
And it's weird that like, I don't know.
Um, I think a lot of times people will get their kid like something small as
opposed to getting a dog or a cat, something that's harder to kill by not
taking care of it correctly.
Uh, they'll get like, my parents got me like a hamster and then like,
are they especially susceptible to dying?
Oh yeah.
Um, well, this was two hamsters who killed each other.
Oh, this happens a lot.
Um, or, uh, I kept getting lizards and then like the pet store, the pet store.
Fuck pet stores.
Um, hold on, hold on.
We are getting way too, yeah, yeah, okay.
So rant about pet co another time.
The reason we have gray here is because one of the things that breaks down when
infrastructure breaks down during, you know, uh, short-term outages of
infrastructure in your city is security.
Uh, the cops sometimes can't get to where they, uh, need to be to prevent
bad things from happening and you have to take care of that shit yourself.
Or sometimes if things hit shit, it's the way they start bad things happening.
Right.
Exactly.
And, uh, the, the problem is that in those situations, when you really need to
go out and get a gun or something, it's too late.
You don't have a chance to do it now because the ability to get the gun is
gone.
It's something you had to have beforehand.
And, uh, I am somewhat, I have been somewhat anti gun, uh, but, yeah, now
that I trust the system far less than I used to, I am beginning to see the
wisdom of maybe having a gun locked up in your basement, possibly even, uh,
buried in your foundation's John Wick style so that there's no way you can get
to it and accidentally suicide yourself.
Or, well, I guess you still could if you were, uh, if you were really determined.
But the point being that you're not about to have the gun used against you in a,
in a, uh, in a burglary situation.
This is like when you really need the gun, you can go break open your foundations
and get it.
So we brought Gray here in order to ask him things about guns since he is the
discord gun guy, like, uh, what sort of guns should we get?
How can we keep them safe?
How do we maintain them?
That sort of thing.
So Gray, are you in fact a gun guy?
Yes, uh, one, I'd say not the gun guy, because there are enough other enthusiasts
on the conspiracy that we have the use of weapons channel to quarantine
discussion of such things.
But, uh, I would say that I'm definitely top 10% on the discord for overall
familiarity and technical knowledge.
And I've put enough reading into it and own a few of them.
So I feel comfortable offering my expertise here.
I guess I have the question to open with unless someone else also wants to open.
I guess my, my opening question would be if I want, um, a gun that is reliable
and easy to maintain and just, just a standard decent gun to not have on me
all the time, but that I can break out of my basement if I really need it in
situations where site is burying down for a couple of weeks, what sort of
sort of gun should I get?
Wait, can I guess you're going to say a shotgun?
Yes.
Can I, can I narrowly guess double barrel shotgun that doesn't have the pump
action that would deteriorate over years?
I actually wouldn't say double barrel.
I have a sentimental fondness for them and they can be quite useful with practice.
They, and they have, they have one advantage over pump action shotguns,
which is that because they don't have that repeating mechanism, uh, for an
equal barrel length, they can be about four inches shorter.
And that, that does make a difference if you're using them in security type
situations, but the amount of practice that you need to get their weird
reloading motion down and grab two, two shotgun shells reliably out of a pouch,
something like that.
Um, I, they're the fastest way to get two shells out, but a pump action will
always be faster for the third.
And since you only have to memorize one motion, one set of motions to do a pump
action properly and because they just repeat one by one by one, I think it's
easier to train and the maintenance requirements are honestly about the same.
Nice.
I was just saying, I mean, part of me is thinking that like in, in the average
home invader scenario from the movies, what I'm gathering is if you can't do it
in two shotgun blasts, then what's the third one going to do you?
Like if there's three guys, yeah, I mean, I, I guess, like, they don't know.
Maybe they, they won't be doing an inspection inspection of what kind of
gun you have.
And when they're first to have, you know, holes blown in them, they might just
leave.
Yeah.
So there is one possible argument in favor of a double barrel.
If you have exactly, if you're going to have exactly one gun and your intended
use is a home defense situation like that, which is that those two big gaping
muzzles pointed at you, the intimidation factor is extreme.
The other benefit of a shotgun with intimidation factor is that everyone
knows the noise of the double barrel or the noise of a shotgun.
All you have to do is like, this is my, my home defense strategy.
Should I have a shotgun at home is I hear them robbing the house.
I say, go, go nuts, take whatever you want.
And then if I get them caught upstairs, I'm like, Hey, I'm sitting behind
the door with a loaded shotgun and you can have whatever you want in the house.
But if the door opens, I'm going to shoot you in the face.
I've heard that the racking sound of a shotgun, uh, I guess being loaded is
enough to stop most people and deter them.
So I, I know of cases where that definitely didn't apply, but it's a
very distinctive sound.
And if, I guess if someone's fight or flight isn't already engaged when they
hear that, that's going to cut out the fight option for most people.
Uh, and I believe there's case law in a couple of states that that constitutes
a demand that they leave that once, if you build that noise, that is all
the warning you're required to give.
So what I'm wondering is, could you like just do what Steven said, but like,
maybe just have your cell phone play the sound of a shot.
I don't know.
I don't think you're going to get the base required out of a cell phone
speaker, honestly.
You could probably build like a little, a little button, you know, with the
right speaker that would do it.
But then in that, I mean, it's, it's part of the, you know, the, the game
theoretical implications of it is like, you don't want them to test the, your
metal, or, you know, if they're like, well, I don't care about getting shot
or whatever, then you want to actually be prepared to have to do the worst.
Yeah, but if you want to, if you want to, you know, uh, repel some
percentage of invaders that might work.
Well, I categorically can't endorse putting more effort into the bluff than
it takes to actually have the actual threat available.
So I'm going to say, even if you could, don't.
Uh, isn't it a bit of work getting a gun, getting the licensing,
practicing with it and maintaining it?
So getting it under most circumstances, not that big a deal.
If you don't have a criminal record and you don't live in a couple of states
that are just comically, stupidly draconian about this, um, the fact
of not having a criminal record will be sufficient to get you a gun over the
counter in less than an hour.
Oh, and also they cost money, right?
Yeah.
So a pump action shotgun of the type that I would suggest getting, if you're
going to get exactly one gun after tax and including a bit of ammo, you're
probably looking at spending 400 bucks.
Yeah, that's a lot of money for some people.
Oh, okay.
But getting a convincing, convincing robot would also be somewhat expensive,
but playing a sound from YouTube on your computer, if that would work on 10%
of whatever.
Well, um, I was being kind of facetious about that, but I like the idea
because part of it is the, is the, um, repelling factor of just having it,
right?
Like I, sorry, go ahead.
I, it's related, but it's like, I was talking to somebody about guns just
recently and, um, their primary home defense gun has a laser on it.
And someone was pointing out, like they, they got into some, apparently it was
relaying an argument to me that he had, and was saying that, you know, that's
like, uh, showing intent to harm or something.
Cause your, your pinpointing is like, no, I think it's an act of, of compassion
towards the person.
Cause that is the last, that's, that's the last straw, basically.
They see that.
And then if they don't stand down, they know exactly where that bullet's going.
Yeah.
That I would.
So get a laser pointer.
Yeah, exactly.
Again, you're making more effort to, to have the bluff that the actual
threat requires.
Well, laser planners are nine bucks.
Yeah, that's, um, so you said in under an hour, isn't there usually
multiple day waiting periods?
Uh, that depends on a couple of factors.
This, the specific state you're in being the biggest one, uh, Virginia, where
I grew up has, I think a three day waiting period for handguns and a law
that prevents you from purchasing more than one in a month, but those are both
waived if you have a concealed carry permit.
And the, and it doesn't apply to like long, long guns.
Those almost never apply to long guns.
Um, in Minnesota, where I lived before moving to Colorado, they have
something called a permit to purchase.
And what you do for that, it's basically a sort of pre background check.
The state runs, you go down to city hall, you fill out this form and the, the
license they give you is required to purchase handguns and certain kinds
of rifle that looks scary.
Uh, and basically it just means that that permit means that the, that the
state police have already checked you against the state's databases of organized
crime affiliates, known gang members, uh, like all felony convictions, period,
uh, drug arrests because that's a disqualifying factor and also involuntary
psychiatric admissions because that's a disqualifying.
I was going to ask about, what about mental health?
If you haven't been, uh, found guilty by reason of insanity or found
not guilty by reason of insanity in court or involuntarily committed to a
mental hospital, uh, then you don't fall under the mental health
exclusions for ownership.
Okay.
Before we get too far field, uh, I know that we were all expecting to say shotgun,
but can you tell us why specifically a shotgun would be your first recommendation?
Because a shotgun is, uh, how do I put this?
I'm trying to remember the phrase that this was first given.
So shooting a rifle is sciencey.
Um, the sites are somewhat complicated.
There are a lot of ballistics and there's a lot of ballistics knowledge
that goes into using a rifle beyond its point blank range.
Um, the particular selection of ammunition has, well, some influence, but not
a lot most of the time, but there are a lot of variables involved in shooting
a rifle that you sort of have to know to, to cover all the things you would use
a rifle for.
And you also have to aim, right?
Yeah.
The, the aiming for rifle is more complicated.
Uh, shotguns are more artsy.
They're the aiming of a shotgun involves pointing.
It's done in fast and intuitively.
And unlike the aiming of a rifle, it works off of muscle memory.
And like, I think the majority of cases where you'd be using it for
self-defense, it would be short range.
So it's unlikely to shoot somebody at 30 yards and self-defense.
Yeah.
If you're, if the person's 30 yards away, unless there's a rifle pointed at you,
it's not a self-defense shooting.
Exactly.
And I mean, and how close do they have to be for it to be self-defense?
I mean, in, in practice, there has to be some sort of lethal threat, but I don't
think that I would not be comfortable making an argument that someone 30 yards
away was a threat unless I'd tried to run first and they'd followed.
Okay.
Um, most pistol shooting, like the effective range of a pistol, which is
probably the commonly used defense thing just because it's what police carry
mostly, those almost always happen within five yards.
That's short.
Yes.
Holy shit.
I heard someone sprinting with a knife can usually cover nine yards before
someone can draw and fire a handgun.
Yes.
You'd need a lot of practice to narrow that.
And I still wouldn't like to rely on it.
The other thing too, I mean, just like with the knife thing, again, two
opponents standing in an open field and under ideal conditions, someone couldn't
sprint in your house.
You don't have enough runway.
And even if you did, you've got, they've got to run upstairs.
Like, I mean, they're a chance to trip over.
Exactly.
So, you know, I think of gun safety primarily in the terms of home defense.
And so that sort of factor doesn't really play in.
Like you've got a lot of cover.
If someone kicked your one access point in, I guess two, if they broke
into the downstairs door or whatever, but from where you are, you're situated
enough to where if you're pointing a gun at them, that they have a knife, you're
like, I, you guys can leave or, you know, the corners can drag you out.
Right.
Honestly, the downstairs access point is much less secure.
Right.
This is a solid door with the deadbolt.
The downstairs is just plate glass.
You can break it with a rock.
Yeah.
But so I guess the cliff notes of why I'd recommend a shotgun, they're cheap to
acquire, cheap to shoot.
The maintenance requirements are low and the training is generally easier.
And for a lot of people, more fun, if you're taking, if you're getting a
shotgun and just want to take up shooting, I would recommend picking up
skeet shooting or trap shooting.
That is fun.
That's so for people not familiar with the term, these are various shotgun
sports that involve a clay target, a clay disk being thrown through the air
that you're supposed to nail with the shotgun when it's flung.
And I believe it explodes satisfyingly if you hit it.
If you, if you get a very, if you get a central hit on it, it turned just
evaporates into a cloud of smoke.
It is most satisfying every now and then you'll just get it with one pellet
and it'll just kind of wobble, wobble, wobble.
But I've also seen the impact that skeet makes on any use of a shotgun.
It's valuable even to professionals.
I know people with no military background who whose only use of it is to
shoot skeet regularly.
And I've seen them humiliate US Marines in informal competition.
It's also just fun.
And we'll have to get around to that part of the aspect of it, maybe if we
get time, but it's a blast.
Like, I mean, and I'm maybe lowballing it, but probably not that much.
I think the time from I've never seen a shotgun before to proficiency is 10 minutes.
I'm serious for home defense purposes.
Like just, Hey, here's how you hold it.
This is the end of the bullets come out.
You point in the general direction of what you're aiming for and you'll hit them.
Like there's really nothing to it.
So to aim it.
Yeah, I can, I can believe that for, for just learning to aim the thing.
As far as the aim it, if it took them more than 90 seconds, I'd take it away from them.
Like that.
I mean, there's nothing to aiming one as far as the other muscle memory you need.
I would be comfortable saying that five minutes a day of practice will put you in
good stead if you're not paranoid.
Yeah.
What about the recoil?
So that is a, there are a lot of things that will influence that if you're
buying something for home defense, you will not want to use the same sorts of shells
you would typically use for skeet.
That's actually another advantage of shotguns.
By the way, if you have any uses in mind that aren't home defense, shotguns can be
retooled for a lot of different applications with just a change of ammo.
And the ammo is widely available and there's an extreme variety of it.
Are there any especially fun uses that are not home defense?
Ski shooting, target practice is fun.
So sporting clays in particular, which is designed to simulate like you moving
through an environment with game birds is particularly ridiculously fun.
So instead of just having as like on a trap range, there will be a house that
you're a trap house that you're standing in front of and the clays will be flung
out in random directions on a sporting clays course.
There might be one that simulates a rabbit and the clay target will roll on
its side along the ground and have a jump at a defined point.
Oh, cool.
The variety of tests that it can subject you to, it's a bunch of fun.
That's the kind of that I did was it wasn't so you basically moved
across something like a dozen different arenas and then they would fire
from one or two spots, often simultaneously.
And it's I mean, it's it's fun and engaging, but there is recoil.
I mean, by the end of the day, I had a nice shoulder bruise
and it was the second manliest bruise I've ever received.
So I don't do a lot of manly things.
So I was very proud of it.
Yeah.
Shotguns, they do throw a lot of lead.
They don't throw it very fast, but they throw a lot of it.
A turkey load, like something you'd go off for wild turkey.
For that, you want a lot of really fine shot.
So you actually have to use a shell that's longer than the standard
length just to fit all the shot and powder in there and to make sure
that normal guns don't take the ammo by mistake.
Would that would that be on the scatter shot?
That that's just a general term for the first shot.
Like with shotguns, you start at birdshot, which can be very, very fine
down to like a millimeter per pellet.
They the sizes can step up pretty big from there.
Then you get into buckshot named because somebody at some time
thought it was appropriate for deer hunting.
Personally, I wouldn't chance it, but it could work in a pinch.
And then the next step up from buckshot is slugs,
which is just a solid one ounce blob of lead that's launched at one
and a half times the speed of sound.
I can't remember the goddamn name of it, but what is it when you
shoot basically a bunch of shrapnel?
Flush it rounds.
Yeah, those those aren't for shotguns, though.
They they exist for shotguns.
They were tested in Vietnam.
The problem with them is that they're partly because steel is not very dense.
They're comically ineffective under a variety of common circumstances.
Rain drops will knock them off course.
But the point is you shoot a lot of them, right?
So like you're almost guaranteed to have a few of them hit.
Yeah, the principle with a shotgun is just none of the individual pellets
is supposed to cause the terminal performance that you want.
But with enough pellets, you're going to get something somewhere.
You won't have your pellets going after something like deer.
Then you do going after birds because, well, there's a lot more meat
in the way that you have to damage.
You're very resilient.
So getting back to our defense thing,
what kind of shot do you want to buy for taking down humans?
So the human shot for this purpose,
we'll call it, we'll assume that humans are deer.
OK.
In the military settings that I've seen,
you commonly see double or triple zero,
usually pronounced triple ought buck shot used.
Triple ought buck is a bullet
about the size of a millimeter pistol bullet
and the shell will contain around nine of them.
So that one shell is equivalent to emptying a pistol into someone up close.
Damn. I don't.
But it goes a lot slower than a pistol.
Oh, it goes faster.
There's a lot more barrel to accelerate it.
Oh, OK. Yeah, you're you're probably getting.
I think you might actually get after accounting for the bullet weights.
You're you're definitely getting at least as much energy propellant
as a pistol would deliver.
But the the spheres are lighter
and they don't penetrate as well.
So I'd say that the the overall performance per blob of lead breaks even.
I don't recommend zero or larger buck shot, though,
if you're talking about using it for home defense,
because it will go through both sides of a drywall.
The police standard I'm for the for this reason in a lot of cases
is number four buck shot, which will go through one sheet rock, but not two.
So if you're firing, shoot your neighbor.
If you're firing it inside the house,
you don't have to worry about anyone outside the room you're in.
And that is a pretty big advantage since the whole reason you're
doing defending is that there are people in the house
that you care about more than things. Gotcha.
And unless they're all behind you,
including your neighbors, if you share walls with people,
that's when you load up the good stuff.
If as we do, you live in somewhat densely populated areas,
I would be very careful to select something that won't leave the house.
So how do you keep this safe in your house?
My guns are kept.
I have a gun safe on order, a big, heavy one
that's probably going to take forever to deliver because covid.
But the my current storage involves a case
that has several locking points on its own.
And when the options available,
that is chained with hardened, especially hardened chain
with an additional lock to a radiator.
OK, if you live someplace that has radiators,
they're very good to chain that sort of thing, too.
I don't have radiators, but I have a basement with exposed studs.
Can I drill like a hole through a stud and feed the chain through that?
If you've got anything else like load bearing that's visible,
I would use it first and like chain it to a support column.
The there are if you don't have
if you've got exposed studs,
you could just nail another hard piece of wood to two of them
and use that as your, you know, your rack to drill through.
And it might be easy to kick kick that wood.
Well, no, maybe if I put like two large screws through both sides.
Yeah, make it make it sturdy.
What if you just chained it to a bunch of like chain a bunch of things together?
So it would just be very unwieldy, like to your coffee table, to your couch.
Like that's actually a fun example that I was going to bring up.
I've seen in like highly secured building
settings, this system that I would gather is specified by the insurance age,
by the insurance industry for rating the security of doors.
It will say something like this door is certified
against two hours of surreptitious entry attempts
or five minutes of brute force up to an including sledgehammer.
If yeah, if someone is willing to use dynamite,
there's no door that's going to secure anything, but I just find it funny
that people try to enter through doors or windows when you could just get a saw
is all and like usually cut your way right through the wall.
Well, it's way easier to enter unnoticed through a door or window.
That's true. That's that's why they separately rate the surreptitious
and brute force attempts.
Like dynamite plus sledgehammer will clear any door that you can get through alone.
It may damage what you want to take.
So probably that's why people don't just default to that option.
So what were you saying about insurance companies and the gun safes?
Oh, so well, the if you don't have one thing you could do with a safe
in it, since you own the place is get a safe and actually screw it into the studs.
A lot of safes will have screw holes so that you can you put it up
against the wall and you screw it onto the studs.
So they have to basically structurally compromise the house in order to move the safe.
That's the best case or the best case is that, but you have concrete to work with.
The second best case is being able to get it into the studs like that.
If you rent and like most landlords I've had, your landlord is not comfortable
with you drilling holes in structural elements of the building.
Then you're probably best off with enough security that it's inconvenient to try to get open
and then also just having the storage concealed.
There are a lot of products you can buy that will, for example,
stick to the underside of a bed frame and hold a shotgun there.
Some of them will have a like a lock that can be released with a fingerprint
or with a finger touch combination that you can do in the dark.
And it will release the gun.
You can pull it away from that.
Could you stick an alarm on it to you could.
And there are I can't think of a specific example,
but I am sure that there exist locking solutions like that.
You mean just to show that the shotgun's been moved?
Yeah. Yeah.
I mean, they make those little they're 10 bucks to a pair.
You spilled them good about Walgreens.
They put on sliding doors or windows.
And it's just, you know, if the magnet gets far enough away from the base part of it,
it starts screaming.
So let you know if the door was opened or whatever.
I mean, you could just if you're doing under the bed solution,
you could just have, you know, the magnet glued or taped to the gun.
Barrel and the battery part DIY.
Yeah. If you're if you're storing it in a way that doesn't require immediate access,
which is what I would prefer.
Like, you know, I only want to bust this out in the once in a decade actual emergency.
Well, you want it to still be something that you can get at
in the space of a few seconds when you want to, which I think I personally do not.
Those touch locks are generally, I think, good for that reason.
If it takes you 60 seconds to get at, it's not useful when you need it.
I see I am again, specifically thinking about societal breakdowns.
The the city has been hit with a disaster where I will have time
to take a sledgehammer into my basement and break it out of the foundation.
John Wick style. So your plan isn't home defense.
No, like for forever circumstances.
Is for in that case, just like.
Oh, his plan is civil disturbance.
Yeah, we're talking about different mission requirements.
Yeah. Yeah.
Just tighter than the wall.
You absolutely could just keep them in a safe
if you want to look cool and have a room you can show off.
Then you can also get wall racks that will accomplish largely the same thing.
But, you know, leave them visible while they're stored safely.
Wall of guns picture can be kind of cool.
So that's not a terrible idea, but the safe is still strictly safer.
So all of one gun is probably not as cool, though.
Hence the name.
My grandfather had a pretty cool rifle
that was mounted above his fireplace.
And I always thought that was pretty manly.
And it worked in that one zombie movie parody.
Shaun of the Dead. Oh, yeah, yeah.
They had the rifle at the pub that happened that apparently
when they when they need it, turns out to not be deactivated.
That being said, if you.
OK, since for your mission requirements, Anyosh,
if you since you don't specifically don't want it to be accessible on
except as a very deliberate decision, I would
store the gun itself locked and hidden somewhere
and like store the bolt, the main critical operating part
removed from the gun in a different and more securely locked
and even less obvious place. Oh, OK.
I there's at least one amusing story from the Spanish Civil War
in which the Republican forces took over,
captured a government armory with 100,000 rifles in it.
But the government troops had had the foresight to take the bolts out,
turning them into expensive, finely polished clubs.
Did they take the bolts with them? Yes. Oh, nice.
Yeah, they left behind and since the bolt is maybe five percent
of the weight of the thing, it was much easier than trying to take the guns
with them and denied it to the enemy equally effectively.
I'm trying to think of the funniest way to like hide a gun in plain sight.
I'm like, I'm imagining just using it like as the shaft of an umbrella.
So I don't do that with a gun.
But like a lampshade over it.
There's a rarely and well, not rarely enforced
because it's very vigorously enforced when they find out about it.
But for most people, it will rarely matter.
There is a rarely mattering law called the National Firearms Act,
which requires federal registration and a tax stamp and an extensive
and theoretically an extensive background check
for a couple of specific categories of gun.
And one of them is something that's not identifiable as a gun
or that that can be fired in a state where it's not identifiable as a gun.
So a pen gun like you see used in a couple of the Bond movies
that fall under it.
With 3D printing, you can make some pretty weird looking things
that are guns, but look nothing like a gun.
I could.
I have participated to some extent in 3D printed gun discussion
and would be entirely content to talk about that in some sort of parallel universe
where people's minds get killed.
OK, I can't imagine where we could find a venue like that.
So you have this gun, you've gone to the range and you've practiced with it,
I hope. How do you maintain the shotgun?
Clean it after at most every other shooting like cleaning
after every shooting is preferable, but honestly,
shotguns in particular are unlikely to require that level of maintenance.
Make absolutely certain periodically that all of the mechanics
are functioning in the intended ways and not in a couple of specific
unintended ways. I've seen one rifle go off
when the safety was turned off, because without getting too much
into the details, basically the trigger was pulled with the safety on
and the safety accomplished its goal of not having the gun be fired
when the trigger was pulled, but the mechanism didn't reset properly.
So when the safety was turned off, the already released
firing piece moved into the position it was supposed to.
Nobody was hurt.
The gun was pointed in a safe direction as it should have been,
but it was quite a shock for everyone present.
And what is involved in these cleaning maintenance things?
What do you do?
You do at least a cursory disassembly for any of the common models of shotgun.
I would specifically say if you're getting your very first gun
and you plan for it to be the only one looking to a Mossberg 500
or Remington 870, they've both been produced in the tens of millions
they're relied on by people who need guns they can rely on.
And if you're the sort of person who really likes to customize
the aftermarket, the accessory market for both is enormous.
So you can find easily enough on YouTube any video to disassemble either of these.
In the case of a shotgun, basically it means that you lubricate
all of the parts that are going to be in constant contact with each other.
Swab, powder fouling out of the barrel and chamber
and scrape off occasionally some burned on powder residue from the bolt.
How long does it take?
A cursory cleaning for a shotgun
you could probably accomplish with practice in 15 minutes.
I think there's a lot of, you know, like
depending on the culture and when, but often, you know,
like the reverence for one sword or something.
And like you can wipe that thing down in five seconds.
But a proper cleaning can be it was more of a
like some ritualistic and so like I don't know anyone personally
who treats their guns with that level of reverence.
But like it's not usually the kind of thing of like
at least in my limited experience where it's like, shit, I got to get this done.
Let me hurry up. It's like, no, I'm going to be, you know,
I'll sit at the table and watch a movie and I'll take them apart
and clean everything and get it all nice and done.
And then it's just kind of like
a leisure, it's a relaxed activity.
Yeah, none of the, particularly with a shotgun,
none and more particularly with a pump,
none of the individual activities involved in even a detailed cleaning
are mentally effortful once you actually know how to perform them.
So it's yeah, it's absolutely something that you could do while watching reruns.
And how much practice would you recommend
to get down the shooting and the loading part of knowing how to use a shotgun?
I'd spend five minutes a day cycling it with dummy rounds.
Get three or four of them so you can practice the reload motion.
There's four, how long, like a week, a month?
Five minutes a day for a week will have you familiar.
Five minutes a day for a month would probably have it in good muscle memory.
If you enjoy doing it, more practice certainly isn't going to hurt.
But I mean, like two hours at a ski shooting range would accomplish a considerable amount.
I mean, not for muscle memory and long term commitment sort of thing,
but just just getting your hand around the practice.
And like and it's one of those things too, for people who hate guns,
admitting that they're fun is like, I don't know, taboo.
But that's so I don't own guns.
But I fired several and it's a great time.
Like I get why people like them.
I I guess it's weird to discount that.
Like, I mean, I hate any invidious comparison to driving.
But like, you know, driving a muscle car is a lot of fun.
You know, if you've ever driven like, you know, an old diesel,
the ones that you feel shake, you know, and like that's again, it's fun.
And, you know, but again, it's not dangerous in the same way that shooting a gun is dangerous.
But it's I think there's a much more dangerous depending on.
Yeah, that depends on the metric you're using.
Yeah, I'm just thinking about the number of people killed.
Although, actually, I don't know what the numbers are for people killed by guns
versus by cars.
I was going to actually bring this up as an example of the availability heuristic.
Like a lot of people, I don't know a lot.
I mean, you hear a lot about gun deaths, right?
You hear a lot about gun deaths and many people are worried about being killed
in a mass shooting and don't be wrong.
I've let this fear affect my life, but not in a way that like is ruining it.
I think mass shootings are what?
0.2 percent of all deaths or 0.02 of all gun deaths.
I'm pretty sure it's even less than that.
Mass shootings are incredibly rare.
Yeah, but they kill more than one person.
That's usually I think minimum four.
Do you have this number at the top of your head, Gray?
You're my Wikipedia.
First order approximation.
Let's the my first order approximation of the worst case is one such shooting a week
in the US and let's say a mass shooting or yeah.
Once at one mass shooting a week spread across the population of 300 million.
I think it depends on how you define mass shooting because like I've heard people
saying like an armed robbery where four people got shot counts as a mass shooting.
Whereas to me, that's more like a drug deal gone wrong.
I want to think of mass shooting.
I think of like a school shooting and killing your family of five doesn't
count as a mass shooting.
Yeah, yeah, so squishing together a couple of category boundaries I've seen
that are probably useful for understanding that.
Let's say more than three victims, not directly known to the person committing
the crime and not in connection with another felony.
So that excludes like if a bank robbery went really badly and a bunch of people
got shot, that would be terrible, but it would also be not helpful to classify it
as a mass shooting because the dynamics at work there are not similar to the
it's a non-central example.
Yeah.
So let's say yeah, let's say one mass shooting a week to a first order
approximation of worst case and let's say just to be hyperbolic, I'm pretty
sure this is more than the average number, but 10 victims.
That would be 500 people a year, 520 people a year, which is actually fewer
last time I checked than the number of accidental gun deaths, which are also
vanishingly small, I think that there's something like 600 a year spread
across the entire population and that's about 2 percent of all the deaths
caused by firearms and and suicide numbers.
Those are in the tens of thousands, right?
Or thousands at least.
Twenty thousand give or take five thousand suicides, I think.
And ten thousand give or take three thousand homicides.
Yeah, the I think like the only.
Maybe not the only, but one of my misgivings about guns is that they do
increase the amount that people will commit suicide, because
if you give someone an easy way to kill themselves, they're more likely to do it
in a fit of peak as opposed to if they have to really think about it.
They usually don't.
That's why you cement it into your basement by the time you've broken it out.
You've got all that energy out and you don't want to kill yourself anymore.
Maybe you've exercised releasing endorphins.
Normans make you happy, happy people don't kill people.
So that is definitely an argument for the sort
of more code red only storage method that I suggested for any.
Ash. Yeah.
So you brought up mine killers.
I remember there was an episode about.
What was about transgender stuff?
Oh, the JK rallying being dumb about transgender stuff.
And I believe it was David on there that was saying, like, we'll just get a gun.
You know, if you're worried about violence, there's a technology for this.
Just just get and.
There is a steel man for that argument that I don't feel like because David's
very quippy, but he didn't give the good reasoning behind that.
Oh, do I want to do my best?
I'm already convinced, but like, I don't like to hear your thing anyway.
I want to hear everyone else's too.
But like, for me, what I what I like about the the best version of the argument
is that, again, if someone breaks in your door, I don't know how what your
measurements are, I'm like less concerned about someone breaking into my house as I
am like violence from people who hate gays or whatever.
Like, so you you're thinking like concealed carry or something.
Yeah, that's more where my like, I guess.
Yeah. So whatever your concern, I mean, the the the factor that I really like
about guns when it comes to self defense is that I'm not sure exactly how much
you weigh or how tall you are or whatever, but it doesn't really matter.
Like you're you're not six, five and 250 pounds.
I'm a small person.
Exactly. You're a small person.
But a six, five, 250 pound person is stopped by you with a gun and you don't
have to learn how to fight like, you know, Bruce Lee to take this person down
enough dedicate a lifetime of training to be able to survive an encounter.
If you're three feet away, if you're three feet from arms reach from them
and you're ready to shoot, you you are safe, right?
I think that's another thing where you could just intimidate people to back down
to because that kind of like, there's like harassment and mostly like
transgendered people tend to get beat up.
Maybe they'll get beaten to death or whatever.
But it's not often somebody just like coming at you with a gun.
See, I would be worried about getting jumped if I had a gun on me.
Like, so that's that's the circumstance where if I felt like I was going to get
jumped, I would draw the gun first, not wait till I was getting mass kicked.
Release.
Yeah.
I mean, you wouldn't be able to.
Do they make finger print release things you carry on your person?
They do, but I've heard they're not very good because they have delicate
electronics that tend to get banged around when the explosion happens in them.
Yeah, as a dude, don't rely on anything
electronic, more complicated than a laser sight in a firearm setting.
Those probably exist, but they're not commercially marketed because.
Well, at least partly because there's been a lot of lobbying to prevent them
from being required lest they become mandatory everywhere.
And I know that the NRA agitated against them for extensively in the 80s and 90s
when they were being talked about as tech of the immediate future.
Yeah, I was going to say they've been around that long
so that they were just saying no earlier than Reagan administration.
And I'm pretty sure that there haven't ever been any examples ready for to be marketed.
Yeah, I guess my concern, though, is that like if you're getting jumped and then,
you know, the gun goes flying out of your concealed holster inside your jacket or
something, then this goes from an ass kicking to a like there's a gun in the situation.
Yeah.
So that's why I mean, I guess it depends.
You know, if like this is the situation where I think in the mind killer's example,
it was leaving women's restrooms available to assigned women because it's a nice place.
It's like a refuge.
Then that's that's the I can see the argument there
because then society will say, hey, you're not allowed in there.
You six five burly man.
And again, complexity is a side.
I understand that argument, but
like that's not necessarily a situation at that point where you're ready to kill somebody.
And that's the important part of having a gun.
Like it's it's nice to be able to threaten somebody.
But if they don't back down, especially if they're close enough to harass you to a
point where you're actually scared, like if someone's yelling at you from across
the street, whatever, like that sucks, but not worth not worth, you know, a gun fight.
But if somebody is close and grabbing and shaking you or something,
that's almost like too late.
You've got to extricate yourself and then like or if you do go for the gun,
use it immediately, you can't like be.
I mean, you tell me if I'm wrong, Gray, but I'm just imagining the situation.
And maybe I'm painting too vivid a picture, but you wouldn't want somebody
grabbing and shaking you and you hold the gun while you're being held by them
and say, let go or I'll shoot because then they're right there.
Oh, if they're already touching, you would probably just shoot.
That's that's what I'm saying.
Yeah, I wouldn't even like try to intimidate at that point.
And, you know, if they're in contact, the time for that sort of thing has passed.
Top two topical additions, though, partly because you've been talking about
something you're carrying and that is sort of out of what we've already been
discussing, if you don't already have a gun and aren't willing to spend
significant time learning to use a pistol, don't get one.
The learning curve is much less forgiving.
There are more things that can go wrong.
The muscle, the amount of stuff you have to get into muscle memory is greater.
And yeah, in general, that's a much bigger lifestyle decision.
I guess I agree.
It's a bigger lifestyle decision, but I'm like every Volver is and you'll
correct me, but not that much more complicated than a shotgun.
Like it's got two moving parts.
Mechanically, no, but like in terms of actually using it,
for one thing, because there's no spread, accuracy with a pistol is a fantasy.
Like getting getting the amount of accuracy with a pistol that you would get
with a long gun is a fantasy.
But you're not looking for accuracy for, you know, self-defense.
Have you ever seen the security videos of two people about 10 feet away
emptying clips into each other and neither one hits?
Like guns are ridiculous.
Pan guns are ridiculously easy to not even get close to your target.
It's probably like an upper bound on the accuracy of the biggest class of people
getting into gunfights in the US, namely police officers.
I would upper bound their shot for shot accuracy at 10 percent.
That sounds generous. Yeah.
Yeah, that's why I find it hilarious when in movies, like someone who's never used
a gun, you know, someone will throw them a gun, be like, take this and then they're
just firing it and it's like, no, no, they are easy.
Like, I mean, again, doing it with accuracy and, you know, especially accuracy
per shot or whatever, extremely good.
If someone is like just out of arms reach, exactly at point blank range,
they're about to step close to you.
You can tag them in the torso.
No problem.
You shouldn't be thinking of a handgun as a ranged weapon.
It's a power fist.
But that exactly.
And that's how I think of them.
Like, yeah, I can't I can never imagine a situation where you want a
ranged weapon for self defense, unless your range is 20 feet in your house or
something, like if you're a crack shot and you spend several, I don't know,
dozen or so hours a month practicing or something, then it's like, all right,
cool, you're probably prepared from the dining room table to shoot your front
door if you need to.
Like, I'm thinking specifically of somebody who I learned a few days ago has
a gun attachment underneath their dining room table with a magnet that they
just pull the gun down and it's ready to go.
And they make a compelling case.
So in the in the paranoid, I need this for home defense in the event of somebody
breaking in, which is ridiculous for this person's life circumstances aside from
that, but for that, for that idea around chambered.
No, he's not.
He's not an idiot.
OK.
So like, but but the but the rationale is that most of his guns are in a safe in
the back of the house.
One is accessible in his dresser drawer, I think.
But like those are both past the living room door.
And so someone comes in and says, aha, I've got you.
Then it's like, no, I don't have to run past you to get to my bedroom.
I've got a gun right here.
Yeah, the my thoughts on that would take too long to discuss for the and that
would be too technical for this episode.
In general, yeah, if you don't want to include guns as a lifestyle thing,
avoid handguns.
Totally brings a better pick for literally everything.
Well, the other topical addition I wanted to make on shotguns because
Jase asked about ammunition.
I will repeat the recommendation for number four,
buckshot, if you're interested in something that might ever be fired in doors.
If you are as Jase is somewhat slight of build,
go with a 20 gauge rather than a 12 gauge.
And regardless of which one you pick, get a recoil pad.
It will be a large quality of life improvement while you're practicing.
How much practice would you recommend in just shooting?
If you're doing the reload drills,
I'd say you can probably keep from atrophying too much with one weekend
of like a day, a weekend day of skid in a month.
No, so but you'd have to you would recommend doing at least one week of the
skid out of every four weeks. Yes. Wow. OK.
And the thing about shooting skid is it's fun enough that if this agrees with you,
it's something that won't feel like an imposition anyway.
How much does that cost then?
Depends on the ranges in your area.
I can't remember what a membership at the nearest skid range to my house in
Minnesota cost, but it wasn't terribly unreasonable.
You're looking at a few cents a pop for the clay pigeons and
well, more now, but I seem to remember target loads like you would use for
shooting skid being between 15 and 25 cents before covid per shell.
Oh, yeah. And then has covid affected your ability to get a gun?
It definitely led to some panic buying early on.
I already had most of what I wanted.
So I'm sorry, I met you plural like the generic you.
Yeah.
So there was definitely some panic buying right after the pandemic was declared.
The there's probably still a delay on background checks.
It's been over a year since I had to file one of those forms.
So I have no direct experience with the climate right now, but I have
looked to buy ammunition during this time and it definitely got more expensive.
It's not like right after Barack Obama got reelected expensive,
but it is definitely above equilibrium pricing right now.
So above the above routine pricing right now.
If you don't want to put that much money and time into getting a gun,
and if your concern is more again, like protection on the go,
do you have recommendations for other kinds of, I don't know, I'm thinking
like pepper spray, taser,
what other types of self defense besides a gun or even, I don't know,
what are your recommendations?
So I have a hard time recommending tasers because they're more much more
dangerous to the person they're being used on than pepper spray and
not as relative, not as effective relative to pepper spray as guns are.
They seem kind of fiddly.
They're also they can be reliably stopped by thick clothing.
So depending on where you live, they may be worse than useless for a good chunk
of the year. Yeah.
Gets cold too.
Yeah, pepper spray is
pepper spray has the virtue that if you're if the idea of actually using lethal
force is really troubling to you and it should be at least somewhat troubling.
If it's really troubling to you that you might kill somebody,
pepper spray is something that will very, very reliably not do that.
I guess if someone had like horrifying multi trigger asthma and did that and
were hit with pepper spray and an ambulance couldn't get to them in time.
It's very happy pen.
Yeah, there are a lot of things that have to go wrong all at once for someone to
die from being pepper sprayed and unless someone's taken a fair number of precautions,
it will cause a lot of very distracting discomfort.
The last time I remember talking to you about its use with someone who is familiar
with it, it was a New Mexico state trooper.
And what he explained to me was that New Mexico state troopers aren't allowed to
carry pepper spray until they've been subject to a grueling application of it
directly to themselves so that they understand just how much suffering is
behind that button when they press it.
Yeah, I saw it involved being like continuously sprayed into the eyes,
nose, and mouth for over a minute.
A minute.
You have to approach the person who's pepper spraying you and relieve them.
Can I say they're not going to like wrestle you for it,
but you have to approach them under this continuous spray directly into your face
and grab the can.
Why? Why is that the requirement?
So that you know exactly how much pain is being inflicted when you squish that button.
So you don't use it against like someone who's annoying you in the grocery store.
Yeah, the problem with it is the fact that it's pretty much guaranteed to not be
lethal might lead some people to use it casually.
And it's really not appropriate for those circumstances for casual use.
And I remember watching this training camp.
I think it was military.
I forget. It was like when I was in middle school,
but they were making a bunch of recruits walk through a tent like a maze
that was full of pepper spray.
And when they were coming out just sobbing,
like vomiting, curled up in fetal position, crying for their mom, like.
Let's take the hottest pepper you've ever had and grind it into your nose and
corneas and still not be applying as much Scoville heat as pepper spray has.
OK, yeah, it's it's it's disabling, which is which is the nice thing about it.
I mean, so for the circumstances you're talking about,
like if you're on the go worried about being harassed,
pepper spray is awesome.
Like I the downside of using it in my and you know more about it than I do.
I'm talking like an expert.
But I've been downwind to pepper spray,
which tells me that if you were to fire it, say in the confines of a bathroom stall.
Yeah, you could get hit with it too.
You would get hit with it too.
But you'd be hit with it less.
You'd probably be able to see your way out where they would be blinded and you
know, on the ground trying not to throw up in their face.
So at least like the threats neutralized.
Yeah, exactly.
The threats neutralize and you're uncomfortable.
That's another deal to keep your bones in one piece.
But you were talking about getting a button that makes the shotgun and shotgun
noise tasers are and forgive me that taser and stun gun aren't the same thing.
I'm talking about the one that you press the button and there's an arc of electricity.
That's a stun gun and that's the counterintuitive part to me.
Because the one that you shoot isn't a stun gun.
That one's a taser.
The one that you hold is a stun gun.
And I hate that.
Yeah, it's a taser.
Taser is the is the trademark of the one company that makes the actual pistol
shaped shoot at a distance stun gun where there's a there's a cartridge that's
loaded into the front of the taser that fires these two electrodes.
Right.
And on impact, they release quite a bit of juice.
Taser, it's called that because Taser International.
I'm pretty sure this isn't actually true, but it neatly maps to some Golden Age
science fiction. Taser was supposed by at least one reader in the 80s to be
an acronym for Thomas A. Swift's electric rifle.
That is what the Encyclopedia Britannica says.
Yeah, I love it.
So anyway, the intimidation factor of a stun gun is huge.
They're very loud and they're like, you can get a decent one for under 50 bucks.
And so like between that and the pocket maze, you can again, I don't know if
they sell the stuff at Walgreens anymore, either if I sound just old, but you're
still to get portable, you know, key chain hardware, hardware or Amazon.
I mean, 150 bucks is a lot more than you'll need to spend.
No, 50, 50, not 150.
OK, yeah, I said under 50 pulls it out and is holding it and says,
I'm about to turn it on.
It's really loud.
And you're like, OK, when they turn it on, you still jump.
Yeah, because that's a freaking loud.
It is. It is the sound of parking electricity.
Yeah, it's terrible sounding.
And like like you said, but but thick clothing will turn it off.
But, you know, you could get an exposed hand, you can get an exposed face.
Like, but like you said, too, I'm pointing at Gray, I'm just saying you.
There's a lethality element of that, too.
But between a taser and and excuse me, between a
stun gun and Mace, I think you're is Mace also trademarked?
I'm sure be using pepper spray.
No, Mace, I think it might it might have been a trademark, but it's kind of
genericized now, not not in a legal sense.
But if you say Mace, everyone will know what you're talking about.
It's like Kleenex and tissues like they're the same thing.
But Kleenex is the brand Band-Aid.
Yeah, Band-Aid. Yeah.
Yeah, what is the generic term for Band-Aid?
Adhesive bandage. Yeah.
Or I always remember from invaders and adhesive medical strips.
So I have a question.
We're running low on time, so hopefully this won't take too long.
I was wondering since I am again, the more concerned about the citywide
breakdown of services kind of thing, if I were to band together with the fellow
people in my community here, because I like the place where I live and the people
here are cool, and we like are trying to set up some kind of perimeter defense thing.
What sort of weapon should I have in my basement that I can haul out and put
together and use for that?
Because I'm assuming a shotgun will not work nearly as well for that sort of thing.
So like the smokers are coming and we need to hold them off.
Claymores.
Shotgun's not a bad pick for that.
If you were like, if you were asking me, what do I give a squad of my neighbor?
What weapons plural do I give to a squad of my neighbors who are going to be
manning the checkpoint at the entrance to this gated community?
Then I would say most people should have shotguns and someone who knows how to use
it should probably have a.
I'm not sure or what a good.
There's some monkeys around here, so like you could get some kind of rifle in
like Kalashnikov pattern or AR-15 pattern or a Ruger Mini 14,
something in that general class firing something like a modern military round.
I've heard that the AR-15 is really easy to
maintain and has a very common caliber.
Is that the five?
Yeah, the ammunition it uses is very widely available.
It's more expensive than it probably should be.
But what can you do?
Yeah, it's.
The performance is excellent.
Anybody wanting to fire it should be cautioned that it is unholy damn loud.
It's very high pressure and very high velocity.
And the where a shotgun will have will sort of bellow.
An AR-15 will scream.
You need to wear ear protection.
It's it's an earplugs and earmuffs gun.
That's the other thing that the movies all get wrong.
Guns are fucking loud, way louder than you think they are.
So loud that you're wearing headphones or the noise
cancelling things and the earplugs and you're so like, yeah,
you feel it, you especially big guns,
you feel it culturally through your whole body.
Silencers generally don't make a sound.
It's a loud cough.
Yeah, I think the silencers typically
take 30 decibels off a gunshot, maybe a bit more.
But that's the difference between the sound of almost the sound of a space shuttle
taking off and something else loud, maybe really loud, maybe a bit further away.
Yeah, like if someone in the other room shoots a silenced gun,
you're still going to hear it and you're going to investigate.
Yes, there there's absolutely no way that you're going to miss a silenced gunshot
unless someone has spent enough money that they almost deserve to succeed.
OK, so in John Wick, where they're
where they're walking through like a train station or something,
shooting at each other, one's up on a railing and one's in like a crowd.
Oh, every movie I've ever seen with silencers, it's like, you know,
but they're just walking, kind of taking quiet shots at each other,
trying not to expose themselves.
And it's like, yeah, this would this would be like a thunderclap near everybody.
No one's missing this.
And when you missed the ricochet would also make an extremely obvious noise
that even if you didn't know what it was, would send you running.
Another thing, maybe, is get wrong.
Ricochet, the movie Atomic Blonde is really good, though.
Like in terms of they did a good job showing what fighting like actually looks like.
Like it's a great movie.
It's Joan Wick. It's tight.
Yeah, I remember you like Birds of Prey just because you like the like fun
violence thing. This is a like pretty good fun violence thing.
But also it's just like there's a bit off topic.
But like, you know, in the Marvel movies or whatever,
they'll have somebody my size like petite fighting some big guy and using
like moves that make no sense for their body type.
This is not like punches to the chest or whatever.
Yeah, like this is a character who's using a lot of judo and Aikido.
Sort of moves using a lot of improvised weapons.
Everybody gets beat up realistically.
Like it's not like you get in a fight and then like everybody's hair is perfect
in the next scene and like the wounds are gone.
This is like character has a black eye and like sounds fantastic.
Yeah. And ricochet come like happens.
I don't know.
People get tired.
This is great. There was a scene where I found this like just amazing.
There's a scene where she's fighting with this dude in an apartment and like the
fight keeps going on and at the end, they're dragging themselves across the
floor, swinging at each other, missing, falling in a heap and continuing to drag
themselves back up and just fall over from exhaustion.
Yeah, you've got to be in some pretty amazing shape to keep up like that level
of aerobic fighting for over a minute.
Yeah. Yeah.
The worst offender in the unrealistic movie hits department.
I can't remember what movie it is, but seeing someone land a clenched fist punch
to the forehead, that hand is not going to be useful for anything for anything
for a month if you're lucky.
And this part like, well, first, the other person goes down, which is somewhat
believable because you could probably throw enough, put enough force behind a
punch to concuss someone to the hit like that.
But that hand is not going to be useful for anything else for the rest of that
fight. So don't do it.
I wouldn't even punch.
I mean, the open palm strike to the face, especially since I'm sure it coming
from below can jab you in the jaw really good, or you can use all those.
I've pretty plenty of those.
You want to hit hard parts with soft parts and hard and soft parts with hard
parts if you're trying not actively trying to hurt yourself.
So real quick, the AR 15, like how much would that cost?
How much training is this like a really big commitment for someone who is
dedicated to this thing?
It's decidedly more of a commitment than a shotgun, but less than a handgun.
OK.
I don't know what prices are like now because I haven't been shopping for them.
But when I purchased one
early 2019 due to a due to the Obama years kind of gliding the market pretty badly,
I think that the air 15 that I purchased in early 2019 was
four hundred and fifty dollars new and shipped.
Wow. OK, that's not bad.
Plus thirty dollars to the gun shop for running the background check.
OK. What about like a pawn shops?
You can or like gun shows.
Because there's a bunch of those here.
The laws on exactly what you can do there and the recommendations on what you
should are going to vary a lot by state.
I don't know if Colorado is one of the private sale background check states.
So like in Virginia, for example,
there isn't a requirement for a background check if the sale is from a
private citizen to another private citizen.
If you aren't actively in the business of dealing guns,
like there's not a bright line, but if you're selling one every three months
that you have owned for years, no one's ever going to look a skance at it.
In California, those sales are prohibited and everything has to go through a licensed dealer.
I imagine that you could get a better deal that way.
But then also you might want to worry about the quality.
And I wonder if it's even worth it.
Depends on the gun, if it's something made in the last 30 years and if you if you've
learned how, for example, to field strip the thing in question,
most modern pistols disassemble in vaguely similar ways.
So you can get an idea of that and you generally won't be able to at the gun show.
But you'll at least be able to look at some of the innards.
Yeah.
If you can't see any obvious problems and it's less than 30 years old,
you're probably in pretty good shape.
If there definitely is the warranty issue when you buy things that are used in that
fashion, you can get around that either by going to a gun shop and getting things
that either they've bought from owners or are selling on consignment, in which case
they'll have been inspected by usually been inspected by a gunsmith prior to
being offered for sale or by just buying new.
Some manufacturers will offer excellent warranties as well.
Most of them are only two original purchaser, but there are some that go the extra mile.
I would name them off the top of my head if I knew any.
There's another age related question.
So Inyash buys his AR 15 and or shotgun.
The numbers will be different and berries in his basement.
And in 15 years, shit hits the wind.
Is this ammo still good?
If it's been kept and we're in Colorado, so there's no humidity to damage it.
The main thing I think that's going to have
ammo go bad over time is the primers getting moist.
So keep your ammo dry and store with desiccant.
And it'll probably be good for longer than you remember where you put it.
Oh, OK.
I guess since we're almost done here, I have a final sanity check type of question.
So I, you know, assuming I'm preparing for a widespread breakdown that's going to
last for a few weeks and I go out every, let's say I'm not rigorous about it.
I don't cover every month, but like every quarter or so I go.
I rent a gun that's similar to what I have
buried, I practice with it, I make sure I know how to feel, strip it and stuff.
Twelve years from now, shit does hit the fan.
I need to defend myself for a couple of weeks.
Is having this at my disposal actually anything that will make me safer,
significantly safer, or am I like fooling myself that this is going to be any good?
If you've been practicing, even with that wide
and interval, if you've kept it up regularly for 12 years, I'd say that
you're noticeably better off the and you've probably had a lot of fun and gotten
some good exercise in the meantime.
If like me, you've not gotten outside enough during COVID-19, it will make sure
that you're getting the vitamin D you need.
So what you're saying is you're at least not going to be worse off.
You won't. Yeah.
If you've done it regularly for 12 years and you know the mechanics and you've
got the muscle memory, you will not.
You may not be better off, but there is no case that I can see in which that will be worse.
And hopefully I'll never have to pull that trigger on anyone.
That is what you hope.
But the.
Oh.
I think that being familiar with it, particularly not not relevant to any
Osh's mission requirements, I guess.
But since Jase brought up hunting, I think that using them will give you a better
appreciation of.
Trying to resolve situations like that without the use of force, because you
will understand exactly what the best alternative to negotiated agreement in
that situation is.
Yeah, not not understanding the weapon makes you more dangerous to everybody,
including yourself.
OK, this is why I think everyone, even if you don't plan on like owning guns ever,
should have a familiarity with them.
Like it's again, worst case scenario, you have.
Well, I guess worst case scenario, you're you're spooked and you hate it and you had
a terrible time, but if you find an enjoyment out of it, then you get this cool
experience and oh, yeah, that was fun.
I got to shoot guns and enjoy some time outside or whatever.
But it's like, I don't know.
If you have any concern that you might ever be around
in an emergency situation, like then at least you know what you're doing.
Yeah, so your opinion that most people should have some kind of training in some
gun, scrolled away somewhere.
Well, I had an I had an analogy for my thing.
Sorry. It's like, I know how to drive a stick shift.
I don't because it's tedious, but I know how to.
Should I ever be required to? Right?
Yeah, I think it's good to just learn as many skills as you can if you have the
opportunity. I've got a quick thing to say while we are wrapping up that I don't
endorse the lifestyle of the person I was talking about earlier, who like I need
a gun around all the time.
And again, especially because they don't live in circumstances that would
remotely require that.
I mean, if you're living on the wrong side of the law or something and you've got
enemies, then sure, I get it.
But in the person, in the average person I'm thinking of and prior average listener,
needing immediate access all the time to a gun in your own home is probably overkill.
It's not an uncommon response to violent trauma in your past, though.
It's not the case with this person.
But that what I, yeah, I mean, I get it.
Like I used to, when I was in college, I
delivered pizzas and delivered to somebody who lived out in the edge of town.
It was already weird.
I had to go through like a dirt driveway to go to his house.
And the answer is the door with a gun on its hip.
And I was like, expecting company.
And he's like, no, I just always have this.
And I was like, oh, all right, well, cool.
Here's the price.
And it's like I get one thing of like always wanting to be ready and be prepared.
And if you never shot a gun, it is like having a magic wand.
Like you, you, you're a magic death wand.
It is a magic death wand.
It's it's like it's one that only shoots reducto, basically.
But like explaining this to your ancestors,
it'd be like, oh, yeah, you know how like you try and throw rocks and hurt those
people over there with with two hours of practice, I can show you I'd put holes
in them that'll kill them immediately.
Like it sounds like magic and they feel really powerful.
I think there's just definitely like a very much of like a
I can't think of any word for it.
That's better than big dick energy around it.
But that sounds mildly pejorative, but it's not.
I'd say like more life affirming security, life affirming, but like
you feel safer with it.
Yeah, yeah, you feel safer because at any point you could you could just your
I think it's a scary feeling, though, because it's not necessarily accurate.
You can be less safe with a gun on your person at all times.
Yeah, it might make you more.
Yeah, if it if it's if you aren't putting a lot of discipline into the habits
that would require that then a pistol in particular could certainly make you less
safe in that sense.
As far as the big dick energy, I will respond to that with a quote from
another Heinlein novel, which also adorns TV tropes, his page on phallic weapons.
No, she's absolutely right.
He said, patting the enormous pistol on his hip.
This gun absolutely is a pain to substitute.
If I could kill it a range of 30 meters with only my penis, I wouldn't need to lug
this around.
It's very high.
But that is actually not the quote I was looking for.
So I want to I hope that I've done a good
enough job of making this clear with the discussion of actually using force.
I don't think it's a good idea.
One of the reasons that I think that people should be familiar with the care and
feeding of weapons is that is for an appreciation of how much more desirable
nonviolent solutions are.
And I think that people who have never
fired a weapon are just fundamentally less capable, less attuned to that reality.
I would like there to be a world with less,
with fewer circumstances that suggest the use of firearms,
but we don't live in such a nice ordered world.
So I'll quote since I feel like I'd be remiss if I didn't plug myself at least
a little bit with a quote from Excession, the book that my podcast is current,
the culture book that my podcast is currently covering.
It was a warship, after all.
It was built, designed to glory and destruction when it was considered appropriate.
It found as it was rightly and properly supposed to an awful beauty in both the
weaponry of war and the violence and devastation, which that weaponry is capable
of inflicting, and yet it knew that attractiveness stemmed from a kind of
insecurity, a sort of childishness.
It could see that by some criteria, a warship just by the perfectly articulated
purity of its purpose was the most beautiful single artifact the culture was capable of
producing, and at the same time understand the paucity of moral vision, such a judgment implied.
To fully appreciate the beauty of a weapon was to admit to a kind of shortsightedness
close to blindness, to confess a sort of stupidity.
Skipping a couple of sentences by this measure, the love or just the appreciation
of weapons was a kind of tragedy.
Nice. Excellent.
I like that a lot, and I'm with you.
Like it would be really cool.
I think I'm drawing a meaning from that, even if it's not the one that was intended.
Maybe it is the one that's intended.
It would be awesome to live in a world where that sort of thing wasn't appreciated.
You see something and it's just this ghastly horror show, like somebody has a
torture implement or something.
And yet that's not the world we live in.
For many people, they make sense to have a round.
And so like then it becomes like a not insane thing to have a visible collection.
Like, hey, check this out. Isn't this cool?
Yeah, this one only made 1978 or whatever, you know, like or you know,
whatever random stuff, but yeah, I didn't articulate that well.
In the beautiful world that we could build,
like there would be a beauty in people, in children, not recognizing them in,
adults not telling children about them because that's something they were likely
to simply never encounter, like death in after the Dementor attack in HPMOR.
But that that isn't, as you say, that's not the world that we live in.
My favorite, I think the coolest acknowledgement of this reality has to go
to one of the tenets of Sikhism, the wearing of an at least symbolic dagger
called the Kierpan.
They have a hasten to add, I am not familiar with the nuts and bolts of Sikhism.
This is largely this is stuff I've found from reading favorable articles about
this tenet and what I could learn on Wikipedia about the religion.
So if there are any actual Sikhs, I welcome correction.
But the
or if there are any actual Sikhs listening, there are obviously
the actual Sikhs, but the Kierpan is part of the ideal of being the the Saint soldier.
We would like a world that's orderly and safe, but the world that we actually live
in is at least in at least sometimes in at least some places
chaotic and dangerous and unpleasant.
And on some level, you should feel responsible
at least to yourself for being able to deal with that world when it rears its ugly head.
And the wearing of the dagger is symbolic of that.
And I think it's a cool, awesomely mature attitude that more that people could
benefit from learning more about.
I do wonder what the world would look like if everyone was given a gun.
And, you know, mandated practice that you use it, you know, within reason.
Again, with the convicts and the
violent, mentally ill, but like you mean like a personal handgun or like a long arm
like they do in Switzerland?
I don't know, in particular, just the idea of if there was the equality of
ability to do violence, what that would look like, because that's never been the case.
What else?
The learning curve, I think, would be pretty nasty in that world.
And I think the equilibrium of everyone can exert lethal violence on the spot is a
complicated and very ritualized system of etiquette that wouldn't be badly compared
to samurai.
I don't think it's terribly desirable.
But I wonder what how it would affect
whether this would be a more or less violent society, like whether people would be
less likely to attack people if you know that everybody's packing.
It might just make you get creative.
I mean, like, I mean, this is we're wrapping up.
I don't want to open up a can of worms, but like if I'm if my goal is to hurt
somebody and I know that they have a gun, well, I just will make sure I hurt them
before they get to it, right, even if it's on their person.
But a lot of people's goal is just to hurt people
because they like hurting people.
They don't necessarily they're not gunning for someone, right?
They just want to beat someone up.
Yeah, I mean, yes, I might cut down on like school bullying if someone is really
passionate about that issue.
If every student had a gun.
Rape.
I'm pretty sure that if one percent of random assaults on trans people led to
the assailant getting nonfatally shot, they would dry up in a hurry.
Yeah, a lot of.
Oh, just I don't know.
I'm thinking about like the Black Panthers and.
Arming themselves, scaring people into wanting more gun safety stuff, suddenly
more restrictions.
I will add on that note before discussing some other notable colored
Panthers that I'm generally well, not generally, I'm very much and almost for
that exception, not a fan of openly carrying long guns.
What's that?
It's intrinsically there's a really strong tendency for it to be perceived
as confrontational, no matter how polite you are.
And they're just because of the size and because of the way that they're worn.
You either put them on a sling, in which case it's very obvious that you have it
or you're carrying it at something like port arms and both of those just make
the gun more obvious if you must carry something openly without the anticipation
of trouble, it should probably be a pistol.
But you I'm not a huge fan of open carry for that and tactical reasons.
OK, you lose a lot of defensive advantage if someone knows that you have a weapon
before the confrontation started.
The other colored Panthers I was going to bring up in the vein of the random
attacks on trans people with lavender Panthers gave a Jalanti group who operated
in the San Francisco Bay Area and I want to say the early 70s.
Oh, hadn't heard of these.
Yeah, they would drive around in a van, find people who had just attacked random
gay people and work them over with bats and two by fours because the kind of person
who's just randomly going to and nobody ever tried even tried to catch them
because the kind of person who's insecure or hateful enough to just attack
random gay people is not going to go to the police and admit that he ended up on
the end of an ass kicking at the hands of the lavender Panthers.
Yeah, there was something similar in India where they had a gang of women that would
find male rapists and beat them up.
I think that sticks.
Forget what they called them, but maybe I could find it and put it in the notes.
I have one last random thought, which was
when we were talking about ideal worlds, ideal world, I think would be everybody
could keep a backup of their brain.
So if there ever was a confrontation, you know, whether you have to
lethally shoot someone for self protection or you get shot, then you can just be
quite so permanent, like built a new body and have your upload stuck back in there.
And it has a whole range of other uses.
If the building a new body is fast enough, you can effectively use it as teleportation.
All right, we are over time, so we should wrap up.
Yeah, we are thinking of patron as we always do, because we're never over time
for doing that. Who's trying to think?
Jace is probably because you missed a couple of episodes.
Yeah, I did, although I kind of wanted to do the next one.
And I'm doing grade.
Do you want to take a picture?
Have you gotten the joy of thanking a patron?
I guess I've been here long enough to almost become an institution.
So today's patron to be thanked is Tom Beale.
Tom, thank you for letting us bring this to everyone.
Help, I don't know.
I hope you don't mind the gun topic, but
help everyone maybe be a little bit safer in case of a terrible breakdown and make
an interesting episode, if not.
And it's less about this episode as it is about the institution of the episodes.
Exactly. If this is producing value that in aggregate,
you enjoy, that's we appreciate hearing that.
That's awesome.
I was so happy to hear on the last episode
base theorem talking about how much impact the podcast it had on him.
Obviously, it's had an impact on me.
I mean, and I've heard that from a lot of other people, too.
So, Tom, you're like supporting this whole this whole thing that a lot of people
are getting value out of. That's great.
Every now and then you get a little burnt out and you're like,
why am I still doing this? It doesn't matter.
And then you hear from, you know, Alex, base theorem, something like that.
And they're like, oh, I'm doing a good thing for some people.
Yeah, I'm going to keep doing this.
It's nice and effusive.
The last time I remember you
waxing emotional about it to that extent was someone who emailed in and said,
yeah, I've been listening to this since I was nine.
Oh, yeah. And then we were like, oh, no, but we use the F word a lot.
But that also means like you've probably had more influence on their lives than
a couple of musicians and a lot of cartoons.
Yeah, I remember a period where the skeptics guide to the universe
podcasters felt like friends to me where I would listen to them every day because
I had a 45 minute commute to and from college for five years and then like three
years about the same to work.
And I talked, I didn't talk to them, but I heard their voices like more often than
like it was other people in my life.
I was so stoked when I got Jay to do a voice.
That's awesome.
Yeah, I did actually reflect not too long ago that with the possible exception
of Cecil Baldwin from Welcome to Night Vale, I've probably heard listened to
Anyasha's voice for more time than I've heard any other human being speak
because hundreds of episodes of the HPM or podcast over years.
Then, you know, an extra 90 minutes per episode of this.
Yeah, if not in first place, definitely top five.
Damn.
Yeah.
All right.
I'm flattered. I'm, wow, OK.
You can't see it, but I'm doing a double thumbs up.
All right, well, thank you for joining us.
Tell us once again what your other podcast is that you work on.
We uncultured swine or just uncultured swine now there.
We have a Discord server which is linked on the Bayesian conspiracy server.
And we will also link it in the show notes.
And where can people find this podcast?
They just Google that.
They can find it.
I think we've only got it on iTunes right now.
Yeah, it's up there as uncultured swine and we're currently on our fourth book.
Excellent.
All right.
Well, thank you, everyone, for joining us and we will see you all again in two weeks.
Good night, friends.
