Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Yann Yashbrotsky, I'm Steven Zuber, and today we have a guest.
Hey, I'm Naveen Mishra, back again.
Welcome back.
And this is an episode that I have personally been wanting to do for a while,
but also really dreading doing for a while because I get the feeling people are just going to think I'm an asshole,
and I don't know, I've really, I got a lot of qualms about this one, but it is a personal gripe of mine,
which I've always had some feelings about and then have had more stronger feelings about it recently.
So instead of beating around the bush, I'll just get to it.
Also, please excuse if my throat gets a little hoarse today, I am just getting over a cold.
I feel great now, except for there's still some phlegm in my throat.
So I guess apologies ahead in advance to Kyle for all the work you'll be doing removing my...
The thing we are talking about today is marriage and why it is a stupid horrible terrible thing.
Open minded, everybody's open minded.
So really quick, can I put my spin on the title?
Please do.
On why Enyaush thinks it's that, and why I'm not sure what Naveen's position is,
and I'm sort of up in the air, so this will be fun.
Yeah.
Alright, we're not all uniting here against marriage yet, I don't think.
No, in fact, specifically the reason Naveen's here is because I put out a call saying,
hey, is there anyone in the area who thinks marriage is pretty cool and would like to be the counterpoint to me on this,
because I don't want it just to be like a tirade, you know?
And he said, yeah, sure, me.
And I was like, okay, cool, we got someone.
Hopefully this will be good.
My two main objections to marriage are that it is a contract with huge ramifications which no one is told about,
and that it is, in addition to this, a contract which is unconscionable for most people in most cases,
and yet no one knows this.
The first part being the, um, no one knows what marriage is.
Marriage is basically a financial contract, at least in the US.
And in, you don't know that.
I certainly didn't know that.
I was told, as was everyone, from the beginning of our lives when we were reading King Arthur Legends or watching Disney or whatever the fuck we were doing,
that had love stories in it, that marriage is what you do when you are in love.
It means that you love the other person, you are committed to spending the rest of your lives together,
and so you're going to go through this holy ceremony, and you know, holy or not, depending on your religious beliefs, but whatever.
But it is the thing that people in love do.
It is how you show you are in love.
Or in the words of Eugene Merman, who's an ordained minister, and on his Netflix special, uh, vegan goes to the complain store.
He, uh, marries two people on stage, and he's like, so, I'm not sure, state to state, there's like an 80% chance this is valid, so heads up.
He says, it's an agreement that says, I love you so much that I promise to do lots of paperwork if I ever stop loving you.
Oh God, I wish it was just that.
But then you, um, you go, and in many states, you can simply walk down to the DMV or a local government office, sign a single sheet of paper, and you're married.
Wait, at the DMV?
It depends on the DMV, but I have literally gotten married at a DMV before.
Right on.
Um, it was, it was a more like full service DMV.
It wasn't like your little local sub chapter.
It was the main one for the county, but yes.
Cool.
Yeah.
And you, I don't, unfortunately, I don't have my marriage certificate here in front of me, so I can't actually read it off, but it's basically a single piece of paper that says shit all on it.
And I know Steven, you have signed a contract for leasing an apartment to sign a one year apartment contract lease.
That is like what, at least six, seven pages of dense text.
Yeah.
And then I have to walk you through it to, to, you know, to see.
Yes.
They have you, they have you initial on at least each page usually to make sure that you've been exposed to it.
Yes.
There are legal ramifications for lying to someone and to get them to sign a bad contract.
They, they have to spell out the things that they're selling you and you don't have to read it if you don't want to, but at least has to be there.
And the marriage license that you get doesn't say shit on it.
It's certainly, I went through a lot more paperwork signing up for an apartment than I ever did for getting married.
Tons of paperwork for buying a house, which is again, arguably a much smaller financial commitment than getting married to someone is.
And yet you don't know what you're signing.
And that is a huge issue and a giant red flag in my opinion.
Because what you're signing is actually really fucked up.
Which is going to get me into the, the bigger problem that I have being that the marriage contract is basically unconscionable for reasonable adults nowadays.
What the marriage contract does is eliminate legally a large part of your personhood.
You, you are no longer a single person in a financial sense.
You are one mashed up entity known as the marriage.
So if, if you had property from before the marriage, after you get married, it is not your property anymore.
It is the marriage's property.
And you can actually sign some really good prenups to prevent this from being the case.
But if you don't hire a lawyer and get a good prenup, this will be the case.
And even if you do get a good prenup, it can still be challenged in court and drawn on for months and so forth.
But any property is now property of the marriage.
And anything that increases in value over time is, is that increase in value belongs to both people.
So for example, let's say that you had some stocks or in the much more likely case of one of us, some Bitcoin that I don't know.
A few years ago, you put down $100 on Bitcoin, never looked at it again because, you know, you don't like to check Facebook.
I don't know. No one, no one, but it doesn't matter.
You got some Bitcoin, you get married.
Any increase in the value of that Bitcoin, you got to sock away half of it to give to your partner because they own half of it.
Quick two things.
One, we can table for later if we need to.
But when you say you have to set it aside, can you expand on what that means?
That means as long as you die together, you don't have to set it aside because they'll inherit it.
But if you were to ever split up in any meaningful way, you have to calculate how much every asset increased while you were together and pay the other party for the amount, half the increase.
This is particularly frustrating if you have some property that is not well developed and spend a lot of effort and money into developing it.
And then your partner gets half of that even if, you know, they weren't involved because it wasn't yours.
There is no such thing as your property anymore.
There's only the marriage's property.
So I think once just one more pushback on half two, you mean in the circumstance where marriage doesn't end either in someone's death or in unamicable terms, right?
So like if there's a peaceful disillusion.
Oh yeah, you can voluntarily give up the rights to any property you want.
Okay.
The other person can say, no, no, you keep your Bitcoin.
I will not force you to pay me half of what it's worth.
But, you know, they legally have the right to do so if they want to.
Okay.
Another thing I wanted to ask about was prenups.
Because I have a co-worker who just actually finalized his divorce.
He was half a day late for his first day at work because he was at the courthouse finalizing the divorce, which is kind of like a great way to turn over a new chapter in life, you know, a new job and, you know, finally got over all this to your divorce in the same day.
Yeah.
He was talking about how, and I don't know him very well.
I don't know a lot of the details, but he had said something along the lines of the, you know,
I think I mentioned prenups and he was like, oh yeah, beware, those things don't count for shit.
Yeah.
So my impression was always-
They count a little bit.
Are we planning on getting into that later or do you want to dive into it now?
I mean, we can get into it later.
The courts consider them, but how much it's considered depends on your state and your judge for that matter.
They're dicey.
They can help a little bit.
That's weird.
I guess I'm not, I don't know what the text of a prenup looks like, but couldn't it just be like this, you know, we, the below signers both agree that this property belongs to this person and this property belongs to this person.
And it can be, you know, a set of list of properties or it can just be, you know, major thing each or whatever.
And then they both sign.
How is that not good enough?
It's going to go to, if the other person wants to take you to court, they can still take you to court and challenge it.
But how could they challenge it when they signed it?
Because the marriage contract is that big of a deal that it, the prenups can be challenged just based on the fact that you were married and then you spend thousands of dollars defending the prenup.
Thousands, if you're really lucky, probably tens of thousands.
Maybe this, maybe I'll be enlightened over the course of the conversation.
This is what it says, man.
Any contract can be challenged.
Yeah, but like, I know, but like, I mean, it seems like if it's pretty cut and dry, like, you know, I can't pay a hundred bucks less on my rent every month.
Why not?
Well, like, if I, well, let me finish.
I think, I haven't tried because I don't want to get kicked out.
I feel like I signed something that said I'd pay this amount.
And if I stopped paying that amount, they'd say, look, you're not holding up to your end.
I could take them to court, I guess, and say, I just felt like I didn't feel like paying that much anymore.
So I didn't.
Right.
How would I have any chance of winning?
It depends on the circumstance, right?
If your apartment changed in any way, if the gas lines became electric or anything, or if they changed the goddamn paint.
You can say, this is not the same thing that I signed for.
Those things have happened.
Not necessarily all of those things, but minor things that I can make a case for.
Right, right, right.
Depends on who has a bigger pockets and what kind of effort do you want to go.
So there you go.
Right.
And make a case for is, again, subjective.
Sometimes the judge will throw it out.
He'll be like, they changed the paint from mauve to beige.
Fuck you, get out of here.
Exactly.
And then you're at the lawyer's fees.
Plus, you know, maybe they'll, they'll charge you with paying for the other side for it being a frivolous suit.
But, you know, on the other hand, if it is like a major big deal, like before you moved in, there was no fire.
And now there is a fire or something along those lines.
You discover as best as something.
Yes, right.
You discover as best as then, then that, then that can actually be something that they will look into in court.
And you spend a lot of time hacking about.
Okay.
So in, I guess my, this is a revelation for me.
Contracts aren't like the legal unbreakable vows that I thought they were.
No, no, no.
They're just like, we kind of agree to do this.
Okay.
We kind of both agree to do this as long as neither of us start bitching about it.
And then we'll come back, you know, if we want to fight it, we can.
That's what this says.
Yes.
And then, you know, eventually at some point a judge will rule, no, this contract was fine.
And you have to follow the rules of the contract or face jail time.
Or they'll be like, we're just adjusting it to this little way.
Or, you know, this contract is bullshit.
It's being thrown out entirely.
Whole range of things that they can do.
But it's going to cost you effort and money to fight.
And that's why most people just like to stick with the terms of the contract.
And, you know, once it is in the contract, it is much easier for someone to fight those
sort of things.
It's like, look, it's in the contract.
They have the presumption of the laws on their side.
Yes.
With the difference being that the presumption of the law is always on the side of the marriage
contract if you're married, as opposed to the prenup.
Gotcha.
And again, the prenup can help a bit, but it would definitely help more with property
that you already owned before.
Like if you owned a house and you signed a prenup saying this house remains my property,
no increase goes to the other person, and you never lived in that house together, then
that prenup would likely hold.
But again, you'd have to spend money defending it and it might not.
I know the one thing that you don't even have to bother putting in a prenup ever is
any clause with children, because the courts just throw it right out.
They're like, the raising of a child is strong of state interest that whatever the fuck you
sign doesn't matter.
We're deciding for you, because apparently the state knows best about things.
But yeah, you don't have to bother at all with things like child support or custody,
because the court will be like, your piece of paper is very funny to us.
Here's the actual child support and actual custody stuff that's going to happen.
All right.
I do want you to continue with your set that you wanted to do with this, but I want to
bring one more thing up to discuss later, but I'm bringing it up now, so don't forget.
That's the idea of common law marriage.
Say if you're living together with a partner for 10 years and you're like, we're never
going to get on paper married, but let's live together.
Let's share our mortgage, whatever, just take and then consider you common law.
I want to touch on that whole thing later.
Okay.
All right.
So yeah, the past property is the one that's easiest to have prenups addressed, because
like you said, they are pretty good at that.
Again, it's challengeable and it's going to cost you money to defend it, but the prenups
help with that quite a bit.
It's still fucking infuriating that most people don't know this, and they don't tell you,
by the way, you should put down and writing all your assets before you got married and
who owns what, because unless you do, the marriage owns it now.
That is, again, it's the matter of no one knowing what's in the contract.
That is a huge part of my issue with it.
But the second part of it, it's a claim on past resources that you had once you get
married.
It's also a claim on your present resources going through the marriage.
And this is the part almost everyone is familiar with, that whatever money we make, we split
it between us, right?
Which is true, and since most people who know about this when they sign up for marriage
are okay with it, I have less of a problem with that.
But it's still an issue if you want to keep your assets separate.
If you both have jobs and you keep separate bank accounts and keep all your finances separate,
it doesn't matter.
The courts don't care.
All of that is income and assets of the marriage, not of you.
You are not a person anymore.
So if, say for example, someone, your partner's car breaks down and you lend them some money
to fix it up, you'd never lent them that money.
The marriage spent that money, and that's it.
There is no lending money to each other.
There is, worse than this, in my opinion, is the fact that it disincentivizes being
nice by a lot.
If your friend's car breaks down and you lend them some money to fix their car, you just
did a nice thing to them.
If you let them stay with you for a while, because I don't know, they lost their place
or whatever, you have helped them and that is nice of you.
If you make more than your friend, let's say you make twice as much as your friend does,
and so whenever you go out, you pick up the tab.
You're like, I'll get dinner.
It's no big deal.
These are all nice things to do, and if you do that in a marriage, then all that, it becomes
treated as the lifestyle, and you have to keep doing that forever.
You better get used to really doing those nice things, because you're going to keep
doing them for a long fucking time.
The worst case scenario is if your partner loses their job and you say, you know what?
Go ahead, pursue your dreams.
I will help pay all your costs of living.
I will even help finance this dream thing of yours a bit, and your marriage dissolves
after a few years while they're still doing this.
The courts say, huh, basically, you've been paying for all their living expenses.
They had no income, and this is the way things are, so you got to keep doing that.
If you were doing that with a friend, there's no court in the world that would be like,
well, you've been letting this person crash in your spare bedroom for two years.
You got to let them keep crashing there for another year and a half, bro.
You've been paying for their dinners.
You better keep paying for their dinners.
It makes the best thing you can do in that situation is to say to your partner, no, I
don't care what your dreams are.
I don't care if you're miserable working for the man.
Go out there, get another job, and it better be paying about as much as your job was paying
before, because otherwise you have put me in a financial crisis.
The fact that you have this legal hold over me as long as you are not making as much as
you were when we got married.
If your income increases, there's better start increasing too, because otherwise you
are subsidizing their lifestyle, and you're going to keep doing that for a long time afterwards.
Like you said, none of this is necessarily a thing that has to happen.
The other person can say, you know what, we thank you for helping me out or whatever.
I'm not going to go after you for all this money, but they can.
They have the option to do that.
That is the only thing that the marriage contract brought into your relationship.
Everything else that you had with your relationship, the love, the helping each other, the sharing,
a living space, the sharing expenses, you can do without marriage.
The only thing the marriage contract brought in was the obligation that afterwards you're
going to keep doing that once you don't want to anymore.
Two quick things.
I guess three things, and I'll do them quickly.
Was that both prongs of your fork that you're stabbing marriage with?
The fact that it disincentivizes niceness and that it turns you into a part of a marriage
rather than a person?
Yes.
Okay.
I wanted to make sure you got all that out.
Hold on.
What was the last thing that you said?
Let me tip my tongue.
The marriage doesn't provide anything to your relationship except the ability for one person
to defect against the other one at the end.
I think the comeback that would be from the lay person would be, no, it brings in all
these tax benefits and deathbed rights, everything that people are arguing for in the case of
all the stuff that I heard on the news, making cases for gay marriage being legalized.
There's some reason that they wanted that other than wanting to be able to fuck each
other.
Well, other than wanting to be able to fuck each other legally later, right?
Right.
And so then the third thing was the vain counterpoint.
I was just waiting for end rant.
End rant.
There we go.
I'll have more to say later.
No, I'm sure you will.
But yeah, that's the meat of it.
I'm sure you will.
But I think we make two giant jumps that we shouldn't make and let's clarify that.
The fact that people are ignorant of contract law is true regardless of marriage.
I don't remember whether this was Boston Legal or Silicon Valley where people enter
form an LLC and they go to the lawyer when things go sour and he's like, you basically
got married to that guy, right?
Because that's what it is.
When you say there's an entity called the marriage, that's what I, most of my friends
when we have these discussions, I say, imagine you form an LLC with a friend and then act
according to that, right?
That way, if you change the mental model to that, everybody's fine.
Oh yeah, it's the LLC.
Oh yeah, we work together.
All of that changes.
Right.
People don't have that mental model, unfortunately.
Right.
So how is that the fault of marriage?
The fact that people aren't educated in contract law, tort law is not the fault of such a thing
as marriage existing, okay?
The fault of marriage is that all of society is geared in a way to hide this from people
and to encourage them and push them into this sort of contract that they have no idea
No, no, no, no, no, no, let's push back on this.
Okay.
The fact that society pushes you to get married has a multitude of reasons that are outside
the scope of this conversation, right?
Humans pair bond and we need all like a sustained relationship and all this good stuff.
We as, let's even restrict this argument to the current state, the current timeline in
the USA have instantiated a legal version of this union in this way.
That is what I have the problem with.
Oh, then great.
I don't care.
Oh, god damn it.
Well, no, I'm totally fine with any other sort of marriage, like people just getting
together and saying vows into church.
No, no, no, no, but wait, wait, wait, wait, we are in this timeline in this planet or in
this country.
So we have, as you said, Steven, when we get married, we are telling the state that we
ask you to give us less taxes because we say that we will consume together.
So that's a less resource consumption we can do this way, right?
We ask you to do these all things.
So it is on their, their ownership protection to say you will also keep doing this as long
as the other parties.
Don't involve the state.
You can get married in whatever ceremonial way you want.
Don't involve the state would be my saying unless you've really looked into the contract.
Right.
That's a different thing.
Well, yes and no.
I mean, yes, it's a different thing technically, but no, almost no one knows that or treats
it as a different thing.
And that is what-
People are ignorant is not my argument.
Well, I am helping people be less ignorant maybe.
How many people read the Apple and use a license agreement?
Hold on.
The Apple and use a license agreement can't fuck you nearly as hard as a marriage can.
But the, the disknowledge, I think between the LLC and the marriage model is that you
can't enter into a business without being presented with the contract.
Yes.
Whereas you can enter into a marriage without seeing the contract.
Yeah.
You see the contract.
You see the page that says you're married now, but that's not-
You can form an LLC in a single page.
Yes, but an LLC will say in it, you know, this is the revenue streams.
This is how it's split up.
This is the assets of the LLC going in.
It contains the terms of the LLC, not just like saying congratulations, you're a business
and all the terms are never shown to all the business partners.
So if the issue is the introductory statement is not broad enough or is not defined in-
In any terms whatsoever.
In any terms whatsoever.
In enough detail.
That's a great point.
Let's have that argument.
Yeah.
But I'm not saying, but that's completely different to saying don't let the state in because let's
say you don't let the state in and there's an issue and people want to separate.
How do you split assets?
How do you?
Who is the arbiter?
Right.
These are the conditions of the arbiter that we have.
And they're really shitty.
Oh yeah.
They are shitty because of the reasons that we agreed, well not agreed, but are outside
the scope because we'd have to get into the morality of keeping people together.
We'd have to get into why it's good to pair bond.
We'd have to get into the entire history of women basically being unable to own property
or have income of their own up until just a few decades ago.
Right.
Yeah.
That was, I mean, I absolutely understand why this was a thing back in the day, but
it does not need to be a thing anymore because now it's just a way to ruin relationships.
No.
Wait, wait, wait.
That it can ruin relationships doesn't mean that it is the only thing.
No, there are many things that can ruin relationships.
No, no, no, the point that you said about the only thing the marriage contract brings
to a relationship is the fact that I am incentivized to be less nice.
Yes.
No, I'm not.
Okay.
Because now that you are enlightened and you're looking at it through the mental model of
an LLC, you're saying all of my expenses don't accrue to me, but yet I have to socialize
within this LLC all of my profits.
And if the business ever goes under, you've got to keep your business partner's lights
on for the rest of the long run.
If the business goes under, the issue is the other business partner has incurred a loss
forever for the duration of this business.
So have you.
That's not how the arbiter sees it.
Well, so I think that's probably how Eniash sees it though.
Right.
Yeah.
No, but Eniash's case is, wait, wait, wait, let's not put Eniash into the bus, but let's
do a median income.
Let's hear him crawl out from under the bus if we do it wrong.
Right, right, right.
Let's do median income in the U.S. male, female.
Let's do median earning power, male, female.
So all of these social statistics play into this.
So courts, whatever arbiter that we go to are incentivized for loss prevention, right?
They're not there to say, this was fair then, this is fair now, minus the difference, let's
split it that way.
No, they're saying, I don't want to get more shit on me.
So we will do loss prevention and we will have it be as morally acceptable to us, which
again, follows all this.
Can you clarify what you mean by loss prevention at this point?
I don't want the lady to sue me five years down the line saying, I lost all hope, I got
into drugs because I had zero earning power.
That's more work on the state.
Oh, I see.
You know what I mean?
So let's think of, what's the guy's name?
Kevin Federline, Britney Spears' baby daddy.
So it's not a male, female thing, it's just difference in power, right?
So that's the point.
The state is working to cover their ass saying whoever has the least power again shouldn't
come to me and do the same argument, do the same dance five years down the line.
So they're saying you keep, you take care of them because you already have.
So unless you can prove that we're totally fucked, you also, like both parties don't
have any income stream and all of that nonsense.
So they're incentivized not to care for people because the state says once you've proven
you can cared for this person, you have to keep doing it.
Because you entered into this contract.
Yes.
Which people don't know is in the contract.
Right.
So, wait, wait, wait, wait, I think we're talking past each other.
I agree with you that the contract has to be explained better.
But that is never a reason not to get into the contract or to say that the contract
is bad.
If we use that same definition on any other contract, we would get to, we wouldn't go
out of the house.
You don't think that the contract itself is unconscionable?
Unconscionable to whom?
Against what barrier?
Unconscionable in the way that it takes away a lot of your individual personhood and only
with respect to asset utilization, right?
So when you say...
Actually, there's another interesting, I don't mean to interrupt, but speaking of taking
away your personhood, becoming part of the marriage, husband and wife and or now partner
and partner can't be compelled to testify against each other in court because you can't
be compelled to testify against yourself in court via the Fifth Amendment.
Yeah.
But that...
I see where you're going, but I don't think that follows from that.
I don't think it's self-incriminalization and because you are a unit, therefore you
cannot...
It's not the same...
It's not the same...
Is that an extension?
I don't know if that's an extension.
No, I don't believe it's literally an extension, but it is very similar, that sort of thing.
Okay.
Yeah.
It's similar from the outcome point of view, but I don't think they made the law saying
you cannot incriminate yourself when you get married, you're no longer yourself.
This is a unit, so you cannot incriminate the unit.
I don't think that's how it went down.
Okay.
My bad.
That doesn't mean to do real.
Yeah, no.
That's not literally how it went down.
No.
Right.
No, what was I going to say?
Oh, screw me.
Sorry.
No, no, no.
We were discussing whether it was unconscionable because...
Right, right.
You are bamboozled in...
Well, bamboozled because you take away someone's personhood.
Right.
So that's where I wanted to disagree.
You don't take away their personhood.
You take away their claims to community assets, which I think what they're called,
is it's an LLC.
No, but it's not literally an LLC.
It's not literally.
So why does it...
Like, it's an LLC in everything but name.
So why not call it an LLC?
You know what?
That was a proposition.
Great.
If they called it an LLC, I might have less problems with it.
There you go.
They don't call it an LLC.
So naming it...
They call it a marriage and they say, this is what you do when you're in love.
And if you don't do it, you don't really love the person.
No, no, no.
They're two different people.
I'm sorry.
Only all of the society that we live in.
No, no, no.
Yes, society.
So human beings that I interact with...
Yes.
...to do if you're in love, the state has nothing to do with telling you when you're in love
or how you're in love or what you have to do in love.
State comes and says, you decided you want to do this.
This is the only contract that we have to support this kind of adventure.
Sign this piece of paper.
It is unconscionable to tell people, if you are in love, this is a thing that you do and
here's...
Right.
That is society's problem.
Not the arbiter or the court or the state's problem.
Okay.
Let's just define that.
Oh, yeah.
Then great.
If you want to blame society rather than the government, fine.
But the government made a shitty contract and society is telling people if they don't
love each other.
I mean, if they don't sign it that they don't love each other.
Right.
But why are we...
That's a ridiculous standard to hold yourself against.
Society tells us to do ridiculous things.
And to the person...
Yeah, well, if I go ahead and kill somebody, my wife is not liable.
No, no, no.
But, yeah, I know, when society was telling us to worship this God person and sacrifice
however many hours of our lives and we said, this is a terrible idea and it's stupid and
here's the reasons why, right?
We said it.
Okay.
But it's still...
I'm doing the same thing with marriage.
Wait, wait, wait.
No, no, no.
We said religion was bad.
Let's say...
Yes.
Just to continue this argument.
Okay.
We figured...
We agreed that religion was control 1.0.
Okay.
We figured that there are different forms of control that don't need whatever the baggage
religion brings.
So these are better forms.
Okay.
So when we were going to those forms, the state didn't do jack shit.
It was all...
I...
It was all response, right?
I mean, the state has also often gotten involved in religion.
No, but...
The US is kind of unique in how much it tries in theory to separate the two.
In theory.
Yeah, in theory.
But...
And still doesn't do a very good job of it.
But, yeah, when we said...
Who's the mover is my point.
Is society or is the knowledge the mover or is the state the mover?
It's always knowledge.
It's never the prime mover, so to say.
Okay.
I don't know whether I agree with you in that...
In all cases or not.
But what I'm saying is religion is crappy for the same reason that marriage is crappy.
Because a lot of people are pushed into it and there's no really good reason anymore
to still have it around.
And yet it has all these ramifications.
That's where I disagree.
Okay.
We can both say religion is bad and in the same ways marriage is bad.
But when you say that's why it should not exist, that's where I disagree.
Okay.
It's hard to say that religion should not exist, period.
It serves a function for certain people, yeah.
But most atheists don't say religion should not exist at all.
They say, as in like, let's make it illegal and throw people in jail.
Let's go into the moral reasons for it.
When atheists say religion shouldn't exist, they don't mean religion should be made illegal
and you should be punished for being religious.
They say religion shouldn't exist because people should be enlightened enough to let
go of this bullshit.
I'm saying the same thing about marriage.
I'm not saying that it should be illegal to get married, but rather that it is a bad
concept and these are the reasons why and people should get rid of them voluntarily.
Right.
But the reasons you gave are the instance of marriage according to this state or this
arbiter.
Yes.
Because that's what marriage is in the society that I live in.
I'm not going to go arguing against, I don't know, some funky worship Cthulhu cult out
in the Pacific that I don't know anything about.
No, no, no.
Wait, wait.
So that's what I'm getting at.
So we're using the arguments against an instance of an object in our particular surroundings
to say the object itself or the upper class itself is somehow morally wrong.
I'm saying if pair bonding helps species, I'm saying if...
Can you pair bond without marriage?
Why not?
Okay.
Then what do you need the marriage for?
No, but that's how we've been grown.
I'm saying marriage is the contractual instantiation of a pair bond.
You don't need necessarily a contract to instantiate a pair bond.
You can have it without the contract.
And if you do want a contract to be like, hey, you know what, I'll take care of you
for however much longer, then you can do that.
You should write that down yourself, like make an actual contract.
Right.
Okay.
I think we're in agreement there.
It is, you cannot say we both agree pair bonding is better for the species.
Let's talk about that some other day.
Okay.
No, but that's how we have to get into it, right?
Because when you say unconscionable, unconscionable against what moral standard?
Against the moral standard of people being their own individuals and having...
But that argument was a bigger argument than just marriage.
That argument is the anarcho...
Yeah.
Yeah.
Anarcho-black argument.
There is a sort of article of faith that people have in violent right to their own bodies
and their own...
What is the term that Shelley always uses?
Volition.
I don't know.
Volition, I guess.
She is extremely strong on nothing ever impinging on someone else's bodily autonomy.
Thank you.
There it is.
You're welcome.
Yeah.
There is an article of faith that bodily autonomy is extremely important and some people don't
think that is the case, but I do and I think that marriage in large part violates that.
Right.
So?
So I have a problem with that.
That's fine.
And you argue that other people who value those sorts of autonomies ought to disvalue
marriage.
We agree that...
Yes, exactly.
Yeah, that's my point.
So you don't value autonomy in that way.
I'm saying in the strictest sense, maximizing for bodily autonomy is not possible in this
system.
So whenever that is possible, we have to...
This is a...
It's certainly a possible in the system of marriage.
Exactly.
So whatever...
We have...
We are...
Law is just the instantiation of the morals of the time.
So I cannot say this law is bad.
Well, 50 years ago.
Sorry, go on.
Dude, whatever it is.
It's just...
It's the instantiation of what we think is right and what we think we should do.
The we is the collective society that wrote those rules.
Yes.
If some subset of the society disagrees with that, with the underlying morals, and then
you have...
Then that subset makes a podcast about how terrible those morals are, which is what this
subset is doing by this subset, I mean, me specifically.
Well, you and a bunch of people, right?
Okay.
I don't know.
I don't know those people.
Bits of me as well.
Okay.
Right?
Because I agree that bodily autonomy should be a goal to strive for.
Yeah.
Right?
But what do you do in the intermediary step?
We need protections for loss prevention because more decisions are made to avoid loss than
to improve my gain on whatever access you want, bodily autonomy, profit, money, whatever
the hell you want.
Yeah.
So we are taking steps to solve loss and we're taking baby steps to it.
We'll get there.
Yeah.
My point is we cannot put a value judgment right now to say that's wrong or we shouldn't
do it.
That's my point.
I'm not sure if you, at least to my, it didn't sink in with me that you really responded
to the actual arguments that were made.
I think, I mean, you made a case that marriage has other purposes, maybe, but I guess directly,
what purposes does it serve in, I mean...
It guarantees to whatever arbiter you're under that you will perform these tasks.
That you're ignorant of these tasks is your fault, is my point.
Well, I guess I've got two things on that because one, I consider myself in, you know,
correct me if I'm wrong, but I don't think I'm a complete idiot.
No, no, no, no, no, but I do mean me.
And up until, you know, I think I read about, or you know, you wrote some stuff about this
and I read those and that was sort of eye-opening for me because I didn't know most of the
stuff about marriage either and I'm not an idiot.
So like...
The society has no incentive to let you know what you're signing up for.
Yeah, that's the point.
There's no incentive to educate you.
It's the point.
So as far, as long as that's the case, it seems like there's a strong case, that seems
like there's a strong case to be made against getting married in the way that things are.
So it's just the cases to be made to educate yourself about the rules.
Well, I guess I can see railing against the system of marriage as a completely understandable
result of the fact that no one knows what marriage is because no one's educated on it.
So you could say...
So every divorce lawyer on the planet knows it.
Right.
Well, how many of us in this room are divorce lawyers?
No, but...
Okay.
Right.
So I guess by nobody, I don't mean literally nobody.
I mean almost nobody.
Like, maybe the other side of Inyasha's anti-marriage campaign here isn't necessarily anti-marriage.
It's anti-ignorance about marriage.
Yes.
And so you're pro that.
Yes.
But you're defending the institution as it is.
Yes, because we didn't want to get into pair bonding and good, bad and stuff like that.
Well, I'm not married.
Right.
But if there was a way...
So you're pair bonded.
How would you tell whatever arbiter you're under that you have for a considerable time
and future are going to use less assets than if the two of you were separate?
Who's the arbiter?
The state.
And why are you telling the state this?
Because we use the state for accounting purposes.
We use the state for points of things.
Any time you live with someone, you're using less resources.
Right.
And don't roommates get the same benefits?
Because a marriage is supposed to last forever or until death do us part.
Which is bullshit.
No, but that's a theory.
That's a point of getting married because by your own admission, we're going by morality
that's 50 years old.
So the other person, let's say women because we're all men here.
So let's be sexist.
Why not?
I'm just saying.
Whoever the less powerful party is, will by the morality of the written law have less
bodily autonomy after the fact that this is broken.
So we are preventing their loss.
I'm sorry.
Who's having less bodily autonomy?
Whoever the less powerful person in this LLC is, which is women, according to the morality
of the law that we're going after, which is 50 years old.
I think what you're saying is that, I guess I'm having a hard time dissecting.
Let me try and articulate this.
The laws as they're written made sense 60, 50 years ago.
And to the extent that, like you guys said, women couldn't had barriers to owning property,
barriers to having income.
And it made sense to not leave them desitute if you, as the breadwinner wanted to go find
a younger, hotter wife and say, fuck this old one or whatever, right?
That was deliberately in sense.
Incessant.
We're fine.
Right.
So I don't see how that applies today when like, I mean, up until May, my girlfriend
has always made more money than I have, right?
So like, we're not at that much of a power imbalance in today's society.
Right, but I can make societal laws based on single conditions.
I have to go by median.
But you can decide whether or not to opt into contracts that are 60 years out of date,
right?
Right.
And you can also not defend an institution that is so out of date.
It assumes that women are still property rather than able to have as much property and income
as an email.
Right.
So my argument is, it's not the institution, it's the legal instantiation of that institution
is my point.
Okay.
Is there a non...
Yeah.
Is there an instantiation of the institution that isn't a legal one?
It's a common law marriage.
And back home in India, we're fighting for uniform civil code.
So I guess that was the other thing that I was confused about.
You kept talking about the instantiation of marriage, not marriage itself.
Yeah.
But where does marriage exist outside of the instantiation of it?
So common law is an example of the...
Common law, like you said, if I have a friend, let's say I'm not gay, but if I have a friend,
if I were gay and I had a roommate who I did the exact same things other than having sex
with them and I had my gay partner, according to the law, would there be a difference?
Yes.
Yeah.
What was the difference?
You're having sex with one of them.
Right.
But that's my point.
So there's...
The law cares about that, which is stupid, but it does.
No, no, no, but I'm saying I have the instantiation, which is not legally defined as marriage
right now with the person that I'm having sex with versus the person who's just a friend
sitting in this other room.
I don't like the term just a friend.
I now have basically a hetero-life partner to steal Jay and Silent Bob's term and I really
plan to spend the rest of my life with them.
And...
Whatever it is, right?
Yeah.
And it's fantastic.
And yeah, it does reduce costs and everything else.
And you have this support structure and it's great, but I'm never going to sleep with
them or never going to have sex with them.
And...
Wait, wait, wait, wait.
The reason...
The reason...
The real difference between this and previous marriages is that this one is stronger but
has less sex.
And I don't...
I think it's bullshit that the partnership with sex is the one that, first of all, you
have all this societal pressure to be true and devote everything to and is the only real
relationship in your entire life that counts.
It's not real...
Wait, wait, wait.
I didn't say it was the only real one.
I didn't say the only one that counts.
You didn't say that, no.
But if you look around in society, that's what you hear.
But why are we going out?
That's my point.
We have to go by median.
So there are...
The median person is told that your marriage is the most...
They feel it.
Well, how do you mean that they're told?
The median person is not as flexible with their romantic, let's say, relationship with
the people in this room are, right?
I don't know anymore, honestly.
Or at least they show.
Or any more.
I get that.
At least they show.
People do have serial monogamy where they date around and not have one partner their
entire life.
This is just getting into...
Okay, okay.
Okay.
I'm saying self-identified straight monogamous people.
Would that constitute a 51% of the populace that would vote for the laws that we're talking
about?
Seriously, don't know.
Right.
But that's the assumption that I'm going under.
Okay.
That's your assumption then?
Right.
Okay.
51% that self-identified, whether truly or falsely, to be straight and somehow single
monogamous, right?
Not multiple single monogamous and straight, the rules that I, because of this true or
false self-identification, I vote and get into law of these rules.
I'm sorry.
Did you vote and get into the law of these rules?
Not me, but...
Okay.
I didn't think so.
No one that I know has voted into the law of these marriage rules because no one I know
even knows what the marriage laws are.
They're, again, we're going back to your things.
The marriage laws weren't inherited and they are a bad inheritance.
Let's update them.
I totally agree.
They're a bad inheritance.
Let's update them.
Okay.
Marriage is terrible as it stands right now.
As it stands right now, marriage is terrible.
No, no, no.
The legal definition of marriage does not fully cover the variety of relationships that currently
the people in our social group have.
Which is yet another reason that marriage is terrible.
See that?
Come on, man.
You're more intelligent than doing ad nauseam attacks like this.
Okay, fine.
I think it's somewhat for comedic effects because I think it's funny.
Can you defend marriage outside of the context in which it sucks?
Or can you give examples?
Because common law, as soon as to me, that's one of my impression of it, is that you can
be married without really knowing that you're married.
Yes.
And if that comes with all the weird scary baggage of...
So you can have signed a contract that, A, you were never shown in real marriage.
Yes.
But why are you doing this as a point?
Why are you acting in such a way that would guaranteed across this threshold of resource
utilization?
I am common law married to my heterolife partner if that was a thing, but it's not.
What do you mean?
Oh, yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
So I guess that's, I mean, I'm doing it for the same reasons that everybody who has a roommate
does it.
Yeah.
Like, if my roommate was of the opposite sex and we had, I guess you have to have sex,
do you have to have sex?
No.
Because you don't need to have sex.
Exactly.
If my roommate was of the opposite gender, we would probably be common law married.
We would possibly be common law married.
But neither you nor the other person is going to go and say, yes, I expected this to be
common law marriage and now I am wronged by this person.
Oh, it doesn't matter if you expected it to be common law marriage or not.
No, no, no.
But I'm saying there's no initiator.
Yeah.
There doesn't need to be for common law marriage.
Right.
You're not going to be considered common law married even if neither one of you wanted
it.
I totally agree.
I'm saying, how are you going to enforce that if neither you nor him.
If, if say when he and his head or a life partner broke up and they were common law married
and his head or a life partner said, I'm coming after you because I was used to the same
of living.
There you go.
That's the, that's my point.
Somebody has to initiate it.
Because this is the state.
Well, I mean, that's the same thing.
That's the same thing with any other marriage.
You can always not go after the person that you're getting divorced from.
So my point is this, but the marriage makes that possible.
Right.
The bad things that we are talking about with marriage are state enforcing things that I
don't want on me.
Uh-huh.
Right.
So that's the state.
That's the issue here.
Not the marriage itself.
What is the marriage that's not the state?
Just like we said, I can live, I can have a partnership and I can get, go into the forest
and kiss somebody else and be like, Hey, we're married.
I will do these things that I'm supposed to do in a legal marriage with you.
I guess I, so you are defining the marriage outside of like the context of the state and
the instantiation that we live in in our time to be hetero life partners, Jane's Island
Bob.
Why hetero?
Well, I mean, I'm using that as a Jane's Island Bob.
Right.
Right.
Just life partners.
Yeah.
Just anybody.
Yeah.
So that's what you're standing up for.
Yeah.
Not for marriage as is colloquially used by 99.8% of people.
No, no, no, no, no.
Again, I also have no problem with people running off into the woods and like saying, I'll be
with you forever.
It is the, it is literally the state part that I have the issue with.
Exactly.
So that's not the issue with marriage.
That's the issue with the state.
So have you been arguing about nothing this whole time?
No.
We're arguing about how state gets into it.
What is the exact definition and what is the scope of the state's intervention into
interpersonal relationships?
I also feel, I mean, sort of cheated that you're defending this like, this vague abstraction,
this, this, this interface class of marriage that has no real like instantiation.
No, but it's real to me.
My, let me give you a real life example.
My marriage to my wife has to inherit, because we're code idiots, has to inherit that interface
class, right?
And my instance will inherit whatever that is.
Just because this, this inherited object is now under the enforcement of the state does
not make me or my, my instance any more special than anything else.
No, but it like, I'm trying to think of how to put this in, in, in Java, there's no multiple
inheritance.
In the idea that you can, you can pull in from multiple things and make, make an extended
to one thing.
But in, in marriage in the United States now that is what happens.
Right.
So like you're pulling in from, from what you thought you were getting.
And then the secret thing that you didn't know you were getting right and I disagree
with that.
Right.
But that's, that's what I think.
That's also what I disagree with.
Yeah.
I don't think anyone's going to get on, get on a stump and argue against like no one should
pledge their love to each other.
Right.
Right.
So like, I, so I think that's a weak thing to defend.
What do you mean?
That almost seems like, that seems like you, you made the goalpost smaller than the soccer
ball.
Like, I mean, like, cause that, that, that's, that's not an attack.
That's not a claim that I didn't want to attack.
So how did you, everything that you guys disagreed?
Cause I actually didn't define it when I was asking.
What, what, was it the inheritance or the structure?
Yeah, I didn't say this is an issue I have with marriage.
I just said, Hey, someone wanted to defend marriage.
And I guess he took that to mean something other than what I meant it.
Okay.
So I'm let down because I, because I am in a long-term relationship.
We've been together for six and a half years and we might be common law married.
I don't know.
Right.
I would hope to not have to find out.
All right.
Let's do an interaction exercise, but continue.
I'll get in later.
Do what?
No, continue.
I'm sorry.
Yes.
When I was enlightened on what marriage entailed, instantiations of marriage now entailed.
Not what's saying, I love you entailed.
I was disenchanted with the entire enterprise and I am now on the fence as to whether or
not to ever, you know, legally tie this knot.
Because I don't like the game theoretic implications of getting fucked.
How would you not get, oh, you're just saying that way.
Yeah.
Great idea.
If I wound up in a nasty divorce, which I obviously no one gets married anticipating
that happening.
So I was hoping that you were going to convince me, no, Steven, marriage is great.
You should get married.
Wait, so let's do this.
Let's do this.
Okay.
I will now enter into the state of catatonic said of defending current marriage as it
is.
All right.
So your cases were it incentivizes niceness, which I disagree with either way.
What was the other point?
It is.
You lose personhood.
Yes.
Oh.
What was the other point?
I just made a syntax error.
If someone's going to write to correct me on what I said about Java earlier, don't.
You can extend multiple classes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, all right, whatever.
Wait.
So loss of personhood, this incentivizes niceness.
What was the other thing?
Well, a number of things, including you cannot have separate things anymore and you can.
If I kill somebody, my wife's not liable.
I can have the entire guilt and entire liability of killing somebody.
You can have separate, uh, like criminal ledgers, but is that the only thing that you can have?
No, but that's my point.
So I am disproving by example, not proven by.
How about how about stuff?
You can't have separate stuff.
Is that, is that true?
Uh, yeah, I don't think you can have separate stuff because, because as I say, it's in the
current state.
It's an LLC.
Would you be willing to say separate stuff instead of things?
Yes.
Very good.
You guys are exposing my pedanticness.
This is not right.
Well, I think, I think, I think what you didn't mean is that you literally can't have separate
thoughts.
Right.
But you can't have is separate.
You cannot have property that you have complete ownership on.
Yes.
Yeah.
Great.
Okay.
Yeah.
If you buy a scratcher and you win 200 bucks and you buy a couple of video games with
it.
Those aren't your video games.
Those are the marriage video games.
Yeah.
Right.
So my money that you like earned like as part of the marriage is the money that you found.
Right.
Right.
So let's defend this marriage.
I mean, this, whatever we're calling this, right?
Marriage is a good word.
Marriage is a good word.
And also to throw in there and the fact that nobody, almost nobody knows this sort of thing
and is pushed into it.
Right.
That I cannot defend because I'm not going to defend ignorance on whatever contract you
sign.
Okay.
Right.
And usually let's agreements, terms of service, marriage contract, it's a piece of paper
that you sign.
So if you're ignorant, you're ignorant.
I think the special case here though, and I just want to belabor this is that if I skim
past the terms of service and don't read it, at least it was shown to me and I knowingly
didn't read it.
Right.
You can get married and not even know that there's this secret other contract until someone
try, you know, goes through an acid divorce.
Right.
And that, that was what surprised me.
And that, so I'm willing to get, you know, take, take, you know, a bad lease if I didn't
read it and it says you're going to have to end up paying no matter what, you know, for
a year after your whatever, if I get screwed on lease agreement that I signed because I
didn't read it, that's on me.
If I didn't sign it and I'm still screwed by it, that's where I get pissed.
That seems to be more analogous to the marriage case.
We were talking just before the show about Black Mirror because I've finally caught up
to the year 2012 and watched episode two of season one.
But it's, it's not unlike being told, hey, there's this great opportunity for you.
All you have to do is sign away your life savings and then you go to this opportunity
and it turns out that you've been defrauded of your life savings.
And normally that's an illegal sort of thing, but on this particular episode, they would
defraud poor people of their life savings and do it on national TV while the whole nation
watched and cheered, which is, it's just a sick fucking society.
And the, God, it grossed me out the entire fucking, that they would have this society
like that.
Oh, you're in for a treat.
You're giving to the rest of the show.
Okay.
Okay.
That's one of the Tamer ones.
That's by a mile one of the Tamer ones.
Okay.
So in our society, that would be considered unconscionable.
Those people would be hauled into court for taking people's life savings and defrauding
them of that and not giving them what they actually expected.
No, no.
How many payday lenders are there?
How many, I will rattle off 50 people that I know are doing more ridiculous things with
money than what those guys are doing in Black Mirror.
It's just that the other party isn't there of putting it out of TV and then other having
other people's glee on it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Most fraudulent things are done secretly or at least not on national TV while everyone
cheers.
Right.
Right.
And marriage is almost on national TV where everyone cheers.
Yes.
Is that what you're saying?
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
Where most Ponzi schemes and other things are done on the sly, they aren't celebrated.
They are.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Marriage isn't seen as a 24-hour check cashing place.
No, but what's the guy's name?
Bernie Madoff.
Yeah, there you go.
That was a giant Ponzi scheme.
Right.
And it wasn't made off until the moment he got caught.
Right.
But again, he got caught.
It was actually illegal.
Right.
But who's calling him on it?
Whereas the Black Mirror episode, it was perfectly legal and so was marriage.
Right.
I get the analogy that you're trying to make.
Okay, okay, okay.
I'm just saying the analogy doesn't go as far as you want it to go.
Yeah, I know.
It's not the best analogy, but it's analogous in the fact that normally fraud is illegal.
And I feel...
But this isn't fraud.
This is...
No, it's not technically fraud.
There you go.
In the same moral wheelhouse because of how much you're signing away and how little you
know beforehand.
That is a travesty.
Yeah.
As I said before, I will never support ignorance on any contract.
Right.
Let it be marriage, whatever it is.
Yeah.
But that's a general statement to make.
If we solve that big problem, this marriage problem goes away.
A lot of it goes away.
Right, you go.
Yeah.
So let's defend this.
Personhood, we disproved because if I kill somebody, the other person's unliable.
So assets are shared because, and the only way I can defend this instantiation is to
go back to morals and to go back to self-identified wrong beliefs of society that we have somehow
for lack of will, don't have the ability to correct.
Okay.
So we think that it is a man's duty to, or let's say...
Let's put it on the...
The higher earner's duty.
The higher earner's duty to save and to kind of help the lower earner until they get to
the next step.
Right.
Which I mean, that's one of the reasons I am grossed out by this whole thing is because
I do not want to have a higher earner, lower earner sort of relationship.
I want to be in a partnership with an equal person.
But that's not...
Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait.
No, no, no, no, no, no.
Wait, wait, wait.
We are...
A marriage, we define these things by majority.
Right?
A lot of people do, yes.
I mean, that's how the law gets passed anyway.
So what are we talking about here?
I am talking about ending up in a master...
Right.
You want a power equal footing for everybody and equally knowledgeable...
Yes.
That would be a considerable marriage arrangement, whereas what we have is a throwback to the
times when there was master and there was servant.
Right.
And that is the extent to which the median morality exists, therefore, what else is
the system could you have?
Yeah, the median morality is kind of shitty.
Great.
Okay.
That's the median morality.
What do you mean?
Oh, why are you defending the median morality?
I'm saying the median morality is shitty.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
What else can I defend?
How can you say the median morality is shitty if that's the median morality?
Because it's shitty.
I mean...
Why is your information better than what the median morality is?
How do you know...
How do you have conviction in your right... in your righteousness?
If I didn't... if I wasn't convinced of that, then I wouldn't be coming on this podcast.
There has to be someone at some point that says, look, I know the median morality is
that slavery is cool, or I know the median morality is that women can't own property
or have jobs.
Right.
I know whatever the median morality is, is the median, but it is not good and we can
do better.
We can do definitely better.
Okay.
But I am saying the shitty bit is the issue there.
I'm not going to not talk about it just because I'm not in the majority.
No, no, no.
I'm not asking you not to talk about it.
I'm just saying it is the median morality.
Yes.
That is how most people go by.
That is what I am here to defend, median morality.
So when you say it's unconscionable, it's not unconscionable.
I apologize for putting you into the position of having to defend the median morality because
that was...
No, that's fine.
That was shitty on my part.
No, no.
It's shitty on my part because I accepted this ridiculous challenge.
Okay.
No, no.
But let's... when you say it's unconscionable, it's not unconscionable to the median morality.
It's unconscionable to your morality and my morality.
Okay.
That is my argument.
So it's unconscionable.
Right.
It's unconscionable by definition.
It's only unconscionable to people who follow this subset of morality.
Again, it depends on how you define the unconscionable by definition part.
There are people who would say that slavery is unconscionable regardless of...
Great.
If that was the median morality, that would have been great.
I mean, that would have been the truth of the land.
That would have been a law of the land.
Yeah.
Right.
But there are even the people who were in the minority back then, the Bentham's that
said slavery is unconscionable, they were...
Right.
I'm not saying you were wrong.
Possibly wrong based on the median.
Okay.
I'm not saying you're right or wrong.
I'm just saying this is the median morality, so you cannot...
So we in this room cannot throw words like, it is unconscionable because it is unconscionable.
I both can and I do.
What's the point of having these words if I don't ever use them?
No, you can use them.
I'm just saying it means different things.
Okay.
When you say it is unconscionable, the word left out, it is unconscionable to people
who think like me.
Okay.
Well, I think at this point we are running in circles around something that doesn't address
the root of anything.
Yeah.
I don't know whether we can say that the majority is wrong.
Yeah.
It's the majority right or wrong.
Yeah.
So...
Okay.
This is bad advertising.
Right?
All right.
And bad self-research.
Uh-huh.
Right?
So when I say I would defend the institution of marriage, I meant that people, I believe
that pair bonding is good and I believe that there should be a contract if we...
Let's take two things.
I believe pair bonding helps humanity.
Check.
Definitely.
Okay.
So as intellectual capacity increases, there's a tendency to write down things that we want
to do.
Yes?
Yeah.
Pair bonding has helped people, human beings, to the reason that we know.
So it would also help this more than Dunbar collection of society.
The intersection of that is what I call marriage.
Okay.
And I will defend that to the death because we're just putting rules on how I treat whoever
I want to pair bond with.
This instantiation bullshit is because the state comes in.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So that's my point.
When I say I will defend marriage, I will defend a piece of paper with rules on it that
tells me how I have to treat somebody I pair bond with.
Okay.
Let me process that for a minute.
I mean, thinking about it, yeah, if you pair bonded with someone and you guys wanted to
write your rules down on a paper, that's actually probably a good idea.
Right.
But scale that to society.
Scale that to more than Dunbar.
It'll work for you and me.
Let's say you and me decide to pair bond.
Yeah.
Right?
And we write down how we want to treat each other.
Okay.
But why would not Steven and some other person who also just copy that?
They, I mean, they can use it as a model, but they should probably...
Right.
That's the point.
So there becomes a minimum standard model of this is the minimum stuff and that is what
I am saying point to the state.
Yeah.
The minimum stuff that the state is at is...
I don't know.
Go from contract to state and not state to contract is my point.
I think that what you're saying is the state's minimum is really fucked up.
Yes.
Okay.
No, but still...
That is what I'm saying.
The state's minimum is fucked up.
That does not mean that any minimum that any Dunbar set that comes up with will also be
fucked up.
Well, yeah.
No, I would never argue against people's ability to enter contracts and relations with each
other.
That's what it is.
No, he is.
We didn't taboo marriage early enough.
Yeah.
This is actually to me a very fun discussion.
So let me...
I'm still processing some of this.
I'm going to just think out loud for a second if I don't get you guys don't mind.
Your current marriage is not a minimum model that you and your wife put together.
It's a state model and are you okay with that?
Yeah.
For your personal life?
Yeah.
How come?
Because I will for whatever, everybody's their own hero, right?
So I'm not going to be Darth Vader.
And because of this delusion that I have, I know that my wife is not going to be Darth
Vader S.
Right?
So same here.
But so does everyone who gets married for the most part, right?
Right.
The other thing, like the way that I think about this, too...
So why not have marriage insurance?
Well, like, I mean, it's marriage insurance that really only ensures your partner if
you're making...
No.
No, no.
You can have a marriage insurance contract that ensures the damn entity.
Well, I mean, does the contract ever negatively impact the person who made less?
Ever?
I'm sure.
I mean, not ever.
In a reasonable...
In general, no.
So, like, I mean, the way that I think about it is I certainly don't...
I think my partner right now would never do anything like that either.
But say she took a blow to the head and lost all sense of compassion and it's like, now
I'm going to be this root of the cycle path.
Rude person, right.
Do I want to bank on that never happening, right?
No, but how many other decisions do you make like that?
And just to put this in other terms, I don't make, like, a huge amount of money.
I make roughly the median for an American, middle class American.
So while there are some people that I make more than, there's also a lot of people that
I make less than.
And if I were to get into a relationship with someone who makes significantly more money
than me...
You would be more protected.
I would not want that.
I do not want...
Your choice.
Yeah, but it is still a reprehensible decision.
If I would feel like a bad person, if I were to ask someone who makes more than me to marry
me because I do not want to exploit them, that is the feeling, that is what I consider
marriage as.
The person who makes less gets to exploit the person who makes more.
And I don't want to be that person even when I'm the one making less, you know?
Wait, wait, wait.
We're throwing out words without base here.
You also said that you wouldn't want to marry that person.
What you really mean to say is that you wouldn't want to...
You would never go after that person for those resources.
Right.
Not that you wouldn't want to marry them.
Like, you know...
I wouldn't want this contract that our government has.
Okay, got you.
Because you would find that would put them at risk and you care about that.
Yes, I do not want to put someone that I care about at that sort of risk.
I would consider that a hostile act on my part.
But is there any other decision other than this that you take like that?
With all these considerations into play?
Is there any other risks that I take?
Decision that you take.
So when Stevens...
Or when you said, I am the...
For the purposes of discussion, I am the more powerful party here.
Therefore, if I was ever in a situation where I was the less powerful party, I would not
get into the same beneficial agreement that this power front got into with me.
Is there any other form of contract that you would enter into other than marriage that
you applied the same logic to?
I am guessing zero.
And anyone where I would feel that I was exploiting someone, I wouldn't want...
No, no, not exploiting.
Wait, wait, wait.
I wouldn't want to employ a child either in like, in dangerous conditions or something.
I...
Sure, maybe they work cheap.
Maybe they can really fit down the mind easily, but I'm not going to do that.
In your personal life.
Let's keep it...
So I...
Not you, but let's keep to the general human populace.
The general American citizen, would they do that?
Other than marriage, can you define any other thing?
I would assume a lot of people would choose not to do something...
We'll give you one example, dude.
Oh, God.
I still get...
Well, consurance is legally required in Colorado, so that doesn't count, I guess.
But I try not to defect in common person's dilemma type situations where it would be
to my advantage to free ride on society.
Give me something.
I try not to.
He's not...
Okay.
Give me something here.
Okay.
I don't cheat on my taxes, even though it's pretty easy.
But there's the evasion and there's, what was the other thing, avoidance.
Tax avoidance is legal.
Tax evasion is illegal.
I'm sure you avoid tax.
You don't shelter your income to not pay taxes on it.
Right.
That's what you're saying.
Yeah.
Yeah.
If you had an accountant or a tax person, he would give you advice to...
Yeah.
Well, I do have a tax person and he does give me some advice.
So there you go.
So what are we talking here?
It's...
So what exactly is your question?
Do we put as much...
Because I guess you've raised it differently than you did to me.
What was the query specifically?
Do you put this much risk avoidance or...?
One of the things...
One of the arguments was why is marriage somehow?
Why is this relationship where I have sex with this person somehow better than...?
So I was trying to get an analog to why would you do a similar risk reward calculation on
something that is not as valuable?
I was once in a parking lot and I had my car door open and things someone else's car pretty
bad.
Right.
And I went inside and I found the person and I gave them my insurance information and
I was like, I'm sorry I did this when I could have driven away.
And I admit when it first happened I was like, I should just drive away.
And I didn't and I know part of that reason was because there were other people there
with me.
There you go.
But I think I still would have gone in and done it even if I had been alone.
I'm not asking to prove your morals.
I'm just saying the point that I'm arguing against is that why is there emphasis placed
on this one relationship where I get to fuck the other person?
My point is we are doing all of this mental calculus because you said I wouldn't do this
on if the rules were reversed.
So by that definition, you yourself are placing more value on this relationship with the person
that you're having sex with is my point.
So we...
Because I wouldn't fuck over my roommate either.
But it's not fuck over, it's let me think a lot here or maybe think internally while
you guys talk.
I mean, it's just thought, you know, extreme consciousness, if you want.
I mean, if you'd be more comfortable doing it either out loud or to yourself, whichever
one you're better with.
No, no, no.
I'm saying I want to go against this point of why is the relationship where I have sex
with the other person somehow the real relationship and somehow better?
Yeah, that is also my question.
Why is that one the one that we saddle with all these laws that make it so easy for people
to take revenge on each other?
If you had a child, okay, let's instantiate this.
And I haven't thought this through, this is just my thinking.
So let me give you some rope to hang myself here.
If you and your romantic partner had a child, whichever gender, whichever sexuality, whatever
we define as common law marriage, had adopted a child or had a child, that's one thing.
If you and your roommate get a dog, would that be treated by the state differently?
Would that dog be treated differently?
Would the child be treated differently?
Yes.
If me and my roommate were to adopt a child, though, that would be much closer to the same
thing.
Or you would be able to adopt a child, would you?
I actually have not looked into this.
I sort of doubt it because people talk about how hard it is to get to adopt kids.
I also doubt it, but if we did adopt kids, then we would very quickly be in the same
territory.
The kids thing, people do bring up kids for marriage, and I kind of want to say, okay,
that's a good reason to get married, but it's not because marriage doesn't matter for that.
The state says, no matter what you agree between yourselves, we will decide what the child's
support is, and it doesn't matter if you were ever married or not.
We will decide what custody is.
It doesn't matter if you were ever married or not.
The rearing of a child is such a pertinent state interest, at least according to the
state that the marriage contract and anything writing on it doesn't matter.
Yes, but why is it a desoteric state that somehow came from the planet Mars to put these
rules on you?
My point is that thinking represents, again, I'm going to go back to median morality, but
that thinking represents what majority of people think is good, therefore they voted
for it, or they didn't have the will to not vote against it.
I have a bit of a problem with how you present the laws as they are, because while laws do
change over time, they're slow, and it takes a while to catch up, and it takes a lot of
effort.
No, but wait, wait, wait, let's get to more...
Like no one voted for the marriage laws as they are right now.
I totally agree.
Nobody alive right now would for them as they are right now.
My point is this, these are inefficiencies, and these are heuristics.
So common minimum, one thing, and I can't defend this instance without saying I can't
defend marriages, we're talking about it right now, without going into the morality of this
is what we are put here to do.
At the very least, from the state point of view, their population should be procreated
so this state can continue to exist.
I happen to have some problems with that too.
But that's how it is.
I'm sure that we will...
We can say that's how it is and still say that that is a bad thing.
It is bad.
Yeah, it is bad, but I'm just saying this is how we have decided that morality is right
now.
It is changing because we are figuring out more things.
In our intellectual curiosity, we're figuring out, hey, what happens if I adapt a kid with
my roommate?
Is that legally law?
Is that legally marriage?
These are things that we have to change, but then to say marriage is not an institution
to be guarded against, that's a bigger step in my point.
I feel like the kids thing is sort of a misstep or at least an ingredient we don't need because
you can have child-free marriages that also end in someone getting screwed.
You can have marriage-free childs.
You can have marriage-free childs, but we're thinking from outlier in.
I'm saying think from majority out.
Yeah, okay.
Certainly, like you guys said, state interest, keep the state populated.
I think I derailed you earlier when you were articulating why you would defend your marriage
as it stands contractually.
Also, I guess out of curiosity, did you know what you're signing up for when you got married?
Oh yeah, I was a huge nerd, so I did ridiculous things, watched every cop show possible, read
up ridiculous laws.
I read law for no reason.
Well, I mean, I don't think it's ever a waste of knowledge to know about the law, right?
And you were okay with it?
Well, I guess I might be surprised.
Yeah, I'm just curious about this too.
You were okay with the law as it is?
You didn't add on any pre-nups or anything?
No, pre-nup, no nothing because I think it would be intellectually dishonest of me because
the hidden the head and become a bad person.
I don't apply that eventuality to any other decision.
I don't drive with the fear that there's another idiot on the road who will kill me,
therefore I must buy a tank, which is the thinking about the SUVs, I get that, right?
But I don't go buy a tank.
Right, but you also don't go and strap an anti-airbag to yourself that if you ever
were to get it in an accident, it would instantly kill you no matter how minor the accident
is.
That's a good analogy for marriage as you're presenting it.
I also hate that analogy.
But expand on that again, what's the anti-airbag thing again?
If you get into an accident, no matter how minor it is, it automatically kills you.
No, but I buy insurance.
No, no, no.
Wait, wait, wait.
I buy insurance.
I know that I'm liable.
I know the rules of the state.
So I know that I'm liable if I don't have insurance to pay for the other guy.
So...
Well, I consider marriage to be like an anti-airbag.
It's not anti-airbag.
I'm just saying it's the lack of insurance and not the anti-airbag.
I think it's worse than the lack of insurance.
Why?
Because it is actively harmful to most people.
It's not actively harmful.
That would be a ridiculous standard to compare it to anything else.
You don't go through life with the maximum possible negative interaction happening and
then work backwards to how that should affect your interpersonal relationship.
No, I don't.
But I also don't intentionally saddle myself with things that can make things worse.
Right.
So therefore...
I don't take up...
Okay, so I did take up smoking.
But if I had been as smart back when I was 16 as I am now, I would not have taken up smoking
because I know it is simply a way to handicap myself without any benefit.
No, but you still did it.
And this is the same kind of thing.
Yeah, I did it.
Because I was a fucking idiot.
Same reason I got married at 19.
No, but get health insurance.
Get marriage insurance is my point.
Marriage itself is not bad.
The worst thing that somebody that you are married to is ridiculously bad.
Okay, great.
But so what?
Can I point out another thing that's not clicking for me?
It's marriage insurance for one party in the marriage.
No, get both.
So I have one party insurance.
Oh, I don't think there is marriage insurance yet.
Let's create it.
Well, I thought you meant marriage insurance.
Let me take a back step here.
So you need some sort of actual literal insurance.
Yes.
Oh, see, I thought you were saying that signing a marriage contract in the United States is
like signing insurance for your abstraction of marriage.
No, no, no.
I'm saying there's health insurance, car insurance, make fucking marriage insurance is my point.
Oh, well, I mean...
You could do that.
So you pay deductible, or so you pay out deductible and then your insurance company
pays a real money instead.
So I'm not against this idea.
I think it's actually kind of kind of cool.
But on the other hand, you could also just not get married, which I guess you can't not
get married in some cases.
But the...
Well, but if you could not get married, wouldn't that be a better choice?
Like what are you getting out of the marriage?
Like I get car insurance because I want to have a car because I can get across town faster
than I can in a car or faster in a car than I can on foot.
What do I get out of marriage?
It would be worth paying 50 bucks a month insurance for.
The negative...
Protect against negative side effects.
We're talking about laws of version here, not profit increase.
Yeah, like insurance.
I'm not going to profit from insurance, but what am I getting out of marriage?
That like...
So again, I'm getting out of the car, fast travel.
What am I getting out of the marriage?
The instantiation of what we just said, pair bonding plus intellectual rules.
But I can do that with a roommate.
Like I think we're going in circles, but I don't know if you're seeing the loop catching
itself.
I don't think...
Tell that to me.
I mean, because we're...
You're saying what is the purpose of just agreeing to this document that says in this
state we are married like this?
Yeah.
Why is that worth something that might be worth paying insurance for?
Right.
What's the...
Something on marriage.
If you're like, hey, marriage is cool.
Here's why.
Can you finish that sentence?
Or is that like not a positionality to tackle?
No, no, no.
I think I will tackle this by saying I don't have another opportunity.
I want this pair bond plus contract.
The state marriage is the easiest option for me to do.
Therefore, I took it.
What do you want out of the contract?
I know you keep saying loss aversion, but or compensation, but is that something you're
getting out of the relation?
Out of the contract?
Yes.
I'm happy because I'm married.
I like spending time with my wife.
I like her if possible to just sit with me for the rest of her life and talk to me.
Could you not have had that if you didn't get married?
I could have, but I wanted some...
What would I call it?
What's the solidity?
External validation?
Something like that.
Okay.
I think that is...
Not validation.
What's the solidity bit of...
Let's call it validation.
Why not?
Yeah, because you're not getting that solidity from a marriage contract.
You can still break up as 50% of the married people in America will attest to.
People also lie.
Yeah, right.
So you didn't actually get any solidity from the contract.
I did, because just like you said, I can take her to court.
I mean, yes, once you guys don't like each other anymore and want to...
Once you guys no longer want to live together, you can make the other person's life miserable.
Yes.
And so you can use that as a sort of blackmail against her to keep her with you.
Why is that a two-way thing?
No, it's totally a two-way thing.
If you guys want to move on to your separate paths, you don't want to live together anymore.
If one party wants to keep the other person around, they can hold over their head, I can
make your life miserable for the next however many years unless you stay with me.
I mean, that's what you got out of the marriage, and that's the solidity you're talking about.
But it's not a solidity you want, right?
You don't want to force someone into staying with you because you'd make their life miserable
otherwise.
No, I want to...
No, no, no.
There's a difference between forcing somebody and making the cost high enough so that that
decision is not taken lightly.
Well, I don't think people would have taken that lightly in general, and if they would
have taken it lightly, then the marriage won't change that.
If they're the sort of person that takes that sort of relationship and commitment lightly,
then the marriage isn't going to change things very much.
That's exactly why you need a legal contract.
If people do idiotic things and they would take a decision lightly like that, but they
would later regret it.
This is the exact reason why you want to have friction in getting into the marriage and also
getting out of the marriage.
Well, there's no friction getting in.
That is a separate thing.
I am saying the friction exists for people to make informed decisions and to have validity,
solidity, whatever the hell that is, to say we are staking so much of our shit on this
contract that we agree both that we get enough out of it that the breaking that contract
would involve this much effort.
Right.
I think I'm...
Right.
But I can't...
It's just personal happiness and stuff like that, so I can't...
But what you're getting out of it is the security and the comfort and the happiness.
Yes.
Which I value more than whatever cost that is.
I understand you value all those things, but I think the reason you value all those
things is because society hasn't grained in your head that that is what marriage is.
Hold on.
Can I take that from a completely different angle because I think you're wrong?
Okay.
I think...
I just want to say that can't you have all of those things?
Like say if...
I could.
I just want a box around it.
So the box doesn't give you anything because you can have all that anyway.
No, we just said that it's extra cost for people to get out of the box.
Yes.
Well, it is, but is that...
So it's a box that is hard to climb out of, but there's nothing in the box.
Yes, exactly.
It's hard to climb out of the box.
And there's nothing in there that wasn't outside the box.
No, I just want a pen.
All right.
Pen.
Okay.
I want a pen.
Like a jail.
Yeah.
Well...
Okay.
No, that's fine.
And I don't want this to come off as a two-on-one against you or anything.
No, no, no.
I totally agree.
My point is this.
The value of friction, whether society put that in me or not, is underestimated here.
I am saying I am idiotic.
Human beings are idiotic.
We make idiotic decisions.
So let's make getting together as costly as getting apart or put enough friction into
entering this contract as I would get entering out of the contract.
So I think it should definitely be harder to get into a marriage.
It's stupidly easy now.
Harder than it is now, but not harder than it will be to get out of it later is my point.
I'm saying put a box of friction around things that I would like to have continue.
And also you don't necessarily need the box of I can make your life miserable for years
because once you guys are living together, that in itself is a source of friction.
Now you have to get a second place once you want to separate.
And that in itself is hard, you know?
That's going to keep people, that keeps actually a lot of people together.
A lot of people together, yes.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I've lived with roommates I don't want to live with.
I've lived with roommates I don't want to live with.
Yeah, yeah.
You get that for free without marriage.
You just have to, you just have to-
No, I just, one more level is my point.
I need a paper document that says yes we are together, yes we will consume less resources
together, yes these are the things, yes I don't see anything else, yes I, these are
the things that I want to do together and this is my, this is-
Pretty sure it doesn't say anywhere in the document that we will consume less resources.
No, but that's the thinking.
Okay, I, okay.
And I didn't mean to shut you down when you, when earlier, I think that was going to bring
us background in other circles.
I wanted to just-
Right.
Just detect it from the other side.
Okay.
So let's, let me acknowledge this, my, what I get out of this box is happiness and personal
stuff that I cannot value to your or society's judgment I guess.
Right.
Well, I, I would argue and I think you've agreed that you get that outside the box too.
You loved your wife before you signed your marriage contract.
Right.
So like that didn't actually add anything other than the barrier to exist.
No, stability, it added stability.
I want, I love her and I also want to stay with her and I also want to incentivize us
to stick together and work on things.
Okay.
So friction of getting out of it.
Were you worried she would leave you if you didn't have this box to put her in?
No.
But we don't work like that is my point.
We don't work like what?
Well, let's, let's give you an account example is a annuity better than randomly than a business
person's income.
Would you value annuity higher than a business's cash flows?
You would, right?
I mean, it is the point here and I'm making that ridiculously complicated unnecessarily.
I mean, yes, but annuity is a lot more assured than your partner staying with you.
No, but that's the thinking I this contract turns it into more of an annuity than the
cash flows of a business.
What kind of idiots are we if we can only talk through nerd analogies like this?
I don't, I really don't think it gives you that as much stability as you think.
And we tried, we tried hitting it without, without analogies and it didn't land.
So when in doubt, we scrambled for it.
Yeah.
When in doubt abstract.
And again, you know, business income has the potential to grow where I can, I can tack
on different things to this annuity dude.
All right.
I think we're leaving something out of the conversation because there's something that
people want about marriage, or at least that they think they want because they think that
marriage gives it to them or something.
Why did, why did, why was marriage equality in the United States such a fought for thing?
Why did people, why did, why did people who were previously barred from being married,
gay people and lesbian people, why did they want to be able to get married?
Because society does say your relationship is more valuable once you've gotten married,
once you've gotten married.
Once your relationship has been validated by us, then it's a real relationship and you're
a real adult who has real love.
So that was never.
That social could be one thing and these gay, lesbian, whatever people didn't just spring
from the head of Zeus like Athena.
They also born on this earth and value the same things that hetero people did.
So they also valued the state validation just as much as hetero people did.
Gotcha.
That is a compelling point to me.
I think there are actually also some tax benefits if you make vastly different amounts.
And that's what I was going to ask about next because, you know, that's not what the Talking
Heads on TV said was like, they want to feel validated by the state because we all want
to feel validated by the state.
They said, oh, it's because deathbed rights.
I always hear that like it happens to everybody once a month and taxes and maybe another, you
know, something else.
Taxes.
What is Agus, like, I can have, I can sign a piece of paper or tell me if I'm wrong.
Can I sign a piece of paper that says that you guys can come visit me on my deathbed?
Yeah.
So, so that's just in the closer free with marriage, I guess.
Yeah.
So that's that's the inheritance.
And the power of eternity and tax and all that stuff is wrapped up into that whole
marriage contract.
But that's also independently attainable.
Yes, it is.
So that's just bottom line arguing for.
Yeah, but it's extra effort and you would have to.
So this is like, like he said, marriage is a catch all obligation to anything that you
have.
I get equal hands on.
So if you would write a contract, you would have to like list 59 things.
Yeah.
Here's my power of attorney.
Here's my inheritance.
Every damn thing.
But those things are like standard legal documents, right?
So like, yeah, nobody, but I'm just saying that like, it's not like this is something
that is more effort than a marriage.
Well, also buying a house, which I'm in the process of doing is a lot of effort.
You sign a fucking stack of papers this big and you literally hire multiple professionals
to go through the stack of paper and make sure everything's right and make sure the
house is there's a lot of effort put into buying a house.
And it is a lesser commitment than marriages and marriage is not because of the value of
the house.
The effort is because you either have some kind of loan with it.
Did you bring up a stack of gold and say, this is the title.
Give me the title.
No, no, no, no.
You don't know the other person.
You're meeting them temporarily.
There's risk involved.
There's loan involved.
There's other people doing other things for you.
That's why the paper, that has nothing to do with the value of the damn house.
No, no, no, it doesn't.
But buying a house is a big deal and marriage should be as big a deal.
But using that analogy, if you say the stack of paper does not have relationship to the
value of the asset, then using the stack of paper as a negative on what the other asset
that I call marriage doesn't make a difference.
I'm not trying to compare the value of the two things.
I'm trying to say that people will go through this process of doing all this legal stuff
for something like a house.
There's no reason they couldn't go through that same process once per lifetime in theory,
or maybe two or three times per lifetime for a similarly important long-term commitment.
I cannot outsource my love to Steven to say, I want Steven to guarantee my love, therefore
I provide Steven with, I don't know, affection every month at this rate.
I mean, you could have opened to that, but you did say you wanted marriage to have more
friction getting in.
Yes.
And so like maybe having to read a bunch of paperwork.
Yes.
Or just improve the damn piece of paper.
Torque law education, contract law education, there's a bunch of people working on automatic
constitutionality validation of contracts that would kill 90% of end-usage lens agreements,
that would kill 90% of terms of service agreements.
So that is a general bigger thing that has nothing to do with marriage is my point.
That would be cool.
Oh, yeah.
People are working on it and people are trying to stop them with a bunch of effort, but yeah.
But that's a bigger issue, which is not limited to marriage is my point.
You should send me links after this is over.
That sounds awesome.
Yeah, just Google RoboLawyer or like Google any contract validation efforts.
There's something called constitute, I think, or some constitute plus verb kind of word
that is looking at constitution validation on law.
And there's this bunch of stuff due to Kata open case text or some ridiculous shit that
is maximizing effort on contract reading abilities.
We have gone on for about an hour and a half.
So we should wrap up soon ish.
You guys have more things you want to say.
I'm curious if you guys know more about common law marriage than I do if I'm already married
or not.
Six more months.
Have you filed taxes together?
No.
Okay.
That is actually a really big deal filing.
Once you have filed taxes together, that is kind of a hard point to go back from.
So if you haven't filed taxes together, you're closer to the safe side.
Have you signed contracts together?
Leases.
Yeah, I guess it's but give them the least isn't as bad because roommates, you know,
I don't know, but give them the term.
You have to co-mingle funds.
Do you?
I mean, co-mingle.
Do you keep separate bank accounts?
Yes.
Okay.
That helps.
Are you saying that there's no, like, black and white line between being common?
There's really not a black and white line.
That's really weird.
Okay.
There is one black and white line.
If you introduce yourself as husband and wife or refer to yourself as husband and
wife, then that is very strong evidence that you are commonly married.
And if you file taxes together, especially if one is claiming the other as a dependent,
that is also very strong indication that you are a common law, consider yourselves
common on marriage or whatever the fuck.
So those are two really big ones.
We don't introduce ourselves as married, but like our leasing office thinks we are,
or at least some of them do.
And they say your wife was here this morning.
So if they testify against you, I had a friend who was dating someone long term.
And whenever someone said your wife or, you know, or something like that, they would instantly
correct them, not my wife, because if you let people get away with that with calling
you guys a married couple, eventually it becomes true.
It's like magic that way.
That's weird.
Yeah.
So this is a contract that I can not even get the abridged version that just says you're
married now.
I can enter that without even getting the shitty version of the contract.
That's weird.
That's ridiculous.
That's beyond ridiculous.
So yeah, I don't know what to make of that other than that's sort of confusing.
Why would that be the case?
So I think we've made sense historically why marriage is the way it is now.
Why would common law marriage be a thing like that?
Because scummy men should not be allowed to take advantage of women and, you know, use
their womanly resources without having to pay for it.
There you go.
So this was basically another antiquated thing to like where you can't just have somebody
around and then not...
So this was to protect people from dodging the penalty of abandoning their spouse by
saying you don't have to beat their spouse to be penalized for abandoning their spouse.
If you have used up her most valuable reproductive years and then left her afterwards, then it
doesn't matter if you literally married her, you basically married her.
You used up her reproductive potential and now you have to pay for it.
Weird.
What a weird way to think about a person that does sound pretty dehumanizing.
It also brings in the question of infertile couples or whatever, but that's another topic
for another day.
Yeah, but again, I'll liar.
Oh, that's right.
Yeah, fair enough.
Fertile couples are just treated as fertile couples for simplicity's sake.
But any reading of the law will dehumanize people like that.
Well, and you sort of want that to some extent.
You want it to be abstract enough to apply to everybody, but it is weird to think of
a person like a woman's most valuable resource is her fertile years.
If that's the way the state views a woman, that's sort of unsettling.
At least a state views a woman in the context of some contracts, maybe not all of them.
So that's maybe the other way that's...
It's fucked up.
Yeah.
Okay.
Again, it's law's prevention.
It's all of the things we just talked about.
Okay.
The last thing I'm curious about, if you're going through a divorce, or rather you're
divorced and you're paying alimony for the next decade because whatever, and then you
work hard at the rest of your life because you want to go back to being able to afford
like not having to live with two roommates and stuff.
You want your center living to be like what it was when you were married or whatever.
So you work hard to make more money, et cetera.
Why does your alimony go up?
Or does it always?
It's a remnant of the whole losing your individual rights.
So that's not dissolved when the marriage is dissolved?
No.
No, no, no, no.
That lingers for quite a while.
You're stuck with the zombie personhood.
In Colorado, it's for half as long as the marriage was.
So if you were married for 10 years, then this continues for another five years after
the divorce.
Damn.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I guess...
I mean, so the case can...
I can understand and swallow the pill for like I want to live like I lived when I was
married and especially if I'm now in 50 and I don't have any skills because I've been married
since I was 19, I don't want to have to go back to college or whatever, but it does make
sense to me like then, okay, cool, well, you just got inheritance.
I want some of that now too.
I guess it is the loss that you got from not being in the marriage, right?
But okay, that's...
So there's no stealing man version of that strong enough to knock any sense into me is
what I'm hearing.
No.
Okay.
Or to knock it's argument into me.
I could make one really ridiculous argument saying what would you set the level at?
Any level you set it at other than zero, right, other than zero, any level would be the same
thing, which is arguing on...
Yeah.
So yeah, I would...
I mean, to me, it makes intuitive sense to say, okay, we've granted we're going to maintain
your style of living.
Why?
What the hell is this maintain style of living bullshit?
Well, that's the whole point of the whole Alamo anything, right?
So I'm saying if we buy that, which we already have, it doesn't make sense to me why your
standard of living goes up if mine does, other than like you said, this weird zombie artifact
of the marriage.
So that's it.
And that's it.
And that's not compelling to me.
Neither is the predicate case, but I can at least grant that for the sake of trying
to make the other one make sense.
But that's a whole other weird leap.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
Well.
Okay.
Yeah.
Now that everybody's significantly down, what's going on?
Well, I got my rant out.
We are after this, I'm sure going to get a bunch of email to some explaining other sides
of it, which I look forward to.
And I thank my listeners because they are awesome.
And we will read those on the air, especially since I'm sure some of our listeners are married.
I know some of them.
Yeah.
Same.
That being said, we have some listener mail if you'd like to get into that.
People correcting us or at least weighing in on net neutrality in the same way that we
talked about net neutrality last time.
Oh, let me get it on this, please.
Yeah.
That's why, you know, I'm looking forward to marriage comments too because I thought the
neutrality things were interesting.
So for this episode, we want to thank our supporter, Tom Drozansky, for your support.
We really appreciate it.
I don't know what else to say other than thanks and we notice and it really counts and thank
you.
Thanks.
You guys are awesome.
Okay.
On to listener feedback.
Again, cutting for time a little bit, but not without incident says, a tiered internet
service, Inyash was dismissing as fanatical actually happened in Portugal and the UK.
And I'd like to say that I'm pretty sure I didn't dismiss it as or fantastical.
I didn't dismiss it as fantastical because I was also aware of that, that there are nations
that have net neutrality loss in play and still do have tiered internet.
What I said was that that is okay.
That I kind of expect that sort of thing that you would get packages where you pay less
for certain things because that's how a lot of things work.
If you buy them in bundles, you get discounts.
The, well, I'm going to continue reading this and then wrap up my reply to that in with
the other stuff.
When I say that's okay, I have a reason for saying that as not just because I want people
to get screwed to have to pay an extra five bucks to access Facebook.
Now without incident continues, the origin of the common carrier designation wasn't
some hypothetical scenario.
About 10 years ago, Comcast was found to be blocking some peer-to-peer traffic and by
some, I mean BitTorrent, which the FCC tried to stop.
This seems clearly pro-consumer and I don't know how big internet content companies, Google,
Facebook, et cetera, benefited at this point.
I want to say that depends on how you define pro-consumer.
If you mean the people who are BitTorrenting stuff, then yes, they have gotten to use tons
of bandwidth for their $60 a month or whatever.
But there's also lots of consumers that don't send up and down multiple terabytes every month.
I am one of those low usage people.
I mean, my biggest content transfer every month is the uploading of this episode to our
web server.
Aside from that, I just don't use too much of the internet.
I watch a little bit of Netflix every week, but my uses are fairly low demand.
And so I am one of these consumers too and my internet experience is being negatively
impacted by the people who are clogging up the tubes with their rampant sharing of everything.
I'm just going to use that term sharing because it's neutral, right?
With their rampant sharing of everything and it is sort of a freerider problem.
We're all paying $60 a month for our internet, but there's some people who are just nonstop
streaming everything and putting through tons of data.
And there's other people who use much less.
And I am old enough to remember a time when the AOL minutes, free minutes per month actually
mattered because the bandwidth infrastructure was not built out then like it is yet.
This was before the big dot com crash when everyone went crazy building out the internet
and you had to fight over bandwidth and you literally paid per minute to access the internet
because there just wasn't enough for everyone that wanted it.
And now there is and that's great, but we're slowly getting to that point where we're going
to be bumping up against those limits soon.
And in my opinion, I don't think it's necessarily that bad a thing that the people who use tons
of data would pay more for that than the people who use less.
I know that people who use tons of water pay more than people who use less water.
And one of the reasons is just because you're using more, right?
So if the bit torrentors, yeah, the pro consumer, as in everyone can use bit torrent if they
want to, but it's anti consumer for the people who use less traffic.
Anyways, he says the FCC was forced to create a new set of rules, sorry.
They say the FCC was forced to create a new set of rules to enforce these consumer protections.
But after losing a court case, the FCC was essentially left with no option but to declare
ISPs common carriers in order to fulfill their mission of consumer protection.
So yeah, I had a bit of argument on the consumer protection part.
In some cases, that is protection of consumers, but in others less.
But do you guys have anything to add before I read on to go to the second part of this
reply?
Yes, I think this is my understanding, so it's definitely flawed.
But I think what the presenter wants to say, he has articulated it badly.
The price of a monthly subscription has nothing to do with, let me say it this way, ISPs get
charged based on differential usage, right?
Or differential traffic usage, right?
If I'm the owner of the wire and I'm the owner of the box, I only pay for what more
I use than what I give you the other box.
So there is a reason to say that if the guy owning the box is only paying differential,
the person receiving the data should also be only paying differential.
So that's a point towards taking that strategy away, right?
The pro consumer point of it is the free rider problem of BitTorrent 1.
One point is, what was the point again?
That.
Oh, yeah, bundling on bundling, okay.
My point was this, bundling and unbundling, the $60 bit, pro consumer or anti-consumer,
the only way that people can make money in business is either bundled stuff or unbundled
stuff, right?
So we got to $60 by bundling all of the other elements you talked about, and because we
are so bundled that this $60 provides more value to you or to the most common free rider
than more than that $60, there is an effort to unbundle that $60 back to a different thing.
Now this pendulum will go back and forth the other way and we will settle at the extremes,
but to say that X's pro user, just by default, is a bit of overreach in my estimation.
Now if that's incident continues saying looking at Tyler Cohen's piece, he seems to be coming
at it completely backwards.
The first three points are all about the economic advantages or disadvantages of net neutrality.
I don't care about those things, basically at all.
I care about the internet surface I can buy and how it operates.
It's in no way obvious that economic growth is good for my experience on the internet.
The dot com crash was even discussed on the episode as a good thing for the internet from
a consumer perspective and I totally agree.
I don't necessarily know how to respond to that because I mean saying economics doesn't
affect my choice is ridiculous.
It might be like someone saying, hey, look, we're going to open a bunch of toll roads
that will have less traffic.
I don't want to budget that.
I don't want to come out this from the wrong angle.
I guess maybe it's like as long as it doesn't affect my commute to work, I don't care what
they're doing to the roads might be the only concern kind of thing.
Remember your taxes go up, right?
How are they billeted?
They are asking you for money.
But he's talking about specifically the economic things outside of their day-to-day traffic
on the web.
If that's their only concern, I can sort of see, again, if my only concern about the
roads is how long it took me to get to work, if I cared a little bit nothing else, then
I can see where they're coming from.
Is that your guys' reading of that point as well?
Yeah, I think of it more of a sort of free trade sort of thing where a lot of people
will say, look, I know all the economists say that free trade is good for the economy
and grows the economy, but I don't care.
My personal experience in life is worse.
I've lost my job and people I can't understand are moving to my neighborhood, and therefore
I am against free trade.
No, no, no.
There's a great point against this.
Pia Molini, who runs- Oh, fuck me, I forget what she runs, but she runs an economic think
tank.
She's very economically minded.
The Schumpeter argument of greater destruction doesn't take into account society's feelings.
It's a one-axis thing of productivity as though we value productivity in one-axis.
So it's the misunderstanding of that.
So I kind of see this point, but I also don't know how to argue against that, aside from
saying that I do kind of think economic growth is important too.
It's hard because there are other things to balance it off against as well.
I just think that in this case, the net neutrality wasn't a strong enough prod to make me be on
its side.
I would also say that I'm not convinced from my understanding of every thing about net
neutrality, from my vague and wrong or my vague and incomplete understanding of net neutrality
conversation that this is good for the economy as a whole.
This is good for the ISP monopolies or the ISP mostly monopolies.
This isn't good for anybody who isn't an exec at Comcast.
It's good for anybody that's okay with paying 60 bucks and not worrying about a thing.
Who you pay the 60 bucks to is the issue we're talking about and how much are you paying them?
The service is guaranteed, then what you're saying is right.
I'm saying service is not guaranteed.
In light of running up against the limits of our current infrastructure.
Are we anywhere near those limits?
Is that something we talked about?
We're getting close.
We're not quite there yet.
We're not there yet.
We're also laying down new coordinates and stuff, right?
This isn't like-
Yeah, but not at the rate that we're using it.
And actually, I think this is one of the arguments for the economic growth part is that economic
growth is what gives you new fiber or new Wi-Fi or new other things that expand.
But the issue is economic growth of whom and who gets the new fiber.
And who gets to decide whether or not you get new fiber?
There you go.
Because they're working for laws to keep new ISPs from entering the market.
Like Fort Collins is the city north of us where I grew up.
They wanted to lay down fiber and this was a legal battle for months.
And the city can't do what it wants because the ISPs say no.
Right.
And that's exactly the sort of bullshit that I am vehemently against, that this is why
I dislike regulation because that is an aspect of regulation.
It's not like an ISP could come in and say you are not allowed to lay fiber.
They pull in the state.
No, but the issue is when you say it's a Title II, you have to give power to the state
to then go do it.
The issue is they're not going to do it.
Who's not going to do what?
The state.
When you say Title II, you also have to guarantee.
You cannot just say this is a utility and regulate it that way.
You also have to say if it was water, you wouldn't build a condominium without access
to water or gas and shit.
But if it's Title II, the city would have to be forced to build.
Right.
No, but what I'm saying is that and Longmont also has, does Longmont have Google fiber
or is that city fiber?
They have fiber of something.
They're pulling down 100 gigs a second.
Yeah.
And those are the sorts of things I would love to see is communities putting in fiber for
themselves and being another option to compete with these ISPs and having this sort of strict
regulation is what prevents that sort of thing.
But is that the only thing?
I think the cost of entry.
The cost of entry is high.
I'll give you a point where regulation helps the incumbents, not the new people.
Yes.
The ISPs couldn't have sued the city of Fort Collins if there wasn't already regulations
that would allow them to do that.
But the issue is neither one is going to do the capital expenditure.
Did the conversation slash vote on the 14th, did that give more power to the ISPs or less?
I have this bad answer.
I think you're going to like it.
It just changed the lobbyist's calling card from the FCC to the FTC.
Sure.
That's all it did.
But it seems like it's a step in giving the ISPs more power.
That's how it's perceived by the public in my understanding of the five people I know.
So is that accurate?
Yes.
Do they have more power?
Because...
Yes, but it also removes some of the hurdles for other people getting into the market.
And just in general, I would like to see less hurdles.
I would too, but I'm wondering if this actually did that.
Take the hurdle away and then incent people to do the thing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So it has to be both sides.
Which, I mean, that's one of the reasons I'm on net against regulation and tend to have
a bit more trust in economists who also are like, okay, I admit I really like Tyler Cohen.
So maybe there is a bit of like worshipfulness, not worshipfulness, but you know...
Cult of personality.
Thank you.
It's a bit of cult personality there where when he comes out against this, I'm like, okay,
I'm already against regulation for the most part and he is saying this.
And so I think he probably has a good point and these are the other things I've read about
it.
And so I think that I'm going to go with that.
I don't...
It does give the ISPs more power in some ways, but it's not more power to shut down the building
of new fiber.
Okay.
That's what I was curious about.
So I think someone might make the case that like, well, now we're going to, you know, we're
opening the door to handing them more, they're going to want more now, you know, and people
are worried about that slippery slope.
Now with that incident in his last point, in their last point makes an interesting argument
to exactly what you were saying, saying Cowan touts competition as the important factor
in getting ISPs to behave well.
But once Tier 1 and the big name Tier 3 networks are synonymous, discussions about whether
the last mile of fiber is a natural monopoly won't matter because you won't be able to
get to some parts of the internet without first going through censure rise and cast.
Yes.
Say like this.
This is potentially about not being able to engage in entire classes of activity at
the whim of your ISP.
Or build out your own mesh network.
Or what?
Build out your own mesh network.
I mean, I can see if there was one massive conglomeration once they all joined into
one big company.
But who's stopping the vertical mergers?
People stopping horizontal mergers, not vertical mergers.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And I think, yes, I don't know.
I don't want to get into discussion about whether monopoly busting is a good thing because
I still have strong intuitions that it is.
But those come from high school econ classes and I haven't looked into whether that's still
the case.
Right.
I do want to point out one thing.
This guy, Ben Thompson, went to Wisconsin grad, lives in Taiwan, does a great blog about
media and tech.
He has a good analysis from his viewpoint on his blog Stratechery.
It's a good piece to read.
I think the cost of laying down all new fiber across the entire nation is what is stopping
a lot of people from doing that.
Yeah, but it doesn't have to be the entire nation.
How do you get water to people?
Same fucking thing.
I can dig a water line without an issue, but to dig the same line and run a fiber through
it, I have to call 15 people.
Do you?
I think.
Wouldn't it be?
Okay.
Google Plixbyte says net neutrality has become an issue because people aren't charging directly
for data usage.
Yeah.
This is why ISPs want to shift those charges onto content delivery networks.
Also, yes.
Well, among other reasons, yes.
The solution is a currency with zero transaction costs.
All the internet's issues vanish with the mass adoption of cryptocurrency.
I just, I disagree on that.
Oh, this crypto bullshit is creeping into every conversation that I have.
Is it?
No.
No.
I mean, I don't, first of all, cryptocurrencies don't have zero transaction costs.
But you can make one.
The issue is the crypto community is right now a bunch of anarchist devs who want decentralization
as a goal where the users don't.
So whatever solution they come up with is going to have transaction costs of the centralized
faster system will not.
So it's just tacking on cryptocurrency to anything doesn't naturally make it better.
And at least all the cryptocurrencies I'm familiar with do have a transaction cost because
you need to run the blockchain somehow.
Yeah.
Electricity costs at the very least.
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah.
And none of them are usable as a currency, partly because they are so unstable.
Their value changes rapidly.
But I can fuck with that.
There's a lot of price manipulation goes on.
Yeah.
Also, because the transactions take a while, you got to wait sometimes a long time.
Right.
Because they're not optimizing for speed.
They're not optimizing for other things.
They're optimizing for trustlessness.
They're optimizing for immutableness.
When you're optimizing for that, having a streaming type system on top of it makes zero
sense.
I am not equipped to understand this last paragraph of that.
It's the rest of Googleplex Bytes comment on this.
Okay.
Also, something that no one seems to be discussing on either side is that net neutrality is part
and parcel of common carrier status.
Without it, ISPs would be responsible for all the illegal content it facilitates.
That entails mass censorship if ISPs like not being sued.
I mean, it depends on how the law is implemented.
Right.
But even at the current implementation, it doesn't say that because you're a net neutrality
doesn't have to mean common carrier.
Common carrier doesn't have to mean they're liable for whatever content they own or whatever
content is on their wires.
Right.
Right.
But general adoption, this is my point with marriage and how it's been adapted with the
state.
I think that's the same issue.
General adoption, people think net neutrality equals common carrier equals...
No liability.
Yeah, that kind of thing.
We could always have the no liability as a separate rule.
Yeah.
Without all the other stuff.
Yeah.
Okay.
That's everything that I had about the net neutrality stuff.
Yeah.
That's all I could find about that as well.
Okay.
I have backed off a little on my stance.
I still am generally in favor of easing up.
But define easing up.
Easing up means what?
Easing up means pulling back on the 2015 net neutrality regulations going...
Why?
Given the current political atmosphere, given the current power dynamic, it makes a rational
sense for an arbiter to say, I need minimum access to be minimal yet free.
Free not monetarily, free from content things, you know what I mean?
How minimal do you define minimal is the problem.
That's the question.
Because you can get dial up.
Right.
That's the question.
That would be a great hack if everybody said Comcast D is everybody gets dial up for free
or dial up is the common minimum internet and everything else you have to pay for that
would also satisfy Priya's laws and current laws.
But you know...
It would also make a lot of the first world internet unusable.
There you go.
That's a ridiculous.
So...
Finally, a different comment, but still from Googleplex Byte, which is not related to net
neutrality says, risk compensation means immortals would be adrenaline junkies, not
depressed hold-wellers.
The biggest risk takers are young people who still haven't grappled the notion that they
are aging and will die one day.
With immortality, everyone would be death blind risk junkies.
I think that's a pro immortality argument and I'm kind of behind it.
Nice.
I mean, it makes sense.
Yeah.
Like if I'm not worried about dying, I'd be doing a lot more stuff, right?
You'd be out like, you know, playing cops and robbers with actual guns.
Sure.
With your friends.
I think we got this already, but let's not belay with the point, but immortality doesn't
preclude your sense of suffering.
Well, right.
And that'll stop you from doing 90% of the sense.
I'm assuming once we've gone to the point of literal immortality, then you could turn
on and off pain sensors as you wanted.
But then why are we still human?
Right.
I would drop a Black Mirror reference, but I don't want to spoil it for Yen Yash.
We can talk later.
Yeah.
Well, we'll do it.
I don't think it's necessarily the only reason young people are such big risk takers.
No, they're also just stupid.
Well, exactly.
No, I mean that's a big thing.
I mean that not derisively.
It just happens.
I vaguely remember.
It's like what I imagined would be like if I ever knew what it was like to be a pet dog
and then became a person.
I could look back and be like, I could see how I was like that, but I have no idea how
that was actually happening.
Yeah.
That's how I feel looking back on myself as a kid.
I did a lot of crazy shit that I would never do now because I value like not being hurt
and being alive.
Well, I also think that, okay, so I was always aware of my mortality as far as I know and
yet still took some more risks back in the day.
And I think this whole people, young people don't understand death thing is kind of fallacious
bullshit.
It's not that young people don't understand death.
I think it's that young people have less to lose in general.
Like health wise, when you're young, if you get injured, you can bounce back pretty damn
quick.
No, but I would say don't discount stupidity.
Go ahead.
I was going to say, I think you're right.
Like I can spend stupidity a different way too, but I think it might have taken my first
permanent injury for me to like slow down and stop doing stupid stuff.
Yeah.
Because then you realize like, oh, things do have consequences.
Right.
So that's what I mean kind of by being stupid is that by, you might know like on paper,
yes, I used to have a grandparent now I don't, but to have that actually sink in on a level
that you really, you know, the difference to knowledge and wisdom, maybe, right?
Maybe they have the knowledge that they're just, they're not wise.
Yeah.
Is that too pedantic?
Or applied theoretical.
I know in theory that I can die.
No, I just think-
That doesn't stop me from doing stupid things.
I take less risks now physically because I know that if I hurt myself, it's much harder
to bounce back from it than it used to be.
And because it might actually be permanent at this point.
I might, you know, fucking have a shitty ankle for the rest of my life if I fuck up my ankle
at this point.
And that would be much less likely to be the case back in the day.
Like it from physical to intellectual or financial or anything else.
Well, I mean, that was the other point.
I also had nothing to lose when I was a kid.
I was like, when I was in high school, I was literally one of those burn it all down revolutionaries.
I was like, I did want to see the world burn because it was so fucked and I had nothing
to lose, right?
No, no, no, no.
And nowadays I'm like, well, shit, I have a house and a car and some, you know, savings
and I have, I have a really good reason not to burn the whole thing down.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's just, I think one of the problems is that young people got nothing to lose and everything
to gain.
So why not?
Whereas older, you, you have a lot of shit that you don't want to lose, have risk aversion.
If you didn't know you had it, you had the shit, but you didn't know you had it or didn't
care that you have it.
I mean, I would still take less physical risks because of my health, but I wouldn't.
But if you didn't care, I would take more, do more risk.
So that's the, so if you take 90% is the Arnold Schwarzenegger creatine bit, right?
I don't know what the what?
Oh, you know, so somebody asked Arnold about, did he take creatine or whatever?
And he said, creatine is not anything.
If you can, if you can lift a thousand pounds without creatine on creatine, you can lift
a thousand 20.
Okay.
So having more to lose is a thousand pounds, not reasoning yourself into knowing that you
have or caring that you have is the next 20 pounds.
Okay.
Just a side comment.
I love Arnold Schwarzenegger as a person.
He seems to be super wholesome and awesome.
He's a big fan.
Yeah.
Seven-time Mr. Olympia, man.
Damn.
I don't know.
He also just randomly shows up on Reddit threads.
He does?
I didn't know that.
Oh, yeah.
You know, like on, especially on bodybuilding websites, which I don't see, but I see on
Best I Once in a while, I'm clearly not a bodybuilder.
Man, you're looking ripped.
But there was one that was like, it was on some, I don't know, what was something from
your childhood or whatever.
And someone talked about like how they were abused at home and they had saw like the movie
Matilda and they kind of reminded them of that and they were, they were talking to somebody
on a ski lift.
Like they, they were just like, they finally broke down into a stranger and that stranger
happened to be Danny DeVito in a ski mask and, and the guy was, you know, before.
So as he's writing this comment at the end, he's like, I just wish I could tell him and
Danny apparently told him like, you know, it's going to be okay.
You're, you know, he, you consult him, turn him, turn him around as a person.
Right.
He's like, I wish I could tell Danny that he changed my life.
And Arnold jumps in and he's like, Hey, Danny's an awesome guy.
I'll let him know.
You said this.
Awesome.
I know.
Right.
Arnold's 2020.
Oh, the rock 2020.
Yeah.
That's actually, there was something as long as you're talking Reddit stuff, there was
a, you know, what do we expect to happen in the next, you know, 2018.
And I think it's going to be celebrities running for office in more than they did last year.
Not that many celebrities with clean pass.
You have to, you have to have the right amount of ego and then the right amount of, I don't
know, to not have shame, but things you did.
I'd vote for the rock.
I would definitely vote for the rock.
I'd vote for the rock.
Terry Crews.
Really, really anybody.
Which brings me to my closing point about the net neutrality thing.
I can't remember if I said this on the air or not last time, but you said that you're
generally against regulation and I don't know how to square that with the fact that
I can see the argument of being against regulation in many cases.
In some cases, I think that there should be minimum things that are enforced, you know.
You can't sell drinking water to a place that has no other access to drinking water if it's
garbage.
Right.
That sort of thing.
Shouldn't be allowed to keep your 1950s car that used leaded gas into the air on the
roads.
Why that much?
You're not allowed, I mean, you shouldn't be allowed to sell as like you say the raw
water.
You guys heard of this?
No.
Okay.
There's this guy who used to work for one of the big CPG companies, had a company called
Juicero, which crashed and burned with the squeezable packs.
His next venture is raw water, water filled with microbes and organic shit.
People are getting sick.
Yeah.
And he's selling them for 50 bucks a bottle.
Jesus.
I mean, I think about this every time I hear a story like this, that if I was an asshole,
that would like put life on easy mode.
Yeah.
If you had no moral compunctions about hurting people, you could get by so easily.
Cause it's like, oh no, a company went bankrupt, whatever, onto the next fuck you adventure,
right?
So I think the point where we disagree with you is that setting that minimum is a political
thing and people justify that minimum to be way over what it should be, which works
out to the small guy's advantage.
But when you're big, you can figure out a hack.
Sure.
And you know, obviously the minimum for the small person isn't going to be enough for
the company.
Yeah, for the big guy.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Whatever enterprise level.
That's the argument against regulation.
I'm also not, I also have a, you have a strong distrust of regulation and I think we both
have a strong distrust of anything the current administration wants right now, right?
So I don't know how to square those two things.
Right.
I mean, regulation is regulation.
You want different things than the, than whoever you're disagree with.
Regulation is a function of the government.
So the more you distrust government, the less regulation you would want anyway, right?
But what am I going to trust the government right now to take away the right, for the
right regulations?
Oh, I mean, why is that okay with the previous regulations?
They just reinstated regulations on certain drugs again, Jeff Sessions being like, let's
go after marijuana again.
Didn't do it yet.
Right, right, right.
But yeah, it's like.
He's talking about it, but didn't do it yet.
So.
I meant it somewhat, somewhat, somewhat more as a tongue in cheek thing that like, I...
Oh, why would you trust the government to deregulate at this point?
Well, no, why would you trust the government to do anything in your interest right now?
Oh, well, yeah.
I think getting rid of regulation, you're right because they would get rid of the regulations
that are...
Or keeping their friendship being even right here, right?
If anything, that's a, to me, vaguely compelling point in the fact that this is probably not
a good thing down the road, and this is never designed to be a good thing for the consumer
down the road.
Okay.
Because it was done under the current administration.
Well, did they say that it doesn't sound like a vacant statement?
Kind of.
Yeah.
No, I understand.
Okay.
We got to go because we are way over right now and I'm going to see if I can maybe cut
a few minutes so Kyle isn't fucked as bad.
Anyways, thank you to Kyle, as always, for making us awesome and for dealing with all
our stupid bullshit for hours.
Yes.
I do want to say really quick that our next episode, we're going to have Brian Dunning
from the Skeptoid podcast back on.
He's even talking about his new film.
I think it's free online and there's a short podcast episode that covers the same points
called The Principles of Curiosity.
So you can go to Skeptoid to find the 12-minute episode on Principles of Curiosity or go to
PrinciplesOfCuriosity.com and watch the documentary if you want to follow the conversation a bit,
but it's not very complicated.
Is that this Sunday or next Sunday?
We're doing that.
This Sunday, I think.
Okay.
Good.
I'm glad you reminded me.
Okay.
All right.
Cool.
Want to throw that out there so people could get a head start if they wanted to.
Yes.
All right.
Good.
Yep.
Well, thanks again to Kyle and thanks to Naveen for coming back on.
Yeah.
Thank you.
No problem, Duzan.
Sorry for the bad marketing of my position.
No, this was good.
I had a lot of fun.
Yeah.
This was good.
Thank you for not being more clear when I asked for it.
No, no, no.
No, no, no.
Sorry.
But I did want to plug one thing.
The project that I mentioned when I was here last time, Standard Meta, is now live.
And people are using it.
So tell us again quickly what it does.
It's a self-regulation framework for crypto projects.
So again, going back to our hatred of the government creating regulations, it's a self-regulation.
It's a bottom-up approach to what the STC would do, but it's a bottom-up approach to
it.
Awesome.
Okay.
Thanks.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
