We lived in a utopia where currency was just being nice to people and you just say nice
things about people.
Well, I guess you can't buy, yeah, you can buy a certain amount, I was about to say you
can't buy enough to make yourself the president, but you know what, at that point, you don't
fucking need to, right?
That's how you become president, right?
Well, no, I guess you have to be rich first.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, oh, that's a whole complicated, confusing thing.
Being Bloomberg rich didn't make him president, but it did stop the guy who was going to
attack some heavily from probably from being president, so we'll see how that all works
out.
You think Bernie doesn't have a shot now?
I desperately hope he does, I'm voting for him, but I mean, and I'll vote for Biden
very unenthusiastically.
Surprised by how well Bernie did actually, like I, for some reason.
I was not surprised that he did well.
I think that the- I think I just got really pessimistic after, you know, the events of
yesteryear.
Yeah.
Well, and how poorly he did in 2016, but- Yeah, no, that's what I'm trying to do.
Poorly in 2016.
Well, he didn't do good enough.
Right, yeah.
That's when I thought that he was going to be, like, hands down the one, him or Warren.
I just figured the world was, like, the country was ready for that sort of reform, but, you
know, and I get where people are like, how does it work?
It's, you know, be hard to implement, whatever.
Those are valid points.
I read a fairly compelling thing about how, like, you know, Jeff Bezos is worth $140 billion
or whatever, but it's not like he has that sitting in his savings account.
No.
That's the value of Amazon.
Exactly.
So how do you- well, that's the value of his 12% of Amazon.
Right.
So, like, how do you tax somebody on their, like, their appraisal value?
Literally, what he would have to do is sell off what he owns in Amazon every year to pay
the taxes.
Is that the actual policy, or is that, like, what people are saying would be their conclusion?
Well, that's- Where else is he going to get the money?
If they're taxing him, you know, at 1% of his net value, both of that is-
And now we've segmented into politics.
Yeah.
Well, no, I'm like- And at that point, you know, maybe some people want him to stop
owning that much of Amazon.
I think that's dumb, but whatever.
Well, like, your net worth is pretty high because you own property.
So, like, at some point- I also have a lot of debt on that property.
That's true.
But, like, say if you, you know, in 15 years you own four different places and they're
all yours.
Right.
Like, are you going to have to sell a house to pay your taxes one year?
If the wealth tax applied to me, then yes.
I don't think that that- I don't think the wealth tax will ever apply to you, though.
That's true.
I mean, I hope it does.
But, like, the thing is- Oh, even you hope I get that much money.
The wealth tax is for people who never, like, don't have to ever worry about being poor,
or, like, okay, if they- Not just being poor, like, ever having to be normal again.
Yeah.
I mean, I guess it's possible to blow through $200 million, but, like, at that point, then
like, you just fucked up.
There's a certain amount of money that I feel like is just too much money for, like, a person
to have, and maybe that's- I don't think this is very, uh-
I think of it- This is much more of an emotional response than I haven't really thought deeply
about it, I mean.
But, like, yeah, from my, like, emotional, you know, reactive part of me is just, like,
okay, like, nobody who has the wealth tax applied to them, no one has that much money
really gets to complain about.
So I mean, yes, basically, I agree in terms of how we think of money in the day-to-day
scale, but I don't- Once you get a certain level of money, money doesn't mean that anymore.
Money is not a thing that is how your life changes.
Money is now, like, a resource for how you want to affect the world.
So once you have that level of money, you start using it in ways to shape the world
in ways that you think are better.
And basically, what we're doing is saying to people, we don't want you to shape, uh,
the way of the world, we want the government to shape it instead, so we're taking that
power from you.
I don't know.
I kind of am 100% behind that, like, if I had a trillion dollars, I shouldn't be allowed
to buy all the politicians I want and just protect all of my own personal interests at
the expense of everybody else.
You don't have to buy politicians, but, like, I would much rather-
But people do.
Like, that's what's going on, right?
The really shitty part is how cheap they fucking are.
Yeah.
That's the weird thing.
You see some of the, like, the campaign donations, it's like, what, 75,000 dollars?
I know.
Like, what the hell is going on?
Nuts.
But, you know, what I mean is, like, I would much rather that Elon Musk have 100 billion
dollars to shape the future of the world than for Donald Trump to have 100 billion dollars
for it.
Right.
Yeah.
Unless you can-
Let's pick your politicians, either.
Well, you sort of get to pick them.
Do you?
You get more control.
I put any politician-
I put sorta in quotes.
Are you happy about any politician that is running the country right now?
I mean, running the country, we've got the one.
If I'm picturing, like, my congresspeople-
The whole group of all of congresspeople, yeah.
Oh.
I like Alexandria Cortez.
Okay.
I think she's fantastic.
I think she's, like, the, the, uh, Bizarro Trump.
And how much say did you have in getting her into her position?
Nothing.
She's-
Yeah, she's in New York.
There is, I think, maybe two, two congresspeople that I think are mostly okay.
And I just, I really trust, uh, I really trust some, I don't want to say that we're
trust, but I would rather that money be in the hands of someone who has, uh, some experience
using the money and who is not beholden to the interests that politicians are beholden
to.
If I got to push my power to Elon Musk and not just whoever happened to have more money
than him, who got to shape the world instead, I feel like if we were just to, like, hey,
let's let the people with the most, uh, financial power around the world, we're probably setting
ourselves up for a disaster because there's more bad people with big, big money than good
people.
Is there?
You tend to get money by defecting, I think.
Like, to get, like, large amounts of money.
I don't think that's true anymore.
Uh, I mean, I think it's still definitely true.
I don't think it's always the case, but I don't think that it's...
Under capitalism, for the most part, people get really rich by creating great deals of
wealth for society.
Yeah, you're talking about the US, though.
Yeah, in the US, it's mostly when the government interferes and starts using force and violence
that you, you know, expropriate money in bad ways.
Did you see the SMBC about, like, becoming part of the system?
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
Because you first thought like that to me, like, a year ago, and it was kind of spot
on.
Um, all right.
We had a, well, I guess I was gonna, like, try and segue us into the podcast, but I
can't remember what.
Like, how we're gonna...
I'll let someone else do that.
Insert segue here.
Insert segue.
Uh, hey, welcome to the podcast.
We've already started, but this is the Basing Conspiracy, and you've been listening for
a few minutes now.
I'm Inyash Brodsky.
I'm Steven Zuber.
I'm Jess Dickey.
I hope you're still here.
We promise we're done talking about politics.
I had a moment last night recording with Brian.
I was like, okay, we don't promise.
Sorry.
I was like, I can hear people unsubscribing, dude.
Shut the hell up.
Nice.
What kind of sound does that make?
It's like a slamming door noise.
Yeah.
I was thinking like, just go whoosh.
Did you actually say that to him?
Yeah.
Nice.
Just stay in the show too.
I can't remember what he said.
It was, it was something funny.
Cool.
I like Brian.
Yeah, no, he's great.
I appreciate having somebody there that like is pointing out the, like, I know that I'm
a fanboy.
You know what?
We're not doing the podcast.
No.
We're going to talk about Malcolm Gladwell's talking to strangers.
Yes.
Yes.
Although we wanted to maybe this time get the sequences and a few feedbacks out of
the way first.
So we don't run out of time.
Do we want to try doing that this week?
Yeah.
That's something we could try.
Let's experiment.
Okay.
Everything's crazy this week.
There was no official intro.
Now we're doing things backwards.
But before we jump into that, we are quickly going to talk about the coronavirus because
that is the thing that everybody is talking about right now.
As usual, rationalists are one step ahead of everything.
So there were a couple of weeks.
So none of us got sick, right?
Oh wow.
It's going to still happen.
But you know, a couple of weeks ago, people were already talking about, hey, this, this
COVID-19 thing looks like it's going to be a big deal and start asking what would this
do to the markets if, if this turned into an epidemic because it doesn't seem like people
are panicking correctly.
And several people in the community who have a lot of money in the markets sold some percentage
in preparation.
A lot of people started stocking up on basic necessities.
And then yeah, lo and behold, the things that start spreading less than one week ago, literally
less than seven days ago, I was talking with my boss.
And I was, you know, just saying like, yeah, I'm kind of canceling all my going out being
with people plans.
And he said, yeah, but you know, we're not on the coast.
Fine.
We're safe here.
And I looked at him and I said, Denver international airport is a major hub.
It's going to be here.
Like I didn't say any of the rest of this, but what the fuck was he thinking?
Yeah, anywhere where there's an international airport.
Yeah.
There's people coming here from all over all the time in this giant tubes where they're
breathing the same air as other people for six plus hours.
And then they stay in the hotels here.
It's, it's going to get into every major city.
I tried to get Brian to, to commit to a bet with me at the meetup on Tuesday that like
we'd have a case in Denver by the end of the month because I was being super like gentle
with my guests.
And then we had a case like what?
We had four days later.
We had two cases on three days later on Friday.
How did you get money?
No, we didn't actually place a bet because he was like, oh, we'll have a case in a month.
And I'm like, yeah, we will.
So you know what would be cool is if at airports, like the TSA cared at least as much about spreading
pandemics as they did about stopping terrorists.
Like what if we screened people for infectious diseases, they don't even care about stopping
terrorists.
They just care about security theater.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But like my, it would be, it'd be one thing to like stop somebody who clearly has a cold,
but then it like, I mean, Rachel sneezes six or seven times a day.
Actually it would be six to eight because she always double sneezes.
And it's just allergies.
She's, she's done that every day for the last 25 years, right?
So like in the same sense that we don't want our airport security personnel profiling people
that look like terrorists.
We don't want them profiling people who look sick.
Like we want them to be clearly.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
So like, yeah, another like sort of tangent.
Another thing that airport security loves to do is stop trans people.
Really?
It's like Phoenix and I have made a joke about it now.
Like.
Why do you guys look like terrorists or something?
No, because they have a gender button that they push before you go through the scanner
thing that if it notices something is off, then you get flagged and then you have to
get the pat down and you have to awkwardly like now explain to an airport security person.
It's like, yep, I've got a dick.
Can you?
I'm trans.
Hello, airport.
Hi.
Is that the just trans flying protocol?
Just like declaring what presenting tentacles you have so that they aren't surprised on
the scan?
Because that sounds like the easiest way around it.
Even if it's not a question to answer, you know, have to answer it the way that they
want to hear it.
I guess like for me, I just find it to be funny and exasperating, but some people find it
to be incredibly invasive and triggering.
So why do they, they have to pat down all trans people?
No, I think it's like, if you go in there and you say, I'm a woman and they go in there.
They don't ask you.
They look at you.
They make a judgment call.
They push a button.
And so if you look like a woman, but then there's like something weird on the scanner
or this is like, this looks wrong and then they've got to go like, oh, why does this
woman have this?
They're packing something at waist level and they're like, hold on a second or like me
with binder.
Explosives.
Right.
Okay.
I wonder if anyone's ever tried to be a terrorist and like stick a bomb in their underwear.
You know what?
If you are really committed to it, you can have your testicles removed and put some explosives
up there instead.
I don't know how big the explosives could be.
Stop helping the terrorists.
It's true.
You might have to be like in a vulnerable location on the plane.
I feel like there are easier ways to get things on board.
Yeah.
Well, yeah.
There's much easier ways people walk through with explosives all the time.
Not real explosives, but fake explosives.
They walk through with scissors like every goddamn time.
Like I always, especially when I was still a heart student.
I brought an ace on my last two flights on accident because it's my backpack.
Yeah.
I mean, if I can take down a plane with a pair of fingernail clippers, I can take down a
plane with a can of maize.
Yeah.
I didn't mean to cut you off, though.
No, I would like feel like we should get back on whatever topic.
Right.
The whole coronavirus thing or COVID-19, but coronavirus is just cooler.
So I think that's sticking.
Basically avoid any large gatherings, definitely anything where there's more than 10 people
in close proximity.
I am basically not going out dancing or to any theaters for the next two to three months,
which sucks, but whatever.
Like, do you think it'll be blown over in two to three months?
I bring that up because my manager, I think, takes his cues from
idiot politicians and not scientists on the level of what, how do we concern here?
And it's like, this isn't going to go away in April.
So two months is my minimum lower bound right now.
And as we get further on, if it needs to be extended, I'll extend it.
I think there's a great chance those will just be with us for the next few years.
I think that there will be people with coronavirus running around on earth for,
I mean, like through, through the deck around.
Yeah. Like, but will it still be, will it still be rampant?
Is maybe the question or the concern?
Well, it's more a matter of whether we find a way to treat it and contain it
effectively to maybe vaccinate against it.
There's a lot of clinical trials right now.
It's just pandemics.
One of the scary things about them is just that you're new.
You don't really know, like how to fight them yet.
And learning that is like the key to, you know, finding the antigen and then
like finding ways to treat it, keep it under control versus having it spread,
having it, um, losing your herd immunity.
Yeah. So key things is, uh, don't panic, obviously.
It's not, it's not going to kill most people that are listening to this podcast,
although I'm sure there are some immunosuppressed people listening to us.
So they'll be at high risk.
We want to get past the initial outbreak hump.
It's not going to be like one of those post-apocalypse movies,
but the economy will likely take a hit for a little while.
I'm refinancing my house.
Okay. Yeah.
That's cool.
Down 1.1%.
Oh, holy shit.
Yeah.
Nice.
Okay.
Kind of cool.
Yeah.
Uh, lower my mortgage by like 180 bucks a month.
Yeah, maybe take advantage of it.
If you see a opportunity.
If you're in a major metropolitan area, there's a good chance that sometime in
the coming months, the government is going to ask you to stay indoors as much as
possible for a few weeks.
So when you get a chance, go out and stock up on some food.
Like seriously, rice doesn't take a lot of space and is a lot of calories.
So you can, you can just grab some rice and maybe some frozen chicken.
Get enough food to last you for two weeks if you need to.
My thing, like, I don't know.
I, I have a number of thoughts on, ah, man.
All right.
I'll try and make this quick because this isn't the crux of the episode.
So like I am not super concerned about dying because I'm in the age demographic
where very, very few people have died, which is great.
I'm like, I never got to clubs anyway, so I'm not losing that part of my life.
But like this morning I went to Einstein and got a bagel.
Like, so like killed us all.
But who knows what they've been up to, right?
So like, unless I completely shut myself off, it's not just about not going to
crowded, disgusting places.
It's like, don't go anywhere.
Right.
So like, am I supposed to do that?
That is the thing that you might need to do for a few weeks.
Am I supposed to do that now, starting for like for the next 90 days?
No, I don't think right now.
Yeah.
So it's needed.
Yeah.
I don't know.
Like my, I already see people like, you know, the touch screens of King
Supers for yourself.
Check out.
They either use something wrapped around their finger or they like use
back of their hand to touch it, stuff like that.
Also, I've been in the back of my knuckles for those touch screens for years.
So something frustrating is the Clorox and Lysol wipes are sold out everywhere.
Like you can't get them on Amazon.
Yeah, I can't find Purell.
Yeah, it's really hard to get the masks now.
Let's get the N95 masks.
And it like, and this is the next thing that people always say.
So just to rehearse the cashed thought, leave those for the professionals,
the environments where they're actually useful.
You're not going to be able to use the same mask every day all day.
And if you steal 90 of them from, you know, your local doctor's office,
then they, then the people who are sick won't be able to have them.
They're more useful for keeping other people from getting it if you are sick.
Yes.
My main concern is like both my parents have been smoking for 40 years.
My grandma's in her late 80s.
They're both, both all three of them aren't very high risk demographics.
And that stresses me out.
Are they people that go out a lot and interact with other people from like various,
you know, not really like, but I mean, all my
grandma's friends are in her age demographic, they go to the doctor's
office because they're all old.
And so, you know, sick people with coronavirus go to the doctor's office
and, you know, coughing all the doorknobs because they're a bunch of fucking heathens.
The best thing about like me is I'm not changing really any of my daily
habits because I've been politely germophobic for, you know, several years.
So like, I'm always cautious about doorknobs.
I always have Purell on me.
Like I'm not over the top.
I don't think it doesn't impact my daily life in a negative way, but like,
I'm conscientious about these things.
And it's like, yes.
Now, finally, everyone's being told to do the right thing.
Stop fucking coughing in your hands like a bunch of goddamn animals.
I'm not a prepper.
I think someday maybe we should have a quick episode on just basic stuff that
everyone should have.
But unless you are completely strapped for space, I think everyone should have
at least a week's worth of calories in their house at all times.
Like if you start dipping below a week, go out, get more.
And I, there's almost no one in America who can't go one week without eating
and they're going to die.
But yeah, you don't want to be starving for, you know, a number of days.
If you can help it, it's not healthy.
It makes it harder to fight off viruses.
Yeah.
Like I said, my main concern is people that I know getting sick.
And so like I said, my grandma, her social group, they all go to the doctor
all the time. I mean, they don't go clubbing.
But my mom works in a position where she interacts with dozens of
strangers a day at a dentist's office.
So all them other mouths open all day right when they're in the office.
It's, I don't know, my dad probably thinks he's too cool to wash his hands
properly. So like they're, you know, so, you know, my, my concern is all of
the people in high risk groups that I don't want to get sick.
But yeah, aren't you going to visit your parents after this?
I am.
Sounds like a risky thing to do, sir.
Yeah, I'll explain later.
You can't.
OK, yeah, can't completely alter life for something like this, plus
they're in Fort Collins, so they're in a lower risk area.
Yeah, it sucks, because like I'd like to visit my grandma.
It would be silly for me to like, I don't know, I'm torn on that.
What do you guys think I should do?
Because I don't like appearing like if you, you know, really
really for your loved ones, don't visit them, especially the people
that are on their knees, call them.
You cannot transmit coronavirus over the phone yet.
Wait till it's fine.
Yeah, COVID 20 will be over the phone.
COVID 21 over text and three days.
I'm a little bit worried about working in a hospital.
Yeah, that's worrisome.
The hospital is doing a really good job of, I mean, they were way prepared.
And is it a general hospital or just for cancer?
Well, I work in the Cancer Center, but it's a general hospital.
It's got like a bunch of buildings together for there's the yeah,
the research department.
There's a for some reason, what is it?
Physical therapy office, Children's Hospital.
It's not some complaining about the government.
The juicy how the CDC fucked up the test.
Making it illegal to administer any testing kits that weren't from them directly.
The CDC, the FDA, right?
Or maybe it was the FDA.
Yes. Yeah.
Yeah, I think that might have actually been overturned.
I'm getting the two of them confused.
Yeah, I mean, after two, three weeks of delays, yeah, turns out also
you cannot sell a number of things on eBay like filter masks anymore
because apparently the prices were like quadrupling
and that may run afoul of government anti-gouging laws.
So now you just can't buy them at all, which is, you know, even better.
It's like the government doesn't understand that prices a signal
to suppliers to supply more of this thing.
That's right. I mean, it's it's both funny and and or it's both funny and not funny.
Yeah, I think most of my thoughts these are not the people I want to have extra money.
Yeah, I mean, it's I don't like I as far as prepping for things,
you know, I probably have a week's worth of calories in the house.
I never buy bottled water, but I was at Costco a couple of days ago
and I saw people coughing, which is great.
And it was like five seventy five for 40 bottles of water.
So I bought 40 bottles of water and they're now going to hang out
in my pantry for, you know, ages.
It's also like this one, you know, under the stairs cabinet thing.
So it's not taking up valuable space.
But I was like, this is like cheaper than like this is almost like as cheap as tap water.
Yeah, like six bucks.
So I mean, actual tap water is as cheap as tap water.
And you can get a 15 gallon water containers.
Super fucking cheap of Amazon or anywhere.
Yeah. And then, you know, a little bit of just fill them up.
Just disinfectant, whatever to keep it from getting stagnant.
The disinfectant is like twenty dollars for 50 tabs.
I have like no concern about the water turning off. Me neither.
I just figured, like, hey, now I've got bottled water.
You know, it was the kind of thing that people are, you know,
I saw people walking out with pallet fulls of bottled water.
Oh, really? Yeah. Damn.
I think Scott Alexander pointed out that they're Amazon is still delivering in Wuhan.
Like, I don't think civilization is going to collapse.
It's just going to be like, you know, there's some precautions that you could
still take while not also freaking the fuck out and thinking that's the end of the world.
Amazon is a service you can trust.
Although they were saying, probably disinfect your packages and open them outside.
Yeah, with gloves.
Oh, man, I'm on this clinical research memes Facebook group
and somebody posted a picture of a bunch of
flu masks that they had gotten that were from Wuhan.
Like, ah, should we open these?
Like, look, we just go where they're from.
I don't know. All right.
Should we go on to the the strong post?
Yeah. Or was there more current stuff to say?
I'll just say that basically, I think all the fun stuff,
all of you, I guess I take it in this order.
I read the Slate Star Code X post.
Yeah, we'll link that, which is fun.
I put a note on that already.
And then there was a last week tonight episode on this, too.
So if you want the comic relief version, that one's also valuable.
Cool. Basically, his his thing is find the find the the golden mean
between like licking posts in the subway and chugging bleach.
So, you know, between those two extremes, find find a happy spot.
Yeah, you can actually drink a little bit of bleach, like.
Take that with a grain of salt.
Rather, don't take your bleach with anything.
Sorry, how much bleach should you drink?
You can look it up.
But like, if you dilute it a certain amount, it's one of the like things
that you can use as a survivalist tactic.
Oh, to clean your water.
And bleach tablets.
If you're if you're drinking bathtub water, maybe throw a bleach,
throw a cap full of bleach in it or something, right?
Well, make sure you know what the dosage is first.
Yeah, so find that out.
But don't don't take a don't take a little mini shot of bleach
in the morning to try to keep yourself from getting sick.
That's that's what John Oliver was getting at.
Of course, it was a picture of a guy with an upside down
bottle of bleach just chug pouring into his face.
So yeah.
Yeah.
And then there is a discord group called Social Distancing
created in the Berkeley Rationalist Area because they've got some cases there.
People are worried about it.
People who are socially distancing themselves can join this for tips on
proper stuff and then also just updates and socialization
if you're just going to be stuck in your house.
Um, I'll see if maybe there's a shareable link that I can get.
Or if not, I'll see about how you can get involved in that.
I happen to just be added one day because I have people that I know
in the Berkeley area and they just I think we're just mass inviting people.
Excellent. Cool.
All right.
So jumping along to the less wrong posts.
First one we have today is update yourself incrementally.
Does anyone want to launch into this?
Um, it's OK if your cherished belief isn't perfectly defended.
If the hypothesis is that the coin comes up heads 95 percent of the time,
then one time in 20, you'll expect to see what looks like country evidence.
Yet it is widely believed, especially in the court of public opinion,
that a true theory can have no failures and a false theory, no successes.
Yes. So.
You find people holding up a single piece of what they think of an evidence
and claiming that their theory can explain it as though this was all the support
they needed and apparently a false theory can have no supporting evidence.
So I guess we run into this a lot with, um, not a lot anymore,
but we ran into it a lot with nine 11 truthers, right?
Oh yeah, like, uh, I mean, a lot of conspiracy theories
are people just anomaly hunting.
Well, what about this? What about this?
How do you explain that?
Well, my theory can explain it, so it can't be a false theory.
It's just people are very uncomfortable with saying that that's a coincidence.
That's also a coincidence.
And it's like kind of, you know, linking back to the anthropic principle
episode we had last time where hardwired to look for causality as a species.
And I think the important thing to like rationalist technique to apply to in the
case of especially anomaly hunting and conspiracy theories is like,
if you didn't predict it in advance that, um, I don't know what all
the coincidences that they point to in the nine 11 stuff.
But like if you, if you're, if your model didn't have that already in advance,
then you didn't, you, you weren't modeling this at all.
You were just like, yeah, you're just pointing at weird things and going, Oh,
what about that? Uh, that's, uh, something that I've seen brought up recently
with some shoddy science where there's, there's a bunch of ways you can do
science bad and something that is getting more attention lately that I'm
pretty happy about is people pointing out that you did not, um, theorize this ahead
of time. So people will do, I don't know.
It's like a study about asthma and they didn't have any kind of hypothesis
ahead of time.
It's just then like after the fact they're looking at it and being like, Oh,
look, it looks like, uh, I don't know, you can skew the data this way to make
it look like the, the drug that we're testing helped in these ways.
And it's like, did you predict that that was a thing that the struggle is going
to do? If no, then like, that's useless.
And I, I think I, uh, one of the things that is stressed throughout this post is
that, uh, beliefs generally shouldn't be binary on off theories, either true or
false, that they should be held with, uh, a certain probability, like 95%
confidence that this or that this coin comes up heads 95% of the time, something
like that. Uh, because one of the things that he mentions is that, uh, even
with a correct model, if it is not an exact model, you will sometimes need to
revise your belief down. If an iota or two of evidence happens to counter
support your belief, that's okay. Just shift your belief downward a little.
If it's true, supporting evidence will come shortly and the probability will
climb again. If the theory is false, you didn't really want it anyway.
Mm hmm. Yeah, I've found myself getting really uncomfortable with that.
Like, or rather, I've like caught myself and tried to fix it.
But, uh, um, darn, there was a recent example, but I can't think of it.
But, you know, when, uh, oh, no, I remember it about, um, roundup.
So I was getting really frustrated with people talking about that, like roundup
being toxic. And I looked it up at the time and I was like, no, studies have
shown that roundup is toxic. Uh, the mechanism of action doesn't even make
sense for it being toxic. It like deletes an enzyme from a plant that lets
it photosynthesize. You don't photosynthesize. But, um, last night I was
like having this argument with people and I was like, oh yeah, this is a big
pet peeve of mine. And somebody said, well, actually there have been some studies
recently that had a possible connection to carcinogenicity. So I was like, uh,
all right, show me. And then they did. And I was like, hmm, hmm. Okay.
Yeah. Thanks. Like revised slightly. Yeah. In the down, but I like noticed
myself wanting to like start defending my point. Right. So I didn't look dumb
or something. And then it's like, oh, that's not a good, it's not a good
impulse. You did a good thing. You were a good rationalist. Congratulations.
Yeah. He says that, well, the way he ends his post is, uh, that, uh, maybe some
more counter support comes in just a tiny bit. So you rise down again just a
little bit and new upward support is slow to trickle in. You may find your
belief drifting further and further downward until finally you realize from
which quarter the winds of evidence are blowing against you. In that moment of
realization, there's no point in constructing excuses. In that moment of
realization, you have already relinquished your cherished belief. So by, you
know, slowly just updating a little bit, uh, you can get yourself to becoming
less wrong without even having to have any major, you know, existential
struggle over it.
Hey, that's the name of the show.
He did mention earlier up, which I didn't re quote, but, uh, the rationality is
not for winning debates. It is for deciding which side to join. Oh, yeah,
that's a good line. Yeah. If you've already decided which side to argue for
the work of rationality is done within you, whether well or poorly. Yeah, it's
worth noticing, um, when you, when you do have a position on something in
your not sure how you got that strong of a position on it, trying to trace your
line of thinking backwards and being like, did I get this from first
principles? Did I look this up? Or is this just something that I'd heard
repeated by authority figures enough times or something like that? That's
another thing I'm trying to notice too. Like, uh,
I think that's part of the reason he tries to distance rationality from
political stuff, or at least did at the time, because politics is much more
about winning debates. Yeah. And if you're trying to figure out which debate,
which side of the debate to argue from first, then that's, that's a slightly
different thing. Yeah. Well, I think that was mainly meant to be for, I think
that was mainly like politics is a really bad area to start in, because we're
just as a species so hardwired for tribalism. Yeah. It's better to like, yeah.
And that was the other thing that I had forgotten about the, um, politics as the
mindkiller was that he actually says, like, this is for advanced rationalists,
not, we don't talk about politics around here at all. Ever. It's just more, if
you're just new to this, you're just starting out, like hone your skills in
the areas of scientific fact or like, you know, something that's less, uh,
stabbing directly into your soul first. Anyway.
No, and I think that's, I mean, I'm looking forward to the politics of the
mindkiller series when we get there. They kind of come up.
Didn't we really come up? Yeah, but I think some of more of the points like
keep coming up like that. And I like the, that admonition about like, this isn't
something that we can't not discuss. This isn't something that we just don't
discuss. It's just like, this is a really shitty intro move, right?
Um, I mean, it's antithetical to a good approach for an outsider. Right.
All right. Let me say after having argued about politics 20 minutes ago.
Well, that's because I mean, we're also having fun. Yeah. Well, I was, I was
almost going to say that, but I'm not going to pat myself on the back like
that, but what it will say is that like, we're not, uh, I mean, we kind, well,
A, I didn't know we were starting the episode. That was more discussion among
friends. Yeah. Like if I was trying to tell somebody like, oh yeah, here's what
this is about. And here's how it applies to your favorite candidate for
president. Oh God. That'd be the worst. Exactly. Right. So yeah.
Yeah. Um, another thing I did want to point out with this one is I like when
these posts get self-referential, this one said, uh, this one links to people
wanting their debates to be one-sided, which is an earlier post, uh, debate
should not appear one-sided. What was that one titled?
I think so. Okay. Yeah. That's, um, a benefit that you do get from reading the
sequences in order.
Yeah. He covers previous concepts.
Yeah. It keeps building on them until you've got this, uh, much bigger model
in your head than you started out with. That's why sometimes I do find it
frustrating to like try to say this. Oh yeah. There's this whole thing about
how you shouldn't want your debates to be one-sided. And then I'll link the
original post. I'm like, this doesn't look as strong as I remembered it being.
This just kind of seems like, well, there's also the thing where like,
stuff building up to it. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's hard to get all that context there.
It's like, well, you really have to just read the secret. Uh, that's a lot of
text though. I'm sorry.
Yeah. It's, it's like he's trying to bridge a very large inferential gaps and
has to do a lot of work to get there.
Yeah.
Moving on to, yeah.
Um, one argument against an army. Suppose the country of Fredonia is debating
whether its neighbor, Sylvania, is responsible for a recent rash of meteor
strikes on its cities. The meteor struck cities close to the Sylvania border.
There was unusual activity in the Sylvania stock markets before the
strikes and the Sylvania ambassador, Trantino, was heard muttering about
heavenly vengeance. And then you encounter some arguments by pro-Sylvania
traders again and again and again. But each time the new argument sandally
defeated three to one.
Can I really quickly interject?
Yes.
I cut out a part in the middle where it said that a pro-Sylvania trader, in quotes,
approaches you and says, but look, it doesn't make any sense for the, for the
common strikes to be the work of Sylvania because of this. And I don't know,
they point out something from astronomy, right? Like meteors are very, very hard
for humans to direct. It would be basically impossible. And you go, yeah,
but they all hit cities close to the border. And there was unusual activity in
the stock market beforehand. And the ambassador did talk about heavenly
justice just before this happened. So, you know, I got my three points of
evidence against your one that like, we think humans don't know how to do this
yet, but maybe they do. So I'm going to stick with my argument here.
Because, you know, it just seems there's more, but there's more weight to this
side. Yeah, three to one.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah. By rehearsing the arguments you already knew, you're double counting
your evidence.
Yeah. And then people keep coming to you with another argument. And each time
you're like, yeah, but I got these three against your one. And then someone
comes with another one. And it says, and on every occasion, you feel yourself
becoming more confident that Sylvania wasn't irresponsible, shifting your
prior according to the felt balance of evidence.
Because it's three to one every time. Yeah. But by the end of the week, it's
30 to 30 to three. But you're not thinking of it that way. Because you're
not keeping score. This reminds me of a similar post where it was like a
religious like a intelligent design argument or something. And like every
time they'd be confronted with a new piece of anti information, they'd give
back the intelligent design, you know, spiel. And they'd be like, hi, I need to
feed another and another and another was, I think it was just a similar point
about like cognitive stop signs or something. But it's the same sort of
failure. Yeah. Yeah. And he ties this back right into the previous post, which
is why we grouped them together, saying that the balance may the balance of
evidence may still support your cherished belief. But you still have to shift
the probability down. Yes, down from whatever it was before you heard the
contrary evidence does no good to just rehearse the supporting arguments
because you have already taken those into account. So if someone does make a
contrary point, even if you think it's a not a good point and your points are,
you know, better and outweigh it, you still should as adjust down just a
little bit. So that if you keep getting all these little arguments over time,
they can build up to, you know, bring you to where a 30 to three should be.
Yeah, this reminds me of the argument says soldiers, which I think we
covered earlier too. This is the kind of mindset where you're not thinking
about how to debate like factual, factual facts correctly, you're thinking
about, I've got these three magic items and every time someone comes at me
with a new magic item, I'm going to use these three and they keep, they keep
working. So I'm just going to keep using them. Ha ha, I've got my three magic,
but like it's, you know, you're not trying to win a fight. That's that
shouldn't be the point of what you're doing. Like, if you're actually trying
to find out the truth, then that is just a very wrong way to think about how
to do it. So speaking of wrong ways to think about how to do this, if I'm in
dialogue with a moon landing denier, they will have, if they're, if they make
a living out of it, like some people do, they'll have 4,000 arguments about why
the moon landing was fake. And I've got like three about why it was real. So
like for every one that I hear, I've got to update down a little bit in my
confidence that the moon landing happened. I mean, depending. First of all, if
it's an argument with some validity, then yes, you probably should update down
a little bit. Just how little that little bit is might be very little if it's
really weak. But there's also some arguments that you can dismiss by
actually looking at the argument. Yeah, like looking at this and being like,
no, this, this argument counts for zero because it's so bad because of, you
know, reason X, Y or Z. I think this is more like you cannot use the arguments
you already know to be like, ah, I see, maybe you have a point there, but I
have all this other evidence on the other side. So I'm going to ignore that
point if it is a somewhat valid point to take into consideration.
This is a particular analogy that's trying to get at the heart of why this
kind of why this style of trying to argue is not actually useful for getting
towards the truth of something. But just because they're talking about the
numerical error that some people make that like there's also the point, the
point that this is like physically impossible for people to have done
argument should actually win. Like it doesn't matter whether it's one to three
arguments, like, oh, but it looks suspicious versus this is physically
impossible to have. Like obviously that argument's going to defeat any other
like, but this is weird and isn't that weird. But you're like, this is still
physically impossible. You could just keep using that argument because
Or if that moon landing denier has like extremely good evidence, one single
piece of evidence could overrule everything else. You can be like, oh,
shit, you're right. You know, even if it's just one argument, if it's that good
of an argument. Yeah, this is much more valuable from the perspective of a
moon landing denier with bad arguments where they're like, well, the flag
looks like it moves for a minute. And like, if they just had that to every
counter piece, every every piece of information about why I think the moon
landing happened, but the flag moved a little bit, I think.
So of course it moved a little bit, they were planting it.
Well, but I mean, that's that's one of the things that they say it's like
flags don't wave in space. How did it? How did it blow in the wind? And it's
like it didn't. There was a supporting pole. Yeah. Or like the dust.
This, this would be like a good counterpoint to that. So like you say,
like, well, yeah, but if you watch them jump, and then you watch the dust
move at like one, six, like one sixth G, like, what do they got string to all
that dust was this early CGI? Like,
Yeah, that's another thing. Like, I remember people would say that the
lighting looks like stage lighting. And they're like, yeah, the shadows are
weird. The lighting's like, you know, shit, it's weird. The atmosphere is
different. Like, yeah, the lighting looks weird. It's on the, it's on the
fucking moon. Yeah, we don't have lights like that on earth.
I think someone looked into how much it would cost Kubrick to, because they
say Kubrick directed the moon landing, how much it would cost Kubrick to do
those kind of special effects. And basically it would be impossible.
But if it had been possible, it would be cheaper to go to the moon.
It would be to fake the moon landing.
Yeah. You know, well, they brought rocks back. It's like, yeah, but you know,
we've had meteorite strikes in Antarctica, and that could be moon rocks.
And they're like, yeah, come on.
That's, that's, that's actually something.
Yeah. But like, if I go there, take pictures and then bring back the one
that I took pictures of. And it's like, oh, you just brought those to the set
in LA. And it's like, no, come on. I don't know. I, I lost the, I, I don't
know if I ever had fun. Well, no, I must have for a couple of years had fun
debating with like conspiracy theorists. But then you, it's just like arguing
with create, you know, with religious creationists or something. You hear
the same arguments over and over.
They're not arguing in good faith.
That's always so frustrating.
Yeah. It's more just like a spectacle sport. I think even for them, like, I,
I probably know people who are 9-11 truthers, but I don't know anyone that
I have had that discussion with in like the last 10 years. But like, if they
really believed it, they seem to have like way too much fun with it.
Then it's like, if you, if you thought like, oh yeah, the things are really
actually scary and nefarious like that.
Now, I distinctly remember my sister at one point hearing some moon hoax
arguments and deciding, oh, I'm going to be a moon hoax here now too.
Because this is, this is funny. Like she'd like just decided to say that
she didn't believe the moon landing was real as a quirky part of her identity
now that she could like argue with people about, but like, not because she
thought that any of the evidence was compelling, but more just because it
like seemed like, oh, I could be a wacky eccentric moon person. And that's,
that's appealing to me.
I read a great article how it's a lot more about the community and the
identity than about the belief itself.
Well, I mean, I mean, the belief is a starting off point, but
people can say the same thing about us and like AI.
Suppose
the difference we're all perfectly saying.
All right.
Do we have more to say about that one?
No, he just ended it with saying the right kind of wrong reasoning, a
handful of support, or even a single argument can stand off an army of
contradictions. And that's the name of the post.
Yeah.
All right. So for next time, we will be talking about how hindsight by
yes, and hindsight to the values science, the names of the two posts.
I wonder if that was the thing I was talking about earlier about
pre-registering your hypothesis.
No, this is something different.
I've read these before, but it was a long time ago.
I've been doing this like, you know, doing the sequences, uh, cause I have
not read these in years. And some of these I just kind of like was trying to
get through. I had rationality AI to zombies and I was kind of just blowing
through them. So actually taking the time to look at each one and being like, oh,
I see how these connect to these other ones now. Or, oh, and now I have all
this new context where it's been brought up in these like newer slate
star codex articles about this thing. And yeah, that's been cool.
Awesome. I remember when we had Eleazar on the podcast, back in the wheel
days of the show.
Episode six, I think.
Yeah. And he liked the, the new format of rationality for me, I just
zombies, cause it's like more cohesive. And, and he's like, yeah, the other,
you know, I started kind of turning this big spaghetti mess of a wiki and
you're like, yeah, but I loved that part of it.
Yeah.
And it is kind of fun.
It's a different experience.
It is, but it's nice to have, you know, one of like, yep, I can find this here
because I know it's in this section. And another one where it's just like, I'm
going to kind of just like go through these as they were in the train of thought
that they were released and that has its own sort of.
Or click around.
Yeah.
I did a lot of like, I'd start off wanting to read one and then there's a
bunch of links, like in the text to other posts and then I'd click those and
then I'd click those and the next, like, you know, I always like right click
and open things in new tabs so I can keep track of my history.
That's exactly what I did.
And then you just get like four or five deep, you know, like now I can finish
the one I started.
Exactly.
Or sometimes you never finish it.
Right.
But that's also kind of fun because, uh, I don't know, I also enjoy Wikipedia
for that reason where you can kind of just get lost down this rabbit hole of
that thing's cool.
Look at that shiny thing.
Wait, what about this?
I think I lost on four separate occasions an entire day to TV tropes.
I blame you, man, I used to have the hardest time when I was trying to write
fiction.
If I'd end up on TV tropes or Wikipedia, like doing some research, you're
trying to look at it's like, Oh yeah, what was I doing?
I was trying to be productive.
Whoops.
Even though the SARS, I got lost in the SARS.
I'm the worst.
And now I don't agree with the worst.
Yeah.
All right.
But you know, you're, you're filling your brain with things which can later be
stewed and turned into creative output.
So.
Yeah.
One thing I do have to say is, uh, I really am in strongly like, it's weird.
I feel like this contradicts things I've said before about like, I guess
education or whatever, but the, the weird, like random skills that I have learned
throughout my life have always come back and been useful or like random trivia
knowledge really often comes back.
So enjoy learning.
Yeah.
You know, if learning random stuff is fun for you, then it's a win-win.
So at the very least you've just learned something and that's just fun.
So at the end of the day, at least you can look back and say, at least I had fun.
All right.
Um, I wanted to talk about Malcolm Gladwell's new book, talking to strangers.
Heck, yes, let's do this.
Sounds like a lot of fun.
I was trying to think of a segue between coronavirus and talking to strangers.
And I just couldn't like, as people probably know, Malcolm Gladwell is a popular
nonfiction writer who, um, I think that's pretty good work.
Uh, it tends not to be like, I don't know.
So sometimes it's a bit more surface level than you might want if you're
somebody in this community, but I really enjoyed, uh, talking to strangers.
It was not what I expected.
So I think there's nothing wrong with the equivalent of like popular science books.
Yeah.
No, I mean, uh, what I find frustrating about them is often like, Hey, here's
a book about a subject that I care about, um, say it's genetic engineering and it's
made for like a layperson crowd and then I'll get excited about it, but I'll
start reading it and it'll do this like thing that feels like it's talking down
to the audience the whole time where it's like, you won't believe this.
And like, you're not going to believe what I'm about to say, but trust me, when
you get to chapter three, and I'm like, no, I know, I know, I know, I know.
I'm flipping, like get to the good shit.
I am going to believe you.
It's fine.
After about six chapters, sometimes I'll just put a book down where it's like,
I'm clearly not going to learn anything from this book.
But as long as I'm derailing you there, the good way to do that is more like
how Richard Dawkins wrote The Greatest Show on Earth, which, which really was
my first like, uh, decent dive into evolution.
Um, and it wasn't so much more like, trust me, this, you know, you're going to
believe this, it's going to be crazy.
It's more just like, no, we're going to believe what happens on page 13.
It's like clickbait for your own book.
It just takes it in a really like nice order that will walk anybody from any
perspective as long as they can read and understanding the basics of evolution.
Yeah.
And it does it, uh, you know, and I thought a fun way, I haven't read the
book in like 10 years, but definitely writing style has a lot to do with it.
We're like, I did know a lot of the stuff about evolution already when I was
reading Dawkins books, but his writing style was so enjoyable that I was
enjoying reading stuff I already knew because it was kind of poetic.
He's clearly having fun.
And I was going to say poetic too.
He's big into poetry.
His sites a lot of, or uses lots of verses and stuff, but he
helps you look at things that you already know from different angles, which
is really useful as well.
Another big shout out from my favorite book of his, Unweaving the Rainbow,
which is all about the poetry of science.
You like re consuming things, right?
Yes.
I'm not currently doing a podcast on a book that I've read five times.
Right.
Okay.
So, uh, how would you feel about maybe someday in the medium future rereading
this book and then doing a episode, business experience, see episode on it?
I can just reread it and tell you guys if I think it's worth talking about.
Um, or sounds like it's worth talking about.
I mean, if anyone knows evolution, it's like, you're not going to get much from it.
I, maybe you will.
I mean, it sounds like you already knew evolution and you got a lot from it.
I knew less than I did before I started it.
Okay.
I was like 18 and public school in the US, even a blue state or blue city,
especially like Fort Collins.
I mean, we wasn't very heavily taught.
Well, we can maybe put on a, uh, a, what do you call them?
Surveys on our Patreon, have people vote.
Or I mean, at the very least I'll, I'll read it for fun.
It's been a while.
All right.
As long as I'm talking about the book, I got Richard Dawkins to sign that book
when I met him at a, at a conference once.
So that was fun.
I think I got him to sign a book both times I met him.
One time was Unleaving the Rainbow.
And then one time what was this one?
Cause it was a hard, hard back cover.
Um, maybe actually he didn't, no, I don't think he signed Unleaving the Rainbow
cause I gave that to somebody never got it back.
And I would have chased that down if I, uh, I really wanted it.
So anyway, yeah, anyway, our docs was cool in real life.
That's what you get to call them if you know them really well.
Nice.
Does he know you get to call him that?
No, I'm sure he'd hate it.
I had a chemistry teacher in high school who he called Charles law, uh, Chuck's law.
He's like, yeah, when you're friends, you call them Chuck.
All right.
Yeah.
All right.
Welcome.
Glad.
Well, sorry, popular science.
I got, see rabbit holes.
Yeah.
It's less fun when you're listening to them than when you're reading them.
Cause you don't get to go pet, you know, know when it's over.
Huh.
Yeah.
So actually that kind of segues into the first thing I want to say about this book
is that it is written in a way that is kind of unconventional in a way that I
enjoyed, um, it starts out with the story of Sandra Bland who, I believe, um, that
was a popular, popular, that was a, I don't know, it was in the media.
It was this case of a woman who was pulled over for failing to signal at a
turn and it ended up with her being arrested and then committing suicide in
jail.
Oh, I remember hearing about this.
So it was just like three, four years ago, right?
Yeah.
During, you know, um, the height of the black lives matter and a lot of
attention being paid to police, uh, violence, particularly racially.
So what was her name again?
Sandra Bland.
And what this book does, but it doesn't tell you this is what it's going to do,
which I enjoyed, uh, is describes, here's what happened in, in this case.
And then it goes on.
The next chapter is about a different story.
But let me take you back to Bolivia and the next chapter is, but then there's this
one thing and it slowly starts to, like at first I was a bit like, okay, where's
this going?
I mean, that these were like a bunch of cool, interesting stories from a
psychological perspective, but, um, it tells you these disparate stories about
things that like you're like, I'm not sure how this is connecting exactly, but
each of them illustrates a different, um, point that Glauble wants to make about
why we are bad at talking to strangers.
So that the book is about, um, basically like cognitive bias sort of, but it's,
it's more about, uh, there's this particular bias of like it's, I'm trying
to think of it's mind reading fallacy or typical minding, or maybe it's a few of
them together, but people think that they understand strangers.
They think that there's, people have much more confidence in their ability to
understand other people's motives or to be able to read things about people than
like actually plays out.
And this book brings up a bunch of things that I hadn't heard about before,
which was cool because, uh, kind of talking about the thing that I was, you
know, complaining about earlier, where a lot of science books for the layperson
spends a million words talking about something that like, I feel like I
learned in middle school.
Whereas this was a new take on social, why socialization is hard.
Can you tell us one of the major themes from the first few chapters?
Yeah.
So one of the major themes that kept coming back up was default truth.
And he brought this up when he was talking about, uh, it was the, the
person that investigated, uh, made off and, uh, the Ponzi scheme.
So there was this like incredibly paranoid person and they talked about
like his entire life about how this person became this incredibly paranoid
person and his bizarre habits about like just not trusting anybody, always
expecting everybody was going to try to screw him over.
And that was like, he had seen, um, through made off like way early, but
he couldn't get anyone to listen to him.
When actually like a lot of this stuff was really obvious.
Like if anybody had actually paid attention to the fact that like nobody
knows where this money is coming from, but it was just, uh, the fact that
nobody was suspicious, like nobody else is suspicious about this guy.
Oh, he's walking around like talking about like the way he makes money.
Just totally openly.
He doesn't look like he's lying.
Like surely the government or the police are like, you know, is that one of
the investigative investigative bureaus would know if something was wrong here.
Just the social proof of like, well, people seem to not just touch this guy.
So like, but like this guy couldn't get anyone to pay attention to him.
So what is the default truth thing?
And, uh, he talks about a bunch of psychological studies where they've
shown that we're really bad at like the majority of people are really bad at
telling who is lying.
So they did this one study where you would have, um, students from a college
come in and take a test and then like, if you got a certain number of answers,
right, then I think it would give you credit or something.
Like there was some reward for it and, uh, they paired you up with another
random student and you're supposed to work together.
And then, uh, at one point the test giver gets a phone call and has to leave the room.
The second, uh, student is a plant.
So the second student turns to the first one and says, I think the answer sheet
is over there on the desk.
We could just look at it like, come on, like I need these college credit or
this money or whatever I forget what the reward was.
And like, so they try to convince the other person to go look at the test.
And then whether or not they do, there's an interview afterwards where they
ask a few, you know, benign questions about how hard do you think the test was?
How well do you think you did?
How well did you get along with your partner?
And then did you cheat?
And then they, uh, showed the videos of the interviewers of the people being
interviewed and when they started asking the more like potent, like uncomfortable
questions, like, did any cheating go on while that was gone?
Are you sure?
If, if I asked your partner if any cheating happened, what do you think they would
say?
And so they would show people these interviews and then say, do you think
this person's lying or not?
And people are really bad at telling whether someone's lying or not.
And, uh, because we have this idea of what a lying person looks like that is
not correct.
So lying people get shifty, right?
They get really anxious.
They, you know, they don't make eye contact, but they brought up the point
that like there was this one person who absolutely was telling the truth.
So what happened was, uh, her, the plant was like, come on, let's look at the answers.
And she was like, no, no, no, no, no, that's not me.
No, I like got incredibly anxious about it.
And then when being interviewed, got so anxious about it.
She was like shifting, apparently like, I don't know, just like twitching.
She, she went on this long rambling, like, no, I didn't cheat.
I would never, that's not me.
I just actually, my partner tried to get me to cheat.
I didn't want to say this, but they were, they were really trying to get me to do
it.
And I just, I just kept saying, no, and just the most offensive, like awkward
looking, she was, she hadn't cheated.
She was just a nervous person, whereas there were other people who, uh,
looked so trustworthy, but they were just very good at lying.
But like, it's just the, it's this funny thing where people think that they can,
they, there's kind of roles or there's stereotypes about what like different
kinds of people look like.
Bernie Madoff didn't look like a liar.
It's one of the reasons that they, uh, don't allow, um, lie detector tests in court
because all they measure is how stressed you are, which has no correlation to
whether you're lying or not, or not for most people.
It has weak core, so weak of correlation.
Right.
Yeah.
And I mean, I think famously, I'm not, I haven't had the chance to test this yet.
I would love to.
I am told, uh, from Penn and Teller's bullshit TV series that they did for those
three years.
Oh, the clenching your butthole thing?
Clenching your butthole or doing Kegels while answering correct, while answering
truthfully, and then not doing that while lying.
Yeah.
You give, you give spikes of physical stress whilst, uh, clenching.
Um, I've also been in a situation where I've been accused of doing something
that I was innocent to, but my protestations weren't believed because I,
like, uh, you know, I protested too much or something.
Never anything serious, but he thinks the lady doth protest too much.
Exactly.
At some point in high school or right after high school, someone made like a
Facebook page for my brother's dog and was posting things that like really
only the dog might know.
And so people thought it was me.
I happen to know who it was, but I knew it wasn't me.
And so maybe that, maybe that's a, give me away another friend.
Okay.
Um, but it's like, you know, man, will you stop doing this?
This is, you know, and I'm like, it's really not me.
It's like, I don't fucking believe you.
It's like, cause I, maybe cause I have a smiling or something.
Cause like, I knew, you know, I don't know if they ever asked, do you know
who it, know who did it?
Cause I might have said yes.
Um, but, uh, yeah.
I, I also did this thing that's speaking of, well, tangentially related.
I annoyingly to myself over excuse everything.
Um, and I'm really just trying to practice now the art of like just
shutting the fuck up all the time where it's like, don't say stuff.
So like, unless it's funny, like there was a, I was like an hour late
for work a couple months ago because the train was delayed and they ended up
like, or like stopped the whole South line.
So they bust everybody and the bus driver didn't know where we were going.
So that took us like 30 minutes to get a mile and a half.
I think I've done the same thing you're talking about.
Like your boss is like, why are you late?
And you'd give them a 30 minute explanation, making you even later.
Yeah.
And you're like, no, I swear to God, this is real.
So let me tell you every detail.
And with, with this one, I took pictures because it was funny, not because
no one cares about I was late.
If I just showed up an hour late and be like, sorry, they'd be fine with it.
But this one was like, there are like 250 people out this platform.
And like, we're on the train packed in like sardine cans and it fit like
half people trying to wait for a train.
So I mean, that was more funny.
But I do that, you know, if like, Hey, hey, Zuber, why did you do this
approach, you know, for this thing at work and like, rather than say, I thought
it would work best, I would be like, well, I really it was this and I thought
that because this and it's like, no, man, just like just started when I was born.
And from there it was just all down.
Mistakes ever set.
Um, now I think it's, there was a valuable anecdote that I read once, uh, where
somebody missed a job interview because they slept through it.
It was like a phone interview and they emailed back and they were going to
like try and explain, but like, I'm really sorry, this never happens, whatever.
Instead, they just wrote back and said, I'm sorry, I missed the interview.
Can we reschedule?
And they'd said, yeah, of course, uh, I think it was an error on our end.
Anyway, our scheduling thing has been weird, no problem.
And it's like, if I'd opened up with the sorry, I slept through the interview,
which obviously signals that I don't give a shit about this job or whatever.
They probably wouldn't have gotten the second, the second try, right?
Yeah.
Um, but I think there's definitely a lesson in just like saying as little as possible.
And maybe because I'm, or like the right amount, maybe.
Yeah.
Which, uh, yeah, which is often less than I think it is.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think you can definitely say too little as well.
Yeah.
Just so they're clamped up when they ask you, you know, while you're late and
just be like, reasons.
You don't need to know my business.
Yeah.
So there's so many other interesting stories like this that, um,
so if I, unless you're going to Malcolm Gladwell us through this, I'm curious, uh,
is this going to come back to that woman who got pulled over?
Yeah.
Okay.
So you, so don't rush there.
Just then I just want to make sure that wasn't left because I was compelled to
have those ties.
Yeah.
I also don't want to like summarize the book word for word or anything because
then I recommend people read it and me summarizing.
It's not really going to do it justice entirely.
I do think I want to write a review of it, like, so I was going to more detail that
way, but, um,
I think it would be good to at least have people get the major arguments out of it.
So they don't have to read it.
Uh, well, like the thing is that, um,
like with most of, most of the reviews, like I read on Slate Star Codex, I get the
gist of what the book is saying afterwards.
And I know I can read it and I would get a lot more out of it if I did, but I also
know like the central thrust.
Yeah, that was more what I wanted to try to write.
I just don't think that like trying to talk about it off the cuff, I'm going to
do a very good job of that.
But, um, I did want to talk about a few of the insights that I got from it that
were surprising, not all of them are entirely related to like the main point
of the book, but just like in particular, there was one thing that really surprised
me, um, where there's a chapter about alcohol and it started out with, um, they're
talking about these two anthropologists, husband and wife, who went to somewhere
in Bolivia that was this poor farming community, um, still kind of living the
way like, like with the old traditions, they didn't have a lot of technology.
They hadn't like really been very connected to the modern world.
And they had this social ritual where they would have these big parties on the
weekends, every weekend, somebody would, uh, throw a huge party.
They'd slaughter a cow and throw the hide in front of their house.
So people know that's where the party is and have a big barbecue.
And they had this, uh, sort of ritual around toasting where you're like the
head of the community would toast the guests, so say like the anthropologist
and his wife, and then they would have to toast their hosts and the wife has to
toast the husband, the husband has to toast the wife.
Then you have to, everybody goes around and you take shots of this, uh,
traditional liquor that they had.
And this liquor tastes terrible.
Apparently even the Bolivians hate it, but I guess it was the alcohol they had.
And, uh, this husband and wife, they came back, uh, to the US and they were
talking about their experiences and the wife was like, Hey, doesn't it seem funny
that I think we were drunk every single weekend?
Like, huh.
Yeah.
Like there was a few strange things that they noticed.
So they brought some of this traditional liquor back to a lab and had it analyzed
and found out that it was 180 proof.
Holy crap.
So that that's laboratory alcohol.
Um, the, the guy said that, uh, his friends didn't believe he'd actually
drink this stuff.
So in order to prove it, he like sat there with a doctor and took shots of this stuff.
And then, uh, seemed fine was holding a conversation.
Like, as though everything were normal, uh, declined to ride home because it was
nice and he wanted to walk home.
So they followed him, I think in an ambulance back to his house that he's
just walking down the street and his wife sees him coming with an ambulance
behind him and was like, what's going on?
And at that point, apparently he was like, uh, I'm drunk.
And then just passed out on the floor, just dead.
And they're like, like dead passed out.
I mean, and just stayed passed out for like 16 hours and didn't remember any of it.
And, uh, then they talk about alcohol and what we think alcohol does and what it
actually does.
And this was really cool because I'd never heard this and it makes perfect sense
for me, um, alcohol is traditionally thought of or conventionally thought of
as this agent of the disinhibition.
That's what I've always heard.
Yeah.
Everyone said alcohol lowers your inhibitions, but actually the, um,
Gladwell argues that it is more useful to think about it as an agent of myopia
because what it actually does, um, neurologically is narrows your like
mind's eye, your ability to focus on the present and the past, other things that
are going on in the background of your brain, um, attunes you to the moment and
the context that you're in.
So this is why some people can drink and alcohol makes them happy because these
are the kinds of people that tend to drink at parties or like, you know, when
hanging out with friends in a context for relaxing and partying and then some
other people can drink and it makes them more depressed because they're probably
drinking alone at a bar, maybe staring at some stains on the floor, thinking
about their marriage going badly and the taxes that are due.
And that's all you're focusing on.
You can't even think about good things anymore because you're just so sucked
into this moment of despair.
And this makes a lot of sense for me because I've experienced this thing
with alcohol too, where like, I'm always one, I'm like, does alcohol make me
happy or not?
What does it mean when like, cause when I was going through my, uh, well, just
after my first divorce, I drank, I'm famously, I guess now, uh, for many years,
but I did it because like I did feel happy when I was drunk, uh, even though
I was going through like this horrible thing.
Uh, probably because you were, I mean, uh, I also drank to deal with anxiety,
social anxiety in particular.
Uh, there was a while where I like couldn't go to social events without
being drunk because I thought it was because it's like, oh, disinhibition,
but I, I guess it's just,
you stopped thinking about how bad consequences.
Yeah, exactly.
Like I'm not thinking about all the ways this can go wrong.
I'm looking at the people around me and being like, Hey, this is, this is good.
This is a party.
There's music.
People are having fun.
And probably you're doing the same thing where you're drinking in context
that let you focus on other things.
Um, and yeah, so I'm trying to think I, I, at some point, I, I didn't, I think
I had my first alcoholic drink when I was like 17 that didn't touch it again
for like two or three or probably until I was 21.
Cause I'm a, I was, well, am a complete square.
Um, my, I, I had a rule, especially at a point where I was stressed.
I would drink to alleviate stress for, there was a few months where I was doing
that, not every day, but do a couple shots a night or something.
Few nights a week or something, you know, whatever.
But I had at one point where I was like, man, I'm really bummed.
I should go get drunk.
I'm like, no wait, I should never do that.
And I don't think I have, I've, I've done it where like I'm tired and stressed
and, you know, that puts in a bad mood or whatever, but I've kind of just
already set up a rule for myself.
I don't drink to make myself like not sad.
Um, I tend to not drink that much anyway, but like my, my experience with
alcohol that is almost entirely positive for, you know, you're, you're
drinking at a place where already having a good time.
Well, that was exactly the point that he was trying to make about this
Bolivian tribe where, uh, when you look at their culture more deeply, um, these
were apparently, uh, uh, primarily farmers and, uh, like,
ignorant farmers are migratory.
I forget what the term is, but they didn't really have much of a community
because so many of the, like in scare quotes community, um, a lot of people
that live in this, uh, village, I guess, were gone a lot of the time.
They didn't actually get to have these like kinds of social gatherings, uh, as
much interaction with each other.
So they compensated by doing this ritual on the weekends when everybody would
come home and they intentionally would, they would drink in this context.
And it was this like, you know, ridiculously high-proof alcohol.
But the thing that like the anthropologists were confused about was
the fact that they didn't have pathological drinking in this culture.
You would think that some of our people are drunk every week and having
these kinds of parties, drinking laboratory alcohol, like there would
be violent fist fights and like all kinds of, you know, really bad social
consequences, but there weren't.
And that was what really confused them.
And it's because they only ever drank in this specific context of we are a community.
We're gathering to celebrate like togetherness and we're toasting the
people that are important in our lives right now, like showing hospitality.
Um, and that's kind of interesting.
It's really common in Europe from what my parents tell me.
Yeah.
I, you can think of other examples too.
Like cultures where they have these kinds of, like I, maybe it's a cultural
evolution sort of thing where you probably survive a mechanism.
I hear most cultures when they first discover alcohol do absolutely nothing
for about a century until the culture evolves enough.
Well, I don't know.
I mean, I think that, uh, again, this might just be a thing that I've been
told a bunch of times by authority figures and haven't questioned, but I
think that a lot of times it was people used alcohol in order to avoid like
contaminated drinking water for the most part.
I think, uh, I heard that like, was it medieval Europe where people were mostly
drinking diluted beer all the time instead of water, even children, like
the elderly, because that it was the safe drinking water, basically, but
everybody was a little bit buzzed all the time.
As long as we're looking at, uh, urban legends about the history of the world,
is it, is it actually true that the propagation of coffee coincided with the
enlightenment?
I'd also heard that.
I don't know.
It's possible.
It's another thing that might be worth looking up, but that makes sense to me
because coffee is actually an ootropic.
Well, that's my, that's my thing is like, so, you know, you sub out beer for coffee
and suddenly you've got a class of people that are just feeling way more
productive and intelligent all the time, rather than just kind of sluggish and lazy.
Staying up late and hear a lot more sober and, uh, importantly to prepare coffee
and you have to boil water, which is also a way to, uh, make the water drinkable.
I don't know.
Well, maybe.
Yeah.
I mean, I guess you could cold brew, but like, I don't know how they did it.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's fun.
Anyway, my coffee is my go-to if I want to be productive, usually.
That's like the dumbest thing to say.
Sorry.
I think this is, we're recording on Sunday, the seventh.
Yes.
Eighth.
So the daylight savings was last night.
I think my cat didn't know what time it was either.
She came in and woke us up a few times, which is cute and lovely, but then she
doesn't even really want pets.
She just wants us to wake up, wants to wake us up.
She has food and everything.
She just wants to say hi.
So I hate daylight savings so much.
I had a time machine.
Second thing I would do is go back in time and kill Hitler.
First thing would be go back and kill Ben Franklin when he proposed this, or just
before he proposed the daylight savings.
Oh, don't kill Ben Franklin.
I, you know, mother fucker has to come in.
Still have to do that.
What, what if you just slapped the other guy?
He was a sensible guy.
You could explain to him, I'm from the future.
Here's what happens as a result of this.
Yeah, like, by the way, can you clarify the second amendment before you
put, before you write that shit down?
Few other things.
I'm just saying, like, settle that, like, because that's to me, like the dumbest
constitutional argument is like, well, they said this and it's like, yeah, they
didn't know what germs were.
They didn't know about, you know, what kind of guns we'd have.
Like, let's, let's be real.
But yes, obviously there's a lot of other failures in there too that we could
have pointed out, but the gun one might have been the easiest sell.
You know, saying, hey, can you put a slave thing in there?
They're like, well, no, that's actually people wouldn't sign it if we had a slave
thing in there and wasn't the whole point of the gun thing, though, because
they were being, they were, they were currently revolutionaries.
Yeah, yeah, they were occupied by the British.
Yeah.
Well, so they would want people in the modern day to have the weapons.
They need to fight off the British as well.
Right.
I think about able to explain what a bad idea that is.
And I mean, you got to think too, what's the third amendment?
Can you name it right off?
No, is that freedom of the press?
You don't have to house soldiers.
Oh, that's right.
Yeah.
So like, that was also a big problem for them back then, but like, that's
not like, no one today is like, thank God for the third amendment, right?
I mean, it kind of reminds me of the Bible where, especially if you look
at the first group of, uh, Commandments, yeah, that like Moses brought down and
then got angry when people were worshiping the golden calf and threw them.
Seven out of eight of them were about how to worship God, right?
Right.
Well, like a bunch of them were weird specific things that only made sense
in the context of Bronze Age, like Middle East.
No fucking sculptures.
No fucking sculptures.
When they're, when they're worshiping the bronze calf, I think they're also fucking it.
Wait, what?
You're more of a Bible scholar than I am.
Am I missing it?
I have not heard this.
I wouldn't be surprised.
A lot of the Bible talks about people doing sex in bad ways and why they're bad.
Let's see, uh, how many of these are about how do you, whoops, how to worship God?
First one, second one, third one, not fourth, fifth or sixth or seventh or eighth
or ninth or tenth.
Okay.
So only the first three are about how to worship God, right?
Are there's the, the first or second draft of the commandments?
Actually, the first draft was like 30 commandments or something too.
Yeah.
I mean, no one knows what the first draft was, right?
No, they had it.
Like, uh, wait, maybe I'm misremembering, but I'm pretty sure.
Cause he came down off the mountain and saw them worshiping the calf and smashed them.
I mean, as I'm assuming they were the same commandments.
He just had to go up there and chisel them out again.
There was a second group of commandments at one point.
I forget if those were the ones he broke or, but like, definitely there's
30 laws that God wrote that are actually written down in the Bible that like nobody
focuses on.
Yeah.
Anyway, so how does the motif of our, um, the layers of biases that keep us from
understanding strangers properly?
How does that tie into that case with that woman being pulled over a few years ago?
Um, or is that spoiled book?
It, well, it does a little bit, but, uh, I don't think, I don't know.
I, I have a hard time with spoilers where I don't really tend to care about them that much.
I, this is also nonfiction.
So I said, yeah.
I don't think that this will spoil anything.
So there were a bunch of things going on, uh, in this particular case that Gladwell
explains with like side stories or explains the history behind and, uh, coins,
terms for new cognitive biases.
And that was what I found really fun, like the default to truth.
Um, wait, so what is the default to truth?
That was, uh, the people being bad.
Oh, right.
I'd never even finished that one.
That one.
So like back to the Bernie Madoff guy, that guy's an outlier.
Um, as a cooperative species, the theory anyway is that the reason that we tend to,
we tend to believe people.
That was it.
Um, when they've done a bunch of these psychological studies and keep finding, uh,
in historical examples that people are more trusting than they actually should be.
Huh.
When, uh, which is not like, you know, the, the general,
where are these studies done?
Cause I know a lot of Eastern European countries have very low trusting of other people.
Well, yeah.
I mean, it's probably also, um, cultural and whatever, but like, it's more about,
um, they talked about like court cases, for example, or like, if someone tells you
something, uh, you tend to believe them.
God, I wish I hadn't believed my surgeon.
You defaulted to truth that I did.
Well, like, yeah, that's, that's kind of interesting cause something I've noticed
about rationalist cultures that we're also a really high trust culture as well.
But, um,
cause we all cooperate in prisoners, dilemmas.
Yeah.
Well, the thing is in your particular case, I don't think your doctor was defecting
in a prisoner's dilemma here.
I think that either they had misread it before they walked back into the room to
give you the number.
Oh, I'm sure he knew he was lying.
I would lie.
Well, I think because this is my assumption too.
Having now had to interact with people that are, um, a lot of times.
A doctor or someone will know what is for someone's greater good.
Like when you have a kid and they don't want to get a shot or whatever, you tell
the kid, Oh, don't worry.
It'll only hurt a tiny bit.
It'll be fine.
Oh, and it turns out it's going to be a little pinch.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And it turns out, you know, sometimes the kid really gets hurt pretty bad, but it
is for their benefit.
It is you lie to the kid in order to get them to do the thing that is better for
them and that if they were as smart and knowledgeable as you, they would want to
do as well.
Uh, and so I think he saw the stuff and was like, yeah, this guy obviously is going
to be a lot better off after he has the surgery.
But if I actually tell him what the recovery is going to be like, he might not
go through with it.
So, you know, I'll just lie to push him to go towards the right direction is the way
I see it.
My parents are just like, yeah, he's just a, you know, money grubbing scum sucker.
Just wanted to get you under the knife to collect his paycheck.
And I'm like, yeah, well, you come from Eastern Europe.
So I find their hypothesis is more likely than the fact that he was thinking that I
should lie to my patients to get them for the greater good, for the greater
good, because that's where I go with, because I don't want to, because you're
not, you know, some stupid kid.
And like with, like in the, in the event of a vaccine hurting more than you
thought it would, you know, if it bruises your arm for a couple of days or
something, as opposed to being a light pinch for a second, like kids need surgery
or sure, but like, and to run with that easy example, like you still get all the
benefit, right?
If he lies to you, but your recovery time and you subsequently injure yourself,
then he's, then he's just hurting his patients.
That's the problem.
Yeah.
Right.
So like that, that is so obvious that I can't believe that that wouldn't have
occurred to him if he's been doing this for a long time.
And like, when you're, when you're lying to a kid to get a vaccine, you might
have to bend the truth or whatever to get them to do the thing that's actually
for the greater good.
Whereas if you're an adult, you can make a fully informed decision with her, you
know, like that's up to you.
And if he had said, if he had said the recovery time was going to be a year, you
would have said yes.
Yeah, I know.
Like, so I completely agree with you.
It's just that I now have met a number of people who are like, yeah, people are
children, you can't always trust people as rational, uh, actors.
And that has been my experience experience as well to some degree.
So I am, I am more treating people now like they are irresponsible children than
I used to.
And so that is why I see where the doctor is coming from.
I got, I'm my, my top hypothesis on this is what is, uh, there's a, there's a word
for it, never attribute to malice that, which is explained by stupidity or which
can't be, yeah.
Well, that's, I mean, I also, so like, he might have just been hung over that
morning when he was telling you, yeah, a couple of weeks, he'll be fine.
You know, like, I mean, it, that, that strikes me likely, more likely than him.
Like, yes, I've got this elaborate lie.
I spend all my patience.
I've been, I've been practicing for 25 years.
He probably just tells all patients the same thing.
Yeah, two weeks, you'll be fine.
Right.
And no one's gotten mad at him yet.
Uh, I don't know.
The problem is, what am I going to do?
Like I'm considering a malpractice suit, but it's just his word against mine.
There's nothing in writing.
And is it even malpractice to lie about recovery time?
Uh, well, that's, that's up to a lawyer.
I would say, yeah, especially if you're doing it regularly.
If like, if he actually, you know, if you have proof that he intentionally lied
to you in order to try to, yeah, well, if you could talk to other patients of
his been a surgeon for a long time and he knows what recovery times are actually
like, especially because, you know, when I went in after six weeks and told him
like, yeah, it's been three times longer than it should be.
I'm still not great.
And he was like, oh yeah, it's usually takes 12 weeks, sometimes six months.
I was like, you motherfucker, maybe he, you goddamn piece of shit.
I mean, I, again, I wasn't there for the conversation.
Is it possible that like, what he meant was that like it, the actual wound will
heal in that amount of time, but like the amount of time that the pain will go away
will be much longer.
That's possible.
It's just two weeks, but you'll be, you'll be delicate for six months.
Could be.
I at the very least, and that's, I mean, I wish I would have gotten it in writing.
I've never had some very serious surgery, but I've had minor surgery.
The packet, like he literally told me, yeah, I got a packet and the packet said
almost nothing in it.
Certainly didn't have any time frames or anything.
It says, uh, listen to what your doctor told you in it.
So that's useful, but no, he like, I asked him, I like to work out.
It keeps me like mentally healthy as well as physically healthy.
This is important to me.
When can I start lifting weights again?
He was like, you could probably start, you know, lifting some lighter weights
around week two or three, which is when the PA went in, uh, to take my stitches
out three weeks later, he was like, are you fucking kidding me?
You're, are you lifting weights?
You shouldn't lift anything over 10 pounds under any circumstances.
That is a lightweight.
Yeah.
That's, you know, that's a gallon of milk.
Yeah.
That's, that's disappointing.
Less than the gallon, more than a gallon of milk.
No, but gallon milk is surprisingly heavy.
Yeah.
And some people like, I can't lift anything over five pounds.
It's like, I watched you lift that jug here.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, yeah, that's like, I'm sorry, we are way off track.
We are, but keep us surprised of that.
Cause if you feel like it, it's your personal medical shit, but, um,
it was related to default to truth.
It's true.
I, I am a, like, as long as we're anecdotally giving examples, I think I
mentioned this before, I am stupidly gullible.
And I'm, I think less so now, but like in the, in this, I think it's maybe another
just truth of how our brains are wired for me in the context of understanding a
sentence, like just to parse it correctly in my brain for the time it takes me to
do that, I believe the sentence and then I analyze it a second later.
But for the time it takes me to hear it and process it, I'm, I'm just taking
it in as like, this is true.
And, uh, I mean, someone could say something completely outlandish.
I'm trying to think of an example.
Just there's, I mean, it's not in the last couple of weeks, you know,
someone say something insane and I'd be like, wait a minute, you had me there
for a second and they're like, they were clearly making a joke.
And I wish that happens to me a lot too.
This would be better if I could think of an example.
It's just bad.
I'm just bad at like telling when people are joking.
I was kind of depressing when I was with Melissa, she was always this kind of
personally like everyone's lying to you.
Everyone's trying to screw you.
It's like, no, everything's fine.
People are good.
Even if that's true, I think I'd rather believe that it's not because you're
happier.
Yeah.
And also I don't think it's true.
She wasn't a very happy person overall, but kept proving herself right and me
wrong.
I was like, God damn it.
Well, I don't know.
We eventually had the saying, I got to the saying, we're like, what went wrong?
I expected anything more than nothing from someone.
That was my error.
Well, and it seems like if you take that lesson to heart, you end up the kind of
person that she is.
Yeah, there's a kind of like self-fulfilling prophecy, like it's true.
Yeah, your asshole, you can tell yourself that it's okay.
Cause everyone else is an asshole too.
Yeah.
And that's how society spiraled downward.
Right.
But, but I think that they're factually incorrect.
Like a lot of people are genuine and cool.
Yeah.
Like what?
Is she going to say like, oh yeah, Mr.
Rogers, he was totally raping people and, you know, and had a body full of or had
a basement full of bodies.
Well, I also noticed at the time that my surgeon was wearing a gold crucifix, like
underneath his scrubs and all that.
And I was like, that's kind of weird, but whatever.
He's got a Eastern European name.
They're very big Catholics over there.
Maybe, and now I'm like, not going to trust any fucking doctor who's wearing
crucifix under their scrubs.
Cause if you're that into Jesus, I don't know if I can trust you.
How big was this thing?
Average sized?
I don't know.
Like that's two and a half inches.
That's a super common trinket.
Something I'd like you to trust.
I mean, as opposed to over your scrubs where it's hitting patients in
the face when you bend over.
Something I've learned to trust is people's ability to compartmentalize.
Like you can be a very good doctor and then also be religious.
And because you just don't, like those are non-overlapping magisteria.
I know.
And I agree.
It's something that I struggle with too.
I like, I do work with some, you know, I work in cancer research and there's
people that know about like way more than I do about like the mechanisms of tiny
cells and how you treat very complicated cancer.
And then also like believe in supernatural shit when they go home.
I guess I kind of reminded myself of that quote from Vonnegut where he says, I
think it was Vonnegut, if you don't want people to be racist, don't send them
as children to areas where people of a different race are trying to kill them.
Which was his commentary on war.
But, um, you know, you have one bad experience and right away you latch
on to something that you already had sort of a, uh, a predisposition against.
But so you're acknowledging that cognitive failure.
And then you're saying right up, I'm not going to work with a surgeon with a crucifix again.
Yes.
I'm, I'm leaning into it, but hopefully I will find counter veiling evidence
that will bring my, my risk assessments back down to where they should be.
I hope so too.
I mean, I, I would, I will update myself incrementally.
Very well.
There's something to be said, at least for being self aware about when you know
you're being irrational, um, back to Sandra blind.
Um, there's a section talking about suicide in this book where, what did they call it?
I'm trying to remember the, the phrases that he coined or the, yeah, the idea
about suicide being, uh, coupled.
That was it.
So I think, I don't think he actually coined that.
I think this is a psychological term, but coupling is where certain behaviors or, uh,
yeah, certain behaviors are coupled to certain environments, certain contexts.
Uh, they talk about a bunch of other cases in which behaviors are coupled.
Um, and suicide is coupled and it is really difficult for people to wrap their
heads around it though, because especially, unfortunately, like social workers,
uh, and like mental health, uh, people that are in the mental health profession
as caretakers get to know these people and they don't want to think of this person
as, well, nobody wants to think about a person as an automaton, I guess.
But, um,
So what is suicide coupled to?
Well, the, the history that, um, Gladwell first brought up was town gas, where there
was a, like the type of gas that they used to use in, I think it was Burton
in particular, England.
Yeah.
Um, was it had a high propensity for creating carbon monoxide.
And what the, the like unfortunate, you know, side effect of this was that
everybody had a gas powered oven and they also had these, uh, cars that were made
with, uh, that also produced a lot of carbon monoxide.
So there's a point where every middle class family has a very convenient,
cheap, easy way to commit suicide.
And the thing that they don't think, you know, sorry, you were going to say,
No, it's, it's a tangent.
Go ahead.
Okay.
So the thing that like people don't think about is, well, there's a lot.
It's, it's complicated.
People are complicated.
Uh, women in particular, they pointed out often don't want to leave a mess because
they don't want to inconvenience others.
So you don't shoot yourself or do anything that's going to, you know, you don't
burn the house down.
Um, they also don't want to like, you don't want to just figure your body either.
You want to, a lot of people were like, well, you know, I won't, if I, if I'm
going to die, I want it to be painless.
It's possible.
Like as non-scary as possible, especially if you're already traumatized.
I mean, like it takes a lot of, uh, they were talking about like this, this, uh,
poet who apparently struggled with suicidal ideation or whole life.
And then finally killed herself with carbon monoxide.
But talking about like praising, I think it was Hemingway for having the courage
to shoot himself being like a ticket, like a, I don't have that kind of bravery.
And you know, yeah, but it's like, yeah.
So they're talking about bridges too, where I forget which bridge, but they
built a bridge and there were people committing suicide, jumping off of it.
And they tried to propose that they build a safety net and people were really
opposed to it, even though like they had spent way more money doing like other
kinds of safety precautions for people accidentally hurting themselves around
this bridge, but when it came to, here's like, we're going to put a suicide net.
What do you think?
People voted against it and they were replying people who want to kill
themselves are going to find a way to do it because they're just so distressed.
Like it doesn't matter that, you know, they don't like the idea that
behaviors coupled or I guess the idea that what, what it turns out is that
suicide is often this kind of, uh,
it's a crime of opportunity.
Yeah.
Crime of opportunity.
And then also like, if you get the time to actually really think about it or like,
you can be talked down, like people, it's not really a rational act a lot of the
time, even if you do have suicidal ideation your whole life, like that poet,
like you don't really want to die.
You want to not feel terrible.
I hear when they replaced the gas in, uh, England, the suicide rates went down,
plunged, just stayed down permanently.
It's not like people found some other way to kill themselves.
They just stopped doing it.
Yeah.
There are other ways that are harder and scarier and yeah, the more you limit
access to ways to kill yourself, the less people kill themselves.
And, uh, so yes, Andrew Bland committing suicide was a lot of people not
recognizing a bunch of the warning signs and they talk about the Kansas city
policing as well, which, um,
So what were the warning signs that they missed?
She, uh, had a blog or a, um, a video, a vlog, I guess, a V-log, um, her personal
history was she'd had a really rough time and she had been struggling with
suicide, I think actually attempted it.
Um, and it was in that particular context of the kind of thing that ended
up happening to her, like triggering feelings of loss of control.
Um, is it so, I mean, I'm not trying to defend the cops cause what they did
was awful, but is it also the responsibility of every police department to
go through everyone's blogs and vlogs when they're brought into jail to make
sure they're not going to, that they aren't, they have that suicidal risk?
If I'm arrested, I demand the offending, the, the persecuting officers listen
to every episode of this podcast.
I agree.
This is why we always make them two hours including the patreon exclusive ones.
Sorry.
That wasn't super funny.
Like just us getting attacked by dogs and, um, where's that dog upstairs?
Being a good girl.
No, okay.
Um, so what does that have to do with talking to strangers though?
The, the suicide coupling, I think is that they failed to anticipate what is
actually going on in this person's head.
Yeah.
Well, they, they both failed to understand each other's contexts.
Um, they talk about the Kansas city policing where it makes perfect sense.
Why like, or not perfect sense.
It was actually pretty fucked up, but why the cop behaved the way he did,
because the way they were training cops was this very specific, uh, algorithm
of looking for any small example, like any small deviance in order to pull
somebody over to look for hard drugs, uh, weapons trafficking.
It's like, this was the way that cops, like we're catching up many more
of the larger criminals, but unfortunately what it ends up doing like the side effects
when you take it outside of the context of Kansas city is cops will react
to their biases.
So they're told things like look for suspicious people.
So a white cop finds a black person, uh, you know, failing to signal a turn.
Uh, he noticed that her license plate was out of state.
Like there's a bunch of things that apparently, um, a cop will notice that's
just a little bit weird and it'll be an excuse to pull somebody over and to
like scan for drugs or, um, weapons.
And Sandra Bland just happened to have a bunch of things that looked weird
from the outside, but then if you actually knew her life story, it was like,
she had just moved.
She was like about to start a new job.
Um, and the other thing was that, uh, they, they said that she reacted in a
way that was, or she was mismatched, I think was the word they were talking
about, uh, a couple of chapters about people who were mismatched.
That was one of the major points of the book where the way people behave doesn't,
uh, trigger the right like, oh, that's a, that's a, this kind of person or like,
that's a, that's the way that this kind of person acts.
Sandra looked, um, belligerent and angry, but she was incredibly depressed.
But, uh, it's just that like, culturally, we have an idea of what a depressed
person looks like and it looks like someone who looks very sad and is very
submissive, not somebody who's freaking out.
So it was the main thesis of the book that we're just really bad at talking to
people we don't already know?
Yeah, I mean, um, we're bad at knowing people.
It's, so going back a bit, like when I heard the title of the book, what I thought
talking to strangers was going to be about was more of a how to guide.
Um, does he not have any how to advice?
No, it's, that's, that's not what it's about.
It's about, um, the ways that we consistently fail to read others.
And that's cool because, uh, I've read a bunch of how to talk to strangers books.
It's a topic that I'm interested in because social things never like came naturally to
me, so I've had to learn this and I'm always trying to find more advice.
But there's also a bunch of books like that out there.
There's not really a lot of books like this where this is a book saying,
hey, your intuition is really bad actually.
It's, um, you know, talking about the, uh, mind reading fallacy and, uh, the typical
minding fallacy and then some others that are much more specific that I think are,
we're useful to have learned because it's one of those books that like once you,
almost every chapter gives you a new kind of mental framework that you can look around
and now you're just seeing it everywhere.
You know what I'm talking about?
Yeah.
Um, and there's more than I've brought up to some of them were specifically, uh,
things that you can, you know, point back in retrospect to the Sandra Bland case and
realize what the cop did wrong and, uh, how people, the way people talked about it after
the fact was wrong.
And so is this a book that I want to avoid because it's really depressing?
I think not.
Um, because it sounds like it's all about just how it's very hard to connect with anyone,
which is kind of a, no, that's not the, uh, these like thesis or the premise.
It's not about connecting, being hard.
It's more about, um, people making snap judgments and especially us having these
cultural ideas of what like a liar looks like, for example, that are wrong.
Okay.
But, um,
Well, we're starting to run low on time, but did you want to come back again in next episode
and like summarize some of the ones for us so we can know better what, uh, what to,
what our biases are and what to look out for when we're talking to strangers?
Oh, sure.
I can do a quicker sort of just, uh, here's this term and it means this.
If we want to do that, I just, uh, kind of,
I mean, if you think that would be interesting.
Well, I definitely think it's interesting.
But, uh,
because it sounds like there's many chapters in this book and I'm like,
it sounds almost like every chapter has like one, another cool thing that like,
I guess,
if we knew about it would, would it reveal something about society and how we're doing
things incorrectly?
Yeah, I guess, um, I more wanted to kind of just make a teaser trailer for this book
because I do think that it's a worthwhile book for reading,
especially that might be interesting to rationalists who care about cognitive biases
and psychology.
But, um, sure, I could definitely do a much quicker summary of like,
you know, just a bare bones kind of point by point.
Cool.
I think that sounds really interesting too.
Yeah.
So if you guys would be interested in it,
it's just a side, let's plan for that then.
Cause yeah, that would be awesome.
Cool.
Well, I'll start out with a, um, I don't know,
I think maybe an easy one, an interesting one.
This one came up on the anthropic principle episode,
but it's not about the anthropic principle itself.
So even our listeners get into rabbit holes on the discord,
Koi said, uh, uh, Koi quoted just saying,
even if I believe that a Christian God exists,
I still wouldn't go to church.
And he replied, and Koi replied with,
have you heard about hell?
And why weaker, uh, jumped on that saying,
yeah, that claim sounded extremely irrational to me.
I understand that God is evil,
but we are talking about eternal suffering and bliss here.
I would 100% make it my life's goal
to convert as many people as possible.
Uh, did you have any sort of comment about that?
Um, well, first of all, you're assuming context of,
like the thing is, I didn't say anything about hell.
Yeah.
All I was saying was if like a supernatural being who
had the traits of the Christian God existed,
I wouldn't want to worship him.
And like by talking about how I would feel about it
and what I would want to do about it,
I'm not necessarily saying that like,
I guess this is something like, yes,
under like threat of literal torture,
probably I would like, you know,
fuck up on the trolley problem or shoot my best friend, you know,
but like it's more, I was trying to make a point about
the fact that I think that it's a terrible idea.
Like I wouldn't be the kind of person that's like,
man, I wish, you know, it sucks that God doesn't exist.
I don't believe him, but I wish he did.
Like, no, I don't.
And my response to Koi would be like,
yes, I have heard about hell,
and that's exactly why I think that God should be overthrown.
I mean, yeah, like the thing I'd really want to do would be go kill him.
Yeah.
Get together, you know, there's more of us than him and hell.
But like, I don't know.
I kind of think it's a moral duty to fight God at that point.
This is something that makes really fun fiction.
Yeah.
But also like, still know that this has been defined again,
like when you're talking about eternal suffering versus eternal bliss,
what does those words mean?
Are you talking about eternal wireheading?
I don't think that eternal suffering could even be a thing that exists,
because just the way that we work, people get used to anything.
Yeah, but if God's all powerful, we can find a way.
I think Bart Simpson made it.
What if God's all powerful?
I mean, like, sorry, what?
Bart Simpson made that joke,
like when you just get used to the pain, like easing into a hot bath.
I've got two quick thoughts on the like,
have you heard about hell response?
Like, one of them, that's why it's my sort of go-to,
well, not go-to, that's one of my things when I consider the,
I just had to work for it.
What's that thing where you should believe because it might be true?
Oh, um, Pascal's wager?
Thank you.
Yeah, Pascal's wager.
Like, going to church and saying all the right words isn't enough.
Like, and it's also not just enough to like, choose like,
oh yeah, well, I'll just choose to vaguely believe and, you know,
try and be a good Christian.
It's like, no, no, no, like, you got to pick the most evil,
hardcore, like, devil God, because that's the most addictive one
who won't reward your nice thoughts and trying.
You've really got to go like, gung-ho with it.
So like, it's not going to be enough to go to church and, you know,
tithe 20%.
You got to go like, full jihad.
And there was a, I plug a movie that's from 2010
that I just saw last week called The Invention of Lying.
It was, the premise is somehow society is almost exactly like it is now,
but people can't lie.
Like, it just, that they just don't say things that aren't true.
It never occurs to them.
And it's, it's...
Until Ricky Gervais figures out how, right?
He just, it occurs to him to ask for more money out of his account
than he had before.
And they're like, oh, there must be a glitch with our system.
It says you only have 300 bucks.
But yeah, here's the 800 you wanted.
And so he can, he can tell anyone anything and they just believe him.
So he's at the bar with his friends trying to convince them,
like, because he doesn't have a word for lying or what he's doing.
So he, he's like, okay, well, I'm black.
Oh, well, I guess I can kind of see it.
I'm an Eskimo.
Oh, cool.
Yeah, you know, that's awesome.
I invented the bicycle.
No way.
Like, so it, he's doing, he's doing that.
And then there's this really sweet moment in the movie
that actually made both me and Rachel emote, which was his mom's dying.
And she's like, I just don't want to, you know, lie in oblivion forever.
And he's, and recounting is actually emotional.
He's holding her hand and he's telling her, you won't,
all your friends will be there.
He'll be young again.
You can dance, you know, you'll have a nice house.
It's, it's going to be fine.
And because lying doesn't exist, she believes him.
She dies very warmly and peacefully.
But the doctors and nurses over here and he's like,
how do you know these things?
So then he's like a prophet.
And then he goes off and he's trying, like, then there's like,
you know, a group of people around his house, like a hundreds trying to,
you know, learn about this, what he knows about the afterlife.
And he doesn't handle it in the most rational, savvy way,
but he does it kind of funny.
He, for some reason, invents from whole cloth that there's an invisible
man in the sky who causes things to happen.
And if you're nice and you don't try and screw up and you, you know,
don't kill anyone on purpose, then you get to die and have a nice mansion
and all the flavors of ice cream and all this and that.
But the, when he's pitching the idea and explaining about the man in the sky,
which just, you know, my, my rationalist's tearing this apart is like,
you don't actually need that.
They'll believe whatever you say.
You can leave the man in the sky out of it.
Right.
But when this is relevant to the Koi's reply here, they're explaining,
yes, he's responsible for everything that happens.
Wait, so when my mom got cancer, that was his fault.
And when my, you know, when I hit that dog or whatever, that was his fault.
And it's like, yes.
And it's like, we got to kill this bastard before we've got,
we've got to stop this bastard before he kills us all.
Yeah.
And someone from the crowd shouts that.
And I think that's a completely reasonable response.
Yeah.
Um, yeah.
Like from, from, from the ground up, it's an insane idea.
Right.
And yeah.
So the, the response is, yes, let's, let's overthrow this terrible thing.
But if you can't, then yeah, I guess knuckle under.
I'm again, that reality would be the worst thing ever.
And it was never clear to me why Satan punished people.
Right.
Because Satan hates God too.
Yeah.
Right.
I'm sure there's some vague interpretation of that in theology, but like,
is it just because he's super, super evil?
Like, I don't even know where the fuck that came from actually.
Like that's not in the Bible.
Satan wasn't even Satan in the Bible when he's first introduced.
They just, he's just the other that comes and talks to God and is like, oh yeah.
Well, I don't, I think that the fuck was it?
Job.
Job.
Yeah.
I think Job would curse your name if you, you know, killed his family and all of his
animals and covered him in boils.
And God thought like, you know, bet on, let's fuck this dude up.
Yeah.
I feel like I've probably complained about this before, but the thing that I find the most,
like just, or the most, maybe not the most disturbing part of it, but like the one that
just really tweaks me the most is he kills his whole family, his wife, his kids.
And then it gives him a new wife and kids.
The better life and kids.
I should be glad, Job.
The most annoying part of that is that if you know everything, you know what's going to happen.
And you just, you don't need to do the horrible thing where you, where you torture the person
and say that it'll work out afterwards.
Like this was, this was pre New Testament where he didn't know everything yet.
That really makes me wonder about like whether the people writing the Bible think that
like, is that what they thought people care about?
Like, or did people, I don't know.
It's just like, there's a wife and kids.
People were very different back then.
Here's a generic wife and kids.
Well, already a new one from Amazon Prime will be here in two days and your life will be just
the same as it was.
It's like, you don't, you don't, that seems very inhuman.
And I think that people weren't that different back in the day.
Like people formed attachments with their children and spouse, right?
Or like.
Also, I believe there is some, some controversy as to whether the original ending of Job existed.
That it just clashes so much with the rest of the book.
It seems like the.
Like he gave everything back.
Yeah, it seems like the message of Job is just, you know what, God can do what he wants.
And that's all there is to it.
You don't get to question or wonder.
And then at the later point, someone put in, but because he was so faithful to God,
he got everything back.
He was rewarded.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Now that definitely sounds like a retcon.
A lot of the Bible is very much in line with the, because God is an anthropomorphized force of
nature.
I mean, if, if you are a bronze age, Israelite, wondering why like, huh, I'm the only survivor
from this flood that wiped out my whole village.
And like, what, why did that happen?
I guess God just does whatever the fuck he wants.
So I, the thing is, I'm a little torn on this because I like to talk a big game, right?
I absolutely like my fiction to be, we have to murder this God.
And I want to say I would be on that side too.
But on the other hand, like, if I was actually living in Nazi Germany, I don't know if I would
like run out in the streets, guns blazing first time I saw a Nazi patrol to take him down.
I, I.
You would engrace yourself with Hitler personally so you could take him down yourself.
Right.
That was actually the analogy I was going to bring up too, where I'm like, because this is
God in hell and whatever, like it's easy to abstract about it.
But it's like, what if it was the same thing about like, oh, you're going to go kill Hitler?
Have you heard of gas chambers?
Yeah.
I'm like, it almost seems like a non sequitur to me.
I'm like, but what if a bad thing happens?
Yeah.
I'm like, no, that's the point.
I'm trying to stop the bad thing.
I think it would be, I would probably be at the very least you should say, you know,
I'm going to pretend to be a believer and secretly work against God in the best way I
can to hope to someday take him down in the future.
But I certainly don't think anyone should be out there like, you know,
I'm 100% making my life's goal to convert as many people as possible.
You know, it would be my life's goal to convert people to the cause of sub, you know,
secretly taking God down.
God would be wise to that.
I mean, if he knows everything, God's OP.
It's just not fair.
I mean, at this point, we're talking about fantasy worlds.
Exactly.
I mean, I'm more like, I was trying to assert that my values
totally are more like the this is terrible and shouldn't exist.
Yeah.
Like I'm not saying that I wouldn't cave to torture because I'm amazing.
I don't know.
I've never been tortured.
I probably would.
I probably would crack like anybody else.
My general thought.
That's another thing that this is going back to the story real quick.
There's a chapter about torture and talking to strangers and about how you can break anybody.
Does it say you should torture strangers?
Really want to know a person torturing.
Yeah, but the thing is, I'm kidding.
Well, yeah, it was very much the whole torture doesn't work because you can
torture any human enough that they'll tell you whatever you want to hear.
But they're going to tell you whatever you want to hear.
They're not going to tell you the truth.
They won't even know what the truth is anymore after you break them far enough.
And because I know that my pre-commitment to torture is like,
I will cave at the threat of torture.
I love that in Deadpool 2 when T.J. Miller's cables sitting there threatening him.
Like, I'm going to break your fingers the way they shouldn't bend.
And then I'm going to get some nails or whatever.
And he's just like, okay, I'll tell you everything.
It's like, let's just skip that whole part.
I mean, obviously, I'm going to eventually tell you everything.
Yeah, I'm going to tell you everything.
Why don't I just have all my fingers after I'm done telling you everything?
Perfect.
My, what was I going to say?
Something torture?
Maybe you could make it harder for them, buy your allies an extra day or two,
if that is a thing that might be valuable?
I suppose.
In Deadpool 2, he didn't do that.
But he, you know, it's...
It's also a comedy.
Yeah, it's also a comedy.
Well, one of the things that was a, yeah, we probably should wrap up.
One more thing that was kind of cool, though, or kind of interesting.
Apparently, when, you know, they were capturing various people in various wars.
Oh my God, I can't remember words or things.
But the female soldiers would not cave anywhere easily, like near as easily as the male soldiers,
where it was this like this, probably they said the psychology is if you
are a female soldier, you've had to deal with a lot of shit already.
And you've like kind of internalized this hard ass perspective.
But what they kept doing was when they're trying to get a male soldier to
to spill the beans about something, they would pull a female soldier out and threaten to torture her.
And then they would always cave.
And the women would be screaming at them like, I wouldn't have told, I did my job.
You know, why wouldn't you do your job?
And they would tell you that it was really hard to break the female soldiers.
They would just be like, I'm going to torture your male karma.
And they'd be like, well, he signed up for it.
I mean, I generally always prefer my my like fantasy and heroes and my action heroes and
stuff like that to be women, because like for a dude to be in the fantasy army,
taking up swords or whatever is just like every guy is expected to do that.
Right.
You're not special at all.
But for a woman to be in that position, like there's something unique and interesting
about her that she ended up in that spot or anybody who I guess is marginalized or not going
to be the typical soldier, like it's just an interesting like, but then I also dislike the
fact that it kind of keeps pointing out the fact that this is unusual.
It's not as unusual anymore.
It still is like it's still the norm for I guess most militaries are largely comprised of men,
but it's it's becoming more less of like, especially since so many military jobs nowadays
don't involve direct combat.
Yeah, actually, I think a lot of people that are piloting drones are women.
Oh, they found that they're psychologically better at it.
That's distressing.
Are women more psychopathic?
Um, I forget what the reason was.
I feel like looking this up again, because now I'm not sure if I remember correctly.
I think it was more about a conscientiousness or possibly it was a you know what, I don't even
want to say things like I don't know if I'm saying true things or not or just misremembering.
To put a little on the whole hell thing, I took it at face value.
I think what you just said correctly or I interpreted what you said correctly is like,
this is you're making a value statement, not like what you would do in real life.
Like I thought that was clear.
I feel like it's too absurd to be gentle.
It just seems like the argument of have you heard of you will be, you know,
threatened and hurt if you don't do the things someone says.
I don't think that's a good argument.
That's that's a reason to fight against that person.
It's not a reason to be like, oh, okay, says the guy who still pays his taxes.
Because you don't have a rebellion big enough to do the things that you say you like to do.
I need to secretly start a counter government conspiracy.
This is a conspiracy.
There's the names right in the show.
That's true.
Damn it.
I gave it away.
So Globy over at the subreddit, which actually still exists.
For Globy.
Globy?
I don't know.
Okay.
The discord is where most of the interaction happens, but there is still a subreddit and
some people do still use it.
So you can check that out at r slash the Bayesian conspiracy.
Anyways, Globy pointed out that squirrels breaking things is actually quite common.
This was in response to my saying like how crazy it was that the LHC was
delayed like three or four times.
And one of those times was like a random squirrel getting in some place.
They chew on wires, store acorns in antennas.
Engineers seeing specific squirrels in specific tube might say that it's surprising,
but the LHC is so huge.
It's actually not that weird that something went wrong.
Yeah, isn't it like 16 miles?
So that's a lot of areas for squirrels to poke into.
I am significantly reducing my confidence that that was that unusual of a thing,
but there were like three or four pretty coincidental coincidences.
I like squirrels.
That's my reply.
I like squirrels too.
And also I can confirm that they're really good at, like they're just mischievous.
Actually, I'm a big fan of mischievous animals.
Like I kind of like the asshole animals that my friend has this cat that
expresses affection by coming over and just biting you.
Or like like a gentle biting.
Well, yeah, it doesn't break the skin, but it's also like a lot of people like think
this cat is like a sociopath and actually more like there's a bunch of stuff I already
knew about cat psychology.
But more recently, I was looking up the specific thing where cats have this kind of bro culture
like amongst themselves where they do actually like kind of express affection or intimacy by
like fucking with each other, like gently biting each other, like smacking each other around.
That's also how kittens play, like doing like kind of like a fake wrestling thing,
you know, like grab your friend, give him a noggy, like punch him in the early year,
but like a cat does that to a human.
People are like always like, what did I do wrong?
I knew it.
So when I'm petting my cat, she will occasionally like she'll flop like really heavily and like
just like roll over and like expose her tummy and then you're scratching her tummy and she
enjoys it.
And then she'll grab my hand at the front paws and then just like kick with her back
once and she's doing it without her claws.
She's just doing little kicks and it's really cute.
Then she'll like, she'll do little nibbles too, but she's clearly having a good time.
Yeah.
And like, I think she can get over simulated and then when she's bored, she'll leave or when
she's done with it, she'll leave.
But yeah, she's, she's, she, if you want to, she's kicking to get rid of me,
she wouldn't grab my hand first.
She's just like, kick, kick, kick, kick, she's playing.
My cat does that too.
I love it.
I'm trying to get it on video, but she's very uh, conscientious about cameras.
Yeah.
Really?
I mean, she just knows like, all right, Rachel, she's doing it, pull the camera out,
then Rachel will move and she'll like, oh, I'm being filmed.
Okay.
I'm a good kitty.
I'm a good kitty on camera.
I've noticed that with a lot of animals, they don't like being filmed and like,
I don't think they know what being filmed means.
I think they just don't like having a strange object pointed at them.
Oh, okay.
And also the owners start to get weird.
You're not paying attention to the cat anymore.
You're paying attention to the object.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
This is over on the Discord.
More dino mail.
The doof.
Called a Discord.
I noticed that too.
I wasn't going to find it out, but now it's pretty great.
From now on, the Basing Conspiracy Discord is called the Discord.
Perfect.
I read this to Matt's comment.
Yeah.
And I thought it was a lot of fun.
Yeah.
To me, the great filter, the biggest one, and just my,
before we dive in, is awesome one.
Mine's super boring.
I'm going to say eukaryotic life is the biggest filter as far as I'm concerned.
There's probably planets out there covered in slime,
but they're all, you know, single-celled and boring.
Or just one big chain of amino acids, right?
Just one big goop pile.
What, the cube from D&D?
Oh, the gelatinous cube.
The gelatinous cube.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Anyway.
So Matt brings up...
Sorry, Matt.
We're Denimale.
It's a public name.
Okay, cool.
Matt Denimale.
Yeah, there we go.
I wouldn't have outed his username.
Yeah.
Wants to bring out his favorite candidate for the great filter,
because we talked about the great filter briefly in that episode as well.
Oil.
It'd be incredibly difficult to bootstrap a technological civilization without oil.
Maybe impossible.
The only way oil happens is if a very specific set of geological
circumstances are met.
You need a certain rate of deposition, deposition?
I think it's deposition.
Deposition, okay.
Of organic matter, coupled with a certain rate of erosional
deposition from landmasses.
And for that to happen, you pretty much need a certain level of weather,
enough that they're steady erosion, but not so much that you have
repeated massive erosional events that destroy your basins.
You need a certain level of geological activity and a pretty specific
temperature gradient on your planet, such that the typical burial process
results in heating up and cooking the organic matter into oil.
You need the right amount of oxygen so that your oil isn't oxidized in
place and made useless.
If all of these parameters are off, your planet has no oil or coal for the
same reasons.
Which, holy shit.
Yeah, it makes a very compelling case, and I like it a lot, because
I mean, people I remember counted with like, well, we could use this.
It's like, yeah, we could, but that's a lot harder.
And that came a lot later after we'd already boost up our civilization.
Right.
Someone brought up whale oil, but there's not that many whales.
There's not a lot of whales.
Not enough to pull out on our planet.
It'd be really hard to farm them enough to harvest their oil to power a civilization.
Yeah.
I just don't think you could get enough from any sort of animal to
run our civilization.
The fact that we happen to be on a planet that's full of basins,
full of just like really easy energy, certainly helps.
So there might be like hundreds or hundreds of thousands of pre-industrial
civilizations out there just kind of stuck with nowhere.
Banging rocks together trying to make fire, yeah.
Yeah.
Poor bastards.
How far could we have gotten?
Well, I mean, before we had oil, we had water wheels, like with the,
we could probably get up to a late medieval level of technology.
Yeah, and like you're assuming that like if they had everything that we have,
the exact conditions, but with no oil, it's again, like another,
here's a weird like coincidence thing, and like you kind of trace it back and be like,
how unusual is this, but.
Oh man, are you taking away all our fun again?
I'm sorry, I have to just do the no fun thing.
No, no, it's like.
I think that it can be, I think that can be, I think that's still fun.
Like for every planet that has all the pre, all the conditions that lead up to like,
say medieval technology, oil is probably, basins of oil enough to power the planet
for a few centuries is probably a smaller percentage of those planets.
Just because of the things that have to be lined up for it, right?
Right.
So yeah, you could get to the comfortable level, or even, you know,
maybe everyone has, you know, I don't know how easy it would be to make,
you know, and distribute batteries or something that could store charge
energy from wheel, from water wheels or something.
But like, even if you got that far, still a lot harder to get to space
without just kickstarting technology that way, right?
Yeah, maybe they do it eventually, but we'll get there first because we got oil.
Yeah, maybe there's some other like really readily available source of energy that's
really common throughout the rest of the universe.
And people think this about us.
Look at those four assholes just burning dinosaur fossils.
They have to dig up dead animals to burn.
Like we just use whatever.
Mostly plant matter.
Huh?
Mostly plant matter.
People always say dinosaurs, but I'm like, it was mostly plant matter.
It's more fun to think of dinosaurs.
All right, fine.
But yeah.
No, your point.
I had no idea that the Sinclair dinosaur was there because oil is quote,
unquote made from dinosaurs.
I literally didn't.
I'm just, my mind's being blown right now too.
Yeah, I was like, oh, that is so morbid.
That's kind of funny.
Yeah, I never, I never made that connection either.
We're burning his family.
Delicious dinosaurs.
Okay.
And the last feedback that we're going to hit today is from quite a bit before this.
MQP says, I'm kind of baffled that none of the people there seem to take the personal
positive part of marriage.
So as I think when we were talking about marriage on,
I don't know if that was a direct topic or if it came up in an episode or something.
We did an anti-marriage episode.
Well, you tried to make an anti-marriage episode.
Yeah, I'm not.
I played middleman and Naveen.
Okay, yeah.
I think it came up again since then.
Yeah.
Anyways, MQ says, the part where you establish common knowledge about the importance of your
relationship by sending a costly signal about it and doing a ritual, which I'm actually now that I,
he mentions it is a really good point, creating common knowledge is both important and difficult
and you can't often just say things.
You have to signal them and signals got to be costly.
MQ says, Enya, I seem to think that it was just society telling you what to think
and thereby worthless.
Damn your doughnut.
Doughnut in my lung.
It's not coronavirus.
I will let him choke and I'll respond to the first part of that, which is,
if I was smart, who commented this?
MQP.
If I was smart, like MQP, I might have put that in my pitch for marriage as to why I'm for it.
Like, if it works for you, it's one of those things, but I'm married.
I love it.
I don't, people keep, like the common question we've been married for less than a year is like,
how's things different?
You guys looking and then leading up to it, you guys looking forward to like,
post marriage and all that.
I'm like, no, it's going to be exactly the same as it is now.
Like, we've had the life that we have now for the last eight years.
What it was, it was like, it was a fun celebration and ritual is not a bad word for it.
We picked and chose the parts of the ritual, like the common tropes of it that we like
and disregarded the parts that we didn't like.
But yeah, I'm on board so far.
MQP.
Within reason responded that a prenup establishes common knowledge between the two people being
married, which usually a wedding doesn't.
And MQP replied point taken, but the common knowledge that I care about is stuff like,
this couple makes most decisions, most decisions together and shares values.
So if you're doing something that impacts one of them,
you should take the other into account.
Not things like what would happen to the house if they divorce.
You know, it says you don't need any legal stuff to accomplish that and I disagree.
I think having real material consequences associated with being married is a reason
why the tradition became powerful and remains powerful.
And if you try to replace it with something that had no consequences,
people would not take it seriously.
And I think that's a good point.
I, whenever I know that someone is coupled, I assume that anything I say to one of them
will be common knowledge between the two of them by the end of the day.
What if you have like a nine person polycule?
That is, um,
Not coupled.
Depends.
I mean, that depends on how close those individual relationships are.
What if you have a business partner who you are much more financially invested with than
your spouse and you're both financially independent from each other?
I would not expect that of a business partner.
If I told something to Stephen and he was in business with someone else that I told him in
confidence, I would be, you know, hurt and think it's a really shitty thing for him to do
to tell it to his business partner.
But I would expect that Rachel would know before the end of the day.
For the record, I've said this before.
Like most things we talk about, I feel like you'll say to the podcast.
So like I, you know, I'm fine talking about it with close people.
But if you're like, Hey, can you keep this between us?
I always do.
That's not between us and Rachel.
Okay.
Well, I literally do not want, if I'm coupled with someone,
I do not want anyone to tell me something that they don't want the coupled person to know.
Because then I either have to keep a secret from the coupled person
or I have to betray their trust.
Yeah.
And so don't put me in a weird spot where like,
I don't know, I can't imagine the kind of knowledge you could have or want to share
that would be, you know, that you wouldn't also share with Rachel.
But, um, I,
Turns out only males have souls.
For the record, like I, I, uh, I had something and now I don't know what's on the record.
So anyway, that's my general thing is like, I, we, we don't really go home and talk about,
like, tell me everything that, you know, was going on with all your friends.
Like, that's even like a common joke among, you know, men, right?
Yeah.
It's like, oh man, Jeff's getting divorced.
It's like, oh my God, why?
It's like, I don't know.
He said he's getting divorced and he didn't want to talk about it.
So we didn't.
It's like, but how do you not know?
It's like, well, we didn't talk about it.
Like I, there are people that I've known forever and I don't know what the least
bit what's going on in their lives.
It just doesn't come up.
Right.
Yeah.
Um, so it, it, we, we don't follow the TV trope of going home and like gossiping
about everyone we know.
So my former boss and his wife gossiped about everybody and like,
it was their favorite hobby, the two of them.
It was kind of bizarre to me because I just don't understand that kind of
gossip culture.
Like there's a difference between a, you know, I prefer radical honesty, but I
don't like the like layers of secrets that gossiping causes.
Yeah.
Where like, one of them would be like, oh man, do you want to hear about this
thing that's happening with your coworker and, and his friend?
And I'm just like, no, the way you're saying it, he's weirding me out right now.
Makes me think that I'd be safe for saying no.
The, your nine-person-polycule comment is really interesting.
I mean, it has me thinking now, like this is the thing that I'm responding to.
There's the couple privilege thing or the like, yeah, yeah.
No, but I think this is like MQP's point.
Like it's, it's easier, I think, to, to establish common knowledge of, of a
couple of pairing because you're often seen together.
You often talk about each other, but when there's nine people, it's much harder.
And I can see it like how having a big costly ritual that you invite everyone in
the community to, I'd be like, oh, okay.
So these nine people are together or like maybe these four and then they're
linked between these two and then these three, like having a big establishment
like that would probably help.
I like rituals.
I almost think like, yeah, maybe having, maybe having big marriage rituals for
more complicated situations would be a better use of those resources.
I like don't hate marriage on like the principle.
It's more that there, there's a bunch of things about it.
First of all, like the, it's powerful and that's why it remains powerful.
And I'm like, well, yeah, but there's a lot of shitty things about it that did
make it powerful and a good strategy, I guess.
If you're like the, you know, claiming a human as property thing or buying a human
with a dowry and then like the whole like, I don't know, there's stuff that made
sense in the context back then that doesn't anymore and still maybe wasn't
super great for all parties involved, women cough back then.
But like, what if I wanted to, why, why is it that like it has to be a couple?
And why does it have to be like in the context of a romantic or sexual
relationship with somebody that you, like I couldn't make this kind of costly
signal with my best friend.
There's no marriage for your best friend ritual.
I think there should be.
But what if I had a best friend who I had, like I was much closer to than
anybody else in my life, you know, like, so that there's some things about
marriage that still bug me and I like being able to point those out.
And it's not saying that like, because I've complained about marriage,
doesn't mean that I hate it and I want to get rid of it and I don't think
anybody else should do it, you know.
And I do think the reason that I'm not bringing up the like obvious benefits
of marriage is because that's not relevant too.
Yeah, that the downsides outweigh the benefits.
If you're Inyash.
Yeah, it depends on what you mean.
I mean, I've been talking about maybe marrying Phoenix, but it would not be
the traditional, there's not going to be a diamond involved.
I don't want my family nearby or a bunch of the assumptions to be made about
like what this means.
Or even the gender roles thing around marriage too is just like,
there's this like, you know, oh, when are you going to have a baby or whatever?
And it's like, Phoenix doesn't want kids.
I kind of want kids, but I don't want to have a kid because dysphoria,
but my other partner wants to have a kid with their body because they like that
idea.
And it would be cool if, you know, we all just co-parented this kid and
I just want to be able to make these kinds of rituals work for me.
And my circumstances and my people, I think marriage is very limiting.
And I, you know, my sales pitch on it for what it worked for me is like,
we don't have the trophy style relationship anyway.
So, you know, we don't fall into the norms of like, well, this, you know,
everything you saw on TV in the 90s and 2000s or whenever you grew up, I guess,
right?
Like we don't do that stuff.
And I wouldn't suggest anyone marry a partner that they're doing that stuff
with unless they really want to have that sort of relationship.
I'd never merge finances with somebody.
That's bizarre to me.
We don't have our finances merged.
Like, why would we?
Beagle that you do.
Well, I suppose they aren't.
But yeah, if things, if things got hairy and she turned into a psychopath,
we might, but like my, uh, like, like right now I, the mortgage is in my name
and I have the payment auto drafted from my account and I've been nowhere every
month.
Like there's, there's no sense and we both have jobs.
Like she spends her money, I spend my money.
Like that, that seems like the easiest circumstance and that's what we have
planned.
If in the future I happen to like earn three times as much as she does or
something, there, it would be weird for us to, you know, I would, I would be fine
adjusting things a bit, but like it, I don't know, all the, all the stuff that
like people like, oh, well, you know, marriage sucks.
Cause, you know, you know, what, you know, I insert trope or whatever.
I'm like, yeah, but just don't do that part.
Yeah.
Like there's, there's nothing that says you have to.
Or like marriage has these benefits.
Well, like, sure, I'm going to, I want to claim some of those benefits for me,
but I just don't want it to come along with the like, and then you are forced
into this weird arrangement that took place in early agrarian societies where
the expectation is like the man works and the woman stays home and takes care of
the kids.
So she's dependent on his finances and that's why we do that.
It doesn't make sense anymore.
Yeah.
So we don't do that part either.
Like I, we didn't do our, or our marriage isn't reading from a script.
Like I think a lot of the, the, there, I think there are legitimate things to
poke at like this is, these are some troubles with marriage, but like
they're not universal, right?
You could say that of, of, you know, well, the problem with any, I don't know,
I think you could pick apart a lot of things in society that everyone approves
of and be like, well, it used to mean this 2000 years ago.
And it's like, so fucking what?
This reminds me of, I think it's the thing that is bugging me about and I'm
sorry about like the, if this is coming off as.
No, you're good.
My swearing, my swearing made it sound like I was annoyed, but I'm just.
No, I mean more like, I'm kind of, I realized I'm bristling at the way that
the commenter wrote the comment.
And it's the same thing about the other comment about a, about hell.
Haven't you ever heard of hell?
Like some of these sound like, I don't know, like this, the analogy that I'm
thinking of is if I were like, oh, I don't want to get a dog because these
reasons and then somebody's like, why do you hate dogs and starts telling me
all the good like, like things that could happen if I had a pet dog.
And it's more like, whoa.
Well, to be fair, I didn't say that I hate dogs.
I'm just saying that a dog wouldn't work for me for these reasons.
And like, I think MQP was replying specifically to me.
And I had said that marriage is stupid and no one should ever get one.
So I was saying no one should get dogs.
I don't know, I don't even.
Yeah, that was probably phrasing it too strongly.
And I think that like probably what you weren't trying to do was tell other
people how to live their lives, but more of just like based on the bad
experiences you have and like the fact that a lot of people don't think
about these things or know that these are the drawbacks that you're taking
on.
Yeah.
Well, because previously I had said there's basically no benefits at all.
And now I have to walk that back a little bit and say, okay, there is the
very costly social signal and common knowledge created in the community
that these people are interlinked in certain ways.
I don't know that it should mean that though.
Well, if it doesn't mean that, then you probably shouldn't have the wedding,
right?
I don't know.
I mean, like, hmm, maybe that.
Yeah, I guess another, sorry, go on.
No, no, go ahead.
Another, yeah, like one of the things that is keeping me from doing a marriage is
that like I worry about all the assumptions that people are going to
make about being married and what it means.
Well, that's kind of the point.
You're supposed to get those assumptions with the marriage.
Even with like dating somebody, everyone assumes that like me and
Phoenix, if they like see us together, an exclusive couple and that we have a
particular style of relationship, but I'm just like,
I don't know if you're ready to hear about how our relationship actually
works or any of this, but like just the fact that people immediately assume
that like, oh, these people are dating and then that means that X, Y, and Z is also
true.
I was like, no, actually.
People assume that a fair bit less nowadays about people that are dating.
Certainly not so close.
Dating market has changed a lot.
I'm just not out meeting a lot of people who tell me what they think.
And if I, they're not telling me there's a great chance I don't give a
like, if they assume that I live in some trophy marriage where, you know,
I have to watch my step or I'm in the doghouse and, you know, I have to do all
the man chores and whatever.
And she's at home, you know, barefoot and pregnant doing the dishes.
Like, all right, cool.
I don't really care what you think.
Right.
It's like, you don't find it annoying if people do like, I don't know.
Like, what if you were like out of the bar and you got a text from Rachel and
then somebody's like, oh, I was your wife texting you to come home.
I've had moments like that.
Doesn't that annoy you?
No, I, I, really?
Or is it more that you just kind of laugh and you're like, oh, you poor fool.
It's more that.
And, and it maybe sounds condescending.
And maybe it's my, you know, the, I would say it's something to do with, you know,
there's certainly fewer filters I have to go through with people because my,
my relationship is more traditional on its face, I guess.
But like, I do have a gentler version of like, oh, you fool.
You think that's what this means.
I'm, I feel so bad for you.
And, you know, Rachel will tell me if she'd be out with her friends,
they'll go out after work or something.
And, you know, she, like one, one of them has to like lie to her husband and say that they're
working late because they, he likes that she comes home after work and whatever.
And it's like, that's insane.
Like if Rachel wants to go out and do whatever the hell she wants, she can do whatever the
hell she wants.
Like, you know, what we do is to keep each other in the loop.
You know, just because it's polite, you know, if she didn't come out after work one day,
I'd be really worried.
But if she said, I'm going to go out with my friends and be drunk all night and get a lift
home, like go nuts, have fun, be safe.
Um, it's, I, so yeah, in the, in the context where people do say those things, I have, I
have more of the like, I'm sorry, your relationship sucks response rather than like,
I'm annoyed that you're making assumptions about me.
Um, I don't know.
I'll keep my eyes peeled for any time where I feel any annoyance at these judgments,
but it probably doesn't help that I rarely, like, I don't get out that much.
So maybe it's more that like, when I have been in relationships where it was like more
I don't know where I didn't look as queer as I do now.
Um, one thing that I remember kept coming up was like, when I will change my hair, because I
frequently do, or at least used to an hour could a hospital have to be more boring.
But I would have like, I don't know, if I could blew my hawk or whatever it's somebody be like,
Oh man, what does your boyfriend think of that?
Or like, I can't believe your boyfriend let you do that or something like that.
Like I would get that kind of comment all the time.
And I was just like, why do you think that my dating partner has anything to do with
what I do to my appearance?
Like it's just such a bizarre response.
This very well might be a thing that that way to try to police you too.
Yeah, I think this is definitely a thing that maybe impacts women and people who present
as women more than I was starting to get out even though.
Yeah, I think it's shitty on both sides though.
There's there's certain shitty stereotypes from both sides.
Yeah, but as far as like, I don't know as many of them personally since I've, you know.
Yeah, I was asked once, like when is like my brother-in-law asked like,
Hey, when is your cousin going to have or your niece going to have a cousin to play with?
And I was like, not for me.
Like, but I mean, he he's just kind of a bro.
I feel like he's just he was reading from a script.
I think when he asked that, right?
Like, I don't think that he and like, I really didn't care that he asked that said,
if I was asked every time I went out and someone saw my new wedding ring,
like, Oh my God, when are you guys having kids?
I might eventually get annoyed at the repetitive question,
but not at the judge, the assumption on the person asking it.
That said, I know, I know Rachel will get asked once in a while,
like when are you guys having kids?
And that's because she's the woman, I guess.
She's the one that cares about babies.
And then she gets to say never.
And then like, Oh my God, you'll change your mind or Oh, how come?
Or, you know, all that annoying stuff that again, part of my like social filters that I
interact with people who are, you know, I go to I do the people like people like you guys,
or people like my co-workers, which are, you know, programmer rows for the most part,
or like programmer nerds rows.
There's a bro type version.
And they're not really that either.
Programmers.
Yeah, exactly.
So like, there's there's not a lot of like me running around to like the average
person who reads, who gets their life cues from the, the, the life version of TV tropes
and tries to ask you when are you going to do this trope.
So I'm subjected to it a lot less than I think many people would be.
And so I can't say I wouldn't find it annoying if I was hit with it more often.
But as it happens, I'm not and my relationship is fucking dope.
So, you know, that, that should be how it is.
Like if the person I, I, I, I've sold on this before, but like, yeah, I don't know.
Find the right person that makes you happy the right way all the time.
And that's how your relationship should be.
So yeah.
All right.
All right.
All right.
Let's thank our patron.
And while we're, while we're finding the list, I want to point out that, uh,
because we read one of Matt's comments, I bought, uh, my wife and I, which is fun to say,
it catitlated when I say wife.
I bought us each copies of the Gunslinger by Stephen King.
Because they started a new podcast recently called Kingslingers,
where they're doing a, uh, kind of like a, we want more.
We've got worm read through of it.
And this time Scott is playing the Matt and Matt is playing Scott.
To make that less confusing, Scott has read the books before and Matt hasn't.
So Matt's doing the blind read this time.
How far, you know, are they so far?
They're, I think past the first book.
Oh, whoa, that was fast.
Those guys podcast too much.
Yeah, they do an episode a week.
And like the first book's only a couple hundred pages.
So they can keep up.
So like it goes by pretty fast.
I think they did three episodes for the first book, which is,
uh, I mean, not a great strategy.
No, I've only listened to the, uh, inter-episode
because I'm only part way through the first book.
So, uh, yeah, it's interesting.
I've never read any Stephen King before.
And I think it'll be a lot of fun.
I thought it was, I didn't know anything what to expect.
And it's a fantasy series.
Have you read Gunslinger?
No, I haven't.
I know of it.
It's, it's interesting so far.
I don't know what is going on yet.
So I don't have a lot of thoughts on it.
Okay.
But I can't say that it's weird,
but I think it might be in a fun kind of weird.
So.
I think Scott and Mack make anything sound interesting.
I know.
I was listening to their actual like Doofcast podcast
where they were talking about like, it was some, uh, series
of movies that I like definitely don't want to watch,
but I was really enjoying hearing their analysis of it.
I remember when they talked about the Meet the Feebles,
that crazy Muppet movie with a cult following.
And after I heard that episode, I was like, this sounds awesome.
I kind of want to see this.
And then when Matt was over at my place,
or maybe it was the meetup or something,
I was like, so that Meet the Feebles was pretty good, huh?
And he was like, if you're watching it at two X speed.
I was like, oh, okay.
I think, uh, you know, we don't know if the person that paid
them to watch that is listening to our show too.
Probably not.
But that's why I didn't point out the specific movie.
Oh, it doesn't matter.
I mean, so this is just going to be a fact that,
you enjoyed it enough.
Exactly.
They didn't say no.
And it's just a fact that if like they have a platform
where it's like, you can pay us to watch stuff,
they can't guarantee they'll like everything.
What they can do is they'll guarantee that they'll watch it
and that they will discuss it for an hour in change.
And that they will say the things they did like about it.
Yes.
Which I think is really like an asset.
Yeah, it is.
I think they mostly shit on Madoka Magica,
which I found really funny, even though I like Madoka Magica.
I love it.
Oh, okay.
But was that because Scott had to hate tell anime?
Yeah, but I mean, there was also a bunch of things
that they pointed out, like even on not like coming from
as much of maybe an anime background, like
Matt found it to be really creepy how like they were,
you're supposed to be, I guess, like,
to find these like prepubescent girls,
sexualized, like being kind of attractive or like, okay.
Where he having young daughters was kind of like,
On the one hand, I sort of agree with him.
On the other hand, there's a whole cultural thing.
Yeah.
So the thing is like watching that, I didn't even like,
I was like, yeah, you know, Sayaka's Bay or whatever.
But it's just like, when you actually like,
Oh, they're just supposed to represent like actual prepubescent humans.
I don't even think of that anime characters are just fantasy characters.
Like they're not real.
I think I need to keep making that shift.
Like most anime I consume doesn't really have a lot of minors in it.
So that's fine.
Or if they do, they're not doing sex stuff.
But like there's literally watching a show right now
an anime show that is about minors doing sex stuff.
Weird.
Yeah.
So you got to push through like how gross that aspect of it is.
Well, no, no, no, no, because that is like the focus of the show.
So I'm only on episode three.
I was just sold on it at our last meetup by two people we know.
I don't know if it's okay to say their names,
but it's called Darling in the Franks.
Oh, okay.
I've seen that whole thing.
I enjoy that one a lot.
Yeah.
I'm only on episode three and I was like,
Oh, so when they were telling me about it,
they were like, Oh, yeah, the girls are bent over
in their type body suits.
Haha, anime.
And I'm like, Oh, this is literally about sexual trauma being inflicted on minors.
Holy fuck.
Yeah.
Well, Gainex does a good job with that kind of thing though.
Yeah.
Is this, this isn't Gainex, is it?
Uh, or Trigger.
It's, it's, uh, it's either Gainex or it's Trigger,
which is an offshoot of Gainex.
Oh, oh, I didn't know that.
But, um, yeah.
I mean, they're all about deconstructing the tropes of anime anyway.
So like the fact that like they do pose them
in these weird provocative and they have these weird outfit,
they keep making a bunch of jokes about it,
but then eventually like the story gets darker.
And like you realize that like.
Episode two, that's, I mean, I guess it's going to get even darker.
It gets even darker.
Okay.
I'm curious to hear how you react to some things now
that I know you're watching that.
Yeah.
No, I saw episode two and at first I was like,
this is fucked up.
And then I saw episode three and I was like,
it's more fucked up than I thought.
It keeps getting fucked up.
Okay.
And this was recommended by somebody
who didn't watch Game of Thrones
because they didn't like the incest.
No, I watched it.
No, this was recommended by somebody.
Oh, that's a good point.
That's weird.
I, maybe they were tricked into it
because they love anime and then didn't.
I think the thing is it's not like this anime is pro like traumatizing
minors with sex things.
Yeah, but I don't think that Game of Thrones
is really pro incest either.
Yeah, but it's not anti incest.
Game of Thrones is kind of like.
It's not about specifically tackling the topic.
Yeah, which is.
Well, I don't think you're supposed to take away from it
that like incest is sometimes cool.
Right.
But it's not all about like processing the trauma of an incest relation.
Game of Thrones tends not to make value judgments
about like the stuff that it does to the point where I remember
that I was actually pretty annoyed by like a bunch of the rape scenes
because it was.
Here's some rape.
Yeah, like they keep kind of.
Yeah, like throwing it in your face and like trying to be like,
we're Game of Thrones.
We're shocking and adult.
And I'm like, I get it.
Like, can we get back to the plot now and stop just like kind of,
kind of like sexualizing these rape scenes like you.
Okay, we're supposed to like maybe feel bad for these characters
or feel like, oh, this is just a fictional thing
that's happening in this universe where this might happen.
But then I'm like, okay, you keep doing it
in a way that's making me feel kind of gross.
So whoever feels weird and gross right now,
I remember at the start of the very positive push
for the Kingslingers podcast.
So check that out.
I'm looking forward to it.
And which is not at all written by a horror writer.
So there will definitely be no violence or rape.
I don't know what there will be in it.
But I mean, I haven't read it.
I'm sure there's going to be violence.
I assume there's going to be some sort of sexual stuff.
I mean, the guy is called the gunslinger.
If he doesn't shoot that gun at somebody at some point,
I'm going to be pretty disappointed.
Right.
The Chekhovs gun.
Chekhovs gunslinger.
So, yeah, I mean, let's be real, there'll be violence.
But the podcast will be positive.
Yeah, everything on Doof Media is great.
We are not sponsored by Doof Media.
No.
Have we thanked a patron yet?
No, we haven't.
We should do that.
Instead of pimping Doof Media, we will pimp ourselves.
Is it my turn?
Sure.
Okay.
It can be your turn.
Crow Moore is a patron of ours.
He has brought this episode to you.
And we thank him very much.
What was it we were talking about at the very beginning
of the episode?
The coronavirus?
No.
How are we going to tie this in?
There was some kind of...
Oh, about raising our social capital or something.
Right, right, okay.
Yeah, that's the moment of the past.
That's all right.
Sorry about that, Crow Moore.
Crow Moore, thank you.
You're awesome.
And thank you to all of our patrons
who helped bring this to you guys.
And we really appreciate it.
And sorry that we were really off topic this time a lot.
That's true.
We hadn't seen each other in a while.
Yeah.
But I had a great time.
And thank you again to Crow Moore.
And everyone also makes the show possible
and gives us nice new equipment
to keep things sounding nice and crisp.
Yeah.
And can increase our social capital
by telling friends about our episode
or rating or reviewing us.
And in whatever system you get the podcast from.
We also have a subreddit that you can take part in
at the basin r slash the basin conspiracy
or a discord that is linked to on our website the basin
or basinconspiracypodcast.com.
That's right.
Yeah.
So lots of good stuff there.
Awesome, cool.
That's it.
We've been talking for so long.
All right.
Night everybody.
Good bye.
