—
Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Manny Ashbrotsky. I'm Stephen Zipper. I'm Jay Sticky.
And welcome to the Mind Killer. I'm Wes Venza. I'm Manny Ashbrotsky. And I'm David, the rationalist brain on politics.
Yeah.
We are doing a crosscast today.
Mind, brain, Bayesian...
The Bayesian Killers. Conspiracy.
And together we are...
Mumble, mumble.
And I'll form the head.
David's on left leg.
We actually do have five people, and we could totally make a giant robot.
Hell yeah. Well, making a giant robot would take a while.
Super Sentai team.
Yes.
At least.
So anyways, yes, we are doing a cross-pollination podcast thingy. That's not a term.
It's close enough. I was going to say if we hit 10,000 patrons, then we'll do a robot. But that joke has passed.
I definitely don't ever promise that to make a robot.
I want to make a robot.
If we hit that level, I'm prepared to make a robot. Not a good robot. I don't know anything about robots, but I'll make something that looks like a robot.
Cool.
All right.
You know what? I'm going to go with that.
Great.
If we get 10,000 patrons in the next 10 years.
Deal.
All right.
I know how to make a robot that is a Roomba for tabletop. One that does a silly dance.
Great. We're halfway there.
The little car things. I've done some very basic robotics.
We need one large enough to fit at least one of us.
So for like the four listeners we have who listen to the mind killer, but not the Bayesian conspiracy, they're always like this.
Well, yeah.
It's just tangents from start to finish.
We don't have a good script or a strict leadership.
But we usually get to what we were trying to talk about.
So today we're talking about two less wrong posts. First one is priming and contamination.
Yes.
Okay. I guess, yeah.
Wes and David are the hosts of the other podcast, which we'll talk about politics.
I wanted to mention that real quick.
Oh, yeah.
Yes.
News of the day kind of thing.
Did I get to the point too fast now?
You did.
A little thought.
You get at the second place.
This is why you need a good outline.
No.
Outlines are for nerds.
Yeah.
We just wing it and forget stuff like cool people.
Yeah.
Like we haven't mentioned our merch.
It turns out for quite a while.
This is true.
Oh yeah.
David didn't know.
That's all right.
Yeah.
They have merch.
We have a place to bring our dope ass shirt.
It looks great.
You can get the Bayesian conspiracy logo on anything.
Yes.
Well, not anything.
Apparently you cannot get it on mouse pads.
Which is so weird.
Yeah.
Huh.
You'd think.
It's a high item.
I think I give anyone who wants it permission to just download the JPEG and put it on their
own make your mouse pad website.
Go nuts.
Just don't sell it.
If you sell it, I want a nickel.
Yeah.
We want at least 15%.
That works.
Okay.
I went with a nickel because that's what J. Jonah Jameson wanted every time someone said
Spider-Man.
Oh.
Was that from one of the movies?
It was in the first one with Tobin McGuire.
Cool.
Yeah.
Well, there goes my bootleg mouse pad business.
Shut us in.
I guess it's not really if you're cutting us in.
Well, yeah.
But then like then the FBI will get after you because they have nothing better to do with
their time.
Right.
Exactly.
And then somebody for selling fake sports merch, which is actually a fun idea for a
market, right?
Yeah.
I was thinking like use celebrity clothing.
Yeah.
Could be another like whole thing.
Oh, yeah.
Use women's underwear and vending machines and parts of Japan.
And I mean, you could just buy underwear, funk them up a bit and sell them over, you know,
in Ziploc bags over the mail and make 50 bucks a month or how much people are willing to
buy.
I mean, I could wear the underwear.
No one's, no one hasn't got a good, cute Japanese girl.
No, they could tell.
No, maybe only you.
No, it doesn't smell like a cute Japanese girl.
Jesus.
It smells like a big American.
Sorry.
Can we talk about literally anything else?
All right.
Now that we're primed on, on underwear sales, let's talk about.
I felt like contamination was maybe a better segue.
Damn it.
You're right.
Now that we've contaminated the conversation with used underwear sales.
So this post is fun for a couple of reasons.
One, what is the name of this post?
Priming and contamination.
Thank you.
As I said a few minutes ago, I know, but that was so long ago we probably forgot our astute
listeners will have remembered.
Anyway, this is, so this was on the, I forget when this came out, 2007, eight.
Yeah.
So like the state of the research at the time was, and this, I mean, I was taught this in
all the way through college that, you know, if you suggest people, whether it's like spin
wheel and it's fixed to land on like somewhere in the teens or somewhere in the 60s, then
ask them to guess the number of countries in Africa that are part of the United Nations.
Their number will correlate with the number that landed on the wheel or.
Or be a higher or lower number.
Yeah.
If you ask them their zip code and then ask them how many practicing physicians there
are in California, those numbers will correlate.
Whereas if you ask them in the other order, they don't.
I was told all this shit for pages.
I think this is true.
You're bringing up the replication crisis, right?
Yeah.
I think that had more to do with.
That's more like anchoring.
Well, it was also priming, but that was specifically in like social sciences.
Why are we bringing up the replication crisis for people who have not read this post yet?
Because as the title suggests, it's about priming.
Okay.
Yeah.
And priming.
Priming is the idea that if I were to like say, hey, I'm going to go to that place where
I need to go deposit the check.
By the way, when I say bank, what does that mean to you?
You'd be like, oh, the money thing, not the edge of a river.
Right.
Whereas if I, maybe if I had said, I'm going to go chase beavers by your house because
you sent a picture of a beaver over the weekend.
And then as to a bank meant you'd be like, oh, that's where that's the edge of the water,
the body of water.
Yeah.
Now that's obviously like not, if it was just me and you, it's not a reliable sample
size, but the idea was that this was a big enough effect to where you could get people
to connect ideas to other ideas by giving them one idea first.
Yeah.
And like the, like the whole bank thing is kind of just obvious because yeah, you're
going to be thinking about the context of what you guys are talking about.
But this extended to the fact to that some studies said that like, if you prime people
with ideas of oldness, they will start walking slower afterwards, which I mean, at the time
I was like, whoa, that's crazy, our brains are weird.
And then the replication crisis happened, which for people who've listened a while would
already know is the fact that a lot of social science studies before about 2014 or so.
People just didn't bother to replicate them.
And once they try started trying to replicate them, they failed to replicate.
And in the meantime, they'd been like writing books about them.
Yeah.
About what this means for humans.
Including them in, I don't know, discussions where they might be relevant.
Yeah.
So the fact that I know less wrong sequences, that kind of thing.
Yep.
Right.
The fact that I have so many examples of priming just from what I remember from 10 years ago
suggests to me that they didn't necessarily replicate the exact thing with bank or something,
but they did enough similar things across, I mean, decades and different.
In fact, another fun thing about this post is that it's cited heavily.
So like this wasn't just one person misreading one person's paper or even trusting too much
in one person's paper.
It was like the established consensus for decades.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There was there was even those things where if you put a cold cup in someone's hand, they're
going to act more cold to you.
And if you put a warm cup, they'll act warmer to you.
And I think my favorite thing that's come out of the replication crisis is one of the
best ways to predict if something is going to replicate or not without actually doing
a replication is asking a random person on the street.
Does this sound like crazy bullshit?
Not using those exact words.
For things that mostly sound like crazy bullshit, they don't replicate.
Or even just people are like, Oh, yeah, that kind of makes sense.
Those often will even just ask yourself, you know, just this trick, my bullshit, oh, meter.
Now that said, like it's possible to be surprised by results, right?
If you had asked me two years ago, hey, if there's a flu like plague going around in
2020, you think vitamin D will have a surprising effect on the, the impact that it has on a
body?
I'd be like, no, fuck you, you snake oil salesman.
And then lo and behold, it appears to, right?
And the other thing about this too is like, I think it's worth keeping in mind that like,
like I don't blame Eliezer for getting this wrong because it was the established state
of science and his goal wasn't to like become an expert.
Yeah.
It wasn't his research.
Right.
He's citing other research that seemed to have been peer reviewed and yeah.
And I think that, you know, even if you're trying to be as right as possible, like a,
it is still a reliable heuristic to say, let's trust the expert consensus.
And like, I'm doing that with the vitamin D thing.
I didn't review anything personally and I'm not equipped to it would take me a long time
to get good enough.
And how am I going, even if I were to review some of the, the studies that were done, how
do I know that they weren't fraudulent?
Am I going to talk to my own before I believe anything?
Fuck that.
Who has the time?
I think we've been talking a lot because we're in the same room and we can see each other
to West, David.
Did you guys have things to jump in on at here?
So the vitamin D thing is pretty hotly contested.
Somebody's offering like a $100,000 bet that vitamin D cures COVID.
And Scott Alexander is definitely on the other side.
He said, and he was offering to take that bet with slightly lower terms.
100 K was a bit too rich for him.
Cures COVID isn't the claim I heard.
I heard that it impacted the severity of the case.
Yeah.
There's a lot of evidence that people who have bad cases of COVID are vitamin D deficient.
There's not a lot of evidence that it's that deficiency that's causing the severity, but
it does kind of hint at that.
And they, they haven't really had time to write, to run you really good studies on,
on what the causal mechanism is.
Yeah.
Wait, didn't they run a study that were like 100% of the people that they gave vitamin
D had no to mild cases?
I, I don't remember.
I distinctly remember, uh, uh, Sve Moskowitz blog post that said, either this is a real
effect, it's fraud or it's an incredibly good luck and no one has luck that incredible.
Or I guess incredibly bad luck if it's really is a false positive.
Yeah.
Just a bad study.
But then the takeaway to take from this post is that we should wait for that to replicate
once or twice.
But of course, like the other thing with this particular example is that a bottle of 300
vitamin D pills is $8.
Yeah.
And it's not going to hurt you.
Right.
I was already taking it every day for the last few years anyway.
And so when I heard this, this was, geez, sometime over the summer, maybe.
Yeah.
Probably like six months ago.
I bought $80 worth of vitamin D pills and gave them to everybody in my family to take
these please.
I, I gave them out as a stocking stuffers for Christmas.
Nice.
Yeah.
I mean, if they were, maybe it was over Christmas, whatever it was, it was sometime, you know,
the whole year blended together.
But you know, if vitamin D pills cost a buck each, I would have been more inclined to do
more homework or, you know, at least wait for better data or something.
But given how cheap it was, this didn't strike me as like a, you know, if I was being huckstered
by snake oil, well, there's probably some marginal benefits taking vitamin D anyway.
It didn't cost me that much money.
So I, so talking about the replication crisis, I get, I get really mad that that's what people
call it because it's, I call it the bullshit crisis because it is, the thing we're referencing
is we've discovered that a lot of the entire, like the psychology community and psychological
studies are bullshit.
They did them badly with bad information hygiene, poorly designed studies and didn't use methods
that we've known for decades or, or what you should be doing.
Yeah.
And so like, I feel like a couple of episodes, you talked about the, I think you talked about
the post where, where it's basically just to hell, you guys are bitching about how rationalization
is a really bad term because rationalization is the opposite of rational.
Yeah.
So I feel kind of the same way about the replication crisis.
The replications aren't the problem.
Yeah.
Yes.
But it's not, it's not that the failure to replicate isn't the problem.
The problem is the study was bad.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, it's much harder to cite the bullshit crisis in a serious scientific article.
I suppose so.
And I think most people who are talking about it know what it means.
Like, I don't think anybody thinks that replication is the problem.
Yeah.
I mean, that's also true of rationalization though.
Yeah.
I love the fact that he said it's like calling lying, truth-illization.
Truth-illization.
Well, they did call it truthiness.
Yes.
Yes.
Stephen Colbert specifically.
Save the elephant population.
All right.
So I don't have much else to offer on this one other than I think that it's a valuable,
like the, the hysterist, I like the fact that it's left up.
Maybe if they, I haven't read it in the rationality AI to zombies, maybe there's disclaimer at
the top or bottom that says, by the way, this didn't replicate.
If there's not, I would, I would support that, but I do like video of leaving it in because
it's like, hey, look, you can be well informed and wrong.
And that's a perfectly legit place to be.
So.
Yeah.
Likewise.
I appreciate people putting their like confidence intervals at the top of essays and the thing
Scott Alexander does where he has like posted his retractions just on, I think he still
has that on the new site.
I don't know, but there was just a menu link that was like a list of all the things I fucked
up on.
It would be nice if these posts had like a header or something that said, by the way,
this failed to replicate.
Yeah.
Nice.
Yeah.
Brian Dunning of Sculptoid does that every several months, you know, corrections or errors
or whatever it was.
Well, especially because, you know, entry into the rationalist community, people are like,
go read the sequences.
So like this is a 2007 article, but people are definitely still reading it.
I think Eliezer himself is busy doing myri stuff, but you could probably delegate somebody
to do that.
Maybe we should email him.
We can email the folks we talked to who like run less wrong and you know, email Rob Bensinger.
Didn't he have a big, big role in doing the AI to zombies?
Yes, but I don't know.
I haven't read it yet.
AI to zombies, I assume it's fixed or noted at least in AI to zombies.
Maybe.
I have it.
I don't remember it.
Okay.
I listened to the audiobook version of AI to zombies and they didn't say anything about,
by the way, there was no disclaimer in the audio version anyway.
Did they?
I don't remember that either.
Did they include this post?
Yeah.
Oh, they did.
Okay.
I don't remember that and I'm pretty sure I would have if they didn't included it.
So yeah, they probably didn't.
Yeah.
I listened to it this morning.
So per what Jason just said he likes, I'd say like 70% confidence on that.
Okay.
I do want to at least mention that there's still a note of good in here in useful information,
I guess, in here in that our brains do run in networks and activating one concept will
at least somewhat tangentially activate concepts that are strongly linked to that one, which
is, as pointed out in a Scott Alexander on politics recently, a common thing used in politics
where you just associate bad things with the other side and good things with your side.
And even if they don't have anything to do with each other, eventually in the listeners,
an association starts to form between good and our side and bad on their side.
And I think that's most of what you see on Twitter nowadays.
I think that, I mean, a lot of these, this is the sort of thing that, you know, I couldn't
cite a well done peer reviewed study on this, but it sounds like that makes perfect sense
to me and I'm prepared to endorse that.
Well, I mean, I mean, it happened just in the recent Scott Alexander article where he's
like Scott Alexander said a good thing about something Charles Murray said and Charles
Murray wrote the bell curve and the bell curve can be interpreted to be racist.
Therefore, Scott Alexander is racist.
And they didn't say that last line because that would be a lie.
But you know, they let all those associations just go together there in people's heads.
Sure.
Yeah.
And narrative.
You know that nobody who is evil ever says anything right or good.
Yes.
So.
Yeah.
I mean, and maybe just in the, in the effect of reading that sentence about Scott Alexander,
they believe it just in the, just in the process of understanding the sentence.
Are you trying to segue?
I mean, that, that does tie us into do we believe everything we're told, but I don't
know if I'm jumping the gun.
Yeah.
Well, I just, I'm trying to find out whether priming as a concept was replication crisis.
And I think it is just social priming or behavioral priming, having a hard time just
finding a clear answer on Google though.
I know that the, the behavioral priming definitely failed to replicate.
I was the one who were like putting hot things in people's hands or making them think about
old people and they walk slower.
Those ended up being just complete crap.
That, I mean, that, that doesn't surprise me.
You know, like it's, I mean, if you can make people happier just by giving them hand warmers.
I mean, you know, I might be happier if I'm cold and someone gives me a hand for warmers.
Sure.
That's cause I'm not cold anymore.
Right.
I think that one was not replication crisis, the link between temperature and I don't know,
what is it, revealed mood or, or whether you perceive someone as behaving warm or cold
towards you.
I think that's broader than just like, are you holding a warm or cold beverage?
I'd have to.
Like if I'm freezing, I'm probably no way to everything.
I'd have to look into it again, but I actually have a, the West, the wearable that you wanted
to get a amber.
Did you end up getting one of those?
I did not.
Oh, well, I have one.
I like it.
I know.
I tried it.
What is it?
Back when we could see people.
Back when, yeah.
Other humans existed.
I think you let me try it at, at Solstice.
Yeah.
I let a lot of people try it at Solstice.
I probably should be getting some kickback from them for how much I've been marketing.
No, I don't know it.
It convinced me not to get it.
Anyway, what is it?
It's a wristwatch looking device that you wear on the inside of your wrist and you can make
it warm or cold.
I remember that.
Yeah.
Does at least change your, your own internal perception of how warm or cold you are for
some people.
Apparently it didn't work for us.
And they cite some of the other studies about, man, what do they call it?
Cold wellness, like the one about like the beverages and they claim that this device
could have that same result, which I don't know, even just saying it out loud just now
I'm like kind of, but I would want to go like that out to see.
You put it on other people's wrists and then you control how hot or cold it is depending
on how we want them to feel about other people are interacting with.
I have a very strong prior against anything that is, uh, adjective wellness.
Yeah.
Like that's just, that, that just sounds like whoever wrote it or did it or whatever is
just trying to soak a bunch of Karens.
Yeah.
Well, that was the wording of the company that sells the Amber.
It's like, they were citing outlet studies that used like real words.
to me means that like, if my body is at rough homeostasis with like the environment, then
I'm probably in a better mood than if I, you know, if I'm sweltering or if I'm shivering,
right?
Well, the funny thing is this was invented by, uh, students, uh, forget if it was MIT
or whatever, but, uh, there were these students that were working in a really cold lab and
they started trying to figure out something that they could wear to keep themselves warmer.
And they came up with the idea of the product there because, but they all liked this thing.
So it was like, I, I, like the idea of like the people who, you know, made this product
and are selling this product also use it themselves and are getting value out of it, generally
a good sign.
Yeah.
That's what they say about power bands and shit too, though, you know, those people
where they're $60 power bands, but it's a placebo band.
Yeah.
So they are, they're purchasing a placebo effect, which isn't, this is kind of real.
As long as you're selling a placebo effect, I'm fine with it.
If you're selling it to say this will do all this magic to you, then I get annoyed.
That's funny about like the solution about I'm cold at work, like a, I don't know what
the temperature control is like.
There may be it had to be cold, but their solution was like build a $300 watch, not
buy a 25% hand warmer at Walmart, which is what I do.
I think they were moving a lot and they, there was something where they couldn't have electricity.
These hand warmers last like seven, eight hours to put them in your pocket.
Oh yeah.
Those things are great.
And they're, they're cheap.
Yeah.
I used to think of gloves a lot because I don't know my extremities tend to get cold
and I need my fingers for like typing or other things, but like you cover is almost all of
your hand and it just helps so much.
Oh, I got, I used to have these fingerless gloves that like had the top part of the glove
that you could sort of button to the back of it and then flip it forward.
So it would have the finger parts if you wanted them.
Then I lost one of them and I haven't been able to find one that I like as much since
we are getting way off track.
Yeah.
It was all super relevant now.
I tried to shove us into the next post, but you guys were like, also, I just want to say
if the hand warmers last for seven or eight hours and cost 50 cents and the watch costs
300, then getting the watch will, you will get ahead eventually after let's see 300 divided
by 0.25 times seven, 8,400 hours.
So about 30 years of continuous use.
I plan on being immortal so.
And that's assuming it's a day work week.
That's three years of continuous use because 80,000 hours is 40 years.
And that's something they need them every day, not just directly.
Oh yeah, you're right.
I actually really like it for falling asleep.
Yeah, I'm sure I'm done wrong.
I'm sure there's perks.
I'm just, if your solution was I'm cold at work, I've already got a solution for you
and it's super cheap and it's available at your local Walmart.
Alrighty.
I don't know if I should believe you, Steven.
Do I believe everything we're told?
Apparently, this one didn't replicate, but this is the kind of thing that I mean, I
noticed this in my head.
Oh, really?
I don't know if that's because I have heard of this sort of thing before.
I don't remember if I learned about it in philosophy class or from Los Ramos, but I
knew Spinoza was associated with the idea that in order to comprehend the proposition,
it basically means that you understood, like, that you intuitively believe it for the time
that it takes you to comprehend what it's saying and only after the fact do you challenge
it and consider it.
But like, I mean, maybe it's because I'm also a really gullible person because deception
doesn't come, like, isn't something that I, I don't know, I'm less...
We're a high trust community.
I guess, which I, but to the point where sometimes I feel stupid about it, but I think I'm getting
better at it.
It correlates to the high openness trait.
Oh, really?
Because I also find myself being, like, ridiculously trusting and gullible to the point that people
make fun of me for it often.
I did make fun of you the first time I, like, came over your house and you were just like,
oh, hey, you want to just borrow my car?
And I was like, we have literally met for the first time.
I could just drive away with it.
Yeah.
Yeah, you wouldn't.
So the core of this is this following sentence.
One might naturally think that on being totally proposition, we would first comprehend what
the proposition meant, then consider the proposition and finally accept or reject it.
This obvious seeming model of cognition or cognitive process flow dates back to Descartes,
but Descartes' rival, Spinoza, disagreed.
Spinoza suggested that we first passively accept a proposition in the course of comprehending
it, and only afterwards actively disbelieve propositions which are rejected by consideration.
I wonder if this is one of those things, like, where some percentage of people don't
have the ability to visually, like, to visualize objects, like, because this is how my brain
works.
I've done enough meditation to where I see, when I want to, I can notice my thoughts occurring
and I can read something and then, like, I believe it for the time it takes me to read
it.
And I mean, I remember I was listening, it was, I forget, this was, you know, 10 years
ago, like, it was Pendulette or something on a podcast, I don't know, somebody was talking
about Richard Dawkins, because Richard Dawkins was born in Kenya.
And I think, I might have been Pendulette, joked, yeah, he was born at the same hospital
as Barack Obama.
And it took me seconds after that to realize that that was a joke.
Because I'm like, oh, that's interesting, and I'd already had my head somewhere that
Barack Obama was born in Kenya because of how everything was 10 years ago.
But I remember, like, I was like, oh, that's a fun tidbit, I'm like, hold up a minute.
That took me five, 10 seconds to have that flag fly up.
So that, I mean, that's one example that's 10 years old.
But I feel like this just happened earlier this week.
And I was trying to think of an example.
And that's the person that came to me.
I feel like I don't have that internal experience.
Maybe I just...
Yeah, I feel like I don't have that internal experience too.
The post cites, like, some experiment that maybe confirms this.
But I also looked for a replication on this one online and found that a replication
effort actually found the opposite effect.
So at the very least, I would say this is highly contested.
Yeah, or, yeah, like Stephen said, maybe it's just people's brains are different.
So some people do do this and some don't.
Maybe it depends on what sample you got of people you had in your study.
Yeah, I mean, it's still pointing at something potentially interesting.
But I don't think we can actually, like, do anything with it in this current state.
It might also just be a habit that I've ingrained, you know, like, when you, I mean,
if you're reading stuff and you're trying to be a good...
A good, yeah, a good still manner or whatever.
You're like, all right, I'm going to give this person a benefit for the doubt
while I'm reading it and try and make this the best case possible.
And maybe that's what belief feels like in my brain is like trying to make this true.
But I don't think that's true for...
I mean, I don't demand when I'm reading the instructions on a recipe or something.
And yet, like, if it's clear that they meant to say eight teaspoons
rather than eight cups of salt, right?
Like, I should notice the difference.
I think I, like, I must just experience things as mutual.
Like, sometimes I'll read something and be like, yeah, seems possible.
But like, if somebody were to, like, say, do you definitely believe this is true?
I could be like, what I end up saying is, well, I read it in this one book
and it was by an author who generally like does good at reviewing articles,
adding citations, like checking their work.
So like, you know, maybe like 75%.
But like, that's, yeah, that's how I sort of...
Or like, I can read something and be like, oh, it seems like bullshit.
But then it started with the other way too, where it's like something
like 75% bullshit because this is an author, like this is deep actual pro or something.
So I'm curious, have you guys ever played Two Truths in a Lie?
Yes.
When you play that game, do you start from the assumption that things are true
and then try to pick out the ones that are wrong?
Or do you start from the assumption that they're wrong and try to, like, confirm them?
Because I definitely come from a standpoint of like, I start out thinking everything's bullshit
and then I try to figure out which ones are the most plausible.
For those unfamiliar with this, this is, I think often used as like an office icebreaker game
where, hey, meet the new team, tell people, stand up, say your name,
and tell people three things about yourself, two of which are true, one of which is not.
And then people will guess which one isn't true.
The more fun versions of drinking games.
And then try and spot the false.
Yeah, I do the same thing.
So it's quite good for first dates, by the way.
Cool.
Life hack.
If you like your first dates, like you like meeting your office co-workers.
Anyway, yeah.
So basically, this is another one of those that seems to fail to replicate.
So there's not much to really address in the article.
I want to point out that Gilbert Taffer-Rodie and Malone's paper was entitled,
You Can't Not Believe Everything You Read.
OK, that's a good name.
Which also, as the title of the paper, which you are reading is also funny.
The post does end with the suggests that we should be more careful when we expose
ourselves to unreliable information, especially when we're doing something else
at the time, because part of the experiment was distracting people
while they were told false things.
I get this.
I just wanted to talk about this really briefly, because this seems to be a thing
that comes up a lot, that the more you're exposed to something,
the more you become willing to accept it.
And like this just seems to happen in the real world.
Even when we're not talking about this, you know, you automatically believe
things when you're initially told them.
Even if you disbelieve things at first, it seems like the more
you something is repeated to you, the more you believe it, which is why things
like the QAnon conspiracy can ensnare people, right?
Right.
Do you think that, yeah, there's definitely a tendency for I think that's
is that confirmation bias?
Availability heuristic is not a good example.
Like when I social proof or something.
Yeah.
I mean, there's like that's associated with a bunch of other
heuristics and biases, right?
So I mean, and here's a an adjacent example.
You know, like when you look at the or Jace to it, you might actually know
if you if you're looking at the moon rise and it looks really big on the horizon.
Do you know why that is?
Yeah, because it's close to other things that you can use for comparison.
Uh, I don't.
OK, so I read it at one point and I forgot.
Well, so I think I think you know, I was just right.
The but the the commonly accepted wisdom is that it's like a magnification
from the atmosphere, from hitting more atmosphere.
Oh, well, as it turns out, that's just not the case.
But but people, this was like a thing that I remember learning about like 10 years ago.
And I learned about the magnification thing five years before that.
And 10 years later, there are five years later, they're saying, yeah, you know,
we we correct people's belief on this.
And yet in the act of informing them about like, hey, here's this thing
and here's like the way that it's not true.
Here's the actual fact.
If you ask people, sometimes they'll just remember like the thing
that you told them first after the fact, even though it wasn't true.
And so like that might just be an availability thing and attention thing or something, right?
Yeah, I think there's a lot of other explanations like authority.
Man, I've heard you can test the moon thing.
Just put your thumb out exactly and see how much of it it covers.
And no matter where in the sky it is, it'll always cover the same amount.
And I'll be honest, when I first did that to test it, it blew my fucking mind.
Oh, really?
Because it looks huge when it's first coming up over the horizon.
And you're like, OK, it's about the size of my thumbnail.
And then you give it a few hours.
You're like, no way, no way.
Yeah, we're in a simulation.
We're empiricists.
We're empiricists.
That's that's the other virtue here.
Anyway, yes.
So you linked to a thing that found the opposite effect of
people who believed things like in the act of comprehending them.
Can you summarize that link?
Oh, basically, just that it was it was it found the exact opposite of what was linked
in this post that people tended to be more like the cart, at least the people
in their sample tend to be much more like the cart sample thinking
than the than the spinos thinking.
That's why I said, you know, it's certainly not something that seems to have been confirmed.
Um, so the thing I wanted to say, though, is like it seems a lot of time,
especially nowadays, people think that there are ideas which are dangerous
because if people hear them, they will be like mind whammyed into believing them.
And therefore we need to silence and suppress them.
Yeah.
And like, I kind of have a problem with that because it feels like it treats humans
as these very easily hackable, like we must protect people from this information.
Otherwise, their brains will be taken over.
And I just don't think brains are quite that hackable by humans.
Well, that's the whole thing with fake news, though.
I'm really glad that they started cracking down on fake news because there are a lot
of people who think that, oh, I saw it on the news means it's true.
Some people are, I mean, I think was it, I think Eleazar put it a nice way that,
like, you know, the human brain is not unhackable.
He put it more eloquently than that.
But he was arguing with or he is arguing with Neil deGrasse Tyson via Sam Harris
on Sam Harris's podcast because he was like, well, Tyson says that
if the if the AI in a box is acting up, he'll just shoot it with a shotgun.
And he's like, OK, yeah, sure.
But you are not like immune from outside influence.
Yeah. But he put it in a fun, you know, rationalist Yutkowski in way.
I can totally see that.
But like also when people start telling me, hey, how you shouldn't read
Scott Alexander's posts because he will, you know, trick you into being
an evil right wing person or something.
I'm like, I think I can read things and for my own opinions.
Yeah, I've heard of the the phenomenon you're talking about in two different
main guises, one of which is back in the New Atheist days.
Like some there were some argument like from the I guess you call them
like the moderate atheists where it's like, well, yes, of course, you and I,
we can survive without religion because we're we're sophisticated folk
and we can accept reality as it is.
But those poor masses out there, they can't handle it.
And I find that like demeaning and childish or treating people like children.
I mean, definitely it's possible that man, if you think that's demeaning
and treating people like children, you're going to love when we talk
about epistocracy later.
The other main content is what I've heard called the alt-right pipeline.
Whereas like if you listen to Neil deGrasse Tyson on The Joe Rogan Experience,
well, then YouTube will recommend another Joe Rogan Experience podcast to you.
And because he he's had right, that's also something we're going to talk about later.
So maybe we should just move on to the main point of the show.
Very well.
I'll just say that that's the other context that I've heard of this,
this weird infantilization of people in and that I don't approve of that.
If you, I mean, this is probably isn't advice anyone can really follow.
But it's like, if you think you're you're gullible and vulnerable to dangerous ideas,
make a safe, make a safety bubble.
But like no one would acknowledge that about themselves, right?
No one's going to say, you know what?
I think I might be susceptible to the next bullshit thing.
Someone tells me I need to form a safety bubble.
It sounds like I do the opposite because I think brains are pretty hackable.
Yeah, I think I think if you hear something repeated,
there are, I think the best book I've read on this is Influence and Science
and Practice by Robert Chaldini, which is pretty old book.
But it talks about a lot of ways that human brains can be hacked
and how advertisers exploit these to make money, which is how you know they're true.
But so, you know, I try to make an, I do the opposite of setting up an
information bubble.
I try to get information from a lot of different bias sources.
So that, you know, if you have, because if you have people telling you
conflicting things, then you're not just going to sleep on it and just
believe everything you're told because you can't.
I make it a point to every month, at least once or twice a month,
watch the conservative twins, some video of theirs on YouTube, because they're,
you know, really charismatic and seem to be representing the people who are,
who are Trumpers, who think that Trump has a really good point and represents them.
And I don't know, like I.
Sorry, since we, since that Scott Alexander post came out and the rationalists
are officially now concerned about class, the technical terminology we should
use is Trump and proletariat.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
What is that?
Trump and proletariat.
Yeah.
Trump and proletariat.
Yes.
Yeah.
Lump in proletariat with an L is Marxist term for proletariat who aren't communists.
And so yeah.
Yeah.
I try to listen to them once or twice a month and every now and then
I'm like, Oh, these guys have good points.
But then I'm like, Oh my God, they're just went off the crazy train.
And I also try to watch at least one woke video of Mount and I'd also always
really irritates me, but it's good to keep the two things, you know, in consideration.
Yeah.
And I think that's important not because they're, they have necessarily
have good perspectives, so they're giving you information you wouldn't otherwise get.
I think it's just important to hear opposing viewpoints so you remember that
they exist because if you don't, then that I think your brain will get hacked.
I think if you only ever hear one perspective on something, you'll just
kind of accept it as true.
Yeah.
There's the whole thing about bubbles too.
Like your social bubble, where you just tend to end up with a bunch of people
with the same political views, taste in movies, like clothing styles.
I do know there are some friends of mine though, that if they saw like the server
Twins videos that I watch once or twice a month, they'd be like, dude,
if they knew you watched them, yeah, are you?
I don't know if I would be cancel, but they're like, are you, you're, you're
going to be pulled into the alt-right pipeline, dude.
I'm worried about you.
Like this is, this is brain contamination.
Yeah.
It's like, I, I, I see the virtue of not merely like reading a Reddit thread on
like r slash no stupid questions, like what's up with QAnon.
But like actually getting like from people who actually believe it and who
can articulate it in a not crazy way.
Like you told me about these guys before, I haven't seen any other stuff, but
like if they're, if they're, they seem to represent the non-crazy end of the fact.
And so at least one of them is on the crazy end.
They want to move more.
I mean, one foot on the other side of the line.
The fact that they, that at least they have a diverse set of opinions among
the two of them then, right?
So like, I guess, because if you only ever, you know, read about this on
your leftist bubbles, you're going to be like, oh, they're all obviously closet
Nazis who hate minorities or whatever.
And it's like, no, actually a lot of them are like your friendly neighbors who
will help you change attire and, um, you know, like, and so like, that's the thing
is I, I know at least two or three, uh, Trump supporters and they're, they're
perfectly nice people.
And so like, and it, how dare you say that?
I know, right?
Um, but like, if you, if you only hear about stuff from your weird circle about
how weird the enemy is, then like, it just, it, it pollutes everything.
Yeah.
I think the people telling you that, you know, listening to that will contaminate
your brain, understand that, you know, staying in a filter bubble is going to
make you believe everything you hear in that bubble.
And they're, they're trying to do that to you.
That's what they want.
They're upset that you're stepping out of the bubble because then it won't work.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And that does seem to be the case because I don't buy their bullshit now either.
I'm like, exactly what they've
thought would happen.
Yep.
My main source of, of right-leaning news is Saturday Night Live.
Saturday Night Live is the right leading.
No, but I'm joking because it makes fun of everybody.
It does make fun of the right more, but maybe it's me being biased.
I think there's more to make fun of there.
And so the joke was extra meta because it wasn't funny, just like Saturday Night
Live, you know, most, most episodes Saturday Night Live, I think when Tom
Hanks was hosting one of their remote episodes, he was like, it's SNL.
There's going to be a couple of funny sketches, a few bad ones, and the
rest will just be there.
But I actually have been really enjoying it recently.
I saw a really great, I guess it was sort of a skit where they had someone
impersonating that crazy new right-wing lady senator.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
And it was, what's that?
Bobert.
Yeah.
Yes.
And it was hilarious and I loved it.
And then afterwards I felt really bad for loving it because basically it was
someone dressing up like her and being, her, her, I'm a dumb idiot.
Look at how stupid I am.
Is it okay to laugh at that?
But they do the same thing.
Like I just watched because they didn't have a new one last night because
they're lazy and they worked five whole weeks in a row.
And I guess they're tired.
So last year where John Mulaney was hosting and it opens up with a bunch
of, um, it must have been during the presidential campaign.
Uh, oh yeah.
Cause that's the one with the elderly men contest bit.
Yeah.
It was one of those, but it was at the opening cut was like Elizabeth Warren, uh,
by Kate McKinnon.
Uh, I think John Mulaney was doing, uh, Joe Biden, uh, they had Pete
Buttigieg and a couple of others.
And then they had Larry David as Bernie Sanders, who does a perfect Bernie Sanders.
Um, so I figured like, as long as I'm making fun of everybody, I'm into it.
But the one that you're talking about was, uh, a weekend update.
Yes.
And it had, um, uh, Cecily Strong playing What's Her Butt.
Okay.
And I thought it was hilarious.
I thought so too.
But then I thought like, how is different taking notes?
Cause you got a link to all of these, but like, how is this different from
political blackface where you dress yourself up like someone that you want to
make fun of because they act like an idiot.
Cause they do it both ways.
They also, on another weekend update in the last few months, they had two people
on who were like, we need to start when, you know, the cancel culture is bad.
Cause it's not strong enough.
We need to start canceling more people look like this, this, this baby.
But that's just true.
This, this, this baby cried when it was delivered by a black doctor.
We need to cancel this baby.
So like, right.
So I mean, I think that they're pretty even-handed in what they make fun of.
That's why, that's why I write it up as an example.
But if we go any further without talking about libertarianism, David's going to
explode.
I know I should say, I feel like we spent the requisite 45 minutes on, on
sequences and digressions.
So the real purpose of this episode was last, last episode I had said that I,
uh, basically, I don't, I don't quite understand the steel man for libertarianism
and, or, and, and arco capitalism, nor can I articulate the difference.
And this is probably like now getting too broad, but my, uh, I pointed to the,
the, the situation in Texas as it was two or three weeks ago.
And I was like, isn't this what you get when it's just businesses running
shit without regulation?
Cause specifically Texas left the US power grid so they could avoid regulation,
like having to winterize things.
Cause they thought there was unnecessary and dumb.
And then we had the Texas situation.
And the question was like, is this not libertarianism?
And why not?
Or why is it actually good or whatever?
Yeah.
David, I hope we haven't stacked things against you too badly.
And let the man talk.
Yeah.
Uh, yeah, no.
So, um, do you want me to talk about Texas now?
Or should we wait until the part of the outline where it says we're supposed
to talk about Texas?
I don't think it would be better to wait to talk about Texas until like we go
through the basic definitions and so on.
Oh, no, these Bayesian conspiracy types don't read outlines.
I forgot you did have an outline that I'll, I'll find really quick.
So yeah, go ahead and take it whatever order you wanted to,
cause you're our honored guests.
As long as you process this will lead to Texas.
Okay.
So, um, I think it's a good idea to start out with just a basic definition
of libertarianism.
Um, and the definition that I like, uh, is one that recent magazine uses a lot.
So I feel like it's a pretty mainstream definition within libertarianism.
Uh, it's a belief that it is desirable to limit the size, scope, and spending of government.
And obviously this ranges from, uh, extremely moderate libertarians who
think we should limit that a little to anarcho capitalists who think we
should limit it to zero.
And, uh, unless you guys object to, uh, the definition of government that I'm
working on is, um, Max Weber's definition, which is a, um, a geographically
limited monopoly on the legitimate use of force.
Uh, so there's just one group in a certain geographical area that is allowed
to shoot people and other people won't complain too much.
And that, that one organization is the government.
I think that definition is too, too narrow.
And I also like a belief that it is desirable to limit the size, scope, and
spending of government is like so innocuous a statement that it's impossible to
challenge.
Well, isn't it also true of both the Democrats and the Republicans too?
They just disagree on which parts to limit, right?
Like, so if I were to say, if I said, I disagreed with that statement that it's
desirable to limit the size, scope, and spending of government that like then,
then you could just say, Oh, so you think the government should have cameras
in your bedroom watching you have sex?
Cause that's, you know, that's not limiting them at all.
Like, come on.
So I think that's two week of definition and be the, the, the description
of the monopoly on violence.
Well, I think that's part of government.
I would say like the other part of governments might be like this entity
organization that I send money to, and they make roads and put up fires for me.
Well, what that definition says to me is that it's directional.
It's saying, look at where we are.
Do we need more government or less government?
Yeah, yeah, that's it.
So like vacuum then.
Yeah.
So it's the definition isn't that you think there should be, if you're not a
libertarian, then you think there should be no limits at all.
It's that you think it should be limited relative to the current functions.
Okay.
I can, then that caveat's part one enough for sufficiently for me.
I again think that like the Republicans want to limit the size and scope of
government in relation to certain businesses, whereas the Democrats want
to limit it for other businesses, and both of them have their own social issues
where they want to limit or expand the government.
So yeah, I don't know.
I think that usually the Democrats want to expand how much the government is
involved or like just add more regulation.
I think that's what you hear.
But then you hear like, well, I mean, the Democrats aren't saying what you can do
with your uterus if you're pregnant, right?
Like the Republicans are like, oh yeah, we want to stay out of your, out of your
small businesses, but we want all up in your uterus, right?
So I think that they both, they, you know, and I guess I'm not even comparing it
to either branch, but if I, if I compared it to government now, then I can at least
say, okay, sure, if, if the libertarian says, look at, look at government.
And we'll, we'll figure out what that is here in a second.
But then I, as a libertarian, I think that it's desirable to limit the
size, scope, and spending of that.
I can, I can follow what you're saying there at the very least.
Yeah.
And I have to say there is, there has been a political
coalition between Republicans and libertarians, or rather between the
Republican party and libertarians for a couple of decades now.
But that is something that a lot of libertarians don't like, including me.
And it's also very historically contingent and fairly recent.
Um, so like Carter was an extremely libertarian president.
Um, but he was a Democrat.
And then, uh, part of Reagan strategy, uh, won over the libertarians.
And then the Republican was, the Republicans were pretty much just
coasting on, uh, libertarian sympathies since Reagan.
And I do think Trump did a lot of, uh, good for the libertarians by
getting the assholes out of the room.
Again, this is something we'll talk about later, but that coalition is
something I would very much look to, uh, uh, see that breaking down fairly soon.
Um, so just, uh, just a little advanced prediction there.
But yeah, uh, definitely both parties have some upsides from a libertarian
perspective and both parties have some downsides.
And definitely since Trump, the Republicans have been diligently
disavowing their upsides.
Uh, so yeah, if you just think of it in terms of like libertarians can
basically be rounded off to Republicans, then you're definitely going to
make some easily avoidable mistakes.
Totally.
I've definitely heard, uh, some of my left-wing friends left, really
left like characterized libertarians as conservatives.
You just want to be able to smoke weed.
Yeah.
That is, I hate that so much.
Yeah.
I'm not friends with those people anymore.
Okay.
Because of that.
So what about Steven's proposition that, uh, governments are also the, uh,
entity that we send money to, to have roads and firefighters.
Uh, so is the operator of a toll road, a government?
No.
Is a private fire department, a government?
Uh, no.
Okay.
I would say that the, that the, in my, again, what's awesome about this is
that I'm coming from a position of basically zero knowledge.
So yeah.
Yeah.
So like there are lots of entities to whom you'll give money in
exchange for goods and services.
The difference between those entities and the government is those
entities are voluntary, where the worst thing they can do to you, if you
don't send the money, is they stop giving you the goods or services.
The government, however, if you stop giving them money, will have men with
guns at your show up at your house and say, Hey, we noticed you stopped
giving us money, please give us money.
And if you're refused, they'll take you away and put you in a room.
Unless you're really rich.
And I mean, like, that's, that's the, I've heard it put that way before.
And I think that I, so I used to listen to a libertarian podcast, like 10 or 12
years ago.
And when he described it that way, and you know, he went on to say, uh, you
know, if you're, if you decide that you want to drive a little faster than the
government says you can, the men with guns will come over and kidnap you and
throw you in a room and lock the door.
And it's like, okay, sure, if you characterize it that way.
But like, I, I think that the, the, the response to that might be something
like, sure, as, but you're partaking in the society in which we've, we've
funded the roads you're driving on.
If you're running a business, the roads that you ship your goods on, um, the,
we've, we've kept the water clean enough for you to drink that you're, you know,
unless you're ordering all your water in, in bottles and showering with that or
something, right?
Like, or, or purifying your own water in some other way.
Like, I think that the argument is, look, we're giving you all this shit because
you're part of the society and you're signed up to our electric grid.
You're signed up to our water pipes, um, pay your part, right?
It's like, it's like a union.
Sure.
Uh, so let me ask you this.
Let's say you are walking down the street and I come up to you, uh, put a gun
to your head and say, uh, hey, give me 20 bucks and you give me 20 bucks.
And then in return, I give you a half eaten sandwich.
Uh, would you say that's a voluntary transaction or was that a transaction
where I used force?
I would say it's not a voluntary transaction, but I'm already prepared to
challenge this.
But you've got something for it.
You've got a sandwich.
Right.
But I didn't ask for a sandwich.
And I didn't ask for a lot of things that the government does.
Like I didn't ask for a war in the Middle East, but I still have to pay money to
fund the war in the Middle East because I haven't been given a choice there.
Right.
I, I was already challenges on weakness of analogy before I saw where you were
going with it, but I, cause that, that, I don't know, for me, it doesn't
quite feel the same.
You know, so like if I came up to you and so it doesn't, it doesn't quite
feel the same because you've been mind whammy to normalize the normalize getting
robbed every year so that you can fund a military to go off and bomb brown kids
in Afghanistan.
It's possible that I can mind whammy and we'll see if I become unmind whammy
or otherwise by the end of the episode.
But like, I think the analogy falls apart because I'm not just getting a
half eaten sandwich.
I'm also getting clean air, clean water.
You know, my neighbor isn't allowed to poison the ground near my house.
You know, like I'm getting all sorts of protections and benefits in addition
to this shitty sandwich.
Okay.
So how much of the government's budget do you think goes to those things?
I don't know.
And I don't know if it's a, if that makes a strong case to my position.
If you don't want to be depressed, don't look at how much the government
spends on wars versus like, uh, what was the NASA, like the space program?
So let me, uh, so let me, uh, I will, I will go ahead and let you know the, uh,
EPA has a very, very, very small budget relative to the Department of Defense.
So with that in mind, if you could get exactly the same amount of clean air,
clean water, not your neighbor's not being able to poison stuff, etc., for
like a fraction of the cost and also the savings just means that the government
bombs fewer brown kids, then wouldn't that, is it, do you consider that desirable?
How do I get that?
Cause I mean, obviously, yes, something we're going through in the Q and A.
Right.
So that, that's, that's what I want to figure out is, is without, without
some giant entity with a stick ready to smack my neighbor in the face for
pouring, uh, sorry.
Um, so, so real quick, do we agree on the definition of libertarianism?
Cause I have some more stuff I need to say before we get to whether or not
libertarianism is desirable.
We just, right now we need to agree on what libertarianism is.
Yeah, that makes sense.
Libertarians want to reduce how big the government is compared to the
current day.
Yep.
Yep.
Okay.
Sounds, that sounds like a decent definition of me.
So the, so the question isn't, is libertarium desirable?
It's how much libertarium is desirable?
Cause I think everyone could probably think of something they want the government
to stop doing.
Right.
I think there's also like that, that feels too much to me.
Like I'm trying to win the argument by just defining libertarianism as that
good thing that everyone wants.
That's what I feel like you've done.
I, so, yeah.
So if I had to like give a narrower definition that's less like that, it
would be, um, you want to limit the size scope and spending of government.
Um, and in at least one area and there are no areas where you would want to
expand it, but that's getting a little bit too narrow.
Cause so I would, I would say that, but also you can like cut up the domain.
So like you could say, I'm a libertarian on social issues, but not really on
the economic ones or something like that.
Um, sure.
But anyway, uh, so are we cool on those definitions?
Cool enough to move forward for sure.
Okay.
Cool.
I mean, we can also just like do that thing where we, you know, acknowledge
that definitions are, are wuzzy and not necessarily valuable.
You know, if we start talking about something that isn't definition,
look it up into the dictionary libertarianism, I'm fine with that.
Like we, you know, definitely, what is the, the nice catchphrased definitions are, uh,
like the categories are made for man, man for the categories.
Exactly.
Right.
So I mean, I don't want to get hung up on a no true libertarian is right.
I don't want to get here in this.
Yeah.
I don't want to get hung up on a no true Scotsman or hold on.
Let me look in the dictionary for that.
Yeah.
I'm good to move forward.
Okay.
Cool.
So before we move forward, there is something that, uh, happens a lot.
And when people are discussing libertarianism, in fact, I would dare
say it has already happened at least once in this conversation.
Again, is, uh, people will compare ideal governments, uh, to real life markets.
And yes, obviously the real life markets do worse in that regard, uh, also
for the benefit of those left libertarians listening, uh, we are talking
about right libertarianism here.
So if I equivalent, if, if I equivocate between markets and, uh, libertarianism,
then I was going to say, I apologize, but I don't, because I don't respect you.
Wait, can you explain that distinction?
Uh, so basically left libertarianism, as far as I understand it, which is
not very well, is the idea that, uh, if we abolish governments and capitalism,
then people will voluntarily organize themselves into ways that the particular
left libertarian who's speaking currently finds desirable.
Uh, and so it was my impression of what like libertarians are in general.
So that's true to an extent, but right libertarians have a much
better theory about why it'll happen, especially because we're not so
big on the abolish capitalism part.
Okay.
Cause I was going to say the policy government and things will work out
sounds a lot like old Marxism to me.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, yes, uh, a lot of left libertarianism is just like, uh, rehashing old
fashioned Marxism.
So, I mean, isn't that how anarcho, um, libertarianism works too?
Like if we get rid of the government, people will just naturally form companies.
And I think we've already proven that if we get rid of the government, people
will just naturally form a different government.
That's not how I think about it.
It's how some anarcho capitalists think about it, but I think those
anarcho capitalists are dumb and bad.
So I would like to hear why this is just at a meta level.
This is why I like avoiding like neat little labels for things.
Libertarianism, anarcho capitalists, Democrat, Republican, because then
you've got all these associations and, and boxes you've got to check or don't check.
You need to define, like you need to name things though, so you can talk about them.
Yeah.
I don't feel like this is what I believe, right?
Okay.
Like so, but it would take a long time.
Yeah.
Let's get what David believes.
Yeah.
David is here to tell us why we should libertare, be libertarians.
And I'm assuming he wants to be libertarians in the vein of him.
So let's find out what his libertarianism is.
But don't go wrong.
Jayce makes a good point that having to believe that's what we've just been discussing.
Okay.
All right.
Okay.
Um, yeah.
So, uh, that's something you shouldn't do.
Um, don't compare ideal governments to real life markets.
You should compare ideal government to ideal markets or real life government to real life
markets.
Uh, and I have requested you all obtain bonking sticks so that you can be bonked.
Uh, if you start doing that, um, didn't we have an excellent example when Stephen
did that, yeah, we don't have video.
So we're just going to work off the honor system for that.
And yes, we did have an excellent example in chat, but I added it to the Q and A.
So let's just move along so we can get to that part faster.
Very well.
Okay.
David enslaved devotion to outlines.
He's like some kind of outline statist.
I know, right?
Um, yeah.
So, um, basically the reason, so there are two reasons I think, um, libertarianism is
desirable and why you should be libertarians, if you're not, uh, the first one is, uh,
more pragmatic, which I realized for the, um, consequentialists in our audience will
be equivalent to morality, but I have separated them out just for the benefit of the
non-consequentialists.
Uh, so essentially I think that, uh, the function of the law, and here I'm talking
about the law as in like the thing that Wes messes with.
Um, uh, so the function of the law should be, uh, essentially to maximize social
efficiency, to make the pie, so to speak, as big as it can possibly be.
And then if, uh, that society, which maximizes the size of the pie has any really
catastrophic outcomes, like people starving to death or dying of easily preventable
disease, then those can be handled through redistribution.
Personally, I believe if we get to that maximally efficient society, then, uh, there
probably won't be, uh, many things like that, because even if some people are
left with crumbs, the pie will be so big that the crumbs will be, uh, more than
enough to give them an excellent standard of living.
Should the redistribution also be handled by the law?
I'm not sure you clarified that.
Uh, no.
So I, I consider the law to be distinct from redistribution.
So laws would be, uh, things like, uh, regulation, minimum wages, emission
standards, that sort of thing.
Um, and then, um, redistribution is just simply taking money from one person and
giving it to someone else.
Um, but so not be handled by the laws in the government or what?
Uh, so that's why I was making the distinction.
I was earlier between, um, uh, with the law as the thing West messes with, uh,
cause like technically from like a civics perspective, the way that you would
enact that redistribution is Congress passes a thing that we call a law, which
says take money from this group and give it to that group.
Um, but, uh, economics perspective, which is where I'm coming
at this from is like, that is not quote unquote a law in the sense that it is
something that law and economics is concerned about.
I feel like the bad thing you're referencing is what we tend to understand
as regulation.
A more or less, um, there are some things that I would consider law under
this definition that aren't regulations, um, colloquially.
Uh, but yeah, if you want to think about it as regulation versus redistribution,
then that's probably good enough for, um, this, uh, discussion.
And, uh, I also want to say that we are far enough away from this maximally
efficient legal code that I don't consider it worth quibbling over redistribution.
Uh, so if we want to have a separate podcast about that at some point, I mean,
we already kind of did with the UBI episode, but, uh, yeah, I don't, I don't
like fighting about whether or not we should have redistribution, uh, cause it's your
position is we should have it if we need it, but we probably won't need it.
Yeah.
And, um, we are far enough away from, uh, that position where we know
whether or not we need it, that like it's not really something you can have
a different anticipated, uh, or yeah, a different anticipated
experience about right now.
Um, so yeah.
And also, you know, you sound like an asshole when you say we
shouldn't have redistribution and mostly I think that's because poor people
are horribly screwed over by the government.
And so they do actually need help that they wouldn't need if they weren't
being so screwed over.
But like I said, there's not really any difference in, uh, anticipated
experience that we can have right now with the laws we do, uh, on that front.
All right.
So we agreed that redistribution, if it is necessary, is good and that the
government will do it and we aren't talking about redistribution today.
Yeah.
Um, one last clarifying question.
Yes.
What is the pie in this, uh, this, the sales pitch?
The pie is all the stuff that society makes.
Um, so all of, all of the goods and services which are produced by a society.
Okay.
Uh, and if you are skeptical that, um, the, uh, that any problems in this
maximally efficient society can be addressed through redistribution.
Well, there's this thing called the second welfare theorem, which says that
yes, they can be fixed through redistribution and the second welfare
theorem, as you know, from the word theorem in the name is a homework land
thing, but it's actually one of the homework land things that applies
pretty well to reality.
Uh, but the detailed explanation would make really bad radio.
So unless one of my co-hosts really wants to get the explanation, then, uh, we
are probably best off just leaving it there.
There's enough to talk about that we can table some things.
I've got a question about the pie.
Um, okay.
Sure.
Like, I don't think the government is just about the pie because to take
an example that we talked about on the mind killer a few weeks ago, uh, when
that cop ran over, uh, a kid at the, uh, at an intersection where a bunch of
people were doing like donuts and drag racing and stuff.
Sure.
The major problem there was that there's a street intersection and the people
who live near that street intersection want peace and quiet at midnight so they
can sleep or whatever.
And, uh, a bunch of kids wanted to use that intersection for doughnuts and having
fun and whatever.
And they both, you know, want good things, one wants sleep, one wants fun.
Those are both great.
They can't both have them at the same time.
And like the government was there to decide who could actually use that
street corner for their thing.
And they were trying to enforce the sleep and quiet one.
And then, you know, things got messy, but like, I don't think that has anything
to do with making a pie bigger.
It's just how do we use this one street corner that we only have one.
I know the answer.
I know the answer.
Is it close?
Uh, yes, it is actually close.
Uh, so essentially we have, so we have a limited resource, a street corner.
We only have one of them.
The two uses we can put this to are peace and quiet so people can sleep and doing
donuts.
Uh, so we have one street corner that we can use to increase the size of the pie,
uh, because both donuts and peace and quiet are things that go into the size of
the pie.
And so the question is who, uh, has more pie, uh, that they can make on the street
corner, the kids or the people trying to sleep.
And, uh, so the proper role for the government in that context is, or for a
private agency, if we're talking about anarcho capitalism is to, um, figure
out who gets more pie by using the street corner the way they want it, uh, and
then to, um, facilitate bargaining between the two parties so that whoever gets
the most, uh, use out of it, uh, gets it.
And if necessary, they may or may not have to compensate the, um, other people
who have to forego their preferred use.
I know this in, uh, in the particular example, an ideal government, uh, or
indeed a, uh, market with no transaction costs would have the kids and the people
trying to sleep all gather at the street corner and, uh, individually bid on how
much they want to do donuts slash have peace and quiet.
And then whoever, uh, enters the highest bid gets their preferred use.
And, um, if the property rights are allocated to the loser of the auction,
then they, uh, the money that they bid goes to the original loan or the property
rights.
And this is the thing that Wes was talking about.
It's the coast theorem, uh, which states that, um, for a transaction, which
has externalities, uh, which in this case means like you are doing something
and, uh, you, um, you're using it will affect other people.
Then, uh, if property rights are clearly allocated and transaction costs are low,
then the, um, the highest value activity will always be the one to take
place, uh, regardless of initial allocation of property rights.
Uh, the only thing that initial allocation will change is the final
distribution of resources.
But without someone to like enforce that, uh, what did you call it?
Like to mediate that, that discussion, um, and it's just people, what coming
together and throwing money down, um, like, wouldn't that just mean that if,
instead of it was a bunch of kids, it was Jeff Bezos who wanted to go into that,
that, that street corner and shoot guns into the air to make noise as much
as possible, that he would just win de facto and fuck the poor people.
Well, uh, so in this context, him quote unquote, fucking the poor people means
paying the poor people lots and lots of money in order for them to grant him, uh,
the right to shoot guns into the air, which doesn't seem like a terrible outcome to me.
I also hold on.
I'm curious though, I guess I, I, I just, I heard you say the theorem,
but it's still not clear to me why he would have to pay lots and lots of money.
Yeah.
So the, the prevailing, the prevailing legal regime has, uh, means that you cannot
shoot guns into the air whenever you want.
Um, and in, and ideally in Kosian framework, but with that same rule in place,
the way that you get the right to shoot guns into the air is going around to
everyone who, uh, has a property right to you, not shooting guns in the air and
paying them until they agree to let you shoot guns into the air.
I don't think this actually addresses the real concern because the kids don't
have the coordination or the money to rent out that street corner.
Otherwise they would have done it.
And so instead they're just going to go to a street corner where the property
rights aren't being very well enforced until they find one where they can do
donuts and the cops show up.
Yeah.
And that's why I said that we're talking about an ideally Kosian society and blah,
blah, blah.
Um, but like that was just for the purposes of demonstrating how, um, both
peace and quiet and doing donuts go into the size of the pie in the context of
the ideal role for a government being to maximize the size of the pie or rather
for a law code, which doesn't necessarily have to come from a government.
Okay.
I see.
And in either system, either way, you're going to end up with a situation where
the police got to show up due to realities on the ground.
Probably not necessarily.
The old lady could come out of her house and start yelling at the kids and the
kids could say, Hey, how about we toss you 50 bucks and you, uh, look the other way.
I wish it worked that way.
You know, that, that kind of thing happens in real life all the time.
Jay's just said he wished it worked that way.
Is Jay's a libertarian?
No, I am, but, uh, also just the last two apartments I've lived in have just
yesterday there was this dude who was working on his car and he brought a
concert sized speaker and put it on his front porch and then was just blasting
bachata and it was rattling the windows of my building.
And I was just, isn't it nice to be able to call the cops and say they're
violating the noise ordinance?
Can you tell them to shut the fuck up?
No, cause I don't do that.
Did you go off or something?
That means, yeah.
So that's one option.
The other, uh, because the cop, so basically you, uh, your social anxiety
means you have foregone your property right to a quiet street corner because
you're not willing to call the cops.
And, uh, so that means that the guy blasting the music has the property
right.
And so what you need to do is go out and give him a hundred bucks to fuck off.
And then he takes it and he turns the volume up.
Exactly.
I wouldn't do that.
I mean, then you punch him.
I did actually have a, we had these like lousy, shitty teenage neighbors or
maybe 20 somethings fucking teens that were just blasting music and screaming
and doing shots all night long.
And it was like three a.m.
And I, we tried to get like the building security to come do something about
them, but they were like, Oh, we can't, unless there's like documented proof.
So we're videotaping them.
We're like, sure, let me put this on speakerphone and you can hear it.
That was actually, I was on the phone and I was like, do you hear this?
They were, they were howling like wolves.
Like the more I was like trying to lay, I tried to talk to them and say, I was
like, you know, open my window and I was like, hi, two people who work live here
that are trying to sleep currently.
Could you please be a good citizen and stop howling like wolves?
Well, yeah.
So the problem, the problem was you, your means of persuasion was asking if
they're, they can be good citizens instead of throwing a hundred bucks out
the window.
Yeah, but do you really want to pay a hundred bucks every single night to get
sleep?
Uh, yeah.
So then you need to, uh, actually enforce your property, right?
To peace and quiet and get over your social anxiety.
I did.
So the question, the question is, uh, the question is not, does Jace really
want to pay a hundred bucks every night to get sleep?
It's, does he want to pay a hundred bucks every night to get sleep more than he
wants to call the cops and enforce his property rights to get sleep?
So, uh, in a lot of these cases, there's the whole thing of me being a white
dude calling the cops on like poor Hispanic people.
And I'm uncomfortable with that.
Yeah.
Well, I think this is actually a good cozy and bargaining situation.
So like imagine there were no cops and anyone was allowed, they were just allowed
to make that noise.
Um, the idea would then be that Jace, you go out and say, okay, well, I'll give
you, you know, 50 bucks to, to be quiet tonight.
Um, or you can even say, Hey, I'll give you 300 bucks to be quiet all month.
Um, or you could go around to your neighbors and take up a collection and say,
Hey, I want to pay these guys to be quiet.
Um, what, what are you willing to, uh, pitch in?
I don't know.
Like what has actually worked is, for example, there was somebody's car alarm
went off every night and I fucking went around and I videotaped the car going off.
And then I identified whose car it was and I went to their door and showed them
this video and it was like, hi, this wakes me up every night.
This is your car, right?
And then I said, you know, like, I will help you disable this alarm with your
cooperation or without it, with your cooperation or without your cooperation.
Well, I was so like, there's escalating.
I liked to do the escalating level of that where I got the Hispanic neighbors
to be quieter by continually going up to their apartment, walking into the apartment
and looking them in the eye and like, you know, you make people feel uncomfortable
enough times and then like they were usually willing to stop.
See, I don't have the cojones.
So that, so that's basically just cozy and bargaining, except instead
of having a literal auction, you're just like, uh, using social pressure
instead of money.
I think a much more long-term solution that people would fall back on is
eventually forming communities where to buy a property in the community.
You first signed this document that says all of us will respect these quiet hours.
And if you don't respect these quiet hours, we will hire a security
service to come and, you know, force you to be quiet or something.
And so you agree to that.
And to me, that looks a lot like a government.
Can I, uh, no, that, that's a way of reallocating
property rights so that you can, um, lower the transaction costs, which
is not something that, um, enters into the basic cost theorem.
Um, because that just assumes away the problem of property
right allocation and transaction costs.
But yeah, that is the sort of thing that empirical cosines write about all the time.
Uh, can I also think that it'll be a lot easier to understand
libertarian arguments if you understand that even the most hardcore
anarcho capitalists recognizes that in under the status quo, the government
provides valuable services.
It's just that they want those services provided by other entities than the government.
Uh, so, you know, anarcho capitalists and libertarians are, are still very
in favor of having enforcement mechanisms for these kinds of things.
Um, they're just tend to be private companies rather than, uh, governments.
Yes.
You had something, Chase?
Um, actually, I'll drop it.
It was going back to the noise thing, but I want to move along in this, uh, document.
What do you say to people who yell Pinkerton's at you whenever you mentioned
security companies rather than government?
I pay them 50 bucks to fuck off because the first amendment that, uh, property
rights are clearly allocated to them.
Yeah, I kind of, I guess, want to let you keep going just so we can move past
the second bullet point in this, in this talk, but, okay, because I'm tempted
to just keep bogging down on the weeds, but, you know, uh, there'll be time
for bogging shortly, I imagine.
I'll see how long I hold my tongue.
So, uh, any, any other questions about social efficiency and whether or not
it's desirable?
No, for the sake of moving the discussion along.
No.
Okay, cool.
Uh, so basically, if you accept that principle, then, uh, that means
that, um, the, uh, transactions, which should be acceptable by default to you
are any voluntary transactions between consenting individuals, because if both
parties consent to a transaction, that that means they are both made better
off by the transaction.
And so, um, while there are some cases where voluntary transactions can
lower social welfare, uh, for example, uh, if there are externalities like the
parties that are keeping you up at night, they are voluntary between the person
throwing the party and the people attending the party, but there are externalities.
So they might reduce social welfare, but, uh, outside of a few, um, uh, a few
narrow exceptions like that, uh, there, uh, if you agree that the best thing to
do is maximize social efficiency, then you should allow all voluntary transactions
between consenting individuals outside those constraints.
Uh, you managed to both make me praise you when you had said, of course, the
caveat of externalities.
And then you went on to say, barring those few narrow exceptions.
I, I, like, so you had me at the first half, I'm like, Oh, good.
He's sitting next to anality problem.
And then you're like, you just missed it as these narrow exceptions that are
like not a problem.
Well, so the, so the reason why I say those narrow exceptions is because even
if you just accept that, and then you take a very, very, very broad reading of
like what creates externalities, um, and other things like if there's market
power or, uh, information asymmetries, then, uh, that's probably enough to make
you a libertarian because things like smoking weed in your own home or paying
a sex worker to have sex with you.
Uh, unless you like think that there's some really important, like moral fabric
of society, externality or something like that, then those don't really fall
into the, um, they don't really fall into any of those exceptions, but those
are voluntary transactions that the government bans.
So at least I've got to come back to those.
That is enough to make you a libertarian on the definition we're using.
Okay.
Well, like I'm thinking like, you know, my HOA community, I don't think it's
my bylaws because it's in the government bylaws.
But if, if, if we were just operating within the, like the confines of like
personal, uh, what do we call them?
Property areas, whatever.
Like my HOA community decides, uh, among other things, yeah, you know, when
you change the oil in your car, you can just dump it in the gutter because it
flows down the street to the next neighborhood and we don't, we don't
care about them.
Uh, and it's expensive to just build it properly.
So fuck them.
Like it's our rules that we were okay with dumping our oil and name everything
else that shitty that comes out of your house.
Um, we're okay with dumping it because it goes down the street.
Like that's an externality and dismissing that sounds like it sounds like
pretending that that wouldn't happen.
Like that's not a problem.
Yeah.
So I'm not dismissing it, but that's also a pretty easy externality to handle.
Because remember, externalities get, uh, internalized if property rights are
clearly allocated and transaction costs are low.
And in the case of, uh, that particular example, it, the transaction costs are
pretty low, like you just follow the gutter until you find the place that the
oil seems to be coming from and then bang on the door of whoever's houses next
to the gutter at that point.
Um, obviously, but our gated community is, let's, let's say it's gated with 40
foot high walls and we've got guards.
I guess, I mean, I, and I, and this is where I tried to not get bogged down.
And if this is going to bog us down, just say, we'll get to that later, but
I'm just curious how this doesn't just like, you know, totally fuck people without power.
I know the idea is that if you imagine the perfect spherical economist in a vacuum,
everyone has power and the community can get me, you know, me and my, my, my poor
cohorts can get together and go bang on these walls, but they can just, they
can safely ignore us.
Yeah.
So that's fine.
But, uh, Inyash Jase, I need you to, uh, bonk Steven because he just did the, uh,
bonkable offense.
Uh, so yes, it's true that, uh, under some set of circumstances, you can conceive
of a society where, uh, rich people or otherwise powerful people can fuck over
poor people, but for libertarianism to be desirable, it doesn't need to outperform
every single possible scenario.
It just needs to outperform the government.
And if you're positing a group of people who are so powerful, whether it be through
wealth or political connections or whatever, that they can just like dump
oil wherever they want and get away with it, then you're probably going to have
a problem with that group of people, no matter how you organize society.
I think the, uh, counter example to Steven's point would be like, we have
an American government and we also have how they have historically treated the
American Indians, which is very much how you're describing how the gated community
treats their neighbors where they have all the power.
So the neighbors or the American Indians in this case get shat on and wiped out or
whatever.
Exactly.
Okay.
So I, I will receive my bonk and I will, I will say out loud, you're right.
I, I was comparing an idealized version of this.
I wasn't rather than just does better than what we have.
Okay.
And that, that I appreciate you pointing that out.
You're welcome.
For things to box Steven with, cause we didn't have a bonking stick and I was just
like, there's a problem.
I told you to get a bonking stick.
He has been metaphysically bonked.
That's the best.
And I appreciated this kind of bonk cause it came without, without a bonk.
So, all right.
I was also like, when I saw it on paint of bonking, I was like, uh, it's okay.
That probably doesn't mean what I'm reading it as.
If the font's bonking, yeah, it looks like bonking if the font is small.
All right.
No, that's great.
I appreciate you pointing that out.
I, I, I, we should have, we should have put it on a white board and stuck it to the
wall that says this just has to do better than now.
It doesn't have to be perfect.
Okay.
All right.
So how about second welfare theorem?
Um, that takes an hour, right?
Yeah.
Uh, it's not that it takes super long.
It's just easier to explain if you draw a graph.
Uh, if you're really curious, you can, uh, Google Edgeworth box, uh,
EDGEWRTA, uh, space B O X.
Um, and that's like a graphical representation of the second welfare theorem.
It's also something that a, uh, buddy of mine did his dissertation on.
Um, so if you really want to do a deep dive into, uh, the second welfare
theorem, we can have John on, um, but, uh, yeah.
Um, so what about?
Just trying to understand this fucking picture next.
Yeah.
So, uh, that's basically the pragmatic case.
Uh, just if you, uh, buy that you're maximizing social, well, uh, welfare,
then, um, you should at least allow all voluntary transaction or you should
allow all voluntary transactions unless you have some reason not to, and that's
sufficient to make someone a libertarian with a system we currently have.
Um, so there's also some other moral arguments, uh, that aren't consequentialist.
Uh, and, uh, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, let's step, step back a second.
I, I know a lot of people who would say, yes, I basically agree that we should
allow all voluntary, uh, exchanges except for some very small minority that we
might have to object for some reason.
And yet those people do not consider themselves libertarians.
Why not?
Uh, probably because libertarians have chronically bad PR, I would consider
them a libertarian though.
Really?
Or they might object to moral grounds.
That's all it takes, just that most transactions, most volunteer
transactions should not be interfered with.
I mean, uh, I could think of, I think people saying that have not thought
out the implications of that statement.
Yeah.
Almost all transactions are interfered with in some way in our society.
Yes.
If you, if, so I could, uh, elaborate on that, but it's much better if you
just go to the crime of day Twitter, uh, and just scroll on that page or on
that feed until you're convinced.
Well, I'm interested in like what West thinks are the, every single
transaction is interfered with in some way stuff.
Well, so one of those are my tasks.
Also go to the crime of day Twitter.
Go to the crime of day Twitter and scroll on that until you're convinced
that there's a law about just about everything.
Yeah.
Okay.
I, I think I see what you're saying.
So, uh, there's a bunch of numbers and symbols, something 50 CFR, something
dot, uh, uh, make it a federal crime to hunt striped skunk in the big stone
national wildlife refuge anytime other than one half hour before legal
sunrise until legal sunset from September 1st through the last day of February.
Yes.
Okay.
But I make it a crime to sell bunk beds without a permanent label stating the
name and address of the bunk bed maker.
Damn.
You, you can name literally any noun and I will do a search on this feed and
there will be some stupid law about it, uh, or any noun that describes like a
real life thing and not something fictional or otherwise complete nonsense.
I guess what annoys us right now is that we cannot get stem cells injected into
us in the U S if we want to pay someone to do that.
Yes.
We're just talking about that.
Yes, we were.
Oh, you get, they were on there too though.
I'm not sure.
Oh, I don't think we were recording at the time.
Yeah.
All right.
So I think the, the moral position is, I think I'm already sold on this.
I was sold on it when I read John Sturt Mills on Liberty.
Uh, that's a good place to start.
I, I, I think so.
I think it might have coined libertarianism, but the sentence.
The more framework, not quite, but, um, yeah, he was definitely very,
very early on there.
Right on.
Yeah.
I mean, the, the framework is essentially my freedom to swing my fist ends where
your face begins.
Yes.
That's at the tip of your nose.
Right.
I can do whatever I want as long as I'm not impacting somebody else.
And now what does it mean to impact somebody?
I think that's what people get, get fuzzy in the head.
But to me, it's like, uh, okay, um, am I impacting my neighbor by, like he said,
hiring a sex worker to consensually have sex with me.
Um, I'm only impacting them insofar as they have a, like some objection to me
doing whatever I want with my free time.
Or am I impacting my, my society by taking LSD at home?
Right.
No, yeah, I would say.
Yeah.
And like there, like I said, you'd need to have like some sort of basic sanity
check on how you're defining externalities.
Um, because like you could say that like me selling you my watch could hurt
someone because at some point someone might ask me the time.
And if I sell you my watch, then I won't be able to tell them.
And so do you need to compensate that person as well for the, like two
cents that it takes them that they're costed by not knowing the time until
they find someone else who does have a watch?
No, and like obviously not.
And so that's, that really just gets down to the difference between, um,
homework, land and real life.
Like you're, you're allowed to have some element of common sense here.
Uh, and if there are any, like genuinely hard problems to that effect where
it's not obvious that, uh, some person is just being silly.
Uh, in the hypothetical, I have yet to encounter it.
Uh, and if there is a genuinely hard case like that, then just have a bidding war.
Cause that's literally what bidding wars are for, for figuring out who values
something more than someone else.
Uh, could I, for the sake of the conversation, even though I think I, I
think I could imagine already the answer to this, but, uh, how does libertarianism,
uh, take into account, you know, people making your rational decisions, uh, with
regard to like, I don't know, without regulation, uh, you'll end up with lots
of people, you know, making shit products that aren't safe and driving
their shit cars around that'll be exploding.
And if I care about safety, then what am I supposed to do?
Uh, so you did not quite make a comparison there.
So I won't require a bonk, but, um, the way that I address that concern is
by asking when is someone more likely to make an irrational decision when they
are making a decision about how they want to spend their money for goods and
services that they will consume directly, or when they are making a decision
about whom to vote for, which may or may not have an impact on how their
state's electors vote, which may or may not have an impact on who actually ends
up in office, which may or may not have an impact on whether whatever laws we
want passed actually get passed.
Uh, I, people make shit decisions with, I mean, or the whole thing about like
people buying snake oil, I guess, which again is the reason that I kind of already
addressed it in my head because there's even that, like, I think Eliezer wrote
the whole thing about the band item shop.
So yeah, which is sort of, you just have to accept the externalities because
they, the benefits outweigh the.
A lot of it comes down to, yeah, and like, it's not just that people are
allowed to make bad decisions, it's that people are more likely to make bad
decisions in the voting booth than they are in the marketplace.
So trying to ban bad decisions, uh, by government fiat has the problem of
people need to, we need to have a way to decide who gets to decide what's
a bad decision and ban it.
And the current system we have for doing that is elections and that got
Donald Trump elected.
And so if you grant the government a general power to ban bad decisions, then
whenever someone like Trump gets elected, which empirically happens around, uh,
once every 200 years or so, then you end up with things like masks getting
banned during a pandemic.
Well, I agree with you.
Um, I think that's a losing case to make to the general populace.
People are going to see, you know, um, their little old grandma killed by
a snake oil guy who doesn't give a fuck and they're going to want to make a
law against that and no amount of saying people are allowed to make bad
decisions because they should be the ones who get to decide if the decision is
good or bad is going to stop someone for voting for that law.
Yeah, I mean, I have to, uh, I have to go in about then a couple of minutes.
Oh, um, if you want to say then, uh, yeah.
Well, so I wanted to break in here because I think you brought up, you just
brought up my biggest objection to, um, this idea of a government free society,
which is, um, and you mentioned, uh, homeowners associations earlier,
which are part of this, which is that I think if you, if you don't have a
government, people will just make a government.
People, uh, really like preventing other people from doing things.
Um, they are addicted to it.
They can't stop doing it.
And, um, I just feel like in any, any system where there isn't a government,
people will just create one voluntarily and everyone will sign on to it.
And you see this with homeowners associations that you have, there's
these, this area that's unregulated.
And what, what do people do?
They get together, form an association and, um, immediately take away
people's choices about whether to join it or not.
Uh, so I feel like that's, that's, that's sort of what I would expect in
any kind of society that, that didn't have some kind of enforcement
mechanism against governments.
I could picture this on a small scale where, you know, it's
me and, and a dozen people on an island and together, or at least most of us
decide that, Hey, look, the fresh water is coming from this stream on the top.
Anyone taking a shit and it gets there, you know, gets beaten up, right?
That, that's government small scale.
And like, even if someone wants to make an irrational decision there and shit
in the good water, like the, the, the government of the other 11 of us will
have something to say about that.
Right.
I don't think you're going to go pay him not to shit in the water.
I think you're just going to go point a gun at him and say, don't shit in the water.
I'm going to, I'm going to pay him with, you know, by not hitting him in the face.
Um, and the other thing, the other thing I wanted to say is that when you do get
to talking about anarcho capitalism, um, I had real trouble understanding what
the concept was, um, for a while until I, and the way I was able to conceptualize
it is that it's not really an absence of government.
It's a series of subscription governments, um, that are all operating in the
same area and that you can choose which one you want to subscribe to.
Yeah.
So that is why I brought up the, um, Max Planck definition of government because
anarcho capitalism, as I conceive of it and as Wes understands it as well, uh,
is it is anarchic in the Planck sense that there isn't a geographically localized
monopoly, uh, but a lot of the things that governments currently do would end up
happening under, uh, anarcho capitalism.
Yeah.
And if you want to see a really cool creative take on this, uh, I recommend
to like the lightning by Ada Palmer.
Oh, so good.
Quite.
Yeah.
All right.
So I got to run guys.
Um, all right.
Wes, I'm so sorry that I gave you the wrong time.
No, it's fine.
It's fine.
You guys, uh, I feel like five was, uh, too many for this anyway.
I kind of agree.
Five in a room where we could see who wanted to talk next at work, but, uh, maybe.
All right, but, uh, I'm, I'm sure the rest of this will be awesome.
All right.
See you guys later.
Okay.
Bye.
Yeah.
So, uh, also, uh, homo, homeowner's associations are governments.
Uh, they're just governments where emigration is very, very cheap and easy.
So, um, they are like the least objectionable form of government.
And, uh, if we ended up with a society with governments where the right of exit
was as cheap and easy as it is with most homeowner's associations, I'd be
pretty okay with that as a compromise.
Uh, and then before that we were talking about something else and I can't remember
what, well, I think we've, we've basically laid down that libertarianism is, uh, if
you, the foundation was that, uh, if you accept that, um, voluntary transactions
should, except for extreme outliers, always be acceptable.
And, uh, that's libertarianism that brings us to, didn't that turn Texas into a
meat locker?
Uh, not quite because I also have some moral arguments that are some non
pragmatic moral arguments that I want to go over real quick.
Uh, and these ones are important because, uh, the Fonder, someone is of these
arguments, the worst, the libertarian they tend to be, uh, not in the sense of
being less dedicated to the principles of limiting this high scope and spending
of government, but just they tend to be shittier human beings.
Um, so, uh, I do think it's important to talk about these and why they are
bad and, uh, the extent to which they can be redeemed.
Um, okay.
So the first one is everyone's favorite, terrible argument for libertarianism,
the non aggression principle.
Yay.
Uh, so the non aggression principle is the principle that, um, initiating
force against another person is always and everywhere a bad thing to do.
Uh, this is a, uh, bad argument because it is trivially easy to come up with, uh,
cases where the consequences of rigorously following the non aggression
principle are very, very bad.
Uh, so easy.
In fact, that I'm pretty sure you guys could think of one without, um, stopping
to think about it very long and indeed so easy that sometimes these events
actually happen in real life.
Um, like I generated one with the hypothetical a minute ago about the
dozen people on an island.
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah.
Exactly.
The person who did clean water hasn't, hasn't committed violence against us.
First they've just poisoned our drinking water.
Yes.
Uh, my favorite is, um, that, uh, there's a meteor headed towards earth and it
will wipe out all of humanity.
Uh, and Mortimer snodgrass has a space laser that we can use to
destroy the meteor or deflect it.
Uh, but Mortimer snodgrass is a crotchety old misanthropic man who doesn't
care about other people and won't live very long himself anyway.
So he refuses to let us use his space laser and the morally correct thing to
do is obviously to punch Mortimer in the mouth and use the space laser anyway.
And then if you're like super dedicated, then you can maybe throw him 50
bucks afterwards to compensate for the space laser ammunition.
There's a great moment like that actually on a Santa Clarita diet.
She wants into the basement of this building and she's like, hold on,
let me go to the ATM first cause the guard won't let her in.
And he's like, what is this a bribe?
And she's like, no, it's for your nose.
And then she hits him in the face and throws 300 bucks at him.
Nice.
Um, yeah.
Uh, so this is a very bad argument.
If you take it as a deontological principle, uh, but I do, uh, think that
the non-aggression presumption, which is that you should presume against aggression
except in cases where, um, where it's obviously, uh, catastrophically has
catastrophically bad consequences is a much better alternative.
Um, so I am a virtuous.
So I am allowed to think about both, uh, high level principles and immediate consequences.
So I generally like a cost to benefit ratio of around two to three, uh, to
justify, um, uh, aggression, uh, but if you are a strict consequentialist,
then you can just use it as a tiebreaker or if you, uh, are a less consequentialist
virtuous than I am, then you can ask for a higher cost benefit ratio.
Uh, that just comes down to personal moral preferences.
Okay.
And by virtuous, do you mean virtue ethics?
Yes.
And, uh, by virtue ethics, I mean, uh, there are several factors that, uh,
contribute to moral decision making, um, which is intermediate between like the
super hardcore consequentialist or Kantian.
There is only one thing that you should consider versus the like, uh, biblical
deontology of like, there are these thousand and some rules that you need
to follow in all situations.
Yeah.
And, uh, personally, I like the classical seven of, uh, faith, hope, love,
courage, uh, prudence, temperance, and justice, but you know, but those are things
we can get into on our virtuous ethics podcast.
You and Wes could argue about hedonism.
If you haven't done that already, uh, mind killers or whatever.
Yeah.
No, I, I don't want to argue with Wes about moral philosophy because it's
moral philosophy is super half baked.
And now that he's gone, I can say that without getting any pushback.
Eat my ass.
So he can find good ways to justify it, even if they aren't actual good arguments.
Yep.
It's really hard to debate with.
It's fun.
Next time we'll debate with Wes on something.
I'm not saying he's wrong, but I'm saying he has an unfair advantage
even when he is wrong.
I think the virtue ethicist has an easy answer.
Enjoy a bit of hedonism, not so much that it ruins your life, but not, not so
little that it ruins your life.
Exactly.
All right.
So it's a consequentialism to me, but okay.
It's personal consequence.
Yeah.
All right.
So bad argument too.
We've got ethical egoism.
Yeah.
So this is basically just the fuck you got mine, uh, argument, uh, that I think,
uh, Stephen has been worried about this whole time.
And, uh, it is a bad argument because it's really, really bad PR.
And there's no other reasons why it's a bad argument at all.
Um, that sounds like bad PR, just admitting it.
Right.
Can you explain that?
Yeah.
No, it, that's a joke.
Oh, okay.
It's an obviously bad argument for a lot of reasons.
And it's so obviously bad that I can goof on it being bad by saying the only
reason it's bad is because it'll upset people when it's actually bad for a
lot of obvious reasons.
I mean, the fact that a lot of people don't realize that makes it not quite
as obvious as you're saying, in my opinion.
Okay.
Well, sorry, it was a joke.
Get off my ass.
Okay.
You, you, your joke sins are forgiven.
Okay.
I'll get all the way off that.
Uh, yeah.
So, um, the, uh, better alternative to the don't tread on me argument is the
don't tread on anyone argument.
Uh, so politicians basically want two things.
They want money and they want votes.
And in America, uh, the middle class is the biggest class and the upper
class is predictably the richest class.
So, uh, when, uh, governments are making decisions, they tend to
favor the preferences of the middle and upper class.
Uh, and so poor people get screwed.
And this is why you get things like corporate welfare and, uh, much less
of things like actual welfare for actual poor people.
Um, and, uh, there's also just like the basic logic of, um, special interest
politics where, um, uh, essentially it's easier to get a law passed getting you
a special handout than it is to repeal a whole bunch of laws, none of which know
one of which causes you a lot of problems, but all of which together
cause you a lot of problems.
And I actually listened to a really interesting podcast episode recently
about this, uh, so if you want to do a quick digression on that, then we can.
I mean, we're pushing two hours as it is.
So, yeah, and we're not even halfway through the, uh, outline, but what,
what do you say?
I would make it two priority if you feel like coming back for the second
half, I would love to come back for the second half.
Yeah.
I mean, we've got to keep, I'm not, I want to, we're not wrapping up right yet.
No, no, good.
Yeah.
Then let's keep rolling.
We'll figure out where to, where to press pause.
Also, like I, I literally have nothing to do for another four hours or so.
So if you guys just want to like make a super long episode, I'm okay with that.
I don't think I could handle that.
Plus I do got to go out and do some chores.
Okay.
All right.
Then, uh, do you want to cut it after, or, uh, before we get to the Q and A?
No, the whole point of this was to find out why Texas isn't libertarianism land.
Well, we need, we need to, uh, press pause.
Yeah.
Well, we need to, um, uh, we need to, uh, keep the audience engagement.
We need to get them to come back for part two.
This is what happens when you stick to outlines, man.
All right.
Let's, let's press the moral arguments then for now.
Well, uh, so real quick, um, uh, cause this is the basing conspiracy and we never say
no to a good, uh, um, what should we call it, um, tangent.
And this is actually a really cool story.
So in case you didn't notice, uh, alcohol sales laws in America are really fucked up
and they tend to be fucked up at this state level.
So there's a lot of fuckery, uh, instead of just like one big pile of fuckery.
Um, and, uh, I mean, yes, everyone can.
Um, so like, uh, in my home state of South Carolina, liquor stores need to have a
big red dot on the frontage.
Why?
I don't know, because someone said so.
Um, but yeah.
So letter.
Hmm.
Yeah.
So, um, the, uh, one of the weird things about our system is we have a three tiered
system where, uh, the producers, wholesalers and retailers of alcohol cannot be the same
legal entity.
Huh.
And so this has led to a lot of rent seeking getting built up where things like,
um, like the reason you can't make it, you couldn't get, uh, to go cocktail before the
pandemic, uh, was because whenever someone tried, then the liquor stores would panic
and get a law passed banning it.
And just in general, they're, they've like been trying to eat each other's lunches,
uh, which normally that would be prevented by vertical in a, in a vertical integration
where one company owns the entire supply chain.
Um, can we talk about breweries in New Jersey?
Uh, yeah.
Once we finish this story.
Um, so normally, uh, you would just vertically integrate and that would deal with this, uh,
infighting issue.
Um, uh, but, uh, because of this federally mandated three tiered system, that doesn't
happen with liquor.
Um, but then the pandemic rolled around and that provided a shelling point for, um, uh,
all of these various, uh, lobbying groups for alcohol companies to all coordinate and
get rid of a whole bunch of these regulations all at once.
And pretty much everyone involved is much happier now than they were before the pandemic
because they have gotten rid of a bunch of these bullshit laws.
Um, uh, but before they, um, each founded in their individual interests to just try
to get, um, regulations favoring them past rather than trying to get rid of a bunch
of them all at once.
And, um, so anyway, all that is to say, uh, that the government hurts everyone and it
hurts some people less than others, but probably you are getting hurt by the government
quite badly in ways you don't even entirely realize.
And so, uh, the better alternative to the, uh, don't tread on me argument is don't
tread on anyone because everyone is getting trod on, including breweries in New Jersey.
Jayce.
Nice.
Uh, there's this thing in New Jersey and possibly other places where breweries are, I
don't know, I don't know if it's to do with, they don't want them competing with bars or
bars, don't want them competing with them or what the hell, but you can only have a
brewery if it's cat, like categorized in markets itself as like a educational experience
where you have a mandatory tour of the brewery that you have to, you have to take the tour
and then you can have a tasting afterwards.
But the breweries that I went into, I don't know, someone described it and they're like,
Oh yeah, I did a brewery tour.
You got to see the stills and stuff.
And I like built it up in my head as, Oh, cool.
Like, I wonder if you like go in there and you're like, you can make your own beer and
you can like pick out which hops you want.
And they tell you about the history of that.
No, they're like, I went in and they're like, Hey guys, come this way, sign this waiver.
Here's our stills over here.
Here's the other stills.
Here's the shit that we put in the stills.
Okay, go drink.
Sign this other waiver first.
It's just like, Oh man, I wanted the tour.
Can you deliver to me and solve this?
Yes, it can.
Because if you get rid of that stupid law that requires the tour, then you can actually
distinguish between the breweries that actually do give you an educational experience and
the ones that just have to say they do to get Uncle Sam off their backs.
Also, the, uh, don't tread on anyone.
Have you seen the ridiculous, uh, redraws of the don't tread on me flag?
Yes, you tried on me, daddy.
The, the no step on snack ones.
I like, I like that one, but I, I like the, like, please tread on me daddy ones too.
I like the most minimal one where it was a squiggly line and the word don't.
So, I mean,
Just make you merge for the, if anyone, if people haven't made it flag, like it just
lots of snakes, don't tread on any of us.
My own real conventionally, um, conventionally, don't tread on anyone comes on a yellow
background beneath a hedgehog, which is the animal of the libertarian party and
also just a generally good, uh, symbolic representation for a lot of reasons.
I had a good animal.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
My, my, my one sentence example of government being annoying with business
regulation like that is car dealerships, at least in Colorado, aren't open on Sundays
because of the law.
And I thought that was insane because unless you want to skip work, it means you
have to do all your car shopping on Saturday.
Cars since 2013.
I don't even think that was the case in 2013, but I was in school and I guess my
schedule was more flexible, but when I was buying a car last year, it was annoying.
Um, so I guess the, the don't try to, there's so many things that I feel like we
need to hit, like don't tread on anyone is, is a great motto to live by, but as
soon as it becomes very profitable to tread on one group of people, people might
be inclined to do it, right?
Use the example of the American Indians earlier, like, uh, when it became very
profitable and easy to say, Hey, get out of here, or we're going to kill you, or
like, you know, we'll kill enough of you to scare the rest of you out of here.
Um, people just did it.
It, you know, like, uh, so, so people, people just did it.
People just did it, but they didn't do it because it was profitable.
Like it took a long freaking time before, uh, America's having, um, uh, colonized
the, uh, Western United States actually turned a profit in any accounting sense.
They did it because of manifest destiny and because, um, Theodore Roosevelt, uh,
thought that it would make his pee pee feel good.
And so it was right.
And it wasn't just Roosevelt.
It was also like Taft and some other people involved.
Yes.
Does the don't tread on anyone kind of motto require like that all libertarians
be basically like rational altruists?
Uh, no, because treading on other people is very rarely profitable.
Um, this is not something that was in the Q and A, but it should have been, uh, just
generally, um, if, uh, if people are more, will spend more resources to defend
things that are theirs, uh, then they will to take things from others.
Uh, and this is true for both, like, um, uh, both rational, strategic reasons
and irrational, emotional reasons.
And so that means that stealing from other people is almost never profitable.
Uh, if you just have like arbitrary amounts of money that you're willing
to throw at stealing from someone, then sure, it'll cause problems eventually.
But that's another one of those circumstances where, like, if you have
people that are that powerful and that determined to screw over other people,
then it's going to cause you problems no matter how you organize society.
I think the prevalence of people stealing from other people kind of, um, disproves
the stealing is almost never profitable thing.
Like this is a thing that happens a lot, especially
the taxation is theft idea.
So it, so it happens because there are economies of scale with respect to
stealing, at least certainly with, um, governmental stealing, uh, because
like the government already has a big military lying around.
So they might as well use it for something, uh, and taking stuff from other
people seems like a fine use of that military.
But if you don't have a military lying around, then, you know, you need to get
a military together before you take stuff.
And that's the expensive part.
And if you don't have one lying around, then your neighbor who does
might just take your stuff.
That is the admittedly hard problem.
At least we can, at least we can flag it as a hard problem.
Yes.
So, so national defense is one of the big things that anarcho capitalists
don't really have a good response to.
And I admit that, uh, it's, it is a hard problem.
All right, I got two questions that are probably related before we dive into the
Texas thing and maybe that's okay.
So like we've got the standard, uh, um, uh, allegory, parable, parable of the, of
the fishermen at the pond, right?
Or at the lake where there's, there's a hundred fishermen or fish, fish, you
know, you know, the story, the fish factory, there's 10, there's 100 of them
around it.
It's, they're all polluting the water, like crazy to get all as many
fishes as they can.
They all agree to buy a $300 filter that costs $300 a month to maintain.
And they're all doing great.
The water stays clean.
Uh, Jeff, the dick, the dick, uh, hold out decides, you know what, I'm not
going to wish the 300 bucks and they're making $999 a month and everyone else is
basically doing the exact same, except they're all paying for the filter and
then not paying for the filter catches on because they're all saving money.
And then they're all worse off because the, the fish are all dying.
So like, there's that, that's like the, the hold out problem.
You know, like if, if those, if those teenagers wanted to go around and pay
the neighbors to make noise on that intersection, like all it takes is one
person saying, fuck you, I don't care what you're offering me.
Another more, more snodgrass.
Right.
But like all it takes is one person to say, you know what, I'm not, I don't
want to do this.
Uh, Scott Alexander uses the example of someone farming wasps in their backyard.
Right.
Like, uh, if, if I live in an HOA, we can say no wasps, no wasp farms allowed.
But if I, because you're an asshole, right?
But so like, famously, there was an old lady in a libertarian town that loved bears.
And so she fed bears on her property and it was a huge problem for the rest of the
community.
It sounds like a problem.
So like, it just, I guess, how does the, so then again, we've got the, we get
the, all right, we'll pay you all $100 a month to not raise wasps or we can all
agree 100% of us to not do it.
And then we'll sign a piece of paper saying that we won't do it.
Otherwise we owe you $100.
But like getting unanimous votes for everything down to the level of wasps
sounds like impossible.
So that, that is getting deep into the weeds.
And if you want to take a four hour tangent for me to talk about mechanism
design and pre-commitment, I am super down for that, but it sounds like I have
more endurance on that front than you guys do.
I was sort of hoping we get to that general topic, but.
Okay.
I mean, there has to be a, so there has to be a not four hour version of defend.
You don't have to defend it perfectly, but there has to be a not four hour version.
Otherwise I'm going to accuse you of Jordan Peterson.
Okay.
Uh, so the short version is, um, uh, while you are, so, so like the way I would do
it, if I was like designing a mechanism for that is I would have everyone buy
into like basically buy into a, uh, basically social insurance pool where if
say the filters cost $300, but not having them, uh, will get you $400 in profit.
Have everyone put $200 into the pool.
And then at the end of whatever period, the pool pays out evenly amongst all
people who had filters and then, uh, if there are holdouts, then that gets back
into the complicated area, but basically there are ways around the problem.
And, um, they tend to not be simple, but, um, if you, if you do want to read the
work of the, uh, woman who literally wrote the book on this, uh, it is what Stone Cold
badass and first woman economics, Nobel prize winner, Eleanor Ostrom did her
prize winning work on, uh, it is well worth the read.
Okay.
That sounds fun.
Yeah.
Cause I'm just thinking like then that just, and then we'll, we'll just push past it.
I'm thinking you got to pay somebody to inspect the, the filters.
So like they're going to get less than the 100% return unless the person's being
paid by somebody else.
You got to pay the accountant who's keeping track of all this shit.
Like these people are going to lose money somewhere or it's coming from somewhere else.
But all right, let's, let's do touch on Texas.
Cause I'm curious, like, so this, this, this was in my, my night, my naivete.
I was thinking, all right, well, look, they said regulation sucks and they went
without it and they all got fucked, right?
Or at least many of them, plenty of them did, right?
The rich ones or the assholes got to fly out to Cancun, but, um, the, the rest of them
who didn't have plane tickets ready to go to Cancun, uh, they got fucked, right?
Yes.
This seems like a great argument in favor of regulation saying, look, I don't care
what you guys want to do.
We're going to, we're going to put in some minimum enforcements on what you're
allowed to do as part of our society that includes like the kind of shit you're
allowed to burn to power your vehicles.
That includes the amount of like minimum effort you have to put in into building
your critical infrastructure, et cetera.
Yeah.
So, um, the big case against, uh, blaming Texas's power failure on libertarianism is
that their grid wasn't libertarian.
It wasn't like it was a regulated cooperative with a whole bunch of stakeholders of
whom consumers were only a small share.
Uh, so in an ideal libertarian society, then you would just have a whole bunch
of power companies competing and one could be like super duper robust and their
customers would pay a lot for that.
Um, but they would almost never fail.
And then you would have more lackluster or more lackadaisical companies.
Uh, and if their customers wanted to save money and deal with occasional brown
outs and blackouts, then that's a choice they could make.
Obviously with cases like power, where you actually need to run physical power
lines to every single house, it is more complicated than that.
And, uh, that is something I specifically want to address at length in the Q and A.
But, um, suffice it to say that Texas does not quite live up to the libertarian ideal.
Uh, but, uh, to some extent that is a, um, uh, what you call it.
Um, it's kind of no true Scotsmaning.
Uh, so the other thing I'll say is, uh, if you do pass that sort of regulation that
every single, um, uh, especially if you pass it at the federal level, then you
would need, uh, everywhere to be able to deal with hurricanes as well as, um,
Louisiana does and heat as well as Texas does and cold as well as Alaska does and so on.
Well, and, um, it's better to just have a, uh, to make those decisions as locally as
possible so that, uh, each individual customer or not individual customers because
of the fixed cost problems, but, uh, where as few numbers of customers as you can get
away with are making decisions, uh, for themselves about what risks they want to take
in exchange for higher energy bills.
And if you mandate Texas needs to have its grid hardened against these once in a decade
snowstorms, um, then that will lead to higher energy prices and you are making a decision
for the people who are paying those prices that they should be paying those prices when
they might rather use that money to buy food or, uh, put gas in their cars or do other
things that they would prefer to paying higher energy prices.
And so it's really easy to point at a specific bad thing that happened and then hit the do
something button, but you need to remember that those sorts of things come with costs
and you need to, and someone needs to pay those costs.
And the best way for evaluating, uh, those sorts of cost benefit, uh, calculations is just
by making, by allowing the people who are affected to make the decisions.
And so that's why, uh, you would want, uh, those decisions made by actual Texans.
Okay.
Yeah.
I follow, I think I follow everything you're saying.
I think that, like, uh, I mean, whether or not the average person that you ask would
agree to this or not, they would, I think probably understand that they'd rather pay another
$60 a year in energy bills than have a 20% chance of paying $16,000 a week to warm their
house, right, um, over, over, over any given decade.
Like I, I sort of just assume that's the case.
And the, you know, and this, this gets me to, I think my solution with Texas that I
gleaned from this conversation is that these people probably weren't given a choice
because there weren't competing markets.
And so what happened in Texas wasn't a libertarian, you know, failure.
This was just bad design, bad, bad, bad organization.
Well, seeing that it couldn't be competing.
Yeah.
So you, so you could, um, could.
If you said this is like a thing that locally Texans should, um, decide on it.
If 51% of Texans decide, you know what, we do want to winterize and we're willing to
bear the costs and they pass a regulation that says all the power has to be winterized.
Um, is that acceptable in a libertarian version since it was local decision and the
majority decided to go with it?
That is certainly more acceptable, uh, than the federal government saying all
power grids need to be winterized.
Um, uh, so the, so the other, um, big objection I have to, uh, blaming Texas
on libertarianism is that they're like the reason why Texas could only experiment
with different ways of providing power.
If it was an isolated energy island was because of federal regulations that
they didn't want to follow.
Uh, and those regulations weren't like simple common sense stuff.
Texas was doing those anyway.
Uh, it was like very specific things where Texas thought that they could do
them better and cheaper.
And in a lot of cases they were right, but the government arbitrarily, the federal
government arbitrarily decided, if you want to experiment with that specific thing,
then you can't be plugged into our power grid.
And so like the liberty, the really simple marginal libertarian solution is
just let people experiment with different ways of providing power without
being completely cut off from all other grids in the country.
Well, if those other grids feel that that experimentation will put them at risk,
don't they have the right to disassociate from Texas if they want to?
They do, but I'm pretty sure that no one was making that case.
Like the, the, the generally power is generated locally.
And the only reason you have a national grid is so that the entire thing
doesn't blow up in the case of these local emergencies.
Um, and I, if anyone has made the case that plugging, uh, that connecting
Texas's grid with the rest of the country would present a serious environmental
or safety risk to the rest of the country, I have not heard it.
I think that, yeah, if, if I have, in fact, just not heard it and that is true,
then of course that's a decision that the rest of the country, um, is free to make.
I think that's why, like, you know, and this will be, you know, future
conversation fodder, but I guess at the end of the day, there's a reason
this is a gigantic field of study that you can't sum up in two hours.
Cause like, yes, there's a zillion nuances.
I mean, you know, if, if 85% of my neighbors in Texas were like, no,
fuck the, you know, paying an extra $11 a year for a safer electricity.
I want to spend that on whatever you said, food and gas, but I'm assuming
more stupid things cause it's $11.
I'm making numbers up, but like, should I just be fucked?
Cause all my neighbors are idiots.
Like, no, obviously I can just move out of Texas, just get in your car
and drive 2,000 miles, but that's not like, that's not a real solution.
Right.
Probably also buy an emergency generator.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I suppose if I had the, you know, but even that, like, I mean, I
imagine that you can't run that inside.
So it has to be outside and then I've got to have that.
No, you can run an emergency generator inside.
Really?
It depends.
It depends on some of the details, but yeah, I suppose.
Yeah.
If you, if it vented outside, if it ran on gas, then, or if it ran on electricity,
you had like one of those Tesla powers power banks, you know.
Oh, okay.
I was about to say it's counterproductive if it runs on electricity.
Yeah, you know, you just plug it into the wall and charge it.
Then you, then you power your house.
Yeah.
Yeah, they do have electricity, powered electricity generators that are
called extension cords.
But I do, I can put the Texas thing aside because that's, this was not
a good libertarian example.
And I knew it wasn't.
And real quick, I do, I do want to, I do want to say it isn't necessarily
the case that lack of competition means it's not libertarian because you
can have natural monopolies where you don't have competition, even in an
ideally libertarian society.
So that, that wasn't, it's not that if there's a monopoly, then it's not libertarianism.
That would be left libertarianism or just blatant, no true Scotsmaning.
It's more that the particular monopoly we're talking about here is definitely
has some government mockery in addition to just general monopoly problems.
I just agree that we can just set Texas aside because anybody who wants to
score a point against libertarianism is going to point at Texas and say, see,
look, this happened because they didn't have regulations requiring winterization.
This is a big libertarianism fail.
And just saying, well, yeah, that's what the people of Texas chose is not, it's
not a counter argument.
Like, people are going to still walk away from that saying, yeah, okay, I won.
That's a point against libertarianism.
We shouldn't have it.
Yeah, I mean, so if someone stubbornly ignores that some policies have costs and
that it's often very easy to just pay attention to the benefits of the policy
and ignore the cost, then that person is just an idiot.
And I don't care whether or not they think they scored points.
Well, okay, you can say that.
But in my experience, that is the majority of people.
That's even where I was 10, 15 years ago when I argued with my libertarian
friends back then, I was like, yeah, sure, there's costs to some of these things,
but it's worth it to have the regulation and save lives.
And maybe now I think.
Yeah, so if they have actually done their homework and shown that they
and like done a cost benefit calculation, then we can have a discussion.
But usually they just say, oh, no, it's worth the cost.
And they just leave that as a baseless assertion.
Yeah, but I don't care about refuting every single baseless assertion.
There's too many idiots out there making baseless assertions for me to go around
rebutting every single one of them.
Well, that's the problem, because every single one of these people does have a vote.
And so and that's why we need an epistocracy to disenfranchise them.
Oh my God.
So so libertarian leads directly to not everyone should have the right to vote,
which is going to be a huge problem in the U.S.
My brand of libertarianism does yes, because my brand of libertarianism
is very unpopular, despite being very good for pretty much everyone.
That's I mean, that's not very good, though, to be very good.
You have to deal with the realities on the ground, including everybody wants a vote.
Yeah, regardless of how good it is, you still have to be able to sell it.
But that was that was the joke I was about to make, which is like, David,
how do we like, how does libertarian, how do we use libertarianism to stop
people from making stupid arguments against libertarianism?
You don't understand libertarianism.
Well, well, PR is not my department.
The answer is we hire a really good PR person.
That's hard. Or several.
So I also want to talk real quick about the follow up from Inyash.
Yes.
About people receiving math of electric bills, because this is also a very good point.
And this is something where libertarians can actually have some more traction
without needing to completely overhaul the way the entire country does power generation.
OK, so I understand this is that people could get lower rates
if they went with a variable variable rate contract that said, you know,
you're charged more or less, depending on what the power demand is.
And for the most part, they save money all the time in the aggregate.
But then this happened and some people got bills for tens of thousands of dollars
or at least over ten thousand dollars.
And technically, that's on the up and up.
The demand went really high.
The supply went really low.
Everything checked out.
But like that seems really wrong to most people that like you can just get hit
with this bill for well, especially when you didn't.
And so like, again, other than deciding you're going to get in a car
and drive two thousand miles, like you didn't you didn't get a choice.
No, there were other options.
Yeah. So yeah.
So this this is something that a lot of people object to.
And I just straight up do not understand it like basically what we have here
is a decision between a constant cost or basically playing double or nothing.
And these people lost.
And for some reason, people are focusing on the fact that they lost
a bunch of money playing this game rather than the fact that they chose to play the game.
So if you choose to if you choose to take a variable rate contract
and and once a decade, there are these big snowstorms and demand goes up
way, way high and supply goes down way, way low.
That that's like something you should have priced into your decision.
And if you fail to do that and you end up saddled with a really big electric bill,
like I like my heart goes out to people who like genuinely cannot pay these bills.
But after a certain point, you just need to say that like people have to live
with the consequences of their decisions.
And I don't get why that's such a hard concept to wrap your head around.
Like another instance of the same argument I've had was
I had a friend arguing that CD Projekt Red should pay the guy who wrote
the Witcher books a lot of money because the Witcher games were a way
bigger success than he anticipated when he originally sold the rights to it.
But like CDPR offered him a percentage contract.
He declined it in exchange for a fixed rate contract.
And he ended up losing that bet.
And like I don't see any way to make the case that he should be indemnified
for having made this bet and lost that doesn't end in a massive cluster
fuck where everyone will always make those big bets because they know
that they'll be subsidized if they lose.
And like that's like exactly the mode of thinking that led to the 2008 financial crash.
So clearly this is a bad thing to generalize.
And there's no reason why you should embrace it in this specific case
without generalizing it.
So don't embrace it.
I think you are pivoting to a much easier to defend arguments.
So I want to bring it back to the power one.
Yes. So so I'm I'm pivoting.
I'm pivoting to a different case of the same thing happening.
Yes. I'm like it's a it's a case where I think a lot of people's
intuitions will be primed differently.
And I agree.
But I think that there is a distinct and important difference in the fact
that people's intuitions are primed differently.
They think that having the ability to generate heat in a deadly snowstorm
is a basic necessity of living, which it probably is, and that it is immoral
to charge someone that much amount of money.
And I agree with you on all the points that you made, except for the fact
that a lot of people believe that the government should prevent people
from being able to make immoral contracts.
Like the government does not allow you to take out a hit on someone else.
The government does not allow you to sell yourself into slavery.
And there are people who would say the government should not allow you
to sign a variable rate contract that has no limits and no exceptions
for things like this happening.
And therefore the contract and the bill should be thrown out on
on the grounds of being unconscionable.
This is actually so I I wage, but we will have to just table that.
Yeah. So I actually do think that
I do think you should be allowed to sell yourself into slavery.
And the reason why it's acceptable to ban assassination contracts
is because they have large negative externalities.
I would I would love to see someone trying to internalize that particular
externality. But yeah, assassination contracts do fall into the exceptions
we've talked about to where voluntary transactions are maybe not
social utility maximizing. You have a thing, Chase?
Yeah, if we're not going to the QA,
could you talk about the sort of issue with perfect information?
That's sort of my one hesitance about some of this,
like scam artists could flourish.
And I think to to to expand on that exact thing,
or maybe this is an example, tell me if I'm right or wrong, Jace,
like I don't know if the average person is equipped to understand
that the risk involved over the next 20 years of signing a variable rate
or fixed rate contract for electricity. Yeah. Right.
So like that person either might select information due to lobbying
or lack of internet freedom or something, or they might just not be good with numbers.
I also think this is so so I advise scam artistry.
OK, so let's say that when you're choosing a variable rate versus a fixed rate,
there was text in in 14 point bold red print
saying warning over the past 10 years, prices have gone as high
as such and such during these circumstances and are likely
and by meteorological estimates,
there this is however many percent likely to happen again
in the next 10 years and people chose the variable rate anyway.
Then would you still think that they should pay the variable rate?
I think that's my easier question than Jace's.
But just a quick answer would be like if that was presented on the front page
and they had said, look, your odds of having to pay $48,000 a month
for electricity are approximately one in 500.
Do you still want to sign? Then I'd be OK with it.
If it's hidden in obscure legalese on page 468, then I disagree with it.
What's making the company that's producing these have to put that label?
I don't think in the particular case of Texas,
it's people vote people in the Texas Energy Cooperative
or whatever it's called voting to require it.
OK, I like that.
Are you going to say anything?
I think this a lot of this the real sticking point comes down to
what is government allowed to stop people from doing for their own good?
Like that that is what the variable rate contract question is.
That is, like, do people have to get vaccines before they can get on a plane
kind of thing? It's what is the level where the government says
you have to do this thing for your own good, even if you don't want to.
So that's so long scenes are variable rate is one of those things.
Yeah, so vaccines are an interesting and timely example
because you don't actually need a government to
to enforce vaccines.
You can just have the airline companies enforce vaccines
and the schools and the stores and so on.
Like that that is something that I think a libertarian society would actually
address very, very well for the same reason that even though
I live in the deep south and like probably 70 percent of the people
I see walking around are unmasked, every single business has a sign
in the window saying, please put on a mask before you enter this establishment.
I heard that text the business is actually were able to
enforce their property rights in in a meaningful way
to having their customer base actually use protective equipment.
Then that would be like a lot.
Better like that would be much better than just having a government
where there's a 50 percent chance that it's run by someone good
and a 50 percent chance that it's run by Trump.
I heard that Texas like I know the odds aren't 50 50, but that was
the purpose is good.
I heard that Texas after the after the the mask lifting
passed that like target, for example, said he still have to wear masks to come to target.
Yeah, that's a that's a good example.
And then the idea of a vaccine free schools and airlines, I'm just picturing
like someone deciding to send their kid to the Jenny McCarthy Elementary School
where like one in 10 kid dies of of preventable illness
or like someone else deciding, you know, I'm going to fly in the vaccine free airline.
I guess then again, it's probably cheaper to fly in the vaccine free airline.
And if you're vaccinated, you're safe to fly there.
So yeah, that's not 100 percent, but you're safer.
Yeah.
Assuming they didn't ban masks and make you lick each other's faces,
then you're probably you're probably in a decent shape.
It works as long as you assume people make rational choices.
But that's my other issue.
Yeah, I think I want I want protection.
This is my well.
So so again, people are more likely to make rational choices
about what they're buying for themselves with their own money
than they are when they're voting.
And so like it is completely true that people are often irrational,
but they're more rational in the marketplace than they are in the voting booth.
So the government cannot be a solution to irrationality.
I mean, the government, you're right,
because I'm looking at an ideal government, not the one we have.
And yet I think I think we're getting I dodged that bunk.
I think I think we're getting a little far afield.
But I do, you know, we'll we'll put this for next time.
I share Jason's concern massively for like, how do we protect people?
Yeah, so who don't have either perfect information
or the ability to move to a place that a better age away?
Yeah, so I do want to talk about perfect information real quick
because it is just like another chance for me to goosh about some basic price theory.
So the the information problem is essentially
so suppose you are a car dealer
who knows whether your cars are peaches or lemons and someone
and I'm trying to buy a car from you.
I don't know whether they're peaches or lemons.
So because I don't know whether they're peaches or lemons, the only
I won't be and say your lot is split 50 50 between them.
And I won't go into specific numbers
because that would that doesn't make very good radio.
But if that's the case, then I'm only willing to pay
half the price I'd be willing to pay for a peach and or rather
the half the price I'd be willing to pay for a peach plus
half the price I'd be willing to pay for a lemon, which is the expected value
of a random car.
If you know that I'm not going to do better than that halfway between price,
then you're going to take all of the peaches off a lot because you're getting
underpaid for all of them and so you'll only have lemons.
I will only be willing to pay the lemon price once you take the peaches off a lot.
And we end up with a market where you only sell lemons
and you don't get paid very much for it.
So this is a case, not just of imperfect information, but of asymmetric information.
And in asymmetric information markets, then voluntary exchange
isn't guaranteed to create the social optimum outcome.
It's very important that it is in asymmetric information markets
because imperfect information markets where the imperfection is symmetrical
do actually produce the or an efficient outcome because
if you don't know whether any given car is a lemon or a peach,
then you'll be willing to accept the halfway between price
because there's a 50 percent chance that you get overpaid
and a 50 percent chance that you get underpaid.
So, yeah, asymmetric information is a case where voluntary exchange can
end with bad outcomes, but there are more ways than people think
for imperfect information problems or asymmetric information problems to be resolved.
Some of my favorites are hostage capital.
Which is just one of my favorite concepts in economics.
You were saying something, Jayce?
I don't these solutions, though, largely require coordination efforts.
No, they don't.
And hostage capital is a coordination-less way to solve asymmetric information problems.
So I will talk about it.
So, well, yeah, I got to be ramping this up sometime soon.
All right, I got to stuff.
OK, then this can be the last thing we talk about in this episode
and we can do a part two at some point.
How long will this take?
It will take like five, ten minutes,
but it'll take longer if you keep asking questions.
Let's let's we'll do some pre-reading before the next episode.
And read about hostage capitalism, because that sounds hilarious.
And save it for next time.
How's that sound?
Ah, OK, fine.
I know we're leaving you hanging, but now you're one.
You gave you gave me hostage capital blue balls.
Thank you.
You're your advice to come back and give us give us the next.
Oh, I don't need an incentive.
So before we like wrap this up, are there since this was supposed to be
addressing the Texas thing, are there anything else that any of us want to say
about the whole Texas thing?
I have one last factual question that should have a yes or no.
You said that the fixed rate was an option.
So if I am either I chose the variable rate, you, my neighbor, chose the fixed rate.
Right.
Did your electricity work with the same reliability as mine?
And you got to pay your usual rate?
Yes, because you can't shut off electricity just to an individual house.
It's to regions, which is why when they kept electricity going to the hospitals,
they basically had the entire region around the hospital got electricity.
And those were generally the nicer parts of town from what I heard.
Yeah.
OK, so at least I'm happy to hear that.
That if you did opt into the fixed rate contract, that you weren't like
individually penalized during the during the black and brown outs.
OK, so that that was my that was my last clarifying question there.
No way. All right.
Anything from Jayce?
No, let's wrap it up. All right.
Wait, wait, anything from David about the whole Texas thing?
Yeah, if a place has a government, then generally you want to bet against
anything that happens in that place being an argument against libertarianism.
Deal. I really not always, but generally.
Sure. No, I really appreciate this whole conversation.
I thought that it was a lot of fun.
I mean, the downside is there's just too many rabbit holes.
This is the kind of kind of conversation you need to have.
You know, I admit when you pitched this group or this episode to me,
my initial thought was, you think we can do that in one episode?
We could have glad to see I'm right.
I don't know. I it was it was a good time.
Inyash, if you are hosting this podcast in particular
and you're betting against a bunch of tangents, then you are a fool.
Well, yeah, OK. But I was, I don't know.
The one thing I would say about Texas is that it seems to me a lot of the
problems that people have against libertarian is what Wes said.
People like to prevent people from doing things.
And one of those things is not having insurance, not having regulations.
And you're going to run into a problem whenever you have a large group
of people trying to have a sort of libertarian government that doesn't do that
because people just don't think it's really important.
It's a sexual harassment thing, right?
Yeah, they have to force people to not make dumb decisions.
And I have issues with that because a lot of decisions that the government
had in the past has said are dumb are things that I want to choose to do,
like, you know, have gay sex or take drugs or whatever it is.
But on the other hand, there's also a strong overwhelming social pressure
to not allow people to get those kinds of bills or to not have certain types
of insurance, and that's another hard problem that I think is difficult to solve.
I don't think the fence one is the only one.
It's given me a lot to chew on anyway.
OK, good.
No, this was awesome.
And this was awesome largely in part today due to Dmitri Pariski.
I'm sorry, Dmitri, I can't read good.
Dmitri Pariski, I'm going to go with that pronunciation.
Your public education system at work, ladies and gentlemen.
All right, try this public education system.
What? I went to the same public education system as you.
Yeah, so can you can you?
It's definitely Dmitri.
Can I try? All right, Dmitri Pariski.
I think it wasn't so much that I couldn't read it.
It's that I can't talk.
So anyway, it was a little column A, a little column B.
Anyway, thank you, Dmitri.
You rock and we really appreciate everything you do for us.
Let us know if we can do anything for you.
That goes for everybody, including you, David.
Thanks for coming on.
And I don't know.
I had a lot of fun, you know, even if even if most of this was just chasing
each other's tails and trying to, you know, touch a hundred things in an hour.
I had a great time with it.
So yeah, it was good.
Let's continue it sometime.
Yeah, thank you, David, for coming on.
Thank you, Dmitri, for being our patron and producing this episode
for everyone to listen to.
Hopefully they all appreciate it as well.
And thank you to West for being here for an hour.
Sorry, we had scheduling per bubbles.
Yeah. Oh, and everybody, if you want to hear more of news
politics and in particular, David, pushing his libertarian agenda on everybody.
Listen to the mind killer.
It is our sister podcast.
It also has. Hey, I only push my libertarian agenda at people who voluntarily agree
by listening to the podcast.
That's true. And West always pushes his.
I don't know what's in this agenda.
It's not fully statused, though.
It's sort of it's very statused.
OK, yeah, it's not that status.
I also like what the hell is it?
Wireheading and hedonism and I guess some wacky ideas that are fun.
And I will just push my general, you know, everything I'm correct on agenda.
So yeah, I'm I'm an ordained minister of the church of the dude.
So that's basically my agenda.
So you abide. Yeah, I abide.
So yeah, I also just as long as we're plugging mind killers,
maybe I'm biased because I'm on the side of the microphone for this podcast.
But I laugh a lot more listening to the mind killers than I do than I do
recording this, I think. OK. David, especially I find your brand of humor
like exactly point on there was one.
I think this prompted me to bring it up in the chat like month, months ago.
I dropped some like one word of legalese and you're like,
for the laws of us who aren't lawyers and or pretentious,
can you define that?
And I still chuckle about that to this day.
Thanks for people like our podcast because we're
with each other and then the opposite, you know, I like both flavors.
Yeah, it's different for sure.
So Google the mind killer podcast or just come to, you know, our site.
We have a link to it as well.
And yeah, we'll see you all in two weeks, I guess.
Cool beans. All right, everybody.
Bye. Thanks, buddy. Bye.
