Welcome to Gazing Conspiracy. My name is Katrina Stanton.
I'm Yannish Brodsky and I'm Steven Zuber.
This episode we are going to be talking about signaling and because it's December in the US, it's Christmas month.
I think it's December everywhere, isn't it?
It's only Christmas in the US though.
That is also not true.
Because it's December in the US, that makes it Christmas month.
So we thought that we'd talk a little bit about lying to children about Santa Claus.
That's one way to put it.
Sure. It's a Christian holiday, but like my family does Christmas, we've never talked about the Bible or got any religious connotation to it.
It's just kind of like one of those excuses that you have to get together and get presents and stuff.
Yeah, and my secular Jewish family celebrated Christmas. In fact, my aunt Susan used the term Christmas tree Jews.
That's adorable.
Which I think might be a slur, I'm not sure.
Oh, maybe it's less adorable.
I didn't celebrate Christmas when I was a Christian and now that I'm an atheist, I do.
So Christmas is a wonderful holiday.
And like many parents, my parents lied to me about the existence of Santa Claus.
And you are very unhappy about that still. You weren't happy when you found out.
No, the funny thing is I wasn't unhappy when I found out. I was proud of myself for figuring it out.
Only much later was I offended about my parents, about the double standard of my parents lying to me.
Because of course it was so, so important as a kid that I never lie.
But I didn't get it when I was a kid. I didn't get it.
I just, my parents could do whatever they want. They were above morality.
So it was only later that that really kind of sunk in.
Your parents were like, God's of your world.
Exactly.
Morality does not apply to them.
I think there's a general bad lesson that may or may not be an actual thing that when children find out that they've been duped for however many years about existence of Santa Claus
and the careful quasi-reason that parents do to explain how Santa can actually exist and do all that he's purported to do,
I think there's an argument that could be made saying that, oh, it weakens their trust in their parents or something.
Because you use the words, your parents are like God's to your world, and they kind of are.
You are more or less programmed to uncritically believe everything your parents tell you through childhood.
That said, I'm going to take the pros-antist stance for this.
It does not reflect my actual position.
I actually have argued that that is one of the reasons that maybe teaching Santa to believe to kids is a good thing because it'll...
Okay, this is not an argument I stand by anymore.
But at one time, I thought it's kind of like giving kids a little crash course in rationality.
You're told all these lies that do not match the real world at all,
and slowly they start to come apart and start questioning your reality and applying these skills.
And I thought it was like a good primer for teaching kids how to be critical thinkers.
Yeah, it's like a true obstacle course.
Yeah.
It's a crash course in cynicism and distrusting your parents and authority.
Exactly.
Which are important lessons to learn in life.
Yes.
Looking back on the actual real-world effects, it doesn't seem like that actually is what happens with people.
They find out about Santa and they're like, well, I still love Jesus, though.
And it never applies to anything else in life.
So that was one of my arguments I was going to give in favor of teaching kids or in telling kids about Santa was that...
He's like, Jesus liked.
Exactly.
And so then at the end of it, you could, you know, maybe not at age six or whatever,
but down the road when the kids a little older, hey, remember all this stuff about Santa Claus?
Well, Jesus now, right?
That was one of my joke arguments in favor of telling kids about Santa Claus.
It does kind of feel like it should be some sort of inoculant, though, right?
Like cowpox would protect you against smallpox?
It's kind of like the cowpox of religion.
Why doesn't it work?
It's chelod.
Humans suck.
Why are they so compartmentalized?
That's actually a good question.
Maybe because the threat of Hellfire is more scary than getting in the coal for Christmas?
Well, not to a kid, really.
No.
I think it's probably much more about fitting in with the rest of society.
Well, that's, you're taking well on my stuff.
I was going to say that about...
No, no, you're fine.
Like I said, I was going to argue against what I actually believe in favor.
So we weren't all agreeing that teaching kids about Santa is a bad thing.
I was going to say that, A, it's religion light, basically.
And there might be some transferable skills to an introspective young teenager or something about,
like, hey, remember how you went through all that stuff accepting that Santa wasn't real?
Well, that kind of works exactly in this situation, too, right?
It's not a slide of children all the time.
And I think that kids are pretty used to it.
So it doesn't...
Maybe that's why it doesn't come so much of a shock.
I don't know.
It didn't come as much of a shock to me.
Okay.
You were already used to your parents lying to you?
I don't know about my parents, but adults certainly do all the time.
And I didn't even...
I'm not sure that I even realized it.
It's so hard to remember how you felt as a kid about a lot of things.
Yeah.
And I mean, I must have been in first grade when I figured out the Santa didn't exist.
My mom wanted me to circle some things that I wanted in a cheap gift, like, catalog.
And then I did and those things showed up from Santa.
Right.
And you began to wonder?
Well, and then I...
That was the day I was like, oh, mom's buying me these things and saying that they're from Santa Claus.
Well, that's normal.
You go into class and your teachers are dressed up like witches and they have special witch names
because it's Halloween and they tell you that they're Hilda
and, you know, whoever.
Ever happened in my school?
Ever happened in your school?
It was so much fun.
Huh.
I don't remember my childhood that well.
I probably haven't at some point.
So, but that kind of stuff, the pretend, like, let's play pretend.
This tree is going to tell you, ask this tree questions and it'll tell you about how photosynthesis works.
Or, you know, that's what it is to be a child is to play pretend.
The Santa Claus myth, I think, is it's certainly more entrenched than a lot of those.
So it sounds like you're saying it's not really that bad of a thing.
Kids play pretend all the time anyway.
I'm saying, yeah, kids play pretend all the time.
Adults play pretend with kids all the time.
So I don't think it's...
Well, again, I can't speak for anyone but myself, but it wasn't terribly surprising that it was another...
It was another pretend thing.
I think the difference, though, between, like, your teacher pretending to be a witch or your parents telling you this tree is going to tell you about photosynthesis is that...
You knew it was pretend?
Yeah.
A, you knew it was pretend.
B, there was no, like, resistance to you questioning.
Like, wait, you're still Miss Higgins, right?
Not Helga the Witch, right?
So, like, but, like, if you challenge Santa that way, you get kind of pushed back where you wouldn't if you were, you know, saying this tree is not really talking, is it, mom?
You might, like, your teacher might say, I really am, I'm her twin sister, that's why we look exactly the same.
But I'm a witch, and we're going to...
We're going to talk about all the planets in the solar system, and then we're going to pluck them out of the sky and put them in this soup.
I stole her body outright using dark magic.
You should hear her screaming within my mind.
But yeah, kids are used to that, and, you know, as an adult who's worked with children and worked at museums, I hear parents telling little lies to their kids all the time.
Little lies, big lies, casually lies as the point.
Something to make your life a little easier?
Yeah.
If they don't know the answer, they'll just come up with something, you know.
So, it's a reality that children live in, and some of those things slip through.
You know, sometimes I would talk with Tim, and he'd say, oh, for the longest time I believed this about AIDS, because I asked my mom, how do people get AIDS?
And she said, by being naughty.
And he thought, and he thought, for the longest time, that if he didn't clean his room, he could get a deadly disease.
That sounds a few levels worse than Santa.
Yeah.
Did I ever tell you about...
But it was so casual.
Yeah, that's fucked.
She just didn't want to get into it.
She didn't want to get into it, so she gave him a non-answer, and it impacted his life in ways that she couldn't have predicted.
Right.
She was probably using naughty as a euphemism for unsafe sex with people you don't know.
Yes.
And he thought it meant not cleaning his room.
We're using needle consort.
Right.
Yeah.
Did I ever tell you about my missing ribs?
Not my actual missing rib, but the story?
Yes.
Of course.
You probably believed for a long time that men had one less rib than women.
Yes.
Because, you know...
Because of the Adam story, where God takes the rib and makes Eve out of it.
I don't think you told me this story.
For the longest time, I think I must have been into my teens, I thought this.
And the stupid thing is, I have 24-7 access to a male rib cage.
I could have checked.
I mean, it's not the easiest thing in the world to count your ribs, but I could have at least tried, and it never even occurred to me.
I was just like, yeah, that's why men got one less rib.
Because, I mean...
I can think of two examples that are related, and probably super tangential.
One, Aristotle had lots of claims to being a very intelligent guy, and he did a lot in natural philosophy.
But, he was also super lazy about stuff.
So, like, he started, like, taxonomy, and, you know, organizing animals in different file-on stuff.
But his...
He had, like, a few claims that were kind of out there, like, men have more teeth than women.
And it's like, you could just ask Mrs. Aristotle to open her mouth.
Yeah.
And count her teeth, and then you could count yours, and disprove that.
But you just said that without even looking at anything.
Maybe Mrs. Aristotle had been missing tooth or something.
Yeah.
Bad cavity.
Maybe he looked at literally one, two people, one male, one female, and counted their teeth, and said,
Well, that's...
That's how people talk.
Nobody's developed the scientific method yet, so...
I thought they had the logic to say that one doesn't equal all, though, back then.
Maybe they...
They didn't really...
Back then, they didn't even have to come up with any evidence at all.
Yeah.
Oh.
They're like,
Platonic ideals is how the universe works.
Yeah.
Back to Santa.
Yes.
Is there...
Go?
Oh, no, go ahead.
Oh, I was going to ask, is there, like, a social utility in, like, kids fitting in with the Santa belief?
I mean, I was yelled at for telling another kid that there was no Santa.
Okay.
By her mother.
Oh.
Well, Santa visits our house.
Guess he doesn't come to yours.
What a bitch!
Damn!
She was pretty mean.
She was a mean Manny.
Santa doesn't come to Jew houses, I guess.
Nice.
Yeah, that's what she's done.
I would even know if she knew I was Jewish, but, um...
She had a great crime did.
It's more, I was...
The implication was that I was a naughty child, where I wasn't going to get gifts from Santa,
because I...
What did she think was going to happen?
Her kids eventually find out.
Yeah.
All kids eventually find out.
That's true.
I don't...
I don't know.
That was going to be the other argument in favor of telling kids about Santa, which,
I think the standard recipe, or, like, the standard consideration with rationalist parents
who are like, well, do I engage in this or not?
And one of the standard kind of comebacks is, like, well, you don't want...
If you're going to do it at all, you don't want your kid to A, be the first person to
know that Santa isn't real, or B, be the last person to know that Santa isn't real.
Why wouldn't you want him to be the first?
Because then they get shit like Katrina got.
So, like, then you run around, you know, ruining your friend's holidays that year.
And, you know, you get stuff...
You get flak from their parents, and, you know, your parents get flak from their parents,
et cetera.
So there's some social utility to not ruining everyone's...
Rating on everyone's parade there, right?
I do know why that mean mama didn't want her daughter to know that there was no Santa.
What is that?
It's because she used it as a threat, like a lot of parents, you know.
If you don't behave, Santa's all seeing, all knowing, and he will know that you don't
get presents, because you're going to go on the naughty list.
I imagine that that had something to do with developing the Santa myth.
I mean, and then the even more intense Krampus myth.
Right.
And then the even more intense Jesus myth.
It's not just Christmas, it's not just torture.
It's torture forever, and no Christmas is again.
I believe her in Tennessee recently.
A couple little girls ran up to us and just said, hey, hi, there are elves in our house
now.
Today elves showed up in our house, and I said, oh, where are they?
And then she said, well, when's the bathroom?
And I was thinking, so do you have you heard of the elf on the shelf?
Yeah, yeah.
What is it?
Like he watches you or something?
Yeah, they watch you for Santa to make the whole threat a little bit more present.
It's a way of introducing the Panopticon to children early.
You will live in a surveillance society.
Some big brother will always be watching you.
Here is how we start you on it with the elf on the shelf.
And I was just thinking, they put it in the bathroom for them, those poor little girls.
Santa's watching you while you poop and shower.
Yeah, he's probably taking pictures.
Santa has to make sure it's a good poop, not a naughty poop.
So I had never actually heard of the elf on the shelf, and I didn't know it was a thing
that actually existed in real life.
I heard about it on a television show called The League, and the daughter names it Kegel.
And it was this Christmas episode, but it was not a family friendly show.
And I didn't know that this was something that people actually did.
That's really funny.
Oh yeah, my sister-in-law got one, and she was just saying, that thing was so creepy.
We couldn't even, the adults in the house couldn't handle it.
And they ended up getting rid of it, finding into that anthology wholeheartedly there.
Creepy elf.
But I think that if it's done right, if you're not threatening your kids, and you're not doing it,
you mentioned a lot of the nefarious ways to employ the Santa stuff.
And I think that those should be definitely disincentivized.
I think there's the kind of harmless way.
My parents don't think, like I said, I don't remember much how to do that well,
but I don't think that they were ever threatening Christmas,
or doing any things that would be super uncomfortable with this whole thing.
I think it was just one of those things that...
I think it would depend a lot on how you were raised.
If you were raised with an awesome, fun, Santa, and happy family,
you'd probably want to pass it on to your kids.
I don't think it really affects their kids that much.
Yeah.
You know, that elf on a shelf thing reminds me,
I read a blog post about someone pre-9-11, comparing pre-9-11 to post-9-11,
and she was talking about what a pain in the ass it was to get her,
I think, one year older, so in a stroller.
Bastard was screaming, would not want to go.
It was like a half hour or deal to get this kid in the stroller buckled up,
and they go, and they're going to the big arch in St. Louis, is it?
Okay.
And they get there, and there's now a new security thing that there had never been before,
and she was like, oh, crap.
Now I've got to take the kid out, go through security,
and go through this whole thing all over again.
It had been like five minutes since they got in the stroller.
But the kid is now used to security theater.
He gets out, they go through the thing, he gets back in, like it didn't even happen.
And she was like, this is fucking scary, and I don't like this.
That my kid just accepts this as part of his world.
And yet, he just got easily back into the stroller, so that's nice.
I'm sure my parents, my parents probably used Santa Claus to threaten me at some point as a child.
And I don't think it's unusual for parents to want to find, to want to do an appeal to authority.
My friend, even when I'm just over visiting, she'll try to tell her kid.
She'll ask me, is it okay to hit dogs, Katrina?
And you will answer?
I'll answer, no, it's not okay to hit dogs.
And she'll say, see, sweetie, it's not okay to hit dogs.
Katrina said so.
Are you an authority on dogs, or is it just more peer pressure?
Well, as an adult, that he doesn't know well, I guess she's trying to.
I mean, I think I am an authority.
And the appeal to authority is just so easy, too.
Yeah, so people appeal to authority Santa, or made up authority, I don't know, God, or...
I thought it was gonna, I took a different interpretation of your friend doing that.
You know the context better than I do, but I was thinking, oh,
she's referring to Katrina as this paragon of virtue, and Katrina wouldn't do it.
Now, would you not do something that Katrina would do?
Come on.
I think it wouldn't even matter who I was if I just showed up, and I wasn't her, or the kid's father.
Then you can be like, look, all the adults are against this.
You do this, the adults are gonna team up on you.
Don't even try it.
It's not just mommy being mean, it's really the norm out there.
You see, other people think that hitting dogs is not good, also.
Yeah, it's for kids, because they're the worst.
Right.
I think it probably also depends a lot just on the actual adult.
Like I said, I'm not sure it affects kids all that much, but if I were to ever be a parent,
I would not feel okay sharing the Santa thing,
because I would know I was lying to my kid's face, like just through my teeth,
and I would feel like a terrible person doing that.
I'd like to think that I won't, if I ever had a kid, that I won't lie to them.
I'm sure I'd lie to my kids sometimes, but it wouldn't be such a pre-planned, you know, conspiracy of a thing.
See, I thought of doing this kind of the way that I would teach them about like religions and stuff, too.
And say, look, this is something that people believe, this is a belief that's out there.
You don't tell them it's true.
You see, your friends at school are going to be talking about Santa.
I'm going to tell you what that's all about.
Now, some parents pretend, or they like to pretend that he's real, don't spoil the fun for them.
But you get them fully in a loop, and then, yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
It also is an example to children.
So, based on the Santa Claus Tooth Fairy Easter Bunny type myth,
I took that and thought it was okay to lie to my little brother.
About other things?
About fairies and another stuff that wasn't real.
And so, we did diaper fairy.
What was the diaper fairy?
The diaper fairy was to help him get potty trained.
So, for days that he didn't have an accident, he could put a diaper,
a clean diaper that he, of course, he didn't have to use,
because he was wearing his big boy underpants underneath his pillow.
And he would get, the diaper fairy would come and get him a treat, a little gift or something.
That's kind of awesome.
It is.
No.
Like, no?
It has the lying component, which isn't good.
But for me, I would just be like, hey, I'll give you whatever a childhood equivalent of a dollar is,
maybe as much as I like a dollar, I'll give you that.
You know, you want like a Hershey's kiss.
Yeah, but that's not as practical as a fairy coming in like being like, oh, what a good boy.
Yeah.
But the thing is, it was me doing it.
So, I would like find feathers that I liked, and stick them under his pillow, or a rock, or...
Or spiders.
My parents just let me do that.
So...
Did it help him?
I think so.
But the question is, at what cost?
At what cost?
At what cost?
So, my parents were modeling for me that it was okay to tell younger kids fantastical lies,
fantastical imaginary creatures come and reward you for not having to use a diaper.
From a consequentialist point of view, though, did he get a diaper trained faster?
Well, I can't possibly compare.
Okay.
To how fast he would have been potty trained without the diaper fairy.
Was he psychologically scarred by the diaper fairy?
I don't think so.
We'll have to ask him.
Okay.
I think, I think...
To me, that sounds just like a lot of fun.
He figured out it was me because I was a clumsy kid.
And I was just sticking random stuff that I found and thought was kind of cool under there.
Did you ever stick any bugs under there?
No, I never stuck any bugs under there.
I was actually frightened of bugs when I was a kid.
Oh.
What?
I know.
I know bugs.
Yeah, me too.
Oh, I did until their legs fell off for the first time.
And then it was no more bugs.
I was terrified of their legs falling off.
Because you thought they were in pain or just because it was icky?
It was icky.
It was icky.
The body parts are just, like, on you now.
It was icky death of icky, you know.
Oh, did you have a concept of death at you?
Yeah.
Okay.
The funny thing is, I...
Gosh, I'm just rambling on.
I came to the concept of really understanding internalizing death because I had just watched
a documentary about pearl oysters.
And in the documentary, they got the oysters, they opened them up, and then they were actually
dissecting the oyster.
And they're like, here's its heart, here's this, here's that.
And then I kind of connected that, you know, the oyster to humans and what would happen
if somebody cut open a human and took out their heart.
And yeah.
So then I was like, oh no, what happens when you die?
It's all oyster's fault.
I had the horrible realization when my family member died when I was really little.
My great-grandfather on my mom's side.
And I was just like, oh shit, we're never going to talk to them again.
This is what death is.
Oh my god.
There was some panic involved at age seven.
Did you get to, and I'm going to die?
Oh yeah, that's where the panic came from.
Yeah, I already had family members who had died at that point.
But just something, this is all about seeing it.
You didn't realize that you would die too until the oyster.
I realized it, but I didn't...
There's knowing something, and then there's internalizing it.
Anyway, there's one way to tie this into signaling, which is did, I guess maybe you,
you weren't raised with the Santa myth.
And I can't remember what I did, but it strikes me as plausible that I might have continued to play along
after having solved it for the sake of everyone else playing the game.
Sure, my little brother did, but it was because he thought he wouldn't get gifts.
Right.
Okay, so not a great example then.
I was hoping that we could say, well, we've signaled this belief, you know, to carry on this social trend,
which would have been a very loose segue into signaling.
Is it still signaling if you pretend?
No, it doesn't. It has nothing to do with signaling.
So your brother was pretending to believe in Santa, and your parents were pretending to believe in Santa?
Like they were trying to do each other.
How long did this go on?
Oh, like a really long time.
He still believes.
At some point, at some point I went to my parents and I said, this is getting ridiculous.
He is getting really old for this.
He's nice shaving.
I mean, I was 14 years old. He's three years younger than me.
Did you know that he was faking at that point?
No, I didn't. I said, well, I don't know if he is or isn't, and I'm going to go talk to him.
And they said, okay, because he was just way too old.
So I did, and he said I knew it all along.
Okay.
It's kind of hard to tell somebody's faking without, like, spoiling it for them.
Did he at some point realize that he would still get gifts?
Yeah, we talked about it.
No, but before that, before when he was 11 and you were 14, okay.
No.
Because I almost figured like maybe at nine he figured out he'd still get gifts,
but at this point it was just too embarrassing to suddenly be like, hey guys!
No, he told me, well, he was also, there were some leading questions involved, like my parents saying,
oh, you already knew?
Why did you keep pretending?
Is it because this?
And he said yes.
Let's do move on from death and Santa and religion and family members to the topic of signaling.
Now, from my perspective, it's an economic topic, a topic in economics related to conveying accurate information,
mostly accurate, believable information between businesses or between a potential employee and employer
about what would otherwise be kind of private or complex information, right?
When you say believable or accurate, what did you mean?
Because those can be two very different things.
I mean accurate.
So conveying some information that would be private or otherwise difficult to come by.
I think maybe that's what the intention is, but I think a lot of signaling is not necessarily trying to convey accurate information anymore.
I want you to think this thing about me even if it's not necessarily true.
Yeah, so there's honest signaling and then there's, I suppose dishonest signals.
Okay, so for people who are economists or have some background on this,
of course you can always chime in by writing in our subreddit or on our website.
I think that at least in the less wrong community we've taken signaling pretty far from maybe that original economic definition.
I guess I've heard that it is not a useful signal if it is easy to fake.
For example, the one that's often talked about is a college education, a degree, various degrees are signaling something.
They might not be signaling mastery of a topic, but they might be signaling,
and what it signals changes over time, depending, but it might be signaling sticktuitiveness, right?
Conscientiousness.
You can put up with this bullshit for four years.
You can put up with it and make it through.
Four, six, or eight, whatever it takes.
The classic example I've always heard is the peacock's tail.
The plumage on the male peacocks is, well, I guess they're peacocks or they're male.
Otherwise they would be pee hens.
But anyways, everyone's familiar.
P-fowl.
P-fowl, yes, the male p-fowl.
The plumage is famous for being extremely big and bright and really a huge liability evolutionarily,
because it makes it harder to fly, makes it harder to escape predators,
and it takes a huge amount of biological resources to grow that tail.
But the point of the peacock's tail is kind of a brag.
It says,
I have resources to spare.
Yes, I am so good at being a peacock that I can just waste all this energy making this giant tail
and it doesn't even hurt my fitness.
I'm still able to do what I need to do and get away from the predators.
And then all the ladies are like, oh my.
Let's get with that guy.
And the fact that it is very costly, it does make flying harder,
and it is impossible to fake the tail.
You actually have to have the resources to grow it out.
It makes it a good signal.
Yeah, there are of course many, many animals that have all sorts of different kinds of signals.
That's just the most famous one.
For health, for fitness, and a lot of times they are pretty reliable signals.
It's the reason we like big butts and we cannot lie.
So speaking of which, I was going to just throw out the idea that I don't think peacock tails would have gotten as big as they are
if they were delicious to predators.
So the fact that the predator basically has to work around this giant tail to eat the small bird
compared to the size of the tail.
If it was also edible and delicious, I think that there's no way that it would have gotten that big in that cumbersome.
Okay, there's also aphids with a lot of big wax tail that comes out of their rear ends.
And it has several different functions.
One is if the predator bites it, they can get away.
And the predator only has a mouth full of sugary wax.
And the other is it diverts their honeydew away from them.
Their honeydew?
Their waste.
Their what?
When they go to the bathroom.
Oh!
Why'd you call it honeydew?
Because that's what it is.
That's big poop honey?
So aphids are flowam feeders, right?
I don't know what flowam is.
Flowam is the conductive tissue, conductive plant tissue that moves sugars through the plant.
Photosynthesis, right?
Make glucose.
And then that goes through the flowam to the rest of the plant and for storage in the roots, right?
So aphids hook themselves up to that and they suck it.
What is the poop honey?
Yeah, and ants eat it, for example.
So that's why they farm aphids to eat their excrement, which is a highly nutritious sugary drink.
But it's also a liability for aphids and plant hoppers and other flowam feeders because it is sweet and sugary and it's right there next to them, right?
So it kind of marks them as a target, like here's a high-protein snack.
So a lot of them have these waxy, what looks like tails that make that kind of go further away from their bodies, stream further away from their bodies.
Anyway, I was just saying that what Steven's saying about the peacock tail, your theory about it not necessarily being easy to come through or being distracting to predators that are trying to get a bite.
She's saying you're full of crap.
No, I said it's not far-fetched and it's an absolutely reasonable hypothesis.
Yay!
I think...
I forgot where we were at, but that was interesting.
I was going to say that when you brought up the signaling in the Les Ron context, I think one of the reasons it's popular in the community is because before Les Ron was Les Ron, it was a co-blog on overcoming bias with Robin Hansen.
And Robin Hansen is rather famous for saying that a lot of behaviors, which we think are very noble and great human things, are actually just signaling.
It's a way of saying, look, I'm great, you should come meet with me or be my ally, and we don't actually mean it at all.
I would challenge that that's not an accurate representation of Hansen's position.
Not that we don't mean it.
So you can mean it and have it be a signal, right?
Yes, it's true.
I had a friend on Facebook this week say, yes, my employer matches my charity donations of $3,000 a year.
There's no point in him sharing that news unless he wants everyone to know that he's planning to donate to charity.
Yes, so that friend has announced on several occasions that he's giving to charity.
But that's good, you should.
Yes, I worked for a company and the whole point was to get people to say that they're giving to charity because doing that pressures other people to also give to charity.
Right, so I think that it's not necessarily just for the esteem or the prestige or the knowledge to convey that signal, right?
Robin Hansen would say it is entirely to convey that signal.
Entirely?
Almost entirely, yes.
He would say that charity is not about helping people, it is about showing off how much wealth you have to burn.
That the whole X is not about X, it's actually about why it comes from him saying that.
That's why he was the model for Voldemort.
Yeah, but I mean, probably there's a 90 minute podcast with him today and I don't think that's what he came across saying, but everything else you're saying about that does sound like what he said.
Well, that's what I get from his blog anyway.
When you meet him in real life, he's the nicest person, so maybe he doesn't actually believe that in real life.
So here's the thing, even if it's signaling, it doesn't mean that it's not accurate, right?
So if you're signaling that you are altruistic, right?
You want to have others, you want to better your community.
You're saying what does it matter if it's, but like as long as the community is being bettered.
Yeah, if the community is being bettered and you're getting some benefit from that in terms of how others see you and maybe your higher ability or your suitability for a friend.
That's okay.
And you also get to make your community or the world a better place.
So you get all sorts of different rewards from that.
It's kind of like how greed or self-interest helps to make the world run by making markets very efficient resource allocation methods.
So people generally think greed is a bad thing, but it has all these wonderful benefits.
To an extent for sure.
Just like with everything, you can kind of screw it up.
But this ties really neatly into a puzzle I was going to throw out later, but since we're already kind of right on it.
So say our friend really had no intentions of ever giving the charity, but he just wants the social esteem of being a charity giver, so he talks about it on Facebook.
It's an easy to fake signal.
And I know you're listening, so I don't believe that you're doing this, but this would be an easy signal to fake.
No one's going to ask him for his receipts.
It's like the people who check in at Standing Rock to confuse the police, but don't actually give five dollars to help.
I don't know, but I'll take your word for it.
Oh, Standing Rock is where there's the big protest for the oil pipeline right now?
Nice.
Oh, so they'll check in over there, but they don't donate?
Yeah, there was this whole thing for about 24 hours.
There was this thing where someone said, hey, if we all check in at the location on Facebook, it confuses the police who are using Facebook to track which people are actually there protesting.
Which wasn't actually holding any water.
Right.
It was entirely crap.
Which is why I petered out after 24 hours.
Because the pipeline hasn't finished yet.
But during that, that's an oil pipeline.
It was just during a few hours of time.
I saw a few people checking in and I'm like, you could do so much more just by giving five dollars.
Money is the unit of caring.
If you actually care about something, donate five freaking bucks to the cause.
Or if you really care about it, go in person.
Ain't nothing like being there physically.
Some signaling is good, but yeah, it's a lot less than putting your money there for it.
Last digression, I promise.
Maybe we don't have to dive into this, but this is a fun signaling problem.
Cards Against Humanity does Black Friday sales.
Oh, God.
Where they up their price or they'll do something weird like that and then they'll donate the extra to charity or something.
And then typically they'll put a leaflet out to their workers or inboxes that they sell these products.
And say, hey, so our cards are made in China.
We gave this giant chunk of whatever was made for this month.
And gave everyone a two week vacation.
Cool.
Who makes our cards.
So anyway, so they'll do that.
Anyway, so this year for Black Friday, you could donate money and they would dig a hole.
Yes, the holiday hole they called it.
Yes.
For every five dollars that was donated, there's this big, what do you call the big earth movers with the shovel on the end?
Big digging machines.
Things.
Yeah.
We know what you're talking about.
All right.
For every five dollars donated, it would run for two seconds.
Backhoes?
Yeah, maybe.
Yeah.
I think backhoes the right term.
And they, I believe stopped after about 95,000 because I tried to go and donate a few bucks just to make it run a few more sets.
Everybody did.
Right.
95,000 dollars literally thrown into a money pit.
Right.
So that's a PR stunt on their part.
Right.
It's not signaling.
I know, but it was just, so one of the...
Why is it not signaling?
What is it signaling?
It's signaling that you're so cool that you're going to participate in this PR stunt.
So I mentioned how they are generally awesome with charities at the beginning because they're not totally dicks about this all the time.
But on their Frequently Asked Questions page about this, they're like, is there a deeper meaning to this?
No.
Why are you digging a hole?
Why aren't you giving this to charity?
Why aren't you giving it to charity?
It's your money.
So on the fact that the question, where is the hole?
The answer was in America and our hearts.
What if you dig so deep that you hit magma?
Well, then at least we feel something.
Yeah, the holiday hole was a lot of fun actually.
I was thinking a little bit about status signaling.
So if I'm talking to somebody online and they, for example, don't use complete substances for punctuation
or they use LOL a lot or just the wrong word for the situation,
it kind of doesn't matter who they are.
That tends to lower my opinion of them and their abilities to actually do things in the world.
Which is not fair because some of the most intelligent and capable people write in a messy shorthand.
BC, are you our words not letters?
Weird outline.
No, I totally agree with you.
But I find that affecting my own behavior because I like smiles.
I use them a lot because you don't get tone in text.
And I tend to joke around a lot and be happy in things.
At least when I'm talking with people because I like interacting with humans.
Because I don't know, I'm a weirdo.
Anyways, lots of times before I send a text, I will go through and I'll be like,
I'm going to delete that smiley and I'm going to delete that smiley because I don't want to look stupid.
Right, exactly. I mean, I'll use smileys when I'm talking with my friends.
But in work emails, I am so tempted.
Oh, I will use them in work emails.
You will use them in work emails.
I'd like to signal that I am a more relaxed sort of guy.
You can be cash around me.
You can do that.
So I totally use smileys in my work emails.
Maybe you can do that because you're a man.
Huh.
And I want to look capable.
I want to look capable and professional.
And so I do not use smileys in my work emails as much as I would like to.
And you could totally get that.
Oh, that did see girl using the smileys.
Oh man, that sucks.
I just want to chime in and I'm just giving back through my texts for the day
and over half of them contain emojis or text smileys.
Whatever guys, emojis are so in.
Yes.
In casual conversation.
LOLs are out.
I've never used LOL because I've never laughed out.
Like that would be lying, right?
Yeah, I've never.
You've never laughed out loud.
At a text, I'll chuckle or something, but I've never, I don't think, laughed out loud.
Well, you could pretend it means lots of love or a little lady.
Yeah, but then like if that's what it stands for, then I don't know.
I heard someone who thought, their mom actually thought it meant lots of love
and someone posted on Facebook that their aunt died.
She replied LOL for lots of love.
LOL, LOL, lots of love, little old lady.
Yeah.
Perfect.
I mean, before LOL as laugh out loud or lots of love existed,
that's what it meant in our family was little old lady.
That's normal.
I'll, you know, if something makes me smile like a bunch,
like I'll sometimes toss an LOL down, but if I actually laugh out loud,
which does happen sometimes, I will say I literally lulled.
I'll just put in that laughing smiley face,
because I feel like that actually gets it through better than I do.
Anyway, language.
Yeah.
The whole thing is symbolic.
Right.
Therefore.
Language is signaling.
We only say things to make other people believe stuff about us.
So I don't think we've done it.
Most of which is lies.
We've given a good example or a good definition of like outside of business context signaling.
And I liked the one that Scar Alexander gave on Less Wrong of Years ago,
which was a method of conveying information among not necessarily trustworthy parties
by performing an action which is more likely or less costly
if the information is true than if it is not true.
Which is to say, doing things, if it doesn't cost too much to do,
and it makes it seem like what you're saying is or doing is true.
Right.
So by that measure, I do like the college education example.
And it depends on your major a lot too.
If you're getting like a technical major,
it's likely that you'll probably learn something that you'll actually use.
If you're, well then again too, even so like,
I talked to people who went through programming boot camps
and through computer science degrees.
And people who went through computer science degrees,
they're like, yeah, we didn't start writing code till like, you know, year three.
And I'm like, that seems like a long time before you hit the keyboard.
Yeah.
Like, how are you knowing what you're doing if you're taking that long to actually get to it?
So I think I'm assuming having that major in computer science
that there's probably just as much like bullshit memorization in that major
as there is in a lot of other majors.
The point is, the point of college isn't to say,
look, I've got this degree.
I therefore know what I'm doing.
It's to say, I got this degree.
Therefore, I show that I can commit and, you know, pass tests and memorize trivia.
So, well, maybe, maybe not the last ones are more subtly implied.
But what you are saying is that I am serious about this.
Right.
So it's not the express that the university isn't selling you $100,000 education
by saying, this will tell your employer that you're serious about this job.
They're saying this will teach you a lot about it, which isn't really the case.
It's Robin Hansen, the person who pointed out that, or maybe you, Kowski,
that pointed out that you can just ask to sit in on courses
and get a Harvard education without paying for it.
You can also do it online for free for a lot of their stuff too.
But no one would take that seriously.
Right.
So like, if on your resume you said, sat in on 60 credit hours worth of lectures,
they're gonna be like, you didn't get a degree,
you didn't get a piece of paper saying you did that, then we don't care.
I assume.
The point is, or maybe the example falls apart in those cases,
because this is kind of new stuff too, right?
At least with the online, with the free online versions.
It doesn't fall apart.
That illustrates it.
Because people, yeah, if you don't have a certification from it,
certification from a trustworthy source that you did those things, then...
Yeah.
And it also depends on the employer too.
Like apparently, I've heard allegedly that Google apparently hires based on your credentials
and your skill rather than like your education.
They may well try to.
Yeah.
Oh, exactly, but that's hard to praise.
You have to like actually ask them rather than help us to boring interview questions.
Like, what's your greatest weakness?
So I currently, and I'm unemployed, I got laid off recently as obviously the people in this room know,
but our listeners do not yet know.
And I've been working in accounting for, God, like 15 years now.
My last job, 10 years straight, and I don't actually have a degree in accounting.
And so that I have been hearing may present a problem when I go out looking for a job again,
because not necessarily because I'm not qualified, but for the purposes of signaling,
because the human resource person doesn't know me from Jack.
And sure, I've got a lot of experience in accounting.
I can show them that I can do the accounting.
They hire me, then something happens.
There's a personality conflict or whatever, and they got to kick me out of the company.
And the boss goes to the HR person and like, why'd you hire this asshole?
And they're like, if someone else, they could be like, look, he has an accounting degree.
He has the CPA.
He had the qualifications.
So it's kind of a covering their own ass thing.
If I don't have that stuff, their own job is a bit of a bigger risk to hire me
because then they might get shit from their boss.
Sure.
I guess you just have to make sure that you know people higher than the company.
Right.
And that's, well, yeah, I wish I knew more people, I guess.
But no, that's another reason why a lot of people like to hire people with a lot of credentials
to make themselves look good.
Like, look, we have this PhD and Nobel Prize winner working for us.
We are obviously very serious people.
Sure.
There was an organization in DC that I knew somebody who worked for.
They only hired people with bachelor's degrees.
And the job was calling different companies and asking if so and so was still in this position.
Cool.
You don't need a bachelor's degree for that.
No, you certainly don't.
Anybody can do that job.
It's absolutely brainless.
It's mindless.
It's just all you have to do is be comfortable asking dumb questions over the phone.
Because you're going to script up, send those emails automatically and just auto fill the fields.
I think that they might start with that and then they have to go through and do double checking.
Gotcha.
Yeah.
So just to put your mind at ease and for anyone else out there, if this is at all relevant,
I think a degree gets you through the door into a field that you haven't worked in before.
And often in listings you'll see, like, we want you to be able to do these things.
This many years of experience, you know, education, high school diploma are equivalent.
I think that the college degree says, look, yeah, I haven't worked in the field yet,
but I am serious about it.
I got $100,000 learning the basics, going to school for it.
And I think that 15 years on your resume will more than make up for the lack of a degree.
Because no one, and I haven't looked for accounting jobs.
I look for other kinds of jobs.
And no one cares about if you have a degree for the most part.
They care about that you have five to seven or seven to 10 years of experience or something.
Yeah.
I'm not worried about getting a job.
Yes.
I'm not worried about getting a job.
I'm just assuming that I'm going to be making a little bit less than I was before.
Because it takes a while to prove yourself if you don't have a degree yet.
Just tell them that you made a lot at your previous job and then haggled down from some
ridiculous number.
Yes.
That's the way to do it.
We're a little far afield from signaling, except for a degree signal, you know, competency
or they're supposed to.
God, was it?
It was an interview somewhere where I was listening to this lady talking about she grew up poor,
why poor people have really expensive clothes.
And because apparently there's a thing where people say like, well, you can't be poor.
You have a thousand dollar handbag.
Why do you have a thousand dollar handbag if you're poor?
And this lady said for for over a year, I went into offices looking for jobs with my poor
people clothes.
And this is like an old black lady.
I'm not sure if she was old at this point in the interview.
She was old.
It's like, I'm a black lady walking into a job that looks like crap.
And they're like, no.
And then I went out and bought me some nicer clothes and this handbag that costs $2,000
and right away, they took me seriously.
They're like, oh, this is an educated woman who obviously knows her business.
And it was it was just that handbag that made the difference and people were all of a sudden
like, this is not this is not your your standard person that we can discriminate against.
She must know something.
That's interesting.
And she could have.
And so so overspending on things like clothes that you would think poor people cannot afford.
Ends up becoming a survival strategy is something you have to do in order to signal that you
are serious and you can handle things.
She might have been able to convincingly fake the signal if she bought a fake good handbag.
Anyone who knows the handbags would know that it's a fake.
Does the interviewer know about handbags?
They just see like that this one's not like, you know, old or something, right?
I have no idea.
But it tends to what the position is.
I guess.
Yeah.
So I was raising that because there's the you can fake a signal.
And that's what she was doing, but she faked it by conveying a real signal.
Right.
I'm trying to think of another example.
Well, she really was qualified and educated.
Yeah.
But she's trying to like, I guess show that she was, I guess, what is what is nice stuff
show that you have your shit together or something.
I have no idea what nice stuff is supposed to show, but apparently it shows something.
I guess.
Do you want to talk more about animals?
I thought of a good example for how to tie this into another case of instead of being
hired because it's like being hired when you're on a date.
Right.
So you're basically interviewing for a relationship or for a hookup.
And so you can convey your, your admirable qualities.
People care about, you know, like your intelligence, how much money you make, how healthy you are.
It's the only reason to buy an overpriced car.
Yeah.
Because they're, they're not worth the money, but you can't just show someone your bank
account.
So like that.
People really like cars.
And that too, I guess.
Some people.
But why do they like cars?
Cause they look really cool driving them and they get, you know, they get, so.
I don't know.
I had this discussion again with my in-laws in Tennessee because I was talking about how
I couldn't understand why people liked guns and got so many different guns and what were
they signaling with all of those guns.
And some people just really like guns and nerd out about it.
And it's something that they can talk with to, they can belong to some sort of community
of other people who are nerdy about guns.
I know a gun or two in Colorado or old cars that they refurbish or sports cars or whatever
they're deciding that they want to have as their hobby.
It is interesting though that like if you're, if you're on a date or if you're applying for,
if you're at a job interview, like you don't just bring, you know, your results of an IQ
test, you know, with a stamp at the bottom saying this is official.
But, but it's weird that you, we don't, and it would be weird if you did, but it's weird
that we don't, right?
So like if, if, if I'm interviewing you to hire you for a job and I want to make sure
you're not an idiot.
Yeah.
Well, you know, I could try and ask you some questions or I could, you know, look at your
history.
I could call people that know you, or you can just show me.
Navigating social situations is also something that is difficult and takes intelligence.
And then that way they can also see whether you're someone they'd like to be around, which
is important if you're working together.
I'm just saying it's weird that that's not the signal, like that you can't just signal
a direct.
So it's illegal to do that in jobs, but a lot of places of work like that, that company
where they call people do IQ tests under some other other sort of guys as like a personality
test.
But yes, it's, it's illegal to give your potential employee an IQ test.
Why would that be illegal?
It just is.
I think a discrimination thing.
But when you do your GREs or SATs or ACTs to get into college or graduate school, those
are IQ tests.
Are they allowed to ask about your SATs?
No, not it, not at jobs.
But, you know, when you go to grad school, that is a job pretty much.
Although in academics, there are different requirements or there's, you know, different
things that they can ask for.
You take your GREs, which is like an IQ test and you put that front and center when you're
writing professors.
Da-da-da, this is what I'm interested in.
These are the scientific questions I'm interested in.
GRE score this.
Biology subject test this.
That would be nice.
If you could have a like relationship score where the past people you've dated or been
in a long-term relationship, what would give you thumbs up, thumbs down?
How do you think you would be scored?
It depends on you.
That's why that's not popular.
You don't want that at all.
I mean, well, you know, I could be like...
So yeah, you weren't allowed to ask somebody their intelligence in an interview or I guess
you can ask them if they feel like they're a smart person or something, but you can't
ask them, hey, take this IQ test and let me know your results.
But hypothetically, you could show that on a date or you could bring it yourself to an
interview.
They can't ask for it, but you could show them.
So like, and I get that we don't.
I have gone on dates where people told me.
Really?
Yes.
Wow.
And then signaling.
What does that tell you about them?
That they're an asshole.
Exactly.
I know.
I haven't been able to get this point out that I get that we don't do that because there's...
If you're weird, you're generally not going to be a great partner or an employee, right?
And since doing that would be weird.
Not necessarily.
There's a difference between weird and asshole.
I want to finish this point.
No, you're totally fine.
But yes, so I think...
I mean, there's a difference between weird and asshole, but weird says that you're not
in this nice box that we like.
There are some places that this box that are desirable, but the outside of the box space
is way bigger than just that one, you know, those small points where good weird is, right?
Yeah.
So maybe your weird thing is that you always think about work, you know, and we would love
that.
But there are more ways to be wrong or more ways to be bad weird than good weird, maybe
from the perspective of a hiring person.
What I was trying to say is that I get why we don't do that because it would be weird
and being weird is bad, but it seems to make...
It would almost make sense to me to have it be normal to say, look, you're going on a date
and be like, look, here's my bank statement.
You know that I'm loaded.
Now I don't have...
Now I don't have to show you my fancy car.
I don't have to buy you an expensive dinner.
You can just believe that you've got proof now.
I might know that you're loaded, but I don't know how I'm going to benefit from that.
Right.
Well, but like, so like the things that people care about, or like, here's my last physical
results from my doctor.
You can see I'm not sick.
You can see I'm perfectly healthy.
I mean, again, that's common in my line of dating.
Oh, yeah.
I guess in more common lines of dating, that's not common.
Like in normal circumstances, if I were to bring saying, look, hey, look, I haven't had
a cold in two years.
I don't even go to the doctor except for to get this physical to check out for this date
to show you that I was healthy.
That would be seen like as the same thing as bringing your IQ test results.
I think that you would be surprised how often that kind of stuff happens, like how often
somebody finds the opportunity to talk about.
So we're talking about signaling, right?
So an IQ test is signaling, but people can be more indirect and say other things that
make it clear that they're intelligent.
And I'm not sure how it works in the dating world.
If somebody, you know, they want to tell you that they're healthy, that makes a lot of
sense.
But if they, if you guys sit down, hey, I'm this person.
Hi, I'm me.
Here's my doctor.
Nope.
Here's my papers for my doctor.
Here's, you know, so like, is that how it goes?
Because that's the situation I was modeling.
So I can say, I have a master's degree.
Hi, I'm Katrina.
I have a master's degree.
Like, or like, do you start it that way?
No.
Come to the conversation.
Oh, you know, I went to grad school here.
I went to undergrad here.
How about you?
You, when you say I went to a school in Boston, that is how you signaled that you went to
Harvard, right?
Because no one actually went to Harvard says Harvard as that is gosh.
So is gosh the way you pronounce that word?
Gosh, gosh.
So you have to pronounce what's correctly.
That is another signal.
Yes.
No, I totally understand.
There are ways to signal these things other than just going out there and doing it.
I guess what I'm getting at is that, and yes, there are ways to bring them up organically
in conversation that don't make you seem weird.
But as long as you're trying to get to that same point anyway, I guess what I'm saying
is that I wouldn't mind a social convention that allowed you just to be forthcoming with
whatever information people wanted to know about and that you wanted to share, right?
I wouldn't mind if I mean, I weren't so skeptical about IQ tests.
Well, I mean, so IQ tests decide like bank statements or doctor's records or whatever,
you know, SATs, whatever, if there's any test used to you.
I guess I put intelligence on the list of three things that people care about when they're
dating because it's one of the three things that I think people care about.
What are they up to?
Wealth and health.
Okay.
Wealth, health and intelligence, I think.
Maybe funniness, but that kind of falls under intelligence.
And not everyone wants, like, not everyone wants to date a comedian, but if they did,
you could say, look, here's my YouTube video of me doing five minutes of stand up and
people are laughing.
Or you could just tell a joke.
Yeah.
I'm not necessarily advocating for this.
I'm saying that I could see how it would make sense to just cut the bullshit and cut a
two hour conversation down to three minutes and then say, do we even want to go to dinner
now?
No, I think that, you know, looking at your health records, I don't feel like we're a
good match.
Cool.
Glad we didn't waste our time.
Have a great night.
No, I would consider that fair.
I think so.
But it would take a lot, it would take a strong seeding community to get that going rather
than you just being the one insane person scaring away everyone you know.
I'm not even saying that I wouldn't necessarily like that.
I'm saying it would make sense.
As long as you're trying to signal the same information anyway, it seems weird to me that
we go with this weird, circumspect way of doing it rather than just going out and doing
it.
In a conversation with a former partner, I was saying, oh yeah, I, whatever, I don't,
I don't want to signal.
I'm just, I want to be very straightforward.
Which is the form of signaling of its own.
Which of course is what he said.
Oh, okay.
So you're signaling that you're, you are honest to a fault and that you're reliable or, you
know.
You're signaling that you're too hip to signal.
Counter signaling is also a thing.
Right.
So, you know.
Is that where that was going?
No.
No, but let's talk about counter signaling.
Counter signaling is the opposite.
It's signaling, but signaling in reverse.
So, counter signaling is when you walk up to your friend who's gay and you're like, hey,
fag, what's up?
Because I, right, right, right.
Because you can't do that to someone that you don't know very well.
But if you guys are best friends, you can call each other shithead or whatever and it's
like, it doesn't matter.
Your friendship is so strong that you can do that kind of thing and everyone knows that
it's not a big deal.
Interesting example.
Okay.
I shouldn't use that example?
I think that's, I think that's a good example.
I only use that example because I worked with a guy who was gay and had a friend that did
that.
Okay.
Yeah.
So, I think that's an okay example for that kind of counter signaling.
I think there's also the one to where like, I'm going to wear jeans to this funeral just
to show that I'm not, I'm not for dressing up for the status quo or I'm going to wear,
you know, a flannel shirt to my sister's wedding or something, right?
Which is less about like the acceptable counter signaling within a relationship that wants
it or is okay with it and more about just like saying, I'm so not for whatever you guys
are doing or I'm, I want to stand out by signaling my-
Or pre-ripped jeans.
Yeah.
God, the homeless look on jeans.
Those are expensive too.
I have really old jeans that look like crap, like with the tears because they're old and
there are people who buy those for a hundred dollars a pair and I'm like, I would sell
you mine for 10 if you would take them.
They would not take them for 10.
They might take them for a hundred.
Try to sell them for a hundred.
If you'd sell it for...
See, that's the problem.
If you sell it for 10, they're going to be like, oh, this is just an old pair of jeans.
But if you sell it for a hundred...
You don't want to rip this.
It's going to become a worse rip and then like you're ripping your crotch.
How do you prevent a rip from becoming a worse rip?
Because if you buy it, yeah, if you buy it like that, it's reinforced.
If you don't, then it's not and it's going to get way worse and quickly.
I didn't realize they were reinforced.
Yeah.
This is how up I am.
I got a chance.
I got a chance to examine somebody who was wearing them and she was showing me these
because I asked her about them.
She was like, yeah, check this out.
I don't know if you ever bought patches for jeans or something, but you iron in or sew
in a patch on the inside.
It's like that, but less visible and they're as solid as ours, but they have holes so your
leg is getting cold still.
I don't really see the point, but they're a thing.
Maybe you can show that you have skin.
I have skin.
I'm raising my hands right now.
You can see.
I know, but on your legs.
They also have skin.
You can tell how my pants aren't wet with blood.
You want to show how nice of skin you have, maybe is what you're saying.
Maybe.
Maybe.
Whatever.
I don't know.
See, why would you say that?
Because you have expensive pants.
You can just pull up your pet legs in front of people.
Casually.
You can tell I'm all about cutting the bullshit.
So I have a question.
What's your question?
One of the ways to signal that you are an interesting and intelligent person is to have
a podcast where you talk about weird things that most people don't talk about very often.
I think that having a podcast signals that you have descended into nerditude to a point
that you don't even mind.
So we are countersignaling by having a podcast.
Might be.
Okay.
Because regular signaling is just so basic right now.
So what do you think?
I'm like, I've got a podcast.
Yeah.
Well, no.
You don't ever say you have a podcast.
You let other people find out.
Oh, I wouldn't have been doing your right then.
You've been doing it wrong, Katrina.
I told a couple of my friends that I grew up with and one classmate from the boot camp
I was at.
And it was only because it did come up.
It wasn't like, hi, I'm Steven.
I have a podcast.
We were talking about podcasts we like and there was, it was a long story, but it happened
to come up really organically.
One of the guys there, this wasn't the person that I told, but he was like, I don't know
why he thought this because like, I wouldn't be surprised to learn that you have some podcast
where you just like some conspiracy podcast story out there and I'm like, that's dangerously
close to the truth.
See, that is good.
You never bring that up.
You never bring that sort of thing up on your own.
Well, if it comes up in conversation, it comes up, but that's because you think of the status
signal.
Well, I think it's a lower.
Oh, no.
I just, if you were to advise, advertise, then something so it's like, have you seen
Bojack Horseman at all?
Yes.
The song back in the nineties, I was in a very famous TV show.
Yeah.
No, that exactly.
That's like coming up to someone and seeing like, Hey, in the nineties, I was in a very
famous TV show.
No, then then it looks retarded or sorry, then that looks stupid.
What do you tell people when they ask you what you do with your time?
Uh, yeah, I write a podcast, I do those sorts of things that they just asked though.
It's not like I bring it up.
It's if they specifically ask what I do in my free time.
Yeah, I shared the first episode or two of this on my Facebook and then, oh, yes, yes,
definitely.
So that's the time you do something, put it up on Facebook because that's what people
are on Facebook.
I haven't shared a single episode on my Facebook.
You have a good reason though.
Like when I started up Metropolitan Man again, I was like, Hey guys, this is my new thing
that I'm starting and then stop.
You don't put it out there every single week.
Whatever you should.
You should toot your horn.
By the way, listeners, I am doing my fiction podcast, the Metropolitan Man right now.
We already mentioned on this podcast.
Oh, that's right.
We did.
Yeah, never mind.
If you haven't checked it out though, do I'm loving it.
I'm not even I'm not even on making it, but it's awesome.
So you guys were in just came out.
Yeah.
You should honestly more voices.
I can't have you do more voices.
The only one voice per person thing.
Yeah.
But hold on.
I'm so sorry.
I didn't.
I wasn't making a weird face.
You were making a sad face.
No.
I misinterpreted your face.
You misinterpreted it.
I was making it.
Just hit myself in the face with my water bottle face.
It was different.
It was different for methods of rationality because they were, they were literally hundreds
of characters, many of them, which had one line.
And for that, I was like, okay, these two characters are separated by 20 chapters.
I can have you do these two lines from two different characters, but this is short enough
that I want to keep it down to one person per line.
Right on.
I think it's embarrassing.
It's kind of like admitting that you do role playing games or something.
That's, oh, see, I'm really frustrated by people who think that sort of thing is embarrassing
because if it is something you enjoy, fucking own it, you want to meet other people who
also think that's cool.
Maybe if they're going to judge you and think that you're lame for doing role playing games,
then fuck them.
I don't want to be around them that much anyway, right?
Maybe it's part of my counter signaling where I tell people things that I think are somewhat
embarrassing about me.
Oh, okay.
So you're like, this is really embarrassing, but I'm like, well, well, I guess that sometimes
I record really casual and not very good conversations that I have with people and with them online
so that others can judge us.
Yeah.
So you guys can just do it.
I did get around to a lot of this awkwardness and just not talk to strangers, you know?
I make like one friend a year.
That's how I avoid a lot of this nonsense.
Here's an interesting thought experiment that I thought of when, or not thought experiment,
kind of like a, anyway.
Intapithetical?
Yes, based on a real example when I was thinking about this earlier today.
So what, a couple of years ago you were moving and you solicited to friends to help you move.
And as is in accordance with the most ancient tradition, you paid with beer and pizza, exactly.
Why didn't you pay them an hourly wage?
That is, again, considered gauche.
It means that we're not actually friends.
This is not a emotion-based relationship.
It is a transaction-based relationship.
And you don't want to have transaction-based relationships with your friends.
You use the word relationship like I hoped you would.
That's the whole point, right?
So like, if you'd hired movers and they were like, all right, we're ready for you to sign
the check.
Well, here's all the pizza and beer you can handle.
Like, that would not be okay, right?
No.
So it's based on the kind of relationship you can have with people, the ways that you
can interact, right?
And that was alluded to when you're talking about counter-signaling as well.
God, I was, when 10, 12 years ago, my dad does a lot of interior work, painting, tiling,
drywall, that sort of stuff.
I got a new place and I asked him to help me put down some linoleum in the bathroom
because it really needed a change.
And he did.
And then afterwards, I was like, okay, so how much do I owe you for this?
And he like busted out in a bearish laughter because I had just recently been reading,
you know, all sorts of things about like, everyone should be compensated for their time
and it doesn't matter.
And I was like, yeah, I'm totally grabbing this bull by the horn.
You just finished your Rand's Divergence.
Right.
Right.
And my dad was like, OMG, noob, GTFO, he finally accepted payment for the cost of the materials,
but nothing else.
He was like, you are my son, don't bring money into this.
And I was like, I have learned something.
I mean, I have not forgotten that to this day because I was so embarrassed.
So you said that you had an animal signaling example.
Yeah, sure.
So we were talking about sexual signaling before, right, with peacock feathers and also
countersignaling.
And I think it's interesting that in a world of sexual signaling, like big strong animal,
I have great fitness.
In a world that exists, there also exists the, I guess, desire or not, not the desire,
the space to subvert that and find other successful ways.
You know, for example, everybody uses the cuttlefish.
Everybody uses the cuttlefish example.
I use the cuttlefish example all the time.
Yeah.
I totally know what that is.
You do, of course.
Right?
Yes.
Absolutely.
You know about the cuttlefish example, right?
Of course.
For people who may be dumb, you maybe couldn't hurt to spell it out.
For all the dummies out there.
There are a bunch of examples in nature where there's two types of males or two types of
females, right?
And I think we've talked about this a little bit in another episode.
This does sound familiar, yeah.
So for example, in certain species of cuttlefish, there is the male that looks male.
He's large.
He uses very specific color patterns to signal that he is a male and that he's interested
in mating.
And then there is a second type of male that is a male that looks a little bit more like
a female, right?
So the male that looks a little bit more like a female is taking advantage of the big male's
show and it looking like a female to sneak in and mate with a female without the large
male noticing, right?
So it's subverting the dominant sexual selection strategy in order to spread its genes.
So that's just really common that you have the big strong male and that's how it's signaling
its fitness and the sneaky male.
Is that kind of signaling?
It's not, I guess it's not signaling, but it's, there's the fact of sexual signaling
and then there are ways to subvert it simply because that exists.
And I think that when we talk about signaling, maybe counter signaling is showing that you
don't care about the dominant.
You're so good that you don't have to worry about that.
You don't even have to be so good.
It's just that you, you don't even need to, you don't want to play that game, right?
I am so rich.
I do not need to buy the fancy Tesla.
You don't have to be so rich.
You can just scoot in and say being rich isn't all that great.
That's, yeah.
I am so desirable in other ways that I don't need to have any money.
I can so trick you into having sex with me that I don't need to have any, I don't need
to actually have money or be a big scary male.
Exactly.
So there can be a distract the male and rape.
Okay then.
In cuddle fish or other animals, yeah.
And animals worthy of moral judgment.
Yeah.
I believe they call it forced copulation.
Right?
Sure.
Like you're not supposed to use the term rape when it comes to animals because it's
a value laden term.
It is a value laden term so it makes sense not to use it when it comes to animals.
Absolutely.
We use a lot of value laden terms when it comes to animals though in biology.
For example, in when you're talking about entomology and so insects, sleep insects and
other little arthropods, a lot of times people will talk about natural enemies and that's
the word for carnivores, right?
I think that enemy is a value laden term when you're talking about a predator type or a
group of animals that are either predators or parasitoids.
So what do you use?
Yeah.
Actually, I use natural enemy because that's what people use now in entomological literature.
There's already such a better word for it, predator, right?
You know, because there's a couple different classes of natural enemies or carnivores.
Parasitoid is one and predator is another and those describe two different groups.
You couldn't just say which one you're talking about.
I guess you're speaking broadly.
I guess there has to be a word for that.
Yeah.
You wouldn't do that if you are writing a paper.
Yes.
So a predator is a very specific thing, right?
So it hunts and it eats an animal instead of living inside of it and a parasitoid is
a parasitic insect that always kills its host, whereas parasite doesn't always kill its host,
but all of those things are carnivorous.
Maybe they use natural enemies as opposed to just enemy because that makes it different
and that makes it its own special thing.
But my point is that there's some potentially value-laden terms.
I don't think that people usually write about rape.
It's usually forced copulation in academic literature.
I just ran across that when I was reading up on the dolphins.
I'm surprised actually that this didn't come up.
I wish we'd gotten to this before because we were talking about examples of signaling
to convey a message or faking signaling to convey that message insincerely.
There's a great example of that with the trend in, say, poisonous snakes to be brightly
colored.
You have...
What is it?
The...
I forget which one's which or what the names are.
But there's...
There's Malarian mimicry.
I'm trying to think of the two kinds of snakes, but they're...
Oh!
You're thinking of coral snakes and king snakes.
Yes.
And I forget which one's not poisonous, but my point...
King snakes are not poisonous.
I do remember the rhyme that tells me which one's not poisonous.
What's the rhyme?
The rhyme is...
It's not terribly helpful.
Okay, never mind.
I'm not going to spread this information.
Then is that red touches yellow?
You're a dead fellow.
Right?
Yellow touches red.
Or I thought it was...
Red...
Black touches red.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I don't recall.
It was red touches yellow.
You're a dead fellow.
Red touches black.
You're okay, Jack.
It was the first time I heard this.
Those are the worst rhymes.
They're like, something, something, and you'll see, you'll avoid calamity.
Well, so...
Why didn't you make the important part the rhyming one?
What I liked about it, though, is that the...
And I might be wrong, but I'm assuming that there's an evolutionary incentive to signal
your poisonousness because...
Fossily.
Well, falsely, for sure, but also, legitimately, because you don't want to get fucked with.
You don't want to have to try and rely on your venom or your poison to...
Yeah, so there's...
So you'll signal to people...
I'm sorry, I just, the rest of the thought was, you'll signal to protective predators,
hey, the fact that I'm brightly colored means that I'm going to be able to poison if you
try and eat me.
I don't want to have to, so that's why I'm telling you before you get here.
And then that gives other organisms the opportunity to fake that.
I saw a fly that was paint that had the same similar color, past or be, until I got a closer
look at it.
And if I hadn't had a chance to get a closer look at it, I'm like, oh, that's definitely
a bee.
I don't want to get stung.
I'm leaving it alone, right?
Yeah.
So, to be more specific about that, there is Batesian mimicry and Malarian mimicry.
Batesian mimicry is when an otherwise potentially edible or grabbable animal looks like a poisonous
animal and benefits from looking like a poisonous animal.
So an example would be the coral snake and king snake, right?
Or the king snake looks like a coral snake enough that anything with experience with
coral snakes backs off.
And then there is Malarian mimicry and that's when a bunch of poisonous animals or venomous
animals look alike because now they have strengthened the signal of looking like that, right?
So now things are more likely to know what it means is something looks like a bee or
looks like a monarch butterfly or something like that because when they run into this
other species as well or other things that look similar, other species that look similar,
it's also poisonous or venomous.
As a thought figured out how to punish free riders yet, like do a bunch of coral snakes
ever team up and kill all the king snakes because they're trying to, you know.
Because they're deluding their message?
Uh-huh.
I don't know, I don't think that usually happens.
As a thought rewards the creative free rider for now, give it another million years.
But yeah, it does potentially delude the message, right?
If they're also edible animals, for example, there are a lot of flies that are stingless
that look like bees, right?
Once every single insect looks like a bee, then looking like the bee isn't advantageous
anymore.
Right.
So, I don't know, I don't know what the limits are, but a lot of people are studying it,
so maybe I can find some paper for you.
Cool.
I would love that.
It is fun, I love that.
That's why evolutionary biology, that's not why, that's what, that, the fact that that's
so interesting that such a small part of evolutionary biology is why it's such a fun
subject.
Mm-hmm.
Well, anyway, signaling, so much fun, tell us what you think about it.
If you think this episode deserves a redux where we actually talk more about signaling
theory in a more focused context, and there's, I guess what I'm saying is, if there's interest
in this topic, I would like to revisit it and do it in a more styled way, but in any
case, you've got the very gist and some fun examples, so are you guys ready to move on
to...
Listener feedback.
Yes, that.
Do that.
So, on our, excuse me, on our moral philosophy episode, we got a couple very nice comments
from somebody called PhopeMobile2.
And you can see those on the subreddit for the moral philosophy, moral philosophy entry.
Now, PhopeMobile said a couple of things.
One was about moral relativism, and the other was about Kant.
And so it says, Kant is not a consequentialist.
His universibility criterion is about ensuring a lack of logical contradiction, not about
doing unto others as you would have done unto you.
In the episode, you fell prey to a common misconception about the categorical imperative.
When Kant says to act only according to that maxim whereby you can, at the same time, will
that it should not become a universal law, he's not saying to do unto others as you would
have done unto you.
The argument is not where everyone to do this, the world would be a worse place, therefore
this cannot be a categorical imperative.
What he means is that you should be able to will that it become a universal law without
logical contradiction.
For example, this is a quote, theft assumes the existence of property.
In order for me to steal something from you, you must first own it.
To own something is to place a restriction on who is allowed to take it.
Consider the maxim, is permissible for me to steal.
If this maxim were universalized, then everyone would be permitted to take anything, and there
could be no property.
We have reached a logical contradiction, so the maxim cannot be true.
Anyway, if you want to read more of that, hop on over to the subreddit.
So that is exactly the kind of feedback I was hoping for, because we weren't able to
give everything the attention deserved in an hour-long podcast covering eight different
philosophies.
So, all I was able to say was thanks for giving Kant the defense I couldn't muster here into
place and the big names of moral philosophy, and I wasn't equipped to give him his due.
OpenMobile gives the steelman, which turns out to be Kant's own words, of Kantian deontology.
And I don't know, I must have, but I didn't mean to say that it was basically like the
golden rule from Christianity that do unto others, just that I was due to have enjoyed
it.
For many religious traditions.
Yeah.
But that's, oh, I didn't mean to make that equivalency.
There's a, that's sort of like the shorthand for a non-moral philosopher, and if I mentioned
it, that might have been what I was going for, but yeah, I didn't mean to equate the two.
But anyway, yeah, this was an awesome comeback, or not comeback, I guess, like I said, giving
Kant his due.
Yeah.
And there was another comment on their, in defense of moral relativism, which I will
only fault you for saying that it was much harder to follow than your deontological defense.
But yes, there is a, I tried to give the best version of moral relativism I could give.
If there's a better one out there, you can learn a little bit more about it on OpenMobile's
comment.
If we're talking about the ethical theories, this podcast still, the great Nick wrote and
said, you had a quick aside to think of some tenants to live your life by, and it reminded
me of the eight tenants of Satanism.
Personally, I think they're very well thought out and applicable.
And he links to the Satanic Temple, and I would just like to say I am a big fan of the
Satanic Temple.
I am a donor to them.
I helped create the bronze boffamet that they put next to the Ten Commandments.
Oh, they're lovely.
They're great people.
They are doing God's work.
Satan's work.
Let's be clear.
Well, you know, they're a very secular organization that uses Satanism, this particular Satanic
Temple.
I mean, obviously not all Satanists are the same way, but this Satanic Temple that uses
Satanism as a cover to challenge religious abuses by government exploitations.
Exactly.
And most recently, they had the After School Satan Program, which is for schools that allow
Bible study clubs, they come through and they're like, allow us to establish our After School
Satan Club, because you cannot discriminate against this by on religious grounds.
And then the schools either have to allow the After School Satan Club, or they have
to say there cannot be any religious clubs in the school.
I see that as a not completely bad endeavor.
I love the endeavor.
I consider it trolling for great justice.
I have a request, and that is, I want some pretty cool demonic statues that are cheap
and I can put in my backyard.
So somebody get on that.
Maybe we should get on that.
Maybe.
Do you mean like buy them for you or send you links to where you can buy them?
Link me.
Okay, yeah.
You bet.
You can do.
I'm reading through the tenets of Satanism right now.
One should strive to act with compassion and empathy towards all creatures in accordance
with reason.
That is, that's a nugget of wisdom you did not come across in the Bible.
I'm on board.
I think it probably is, but...
Not that clearly.
If you've read your Bible cover to cover, for every time it says something like that,
it says, you know, slay open your enemies and smash their fetuses upon the rocks and
stuff.
Wow.
It is pretty...
It's the big book of multiple choice.
Yeah.
You can have the angry whip-wielding Jesus, or you can have the happy turn of the other
cheek Jesus.
I'm talking my man, the Old Testament God.
I know.
Yeah.
Jesus, though, too.
I mean, in half his moods, he's like basically a hippie, and in the other half he lit the
fires in the Inquisition.
So, Jesus isn't like the, isn't as, he's not as clear as you'd hope God would have been
when writing his book, right?
Yes.
It's almost like he was a conflicted person.
What?
Uh, there was also one minor note from Robus777 saying that I was conflating negative reinforcement
with punishment, which is true.
It's one of those things that I theoretically know because I read about it, but I always
forget.
Punishment, he said, tries to make the behavior being punished stop, whereas negative reinforcement
tries to make the behavior being negatively enforced occur more often.
Yes.
And negative reinforcement can be taking things away, instead of taking things away, or taking
positive things away.
Oh, wait.
Hold on.
There's negative reinforcement.
Then there's positive reinforcement.
And, damn it, there's like four of these.
I've got nine.
Now I've tied myself in the loop.
Anyway, yes.
Good stuff.
Google the terms.
Backcheck us.
It's just much more fun to say negative reinforcement than punishment.
It's very Orwellian that way.
Also, I think it's how it's used in common parlance.
Yeah.
Yes, I'm a consequentialist, but I think one of the things to take away from having
well-reasoned positions for, from multiple perspectives, and we kind of alluded to this
with like the mental counsel and stuff, but it's not necessary to pick a moral philosophy
and stick with it, especially in contexts where like it might not make sense to you
or where you're not comfortable doing it.
So I'll give you the example of the burning building and you can save the painting.
I don't know if this is an episode or another one, but you can save the painting or your
baby.
Now the good consequentialist says that you save the van Gogh and sell it and save more
babies than just your one, but no human could do that.
And so if you know that it'll ruin your life, even at the cost of killing other kids, it's
still, you don't, I don't think you're a bad person if you're not a consequentialist
in that particular scenario, right?
The goal is, for me-
It's a tough ask to ask someone to ruin their own life.
Yeah.
Or even to think of like a society where everyone was that callous about their kids or their
loved ones or something, right?
So like part of it is the grander scale.
You kind of want to, to have that, that feeling that you are more important to the people
who love you than a Rembrandt is.
Yeah, it would be weird if my parents-
Or Ptosso or whatever.
Yeah, it'd be weird if my parents treated me as just as valuable as people they'd never
met or people that have done exist yet or something, right?
So yeah.
Speaking of people.
Westward101 said,
Katrina seemed to strongly value having people in a child's life for at least the duration
of childhood.
Okay, so we're going back to the kids episode.
There are quite a few people who have been influential in my children's lives but are
no longer close friends that have moved or drifted off family members who we see for
a couple weeks, once a year, etc.
It may be nice to have a village, but no village stays the same.
And really, there's only so much you can control for.
You can control dye, break up, move, etc.
I thought that was, that was kind of a decent point as well.
It's a decent point.
I think I was talking a little, I think I may have come across a little bit too strong
about the importance of just having continuity in the same people who are trustworthy.
I think that there need to be at least some, I think there need to be some of those people.
I think that you need to have someone who in the end is completely responsible and having
that person disappear and be replaced by someone else who's usually destructive in some kids'
lives.
That sounds like criticism that could be made of typical parent-child households too, right?
Like a parent could die, they could break up, etc.
But those are traumatic events.
Yes.
And saying that they also happen here is, you know, true, but not necessarily criticism.
So to have some people moving in and out is fine, right?
And normal, and kids deal with it just fine.
To have all of the people moving in and out and know one person that they can look to
to be steady and be always there, I think is probably pretty traumatic.
Speaking of the kids' episode, Not Without Incidence said, it can't be unethical to
create people that want to live for the most part regardless of any suffering they experience.
I have a problem with that because of the will to live instinct.
I think there's a lot of people who want to live because of that instinct, even if suffering
would be really great.
Wait, what?
Even if suffering was very high?
Yeah, in their life.
Just having the not wanting to die instinct might reduce quality of life below what is
tolerable, but yet they still want to live.
Well, the good news is if somebody doesn't exist yet, then they don't have the desire
to live or suffering.
Right.
He also said that the argument about the potential of your children to cause harm to others
seems more powerful, but avoiding action based on potential future harms could get dicey.
