Welcome to The Basin Conspiracy, I'm Inie Ashbrotsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, I'm Jess Dickey,
I'm Inie Ashbrotsky, I'm Inie Ashbrotsky, I'm Inie Ashbrotsky, I'm Inie Ashbrotsky,
I'm Inie Ashbrotsky, I'm Inie Ashbrotsky, I'm Inie Ashbrotsky, I'm Inie Ashbrotsky,
I'm Inie Ashbrotsky, I'm Inie Ashbrotsky,
I'm Inie Ashbrotsky,
I'm Inie Ashbrotsky,
I'm Inie Ashbrotsky,
I'm Inie Ashbrotsky,
I'm Inie Ashbrotsky,
I'm Inie Ashbrotsky,
I'm Inie Ashbrotsky,
Okay, then.
Okay, then.
I think they do pay better than average.
Don't quote me on that.
In that case, we should be supporting Chick-fil-A because they're helping overthrow the capitalist regime.
See, that's the thing. I think this is all signalling stuff. If you looked at all the CEOs of different companies and boycotted them based on terrible things they believed, I feel like you wouldn't be able to shop anywhere.
Also, you would have to boycott everyone because everyone in the world has at least one thing they disagree with you on.
Yeah, that's what I was saying.
I'm sure me and Stephen have one thing that I'm like, you believe that thing? You can't be my friend anymore.
We'll have to find that.
But to be clear, I wasn't talking about fast food stuff. And honestly, I wish I'd reread the post because I don't really remember the full context of this.
I forgot the link somewhere, but it's not readily available, so we'll just power through.
Basically, the post was saying that it's exclusion if you don't hire somebody based on criteria that is unrelated to their fit for the job, their fitness for the job.
And I think you and I talked about this a bit. I think I threw it into like the censorship episode.
Yeah, I have something to say about that, too, but it's going to be maybe a derailment.
I mean, it's the feedback episode. Derailment is what we're all about.
That's what we're here for, but I'll power through just the bold question I've got here at the end.
Yeah, that's what I wanted to give you.
An extreme case to the supply to literally Nazis.
So I used the example of bringing someone into your house, and that's maybe a little different than working at your store.
If you owned a mom-and-pop shop and you needed 10 people to staff it, I feel like it would be hard for me not to be prejudiced against people.
I guess if they had a blatant swastika tattoo, they'd probably have that out while they're on the shift and that would scare people away.
So that's a good reason that actually does relate to the job.
But I don't know if they just came into the MAGA hat and the workplace mandated a certain like kind of hair catching hat or something.
So they'd be wearing that instead of their MAGA one.
I don't know, you might be like, one might be more inclined to hire people that they more ideologically get along with.
And that's also, I guess, company fitness.
It's somewhat like, yeah, you're allowed to choose employees.
That's basically what I was going to say.
A lot of places, I think like aside from maybe strict scientific or like software engineering jobs, use behavioral questions only on job tests now.
The software job I worked at definitely did a behavioral component on the application and interview process that I did.
And I can attest that everybody I spoke to there that I ever came up with was at least on the left side of center on most things.
But you're in Denver.
That's true.
But I mean, well, I mean, this kind of a swing state.
There's people would not in.
I mean, sure there is, but in Denver proper, most people are left.
There's pretty blue.
That's part of why I moved here.
Well, that's what I get for never going outside.
So, um, all right, I'll say the book and let you down.
I had this all like ready to talk about.
And I kind of forgot the full context other than,
Well, you still, we haven't answered this supply to Nazis, though.
Yeah, but I guess, I mean, there's not really a good like, like I said, I think the thing is, is that like,
if someone is friendly, provides good customer service, there's no outward sign that he's a Nazi.
I mean, he's blonde and blue-eyed, but so are a lot of non-Nazis, right?
And you just find out that when he goes home, he likes to read Mein Kampf and he's like,
man, this country would be so much better off if we could get rid of all the Jews.
The caveat here that Scott gave, which I think is really important is that
any characteristic related job performance broadly defined, including things like company fit and fun to work with.
If you had that guy who won't shut up about how the earth is flat or something,
every time that someone says, like, look at the sunset or something, right?
Yeah.
Like, whatever, that's not a good company fit.
And so like, to the extent that you're the only person in the office
who like really wishes all of your Jewish co-workers would die, then like,
if that belief ever came out, then it's like, look, you're not a good fit for the company.
It has nothing to do with you. Well, it has everything to do with you as a person.
It's not you, it's me.
I don't want some genocidal maniac in my store, so you've got to go.
Yeah.
But if you don't say it, then I mean, I guess.
If you never knew about it, you'd never know about it.
Well, not if you never knew about it, but like, if he never brought it up,
you could still, you know, hire someone to go dig into his Facebook profile
and find out what his views are or interview his friends if you really wanted to.
You'd have to do that to every employee, and that's awful.
First of all, yeah, that's awful.
Of course, like, I think companies do that already.
Oh, there's companies that demand that you give them your Facebook password before they'll hire you.
And I'm like, that's not a company I would ever work for,
because you can eat all of my ass.
Yeah.
But not everyone has that luxury, first of all.
And also, should it matter in that case?
Like, I kind of don't think it should.
Yeah, I kind of, when you first asked the question, it was like,
I think I'd still hire him as long as he wasn't actively harassing any of the other like co-workers
or if it was like a customer service position, you know?
I mean, more than anything.
I'm just waiting for him to show up at, you know, some MAGA rally,
you know, not to rail against these people, but whatever, 2019.
This is what's going on.
All right.
And then, you know, they're pictures on the news and be like,
oh, look, they're still wearing their Zuber's Pizzeria t-shirt at this rally.
You probably should not be wearing the Zuber's Pizzeria t-shirt.
So, but that's the thing is like, I think a company that said you can only wear our stuff
when engaging in like morally permissible behavior or something grotesque like that
would also be super turn-offing, right?
Yeah.
So it's, or like maybe they weren't wearing the t-shirt, but when this guy,
if they get on a podcast and start spewing a bunch of hate and then someone like goes at them on Twitter
and digs up their profile or something like, oh, look, they,
I mean, isn't this what got James Gunn fired?
Well,
Someone digging up this past stuff.
Yes.
But there's two important differences there.
And one's something way for me, but the most important thing is that James Gunn is awesome.
And what he got in trouble for was bullshit.
This could be an awesome Nazi.
Yeah.
But if his stuff was 10 years old,
Yeah.
That's totally fine.
Is that totally fine?
I think so.
Can you go non-genocidal in just 10 years?
Yes.
Okay.
I mean,
I think you can go non-genocidal.
You can go from murderous to non-murderous in like a month.
No, okay.
Probably less.
I mean, the thing,
We should talk about the Liam Neeson thing that was going on last month.
Oh, yeah.
That was neat.
It was awesome.
The thing I keep thinking about is like, if this was the 50s,
you could replace this with, does this apply to atheists?
And people would be like, well, that's going too far.
We don't want any atheists around in our company because, you know,
they were godless society destroying people.
And don't get me wrong,
my impulse is completely to agree with you.
Yeah.
But I think when I'm wearing two different hats,
if I'm the person looking for the job,
I don't care if my coworkers are as long as they're nice and cool to work with
and go to their jobs.
If I ran a company,
especially a small company that, you know,
couldn't take a big hit like this, you know,
if there are people picketing out in front of my mom and pop shop
and nobody could get in past the sign wielding angry mob,
then my business shuts down.
I lose my livelihood, right?
So it's, this is actually really reminiscent of,
Peter Singer wrote a great essay,
probably like 30, 40 years ago called
Is Rational Discrimination Always Arbitrary?
And it had three thought experiments in it.
And one of them was, I think they're all,
they're all thought provoking,
but one of them was if you ran a restaurant in, you know,
some racist backhills area in the South or something,
again, not shooting on people from there,
it's just, this was the thought experiment.
And you're not racist,
but you realize a lot of your clients are.
You know, you would lose business if you hired this black,
what do you call it, bus boy or something, waiter,
that's the word I was looking for.
So is it racist of you not to hire the person?
It's hard to, like that's the point is it's hard to say,
it's a bit of head scratcher,
because like on the one hand you're not hiring him because he's black,
which is like, well, that sounds like textbook,
but it's like, I'm not, that's not really why it's because I'll lose business.
And it's like, well, then you should get up and move to a different part,
but that sounds hard to do for almost everybody, right?
A lot of people can't just leave their business and their lives
and move to a more accepting area,
although unless you can, like, yes.
I mean, but the solution seemed to be past laws
so that they have to hire black people, right?
Yeah, but I think either this was,
well, this would have been definitely after that probably,
but maybe it was before it was widely enforced
and thought experiment rules on apply.
And did the passing of those laws help in those areas?
I have no idea.
It's hard to say.
I mean, race is not going to hire people
just because they're assholes anyway,
but now if you, this guy said,
hey, look, you know, to his racist patrons,
like, oh, you know, it was the law and I'm okay with it.
And then maybe it'd make a few less races,
but oh, this guy's just as good as everybody else or something, right?
So I don't know.
I want to say that stuff like really did actually help.
I think certainly some parts that did.
I'm not sure how legitimate like the idea of quotas is,
like if that's actually a thing that people do anymore.
I think it's not, although I'm not really sure.
I don't know if there's a law for that.
I don't own a business if that's clear,
but it'd be hard to see how it wouldn't have helped.
You know, this is what was this like a Mark Twain quote
about how like traveling makes you less of,
like makes you hate strangers less or something.
Just like, it's really easy to hate those, you know,
those terrible brown people on the other side of the world
because they're just the worst, but then you go over there
and like, they're just, they're like everybody else
because everybody's like everybody else
because we're all people.
I think it was actually a Sudkowski quote,
and this is a rationally adjacent podcast.
It sounds appropriate.
It was like, we're all the same car with different shades of paint.
All of our brains are barring, you know,
mutation or damage are like architecturally identical.
We're all the same.
I mean, on one hand, that sounds like a deepity.
It's like, of course, we've all known that forever.
No shit, but it's like, on the other hand,
I don't know, I think he brings it up with the same kind of like
feeling of why are we, why is this even a conversation
that anyone's having, you know?
So you've decided that it does apply to Nazis or it doesn't?
I haven't decided.
I think it's just, it's in bold.
So it keeps jumping out at me every time I look down at my screen.
No, that's fine.
I think if I had to give one answer,
if I ran a small business, it'd be,
I would have to think of an answer, I guess.
But since I don't, I'm cool with my coworkers
as long as they don't suck.
I agree with you.
Do you think there's a difference between like a small business
and a large institutional corporation though?
Yeah, because a company that makes, you know,
40 million a year can afford to take a PR hit.
I'm not sure that's necessarily true.
I was going more with like a company that's a large institution,
doesn't feel very much like a family.
It's just a place where you go, slot in,
give your units of production, get units of currency in exchange.
Whereas a small business is very much more like a,
a social group.
It is.
Yeah, that's a good point.
I think my personal experience there is weird because
in software, you tend to be divided into small teams
where like you sit with them and those are the people you work with
and you might work in collaboration with other teams,
but like that's your family there.
So it kind of fostered that both.
And then when I was still living in Peaches through college,
there definitely was that familial thing.
In fact, half of them lived together.
If you, if someone on your development team had been like
a racist, would you have been able to still work with them?
If they didn't like say it while on the job?
I mean, one of my teammates was low key pretty racist and it annoyed me,
but not really.
I mean, also there's incompetence at his job.
Or how do you know that you weren't just noticing it more?
I think I was noticing before I learned if his, his,
I'm just like messing with you.
No, no, that's good point though.
It could be, it could be that although I think it wasn't,
but that's, I mean, that's certainly a plausible thing that could happen.
If somebody annoys you for non-work reasons,
then you start hating their work.
It's like horns effect.
Yeah, exactly.
I feel like my answer is still the same,
but now I'm like starting to question it.
What was your answer?
That I would still hire them, but like as long as it didn't interfere
with their job performance as far as getting in fights with co-workers
or offending customers, but like ideal world,
I want to think that it seems like people kind of would self sort themselves
to an extent.
I know that some people have financial needs and whatnot,
but it just seems like if somebody, if a Nazi went and got a job
at like a software development company where everybody was super liberal,
it would not work out.
They'd probably get it too.
Yeah.
It wouldn't be just a matter of their team being annoyed at them.
They'd be like super annoyed at their team all the time.
Yeah, that's like the whole like, you know, the caveat being
if you get in fights with your co-workers or offend the customers
and I feel like that would just happen naturally.
Maybe not.
And if they're good enough at not doing that, then like a,
fine, fine, let them stay.
Yeah.
The downside is that sounds like it would lead to like more,
like we talked about with fast food.
That makes that, that relevant is that you'll end up with this bizarre
situation where I'm trying to think of what the blue restaurant would be.
I'm guessing like Wendy's.
Chipotle.
Okay.
It's definitely Chipotle.
I can take that.
I was thinking Wendy's because their Twitter is just hilarious.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
And now I guess also Gillette apparently.
Yeah.
It depends.
They only heard about it like peripherally.
I don't know about this.
I saw it on Reddit.
They had some commercial that was basically waived all the flags of liberalism.
Okay.
But people are like, look, look where their money goes.
They don't give a shit.
This is just virtual signaling to you bunch of idiots.
They were annoyed.
But it was Reddit.
So everyone's always pissed.
Man, it's came up with a not super appropriate theory for everyone on Reddit.
It's always so annoyed.
But now I've mentioned that I had the idea.
So I've got to share it.
I imagine many people are already on their phones on the toilet.
And the only time they have enough time to write a comment is when it's not going
smoothly on the toilet.
Right.
So of course you're going to sound pissed.
It kind of accepted.
Yeah.
I'm going to think about that all the time now.
Thank you, Steven.
You bet.
Well, to be fair, a lot of people just do it when they're at work and hitting their
jobs and doing their jobs.
Yeah.
Doing the equivalent.
No one's on Reddit because they're having a great time.
You know, and are happy to be there when there's other opportunities.
So maybe that just drew the internet in general.
Did I just solve internet rudeness?
Maybe not.
I mean, you didn't solve it.
You finally got the cause though.
Yeah.
So you were going to talk about Liam Neeson quickly before we went on to something else.
Yeah.
I'll try and power through.
I know we've been at the first one for a while.
What?
Like a month ago?
Liam Neeson, maybe two.
I don't know.
I think it's like at least two now.
He was asked like how he gets that like awesome, we're talking about Mads Mickelson's new
movie with that revenge porn kind of just like that vibe of like murderous rage.
Yeah.
And they were like, you know, how did you get that?
You know, where did you draw that from with your character for like taken and those sorts
of things?
And you said that when he was in his twenties, one of his friends got raped by a black guy.
And he apparently, Liam Neeson walked around and I figured his exact words, but he was
it was specifically not looking for the for the perpetrator was looking for any poor set
black son of a bitch to give him any shit so he could beat the shit out of him.
Yeah.
Which is pretty disgusting thought to have.
Yeah.
Um, he said he was like this for a few weeks, I think less than a month.
And then he kind of woke up and he was like, what the fuck was I doing?
And he never, according to his story, got the opportunity to hurt somebody, which is
good.
And there is the reaction that I heard to this was kind of, I guess, what you'd expect.
Like I said, if you know, half the people went fucking nuts, which is weird because
okay, well, let me explain why I think it's weird.
I agree with you that it's weird.
My thing is that I can't imagine a better way for this to have possibly gone, you know,
his crime is for having once been racist.
Yeah.
And like another, I think more clarification, didn't he actually like, this wasn't like
widely known about him, right?
He actually like came out, told this story and then said, I used to be like this, but
I've changed and I'm ashamed of who I had been and I'm sorry or something like that.
Yeah.
I don't remember if it came with an apology or not, but it was like, I'm ashamed.
And this was, this was, yeah, me.
And how old is the reason like 65?
So this was 40 years ago.
Yeah.
This was during the time when Ireland was still going through its terrorism phase, you know,
maybe he was probably living with car bombs and shit going off in his neighborhood.
Yeah.
That's a good point.
I kind of forgot he was Irish too.
But yeah, my thing is I can't think of a better circumstance for someone to wake up
from a, a prejudice position, you know, nobody got hurt again, according to the story, but
I'll take it at face value because everyone else is how, how, what more could they possibly
wanted?
His only, like I said, his crime is having once had racist thoughts 40 years ago and
that he doesn't have anymore and that he feels that like he's ashamed of.
To me, this was like an inspiring story of growth.
He might have changed some minds that day, you know, I guess I, I didn't know what, what
the mob wanted.
I don't think they know either.
They just want something to crucify.
They're like, you said something racist in some way.
And so up on the cross for you time.
I guess.
Yeah.
That reminds me, Johnny Depp, um, his girlfriend or wife, I forget, said that, you know, he
used to beat her and stuff and had bruises and took pictures and all that.
Well, he just, I think he, I think he won the suit or just like it became public that
that he countersuit the defamation and he's got surveillance footage of her like being
crazy abusive.
One time she had smashed his hand so hard that has lost a piece of his finger.
Wow.
Um, you know, cause he's got some mansion and he's a rich guy.
He's got cameras and stuff and all of them have all this abuse towards her and all the
stuff that she said happened was never, never on any of this footage.
Wow.
I hadn't heard of that.
That's wild.
That the news came out about Johnny Depp and yesterday being what, 13th of March.
So it was interesting cause I was reading the comments there like people learning about
this.
And they're like, yeah, I was on the bandwagon.
I, I'm kind of ashamed that I jumped on this just cause.
Cause he's a guy.
Well, yeah.
And the, you know, this was.
Yeah.
The whole narrative of a.
Guy suck.
Well, that and also celebrities, people in, you know, positions of power in particular
are going to abuse them and reinforce hierarchies.
Yeah.
And it, it's dragons that does happen and what sucks.
And that, this is the same every time somebody makes a false, false claim whatsoever.
Like, um, I'm realizing that I'm picking a lot of like left leaning examples.
That's cause we, the reason I do that and to be an asshole, that's cause I expect better
of the left.
Like on the right, that guy who tried to, who paid that woman to pretend that, uh, Mueller
raped her.
I hadn't heard about that.
Oh, I'll find his name cause it sounds like this sounds ridiculous, not that I'm making
it up.
The whole thing was completely farcical.
Well, there was that whole, uh, two person team, a guy and a girl who, uh, we're trying
to sting, uh, abortion centers into like admitting that they sell baby parts or something.
Oh, I remember that.
Yeah.
Didn't hear about this one.
Yeah.
Oh my God.
It was fucking crazy.
That's nuts.
Yeah.
The guy you tried to, to make up this claim against Mueller, nothing happened against
him.
So he did something else recently.
And it was just yesterday, the day before, I think I didn't, I can't, I involved another
false police report, but I can't remember what it was.
There was that right wing lady who carved a B in her face when Obama was running for the
first time.
Oh my God.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So anyway.
She, she's carved a B into her face and said that a black man attacked her and said something
about like, Obama's going to be the next president or something, right?
Why a B?
Uh, for Barack.
Okay.
Have you done an O for Obama?
Yeah.
Well, I think a B is easier to carve than an O.
I guess.
Yeah.
But, uh, importantly, the B was mirror-imaged on her face, so it was kind of obvious she
did it in a mirror.
Cause everyone was like, that B's backwards.
No one would carve a B that way unless they were looking at you in a mirror, huh?
That's ridiculous.
And with makeup, she actually carved this to her own face.
Yes.
And didn't reverse it.
What a fucking idiot.
I mean, don't get wrong.
It was all dumb, but that's like the one part of the crime.
You get right.
Well, I mean, maybe.
Maybe.
So.
So we're just like making fun of dumb artists now?
No, no.
I, I, I, I, I only brought that up because.
All right.
Let's make fun of the left again.
Well, I only brought that up because all the examples that I bring up are like left-leaning
things.
Yeah.
And I think, and this is, I think Sam Harris put it this way was that like, you know, why
do you only get on the left for like complaining about being dishonest or intellectual dishonesty
is he's constantly complaining about is like, because we expect better of the left.
Yeah.
He didn't put it quite subpoinantly, but I think that's, that's the main thing.
And I guess because me, it's like, it's quote, my tribe.
Yeah.
Like I want, I want my guys to be the cool guys.
If you guys are going to suck like them, why am I even hanging out with you?
I'm more along the lines of because I expect people on, I know this is, it's not racist.
It's whatever it is, tribalist, I guess, to expect people on the right to attack me.
So whatever.
But the first time you're like seriously attacked by someone on the left, it feels like you
are being betrayed and your allies are suddenly turned on you.
And it's really shitty.
And it happens a lot, fucking happened to Al Franken.
It shouldn't.
And yet all the time.
Yeah.
And so the reason I was thinking of the Johnny Depp situation and then on the other side,
the Mueller fabricator, it sucks because crimes happen all the time.
And you know, a lot of people do suck.
And then when somebody makes something up for either to get attention or when oppression
Olympics points or to try and defame somebody, they delegitimize, they help delegitimize
every legitimate claim.
And that's crazy annoying.
So I don't know what to do about it.
I actually, I have a suggestion, like as long as I'm talking up my ass and we're already
kind of all over the place, because Reddit's got a big circle jerk about rape, or false
accusations, never having anything happen, just other than the guy getting expelled and
you know, dragged through the mud for three years while he clears his name.
And then, you know, she maybe gets a couple of months in prison or something, he's like,
they should reverse the sentence.
And yeah, I think that's a great idea.
I think that's a fair, but the downside is that then like, if you try to frame someone
for murder, then you get the jail time that he would have gotten if he was found guilty.
That sounds good for a clear cut crime, like murder where there was a body, but the downside
is like, if you say, yeah, a month ago, this guy assaulted me, the downside of reversing
the punishment is that there's not a way to prove either way.
So I guess in that case, you just let there's not an easier solution for that.
But if you can prove that it was made up, there was one that I saw years ago where somebody
had said that they were assaulted by a professional sports person.
I can't remember what, what, no, it was basketball or football or whatever.
And they like said when and where.
And another editor saw this and he was like, they were on a flight from like Chicago to
whatever, going to a game at that exact hour.
Like, what are you talking about?
So like, if that's the, if it's that cut and dry, and you can say, look, it's made
up, then whatever, but so often you can't.
And if you're, I don't even know about like whatever, I feel like there should be some
consequence.
It is really hard to, first of all, like find that person.
And did you say that that was like, someone had come out and made that accusation or was
it just like they kind of, they posted it somewhere?
The, the football person?
Yeah, I read this three or four years ago.
I can't remember, but for, well, it's paying to as easy as you want for the thought
experiment and we'll run with that.
I think it should be punished just as much as if it wasn't easily disprovable because
the whole point is most of the time they're not easily disprovable.
So when you can disprove it, then it should be punished as a deterrent, right?
Yeah, but I think like, imagine if you claimed that like some rich asshole
spitballing, maybe someone like Donald Trump assaulted you, right?
Daddy Trump has enough money to like bribe the case, you know, if he wanted to.
There was just that thing yesterday about all those people paying to get their kids
into nice schools.
If you can, if you can afford to write a $20 million check, you can afford to fake
some evidence.
Well, so you could turn this around by cheating the system and bribing forensic
experts or something, right?
I see. Or faking records.
So like it sounds appealing and it sounds like a nice, easy solution, but it sounds
so easily scrubbable.
And it might disincentivize people who actually did get raped by Donald Trump or
someone like him to, you know, come forward and say something.
Because well, I don't think he'd ever get if he actually did rape someone, there
wouldn't ever be a case of him actually being on a flight towards him during that
time. No, but you could, I mean, they could doctor evidence of some sort.
Exactly.
If you get a million dollars to pay the best forensics faker to fake you a, you
know, plain log or something, whatever, and then pay a judge to say, don't look at
the plain log too closely or something.
I don't know.
I feel like sneaky things happen in court and the more money you have, the
sneakier you can be.
But yeah, so next, next thing.
Oh, I got a quick, really quick one.
This will only take 30 seconds.
All right.
Richard, you wrote in and said that our episodes are coming out really quiet.
So everyone who heard last week's episode, episode 80 on GPT2, I upped that by
whatever the units of things that Audacity uses.
Disables.
Is it just decibels on the slider?
Yeah.
It wasn't like percentages or something.
Yeah, decibels.
So I upped it by 10 decibels.
That doesn't sound like a lot.
Oh, well, because I mean, like one decibel, I could notice, whatever.
I'm not a, I did 10 up units.
I did 10 up units for every, every person on the mic.
You can hear the difference between one and one decibel change.
I didn't think so.
But apparently the difference on the one slider on Audacity.
You really?
Yeah.
Cause I, I change it so I'll slide one person down and up and then hear them
sound differently.
And just slide them one.
Yeah.
Oh, okay.
Weird.
Cause I, if I move a slider by one, I never hear a difference.
Oh, I heard the general rule is like humans can't differentiate less
than three decibels.
That's why I thought it was not decibels.
Okay.
Maybe I was, you're just super sensitive when it comes to decibel hearing.
My brain's tricking me.
In any case, episode should be coming out louder now, assuming that sliding up the
decibels on the things actually makes it come out louder.
So, um, if anyone, no one told us this for like two years.
So if, if everyone's been stringing to hear it this whole time, then, uh, hopefully
that will be a problem anymore.
So thanks, Richard.
Um, we talked about, uh, how useful it was to society when everyone was taught
basic literacy and basic numeracy, even though it doesn't seem like there's any
one specific case where like, yeah, this is really good to have for this job.
So we should train everyone in it.
It was mentioned in that episode that, uh, perhaps simple programming like
Python is the same kind of thing.
If everyone was programming literate, then we might have huge gains in society
equal to something like literacy or numeracy.
And there was some general skepticism on that point, but Zecharon wrote, I had
stopped at podcast right as you were saying, you weren't sure what teaching
Python would do for students, but in general teaching programming to students
should hopefully increase the amount of logical thinking, falsification, truth,
table style logic, et cetera, even if they never touch programming again and get
degrees in French lit, which is a good point.
So for the record, that was from private correspondence between me and him.
Oh, was it?
I think he, he might have put it on the Reddit.
He said it's going to, but I was going to get points for that feedback.
So Zech, you're welcome.
Now, uh, yeah, no, that's actually a really good point.
I can't believe we didn't think of it.
Certainly at least falsification, writing unit tests, just to think of what
would I not expect us to see here?
That's like the most rationalist question you can ask, um, or at least the most,
one of the most scientific questions you can ask.
And that sounds like crazy valuable.
I think just having, having grooved that in at some point at somewhere in your,
in your curriculum, if you didn't get it in science, cause it's hard to get in
science, cause it's not often taught the best.
It's usually like, you know, memorize the names of stars or whatever.
It's not hypothesis testing, but programming explicitly is if you're
writing tests or just doing something, but specifically testing like that too.
Right.
So I thought that was a really cool comment.
Yeah.
They have started to teach in the cold computational thinking where, um,
it's not strictly programming per se, but it's teaching kids to think in terms
of like these exact things.
And I did always notice there was a distinct difference in culture between
people who at least were programming adjacent and those who had never done
anything similar to that back when I was in high school, there was just a
slightly different way of thinking about things.
They're probably used to like thinking precisely.
And that sounds like it might be putting them on too high of a pedestal,
but maybe I think more like more used to quantifying things into variables
and how they can be manipulated and like, which is different from precise thinking
and knowing like what it means to assert something and knowing that that means
that you can test it in a way that is provable or not.
Maybe like approach to solving problems.
Yeah.
And, uh, you know, breaking tasks down.
A different listener said, and I didn't copy it down.
So I don't remember which listener was.
I apologize.
Uh, said that a lot of basic office tasks, like the really simple ones that are
probably common for accounting or any sort of secretarial position could
probably benefit from some quick Python automation where it would save you time
and effort.
Oh, that was in the subreddit, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's, that's true.
The downside is that your boss learns that and you're out of the job.
Um, there was somebody used to come to meetups that really, I mean, it depends
on the job, but like one guy that I'm thinking of used to come to meetups.
He did a lot, like a lot of his stuff was they used like Excel for basically
all their like database stuff because it was an old company and I guess I
didn't care to do it the right way, but he basically wrote little scripts that
would get whatever he needed and store stuff, however he needed and all this and
that.
So his job basically go in, run whatever script he needed to do and just hang out.
Um, I think it was, there's more to it than that, but I mean, his job probably
took 20% as long as he was being paid to do it.
Oh, I see.
So like if you're like lying about how much time you're spending, I guess.
That's not lying.
It's like, it's doing the job they gave you.
Yeah.
You paid me to do a job and I did it, but if they learn how easy the job is or
not how easy, but how easy it could be, you know, if, if one good developer could
replace your entire data management team, um, but you should pay him as much as
your entire data management management team.
Yeah, like that's going to happen, but then that also means that one person
takes five people's jobs or something like that too.
Right.
So, but UBI basic income sounds like a great, great fix to this cause that's
happening that, you know, whether we want it to or not at some point for most
things.
So I was just thinking, um, 10, 15 million Americans are in their
income through driving of the sort.
It's like 3% 3.2 or 3.5% of jobs.
Holy shit.
So I guess that's including the total number of Americans, not working
Americans, but whatever it's, it's, it's millions.
And I mean, that's, that's going away in the not too distant future.
So yeah.
Did we talk about Logan before on this show?
No.
Logan, the movie.
Yeah.
I don't think so.
Well, just, just the one, one thing where, uh, someone at, uh, at the
beginning of the movie, they have the self-driving semi-trucks, right?
And they're just like barreling along and, uh, one almost runs over Logan or
runs him off the road or something.
It was, it was pretty intense.
Like swirms off the road.
Yeah.
And someone said that kind of, you know, threw me out of the movie because no
system would be programmed to be that aggressive and run people off the road and
shit.
And my view was like, that was really good world building cause we are living in a
crap shack dystopian future where the corporations don't care about people so
much that they're like, yeah, haul your shit to the next door and we don't care
who you run off the road and everyone accepts it because the corporations are
the only ones with power now.
Yeah.
Hopefully we don't get that world.
Right.
Sidebar on superheroes.
Uh, I dragged everyone to see Captain Marvel this weekend and I guess dragged
their word for it because it wasn't as, it wasn't, it wasn't as resounding as
resounding with success as I thought it was going to be.
I loved it.
So we need votes on who liked Captain Marvel.
I liked it.
I think like,
I meant from this, I meant from the people, but from you guys.
Oh, yeah.
Name and shame.
Go for it.
Enyosh.
But you first, Jess, I just wanted to say that I feel like you're, uh, being kind
of down on yourself because not everybody like loved the movie, but like, I
liked to criticize movies.
So the fact that like I was picking it apart doesn't mean that I didn't like it.
No, no, no.
That was what I wanted to do.
Oh, yeah, I said this to Enyosh.
No, my, my, my love of these movies is, uh, secure enough that I feel not, I had,
how did I put it?
I had a way that I liked.
Um, no, it was, it was just that I'm secure enough of my love of these movies
that you guys aren't bumming me out by not liking it.
I, I just, I, I'm, I'm poking fun.
You, if you guys can't hear my smile, it's there.
No, I like picking stuff apart too.
It was just, uh, it was mainly Enyosh, just like when you had said something
along the lines of like, get the feeling that the writers don't think their
audience is smart and just turn out another movie with the exact same recipe
and say, fuck you, eat it up.
Yeah, yeah.
And then you were slightly insulted by that.
So I apologize.
I jokingly said, you'll personally attack.
Well, okay.
So here's my thing about, uh, Captain Marvel.
I thought it was just not a good movie in terms of movies in general.
It was kind of lazy.
There was no character building.
There was no stakes.
I never really cared about Miss Marvel or her, or Captain Marvel or her struggle.
And when I looked back on it, it was very much a, that sort of thing where
things don't have to make sense.
We don't have to make you care about the character.
We don't have to really do anything aside from follow this basic script.
We know you're all going to come and watch our movie anyway.
And I just felt like the creators of the movie had a casual contempt for the
audience, like you said.
So I think it's just generally a downright bad movie.
But the thing is, I have seen a lot of people who really, really love it.
And almost all of those people are of the female persuasion.
And so I think there is something in it that talks to people.
Uh, like there's a really brief, like a minute and a half, maybe two minute
montage of people being sexist to her and her, like trying to do things.
And everyone's like, you can't do that because you're a woman.
You know why they call it a cockpit, right?
And I was like, that is, okay, that's infuriating.
Sure.
But that is just like, not enough.
That doesn't show us personal struggle.
That doesn't really show us her being hurt.
It's a brief montage, but apparently it really talked to a lot of people who have
that experience in their own life.
And they didn't need to see it like fully brought out in the story.
They were just like, Oh, yeah.
I've had that happen to me too.
And just an instant emotional hook for them.
Because like, you don't need to show me all that.
I am on her wavelength right now.
So it may very well be a movie that is just not really for me.
That talks directly to one audience.
And I think it might be like the Harry Potter and the methods of rationality
for women, sort of.
I don't want to say for women in general, because that's way too broad.
But I think we're going to raise eyebrows from our local women.
When people brag on how Harry Potter and methods rationality is all about
like this bratty, uber smart, uber mensch guy, and nobody can stand him.
I think I haven't heard him described as uber mensch.
But I probably someone has done it.
I think the reason a lot of us really love it is because we instantly recognize
our struggles and the shit we went through when we were kids, when we read Harry.
And so you don't need to do a lot more to win us over.
We're like, I know that person.
I was that person.
Oh, my God, this is perfect.
I was that smart as.
Yeah, exactly.
And so maybe maybe Captain Marvel is the same thing for a certain audience.
That's possible.
I mean, for what it's worth, I brought up put this out there.
I brought up the Winnie the Pooh from like the I was going to have like
people vote on Reddit, whether they like the movie or not.
I didn't mean to to derail us on it for more than five seconds.
But I don't know.
I think I might suffer from what Paul Bloom calls like Marvel derangement syndrome.
I was going to say like a pathological empathy or something.
And that I didn't have to be a woman to really.
I guess I know women.
I think that's normal empathy, Stephen.
Yeah, but you can empathize with someone who's not you.
But someone who's so not me.
Precisely not. Yeah.
I don't know. I I saw her struggle and not not through my own history,
but through history of, you know, that I've imagined from what I've heard,
you know, from from women in my life.
So but it's not like like Masters of Sex had a beautiful like several
episode arc where you really see how much she struggles because she's a woman
in these it was either 50s or 60s and just in general,
how they're so easily dismissed and the few women that make it big,
what they have to go through.
And Mad Men just made my blood fucking boil to the point where I couldn't watch it.
And this had none of that.
This was just like, here's the thing that happened sometimes.
So to be fair, if Mad Men was only two hours long,
then it wouldn't have had time to get your blood that hot, right?
I only watched one one hour episode.
Oh, OK. It pissed me off enough.
I couldn't watch anymore.
I completely retract my my statement.
So I think that they they tried to walk the line between like this isn't just
the story of a woman who overcame people being a dick and proved to be crazy.
Awesome.
They tied it into the 20 movie along saga of the MCU in a way that I thought
was fantastically done and loved. But what did she do to become awesome?
She was she was hit by an explosion.
Almost none of them did anything like, well, let me rephrase that.
So like, I mean, we could go through the roster,
but the the the powered individuals on the team, maybe two of them earned it.
Like, unless they're going to I guess Steve Rogers, maybe,
because he was cool enough to get the shot, but whatever.
Like he didn't to quote Iron Man,
everything special about him came out of a bottle, right?
No, because like his character, you know, his personality, maybe was his.
But so was hers.
You know, she could have been an asshole.
She could she could have, you know, so.
Well, what was her personality?
She I so I liked her character a lot more than I liked Wonder Woman's.
OK, and I'm I'm saying this as somebody saw Wonder Woman three times.
I think Wonder Woman, her I loved it.
I loved it a lot more the first time.
Her like adorable naivete becomes super unbearable
until it's going to rewatches.
Like you watch this and she she it's not just that she doesn't know what stuff is.
That's that's quaint and adorable.
And that was fun with Thor when he was from space and whatever.
It's that she directed America because he was from the 50s.
She never gets it, though.
The whole time she's just like, why do people have watches?
What's war? Why is it from being a dick?
And again, that's that's how it sounded on the third watch.
Like, I know and there are a lot of moments I loved in that movie.
And she also overcomes her struggles again.
She didn't earn her powers either, right?
But didn't she get them?
I mean, like, I know she was some kind of special race of super women or something.
But didn't she also train her entire life?
She trained, but she was the daughter of Zeus.
She probably been strong no matter what. Right.
So but but but that aside, the point is, isn't like,
no, but whether or not they earn their powers through being awesome,
like maybe Iron Man did.
But on the naivety thing, real quick, before we move on, the first of all,
I love all the naive fish out of water characters,
which I've told you multiple times before.
I love Thor and Captain America for the same reason.
But one of the things about the sort of naive character
is that it lets you see your own society from a new point of view,
like from someone who is completely shocked by these things.
And to just stop that after a half hour is kind of like lame.
You got this cool way to explore society by pointing out
how weird it would be from someone outside of it.
Run with it for the whole length of the movie, or at least I like that.
Because seriously, why do we have war?
It's fucking stupid.
And I mean, I know why we have war.
But if I didn't, looking at it from someone from the outside,
like, oh, my God, I can't believe these people do this shit.
No, that is a lot of fun.
And it's a great thought experiment.
Like I think Daniel Dennett saying, putting on your your three
your three alien shoes and standing in that position to see the world.
That said, I've got a plug.
I'll have to find the name.
I'll put it in the episode description.
There's the series of adorable comments,
comics with these little blue aliens.
Oh, yes. And it's like, here, I've handed you your present.
And it's concealed.
They're like, oh, thank you.
It's like, no, you must destroy the concealment paper right now.
I want to watch.
And it's like just someone getting a birthday present.
But it's it's putting it from a perspective of someone who doesn't know
any of the stuff is and it sounds hilarious and they lay it all out.
And that is fun. It's cute.
I think we've probably gone on Captain Marvel too long.
I liked it a lot and I totally understand and see why you didn't like it.
And I totally support picking things apart and being annoyed at
at inconsistencies or at least noticing them.
I've got nothing against any of that stuff either.
So moving on.
OK. All right.
Probably back to feedback.
Yes.
This is what you get when you get a feedback episode.
That's talking about movies.
Real quick, so we can get through this from Rockham.
Rockham, is it pronounced Rockham?
Sounds right. OK.
Yes. Now my expertise comes out.
This is when we were talking about derivatives and what they are.
A derivative is any kind of financial contract
whose value is based on something else.
For example, I bet the stock price next week
will be between $10 and $15.
If I am wrong, I will pay you $1.
A simple example why derivatives are helpful to the real economy are airlines.
The airline will say, I bet jet fuel prices will go way up.
If that's true, the airline wins the bet
and uses the earnings to offset their losses on jet fuel.
Either way, the airline wins.
That's awesome. Yeah.
It's useful to realize that a derivative position
that's 200 times higher than an equity position
is not necessarily 200 times worse.
In my first example, you could lose at most $1.
But your books would say that you have a derivative on $15 worth of underlying.
That kind of sounds like the rationalist magic stuff we were talking about,
only with real money.
Rationalist magic stuff?
We had David Yusef on six, eight months ago.
Yeah. Yeah.
This sounds like less magic and more math, but I like it.
And someone might try to forgive me for saying this, David, if you're listening,
but someone might try to to pass this off as like I'm being arcane and mystical.
And really, they just they know derivatives.
But is that like a I guess financial industry ins and outs?
What's like the field that lives in?
Finance. Finance. Thank you, God.
Now, you know how well educated I am.
I'm just not into the business world very much.
Well, there's multiple meanings of derivative, but that's the money one.
Right. There's also the math one and the language one.
Yeah. Are there others?
I think that's it, maybe.
Rockham has a second one on here that's on the same episode.
Oh, yeah. And also about money.
Yes. This is this is your wheelhouse.
I'll let I'll let you guys read this. I can't talk.
I'll read it.
Rockham also wants to emphasize that those two guys from Yukowsky's post,
Merton and Scholes are big names in the world of derivative pricing.
Their model might not be in scare quotes true,
but it is so darn useful and near accurate that it's still the way that you
introduce anyone to the subject.
Hearing how their company failed kind of feels like how it would feel
to learn that Newton died by falling off of an apple tree.
So these are the guys who just kept investing and wouldn't let their ships sink.
Yeah. Lost tons and tons of money.
Yeah. Yeah.
And I think I was the person that didn't realize that those reveal people.
It was kind of like, man, those guys for the example, idiots,
though, nobody in real life would do that.
And then somebody pointed out, I think they're real.
I was like, damn it.
In your defense, it seemed indefensively stupid.
So stupid that would have to not be a real person.
And I wonder it sounds and I'm assuming Rockham knows more than I do.
So I'll take their word for it.
But my my impression was that they were just conning the whole time.
Like, no, no, no.
Well, but I think my impression of reading the post was that like,
you go on long enough, you need you.
It's like those alien cultists that like thought that their
alien ship was trailing behind Haley's Comet or something.
So they bought that big telescope.
And then when they didn't see it, they blamed the telescope manufacturer
and tried to return it.
OK. I thought it was like that.
We're like, they were deluded.
Yeah, they were deluded for sure.
But supposedly they believed in their own model enough to keep betting on it.
Yeah, I sort of I always sort of assumed that the ringleaders of any cult is.
Yeah, but it wasn't.
I think they were taking the hits after a while and they just kept like.
They kept running with it.
Yeah. But I thought it was kind of like some sort of Ponzi scheme stuff.
But the post didn't get into much about how they were doing all of this.
I assume it was some shady, you know, like I'm huckstering you.
Now, I think if it was that we would have heard about it,
the same we did about Madoff.
I didn't hear about Madoff.
Yeah, and also they would have made money off it.
Madoff was the guy who went to jail for his gigantic Ponzi scheme.
The biggest one in history cost literally billions of dollars.
Dope.
Man, life gets easy.
You get to live life on easy mode if you're willing to live without ethics.
Well, I mean, kind of.
Sort of.
Unless you get caught.
Yeah, that's fair.
Yeah. Speaking of cult leaders and since I got the Avengers in my mind,
there was a movie called it's actually really fun.
Bad Night at the El Royale.
It sort of did like a little anthology thing with all check into the CD motel.
That's like on the border of I think Nevada and Utah and like half the hotel
is Nevada, half is in Utah, but that's not really interesting.
And then it does like, you know, room four, room five.
And it does like what was going on because like you see kind of little bits
and then brings it all together and the crazy cult leader in that movie was Thor.
Actual Thor or the actor?
Yes. Oh, OK, neat.
Yeah, it was Chris Hemsworth.
But did he was he he didn't he didn't have his hammer.
He wasn't Thor.
I call Chris Hemsworth Thor.
OK, OK, OK, sorry. Yeah, I see the confusion.
Yeah, because if he's a crazy cult leader, he could in theory claim to be Thor
and have followers that way.
Yeah. I mean, it could have been some other actor entirely who was just like,
I am Thor worship me.
It was a fun movie. OK, sorry.
No, no, no, no, no, you're totally good.
No, it was just it was one of those bizarre sex cults.
It doesn't really explain it made him so appealing other than like the fact
that he didn't wear a shirt that closed and it was awesome.
So who who isn't into bizarre sex, right? Right.
Did he look like Chris Hemsworth?
Yeah, OK, with a weird mustache.
But I can't remember was like a goatee or something.
It was something weird. No, it wasn't a goatee.
Whatever one of those U shaped mustaches, it worked on him.
And then the dude was in it.
He was great from the Big Lebowski. Yeah. Oh, OK.
I like how you're just referring to actors as the other roles that they've played.
And the only actor's names I know I also do that because I don't know actor names.
I got it. His name was because he was also Obadiah Stain in the first Ironman movie.
The dude was. Yeah.
So I refer to people by other stuff they've been.
I don't know anyone's names.
Now I don't know his name, which is ridiculous, because I know his name.
I refer to him all the time.
And yet you have somehow catapulted his name out of my brain.
And Drake's not here, so we can't ask him.
Oh, next comment. OK.
So Elk 12 Jeff Bridges.
Anyway, Elk 12 429 was talking about chess.
I forget when we were talking about chess exactly,
but oh, yeah, we should start dating these for the future.
We should, yeah, because we put in eight days ago,
but those eight days ago when we grabbed the post.
So also we should put what they're in reference to.
There was a chess question and Elk says heads up on the chess question.
There are chess championships, which are open to anyone
regardless of gender and women's chess championships.
The dual system recognizes the most excellent women,
but the top handful of women are able to compete in both.
I think we're talking about I forget his name,
but the guy who like trained his daughters to be a really awesome at chess.
Yeah, that might have been that.
Or there's something after that, too,
where I was saying that there was that they segregate chess championships.
Well, that was probably in response to you saying that.
Yeah, but I can't remember if I learned this before or after,
if this is the same thing that I talked about that brought this comment.
But apparently they kind of only have to like,
there's the like open to anyone and then the specific women's ones.
And I understand that the reason that is,
is that there's just less women that play chess. Yeah.
So that's like that's one way to keep people engaged.
But I think I think I learned this after there was somebody
who competes at chess at the national level,
who was commenting about this on Reddit,
they were saying that the bar for being a grandmaster at chess
is lower for women in whatever this guy was competing in.
And that I think it was like a scale of 25 or something.
And anyone 23 and up was a grand champion.
It may just be because there's less women in the women's championship.
It could be, but he was annoyed because he was like,
I think for whatever it was, if he was woman, he would be a grand champion.
But since he's not, he's not.
Well, if it's only like the top two percent in your league can be grand
champion, then if there's less people in it,
the raw point number is going to have to be lower.
I think it was the same competition, though.
But yeah, whatever it is, it was some weird thing.
That dude could always just transition and become a woman,
then join the chess championship.
But there's a reason he's now doing that, huh?
Or he could try to do what I did at the pot store once,
which was it was women's Wednesdays where they got like half off.
And I just told the guys like, I'm a woman.
And I was like, no, I said, if I said I was woman,
would you give me half off?
And he kind of was just like, I don't know, man.
And I'm like, I'm not going to push it.
That's fine.
But I was sort of in a way that, you know, it's like whatever.
But that was me not really
sincerely doing that because I'm not an asshole.
I did say that to the guy, but I didn't push it because I'm not a dick.
There's that guy who goes around
suing nightclubs for ladies' nights, which seems like a dick move.
Because does he not have a point?
I don't know, like they're trying to just get more business.
Yeah, I know.
I understand absolutely the business justification for it.
It's the same reason we don't hire black people in racist towns, right?
Is it? I'm actually thinking about this.
I don't have any opinions about this
because I haven't really thought about it.
Well, because guys will go to where the women are.
And if women can drink free, they'll go to where the free drinks are.
Exactly. So it's a great business man.
And then you bring in paying customers. Yeah.
So do you have a problem with it?
No, not necessarily, aside from the fact
that it is discriminating based on gender.
I guess.
You know, if we have said that we are not cool with that in society,
is the exception, unless it's ladies' night?
I don't go to ladies' night things
because I don't want to get hit on by all the dudes
that come there to like hit on people from ladies' night.
So, like, there's some more effects going on there.
But I don't know.
I don't I don't have enough brain power
to make a like opinion on this right now.
I just I guess to me is it always comes back to
are we actually against gender discrimination in all forms at all times?
And just I'm just imagining you
putting this in a letter that's dressed dear intellectual dark.
Do it. No, no, I don't.
I honestly don't care about ladies' nights.
I'm just interested on if we as a society
do have that principle or if we have exceptions.
I want to see smart people debate about this
so I can steal their opinions because I'm like drawing a blank.
There's probably this happening somewhere.
So I don't know about the smart people part.
But is there like a I guess I'm not a lawyer is kind of my answer.
Like, I know that you can refuse service
to anybody for no reason or for whatever reason you want.
Generally.
So like, I mean, I remember even going to gas stations
that we can refuse service anyone for any reason,
just like the sign that they post, which is basically the way of saying
like if you're acting weird, we'll kick you out.
But the sign doesn't say that it says we can refuse service for any reason.
I would assume if it's your company, you can give free stuff to whoever you want.
Yeah, but there's also the public access laws
where if you are a public facing company, you have to treat all customers equally.
Like if you are selling shoes,
you can't kick out black people.
You can't kick out women.
You can't be like, we will not serve you birthday kick thing.
Oh, yeah, they're pretty kicking too, I guess.
But the law was originally passed to allow black people to eat at diners with white people.
They're like, if you're a public facing company,
you have to serve everyone who wants to give you money to get your product.
And that's that's it.
You don't get to say, no, you're black, so we won't sell you a sandwich.
Maybe these bars get around that by serving everybody,
but only some people have to pay.
Well, I mean, for me, it sounds like they aren't getting our way with it anymore
because someone took it to court and won.
I think this was like, you know, one guy doing this to several bars in one state or something.
I don't think that has changed the.
I believe the state was Colorado.
Really? Yeah.
Oh, I assumed it was Florida.
What happened exactly?
I apparently I don't have the details.
I my understanding is the thing that he went to several night clubs or bars or something
on ladies nights and tried to get free drinks and said, sorry, ladies only.
And he's like, aha, I got you for discrimination and then sued
and won a few times to different at different establishments.
I assume it was just some asshole trying to make some easy money.
Now, I think it was no actual dude with principles who wanted to see if the law applies.
No, I always assumed that he was making in hundreds of thousands on each of these lawsuits
and was just doing that for a living.
How do you make money on lawsuits?
Don't people make money like Sue McDonald's for hot coffee and this don't get wrong.
She was disgustingly intensely injured.
I heard another person come back and say that actually the McDonald's
coffee wasn't hotter than any of the other coffee being served at the time.
But the debate continues.
In the United States, state courts in California, Maryland,
Pennsylvania and Wisconsin have ruled that ladies night discounts are unlawful,
gender-based price discrimination under state or local statutes.
However, courts in Illinois, Minnesota and Washington have rejected
a variety of challenges to such discounts. Weird.
Yeah. The more we talk about this, the more I think I'm against ladies night.
But I have to think about it more to form like a coherent opinion
rather than just a gut instinct thing.
I'm like I said, I'm not.
I don't really care what the other because I don't go out.
And I think most people like them.
And if most people like things and they aren't hurting people, then whatever.
But I think they do go against the principle of gender equality.
So that's my opinion on that.
It goes against the principle, but whatever.
Yeah. And it's also like weird, like I'm non-binary.
Do I get a drink?
Yeah, non-binary night.
I mean, are they, I guess that depends on whether they're giving the drink
based on gender or sex.
What are they exactly?
How are, you know, that's what I'm getting weird vibes off of it from.
Yeah.
I'd rather everybody just get treated equally now that I, you know,
kind of am thinking about it.
But then you're imputing on a company to do whatever it wants
with its own company, right?
So I guess, I mean, a bunch of big government leftists.
This is hard. I'm done.
Let's make an episode about this later.
I don't have a lot to say about it.
I was just thrown in there because it was somehow vaguely related to the chess
thing, which I should have saved that guy, that post about the guy talking
about chess championships and stuff, because I thought it was relevant.
But then in my defense, I thought we were going to get to this sooner.
So.
So not without incident asked, I'm not a writer.
So be curious about Inya Ash's opinion.
And I think this is before we had Jess on as a as a co-host and you're also a writer.
So I want your feedback on that.
Yeah, I'm not published, but yeah.
But great things.
It doesn't seem to me like most bestselling authors are sellouts.
Obviously, some are.
But even looking at sci-fi, not generally the case, for example,
ready player one may seem like pandering, but based on it on interviews,
it also seemed like exactly what Ernest Klein wanted to write.
God, I butchered that. That's why you guys read these.
Yeah, I think not without incident has a very, very good point.
And for the most part, every single with a few exceptions,
everything I've seen that catches on and becomes bestseller is something
that the author did really want to write and feels, you know,
strongly for and is not just like making a cold, calculated cash grab.
To be honest, I, in my personal experience, have only run across that once.
And it just really left such a bad taste in my mouth that I remembered it.
I'm sure it happens every now and then.
I hear James Patterson does it constantly.
I know the creative Garfield did it, but it really doesn't happen very much.
So if I gave the impression that it does, I'm really sorry.
I think what I was more on about was that
you were channeling that you wrote a non-traditional book
and it didn't become a New York Times bestseller.
You know, right? Not even that.
I mean, sure, that's it's not as optimal as writing a bestseller would be.
And in any case, but no, the thing is you read a lot
and you start to kind of see what will become a bestseller and why.
And it just kind of I understand why people like it.
So I don't know.
I don't remember where this video was, so I can't link it.
But all of the most popular movies, games, books, anything, any sort of media,
the most popular ones always have the same message.
And that message is always you were right all along.
Yeah, Neo in the Matrix, the main story of that
the main message of that movie, Neil was right all along.
Harry Potter. Yeah, he started out being, you know, living under the stairs.
Everyone hated him.
He was right all along.
Any sort of story that's really affirming and that people love
is a story that the main message is you were right all along.
And I just am bored with those now.
And yeah, I'm trying to think of that applied to things like worm,
I guess specifically just worm, because Ward is in finished every wild
those other stuff and almost a little I'm like wondering about that.
Finally, everyone is working together.
Yeah, well, like she's also a what is the word, unreliable protagonist.
So unreliable narrator or unreliable.
Yeah, that's it. Oh, that's interesting.
Oh, well, we spoiled it.
I mean, it's not really a spoiler because it's never explicitly said.
In fact, I didn't really think of that until you pointed that out a couple
weeks ago when we were chatting about it.
Really? I mean, there's there's times
definitely where like she's unreliable for like explicit in text reasons,
like she's blind or something.
But that was like for the narrative of that those scenes.
But it didn't occur to me until like mainly, I guess, when you had me reflect on it
and listening to we've got worm.
But like, yeah, you're in her head the whole story.
And of course, like, and it makes sense to me because I totally feel where she's
going from all the time.
But then it occurs to me like she totally feels where she's going from all the time.
And I'm in her in her head.
So I guess I would.
But I guess I didn't think about the unreliable narrator thing until he
pointed it out to me.
I didn't mean to cut you off.
I'm sorry.
I was enthusiastic, much my thought.
I'm sorry.
I was eager to to join in on how I was enlightened by that.
And then the point.
Let's see.
It kind of maybe you know, it's kind of like your your thing with like the generic
superhero movie.
It's like, here's the recipe for a superhero movie.
Go forth and make it a high that you guys all enjoyed it.
Just like we all knew you would.
And so like there's been that suite of like basically child battle
battle royale movies that are based off of books that have been coming
in the last five years, like The Hunger Games and Divergent and other things
like that, where it's like all exactly the same.
So I'm just talking about future with tribes of humans that don't get to choose
their tribes and then one's awesome.
That that seems like a recipe.
And I can't believe that the third or fourth person to do that thought that
they had an original idea, right?
Right.
Maybe they did.
Then again, that's not really fair because like there's a hundred movies
are like the person's secretly a wizard.
Yeah, it doesn't have to be an original idea.
It was just someone who thought, oh, that's a really cool concept.
I want to write something like that.
And they did.
It doesn't have to be original to in spark a passion at someone.
Yeah, that's stories I think are unoriginal.
I mean, really, there's only seven stories in the world, right?
Well, not really, but what's that from?
It's it's an old theory of not even literature, just theory of story
telling in general, that there's really only seven basic stories
and sometimes the number fluctuates.
Sometimes there's only three, sometimes there's only 12, whatever.
But it comes down to there's only so many broad general categories
that you can more or less fit everything into, but that doesn't mean
things aren't unoriginal.
If you have a summary of that, whatever analysis I'm interested in reading,
it sounds like something Robin Hansen might notice or point out.
I think like the I think it's true for mainstream stuff.
I don't know.
I like to read weird experimental short stories that are just like Xeno fiction,
which I don't think fall into any of them, but like depends what you're counting.
What's Xeno fiction or like starfish alien fiction?
Like somebody is just basically trying to get into the head of the most inhuman
thing they can imagine and kind of describe stories about them or their
daily lives.
OK, like three worlds collide from the super happiest point of view.
Yeah, stuff like that.
That sounds cool.
That sounds awesome.
Yeah, it is.
All right.
Yeah, I don't I without knowing what these categories are and how to tell the
story, it would be hard to say how that fits in.
Oh, well, whenever I mention it, it's also kind of tongue in cheek
because it's said so much.
And on the one hand, it's a truism.
And on the other hand, it's complete bullshit.
So I think you can like pick like nitpick it like technicalities about stuff
like Xeno fiction or maybe like weird forms of fan fiction or like.
Poetry, but you just take your heels in and say that's not really story or something.
No, I'm not saying it's not really story.
I don't know.
Like I think that yeah, you're basically what you were saying is just that like
it's kind of true in a sense.
And then also you can like nitpick it and find fringe examples where it's not true.
Maybe there's like seven stories that just really resonate with people
because that like describes their experience for the most part.
The seven basic experiences.
That sounds fun.
I need to learn more about reading and writing, I guess.
I know how to read and write.
That's where my education on the subject stopped.
So you guys are the ones who write in the 10 like analysis stuff.
I also can't do that.
I'm working on it.
I think you're better at it than you think.
I'm getting there.
Well, I'm trying.
Zeke Aron says one of my favorite TED talks is about the three metrics
that allow us to continually break more records.
The TLDTLDW too long didn't watch.
Oh, OK, is one better training, two better tech, such as lighter shoes
with more friction, three genetic selection, such as going to the middle
of Africa and finding the fastest man in the world.
Also, we know how much faster tech improvements make us.
So we know how fast the record breakers from decades past would be if they ran today.
I would like to say I also saw that video.
I also thought it was freaking awesome.
And so we will post a link on our website, the basin conspiracy dot com
with a link to that TED talk.
Sounds dope.
I didn't actually watch that yet and I'm interested.
So it's not just the case that we're better, stronger and faster.
Well, he said that's part of it.
Yeah, it is part of it.
OK, yeah, but it seems to be implying we know exactly how much faster tech improves.
It's not like you're saying that if we gave whatever the 1950s gold medalist
in sprinting, you know, new running shoes on a good track that they'd be able
to keep up with today's speed speedsters.
Yeah, I think he's saying that we could calculate how fast they would be today.
We calculate how much they would lose by today.
OK, there's better training.
There's better, you know, there's a wider pool of people to grab athletes from.
This reminds me of the Slate Start Codex post yesterday, which was does
reality drive straight lines on graphs or do straight lines on graphs drive
reality where I'm wondering, like, how far can we take this continual improvement?
I think I said that when we talked about it last time, too.
So I shouldn't go on my transhumans spiel again.
We haven't had an explicitly transhumanism episode, have we?
We have one.
You guys did before I was on the show, but I might be misremembering.
It was like episode in the late teens, I think.
Well, maybe time for.
Could do a part two.
To revisit it.
Yeah, it's been a couple of years.
All right, next one.
Calvin three to one says, everyone thinks they are an above average driver
because people don't agree on the correct metric to judge good driving.
The speed safety tradeoff is different between people.
Strategies such as when to change lanes is debated or how to handle heavy traffic.
When is rolling through a stop sign permissible?
Never. God, no, sometimes it is.
Does always stopping make you a good driver or a terrible rule follower?
And so forth.
But I can see how every individual person can see that they think they're an above
average driver because by their metric, there's a lot of shitty drivers out there.
But those drivers are just using a different metric, which they think puts
them, you know, is the correct way to drive.
Yeah, I can see that.
That's a good way to put it.
There's like a book I want to highlight again.
I feel like I've mentioned this maybe twice on the podcast before, but there's
a book called traffic, why we drive the way we do.
And it's like a book on kind of the psychology of driving.
And they talk about a lot of this stuff in this book.
And that was pretty cool for me because I kind of like got really upset
about driving and so I have to drive a lot and a lot of rules of the road are
not like explicit and I want them written down.
So like, you know, the stuff you learned in driving class when you're first
getting your licenses, not like the stuff that people do on the road.
And we're running into that with self-driving cars too, having to train
the AIs and all the like implicit driving stuff that you're supposed to just
pick up through experience.
The one thing that I thought was pretty cool that like I learned from this
book is that there's basically like two styles of merging that everyone does.
And people seem to kind of just learn one or the other, I guess, through like
whoever taught them through experience, but there's early merge and late merge.
And there's these two schools of thought where if everyone were to just
start early merging, which is where say that there's a line of traffic and you're
on a ramp trying to merge into the left, you would pull all the way up as far as
you could before merging.
And then you like kind of zipper merge or whatever.
There's also other merge styles at that point.
And then there's early merge where people try to get in as soon as possible.
So as not to do the thing where they're like pulling all the way up, which seems
rude to them.
So I'm saying this because I'm a early merger.
Me too.
Yeah.
There are dozens of us.
Well, apparently it's the objectively worst way to merge.
No, actually, apparently either one works great as long as everybody's using the same one.
Oh, okay.
Which I thought was really funny because I thought my way was right until I read this.
Well, what's the point of early merging?
Because I want to say when there's construction, you're going from two
lanes to one.
And the point where you only have one lane is shitty because much less traffic can
get through.
So you, why, why make that one lane area even longer by merging like a block
earlier, have it be two lanes as far as you can have it be two lanes.
So until I just learned that this is not the objectively best way to do it, my
thinking was that I see the assholes and nice cars go speeding up to the speed
limit to slam on their brakes at the cones and then force their way in and cause
this cascade of people slamming on the brakes.
Okay. Well, first of all, don't speed up and then slam on your brakes.
Generally, you just drive like a normal person.
And then when you get to the end, you zip her in.
And yes, the philosophy behind early merge is that it's easier to get in early
on because cars are spaced out further apart.
That's what I do.
I don't force my way in.
I get over when there's room and I'm like, so I can save 30 seconds and get to
the front of the line or I'll just get there when I get there.
To me, to me, it's, it's, it's the passive way of driving.
Hey, you guys just found something you disagree on.
Damn, it's Steven.
We can't be friends anymore.
Yeah.
You're looking for one so you could double croaks.
That's right.
Yeah.
This probably isn't important enough.
We'll find it.
We'll find a way.
We'll find a way to run our friendship over this.
Yeah.
So that's exactly it.
I let people in when I can, but I can see, you know, in, in the events that,
that's, that's not the best way to do it.
I will, you know, I'll keep that in mind, but really it's just like,
when is there a safe opportunity?
Like maybe it depends on the area and how, like, like, like Jess said, it's how
everyone else is doing it.
If they're all doing it the same way, both will work.
But since that's not how it works, neither work, it looks like.
I've, I've literally seen this going to the point where it was more than one
stoplight from where the, the actual construction started, which is just
ridiculous.
It screws over the people that want to turn left or want to turn right before
you get to the, uh, the construction.
And also you just, it's so unnecessary.
So driving is dumb and a robot should do it is what I'm hearing here, but it's
hard to teach robots how to do it.
Cause we're, we don't really know how to do it.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
We do a lot of stuff on instinct.
And, uh, I forget if this was from this book or not, but like, if you ask
someone to pantomime the hand motions they make when they're turning a car,
they actually do it incorrectly.
Right.
Like turning left and turning right.
Yeah.
People do that the wrong way.
Well, you actually did it correctly.
But, but I know what you mean.
And that's, that's true.
I think cause it's kind of intuitive, especially like when reversing, uh, we're
trying to get my fiancee into her, into the garage cause it snowed crazy in Denver
this week and the, my parking lot was like kind of plowed in that there was like
room for like one car, but since the, the snow piles were three feet tall, she
couldn't like back into spots to try and angle in.
And so trying to tell her from standing behind the car, like go this way or like
turn left and then, you know, see how the wheels work when you're trying to like
three point turn in.
It's, it's not super intuitive.
I guess unless you are painting a picture in your head of what your wheels are
doing while you're doing it, rather than just doing what, what you feel like you're
doing, I guess I'm getting as driving as confusing.
Um, but I did like, there was one note on here.
When is rolling through a stop sign permissible?
Never question mark.
Um, and then you just mentioned driving exams.
When I took my driving exam, I was told the first thing you said when, when we
stopped was like, you didn't stop once during your exam.
Here's your doubt.
Here's your permit.
You did a good job.
Oh my God.
Yeah.
So I think when I took my driver's exam, I knew that not stopping at any red was
an immediate fail.
So I stopped at every single stupid stop sign, but there are some stop signs that
I literally do not stop for.
I will slow down check, but it's such a low traffic.
And more importantly, there's some red lights that I don't stop for because
they're ridiculous.
They're in places where they shouldn't be.
There is no traffic in any direction for quite a ways.
If I were to stop at that red stop sign, first of all, I am burning the total
amount of useful human productive minutes in the world, which is a sin by itself
by sitting in that car instead of doing something fun or productive, whatever.
I'm also increasing air pollution by burning gasoline unnecessarily sitting at
that red light.
There are some red lights that one should run if one is a moral person talking
that one on Yosemite that is for a bike lane that's on a timer or excuse me, on
a path lane that's on a timer.
Oh my God.
If you're heading towards Bellevue because there's it's not even another
line of traffic, it's for a bike lane that doesn't turn into a bike lane on
this side of the road on the, on the West side.
So it's just for like people, I guess, riding, riding or walking across to a
bike path over there, but it's on a timer.
That's ridiculous.
Yeah, that's not the one I was talking about.
Cause that, that's one that I've, I've thought of running before.
I, I guess I'm never in that much of a rush, but I totally get the impulse
cause I'm sitting there.
I guess I don't want to risk the ticket, but for me, I'm sitting at this light
and knowing that there's, I'm not stopped for anybody and that we're, we're
all stopping here at this line going both ways and there's no cross traffic
cause it's not another street.
And why is it on a fucking timer?
Put it on a button and then stop traffic for the one ass who wants to stop
traffic to cross the street.
That's fine.
Everyone needs to cross, but it's hard not to hate the person that stops
traffic to, to, but everyone's gotta get somewhere.
Anyway, it was funny.
I'm, I don't think I must not have encountered a go through a red light
or something during my test.
I didn't run a red light.
What I did is I guess came to rolling stops for my right turns at red lights
and then stop signs.
So I just distinctly remember that was the thing that was the first thing you
said was you didn't stop once and then gave you the permit.
Yep.
Well, it's hard not to pass.
I guess.
Yeah.
Um, my mom taught me the wrong way to parallel park.
And so I did that during the exam and the guy's like, all right, pull out and
then do it again, but do it this way.
And then I was able to do it correctly.
And he was like, all right, do it that way from now on.
That's hilarious.
Is the way your mom taught you just as effective?
No.
Oh, okay.
It's the wrong way.
I don't know what she was thinking.
Ah, I've got one here from more dinner mail, but it's too long for me to read
because do you guys hear how I read things?
I want someone else to read it, but it was on the censorship episode that we did.
I got it.
Red in the mail says, y'all seem to agree that yelling fire in a crowded theater
should be punishable.
On that level, you all agree that censorship has its uses.
In that particular case, the harm of the speech is immediate and obvious.
Other kinds of speech cause less obvious, less causally direct or less
immediate harm.
So the true question isn't, should censorship be permitted?
Should Patreon discriminate among its clients based on the contents of their
speech?
Instead, it's what kind of speech should be considered sufficiently harmful
that it is censored and or otherwise disincentivized.
Under basic consequentialism, I think we can all agree that there's an ethical
imperative to stop someone who's calling for violence against a specific
individual or group.
There's probably an ethical imperative to stop someone who seems to be
fomenting a mass panic.
The norm of shutting down speech, which directly causes harm is actually a
good one.
The problem again is what kind of speech constitutes harm when that becomes a
polarized, a politicized question.
And I'm not sure I trust the executives of tech companies to make those calls
in a sufficiently John Luke Picard fashion.
Also call back to John Luke Picard because I've been listening to, we've
got Worm, their excellent podcast that Matt, or Matt Slashmore Denimale and
Scott Daly do.
And they were talking about, they were trying to like basically figure out
whether or not the protagonist was doing the right or wrong thing.
And then they, and then Matt came back the next episode and he's like, you
know what, I was thinking about this.
I feel like the way to think about this would be WWJPD or yeah, what would
John, JLPD, what would John Luke Picard do?
And the answer is like, you know, never leave a man behind, never sacrifice
anybody, all that, you know, the heroic things.
And so I like the shout out to John Luke here.
And I've heard that on more than one occasion.
I think honestly, John Luke Picard is sort of the Jesus of the modern day.
Everyone, if they modeled their actions on what John Luke Picard would do, we'd
be living in a near ideal society.
That extends to Patrick Stewart as a person.
Oh, I don't know enough about Patrick Stewart.
He seems to be an outstanding dude.
Okay.
I also am really worried about ever drawing that sort of mythological
inspiration from a real person because real people have real problems.
Whereas mythological figures like John Luke Picard can be perfect
because they aren't real people.
But we can try to be as close to perfect as we can.
Yeah.
But maybe Patrick Stewart lost his temper once and yelled at his kid or something.
You know?
He wasn't doing what John Luke Picard would have done.
Right.
Which is why what would John Luke Picard do?
Not what would Patrick Stewart do.
Sure.
I would rather, I would rather, based my like, I don't know, I would rather idealize
a real person who is a really good person.
Because like, if you have as your role model, someone who doesn't actually
exist, then they're going to be perfect and humans aren't perfect.
I would rather watch somebody who makes mistakes and then see how they recover
from those mistakes.
I think.
Yeah.
Okay.
That's, that's also useful.
Yeah.
I mean, the real problem with that is that in a hundred years or so, you'll find out
that this real person like eight meter did something, I don't know, talked to children,
which apparently damages them psychologically.
Whatever we find out in a hundred years is a thing you can't do because it's
evil that we all do today.
Yeah.
Or even something that like was frowned upon at the time, but was still awesome.
Like Martin Luther King Jr. was apparently kind of womanizer and cheated on his wife
and stuff.
Like that sucks.
Not a cool thing to do, bro.
But it doesn't mean he's not super inspiring dude.
Similar to, I don't know if this is true or not, but her Gandhi didn't like black people.
And Gandhi had a bunch of problematic things about him apparently.
Yeah.
And I think, I never liked the word problematic, not an attack, but
it's gotten very politicized.
It kind of wasted a little tongue in cheek.
No, no, yeah, but it was just because it sounds like this vague sort of thing.
But yeah, I mean, so he's got his things, but that doesn't mean that then again,
also I'm not a fan of non-violence.
Don't get me wrong.
I'm not, I'm the opposite of a fan of violence in real life.
So Stephen, just before heading off to his fight club.
Right.
Yeah, but macho max was important too.
Yeah.
Well, I think my thing with non-violence is the standard thing of like, you know, any
asshole with a machete can come through and take out a whole town of non-violent
resistors, right?
Not let's say dog pile in person.
That's violent, isn't it?
Not if you don't hurt them.
I don't know.
Yeah, like then.
I guess it depends on what form of non-violence it takes.
You're supposed to just lay down and take it.
Allah Muhammad Gandhi.
Then like your, then again, he did it in a smart way.
He said, do it in front of cameras.
And you know, he, he, he did this in a way that broadcast these atrocities to the
world, which is sort of the point.
Um, I think a lot of the non-violent, um, activists actually were doing it
strategically like that.
That's good.
I think, um, there's a, there's a faction of people in the wheel of time book
series that, uh, they are strictly non-violent and in sort of like the,
the idealized Gandhi way, but to the point that it's stupid, there's literally
monsters running around like orcs.
And so, you know, they don't, they don't just find themselves against the wheel
of time as averse of orcs, which is ridiculous.
Well, you don't, because the orcs, you don't need to go as far as orcs.
I mean, even in the real world, there's monsters like bears and wolves, which
you would have to defend yourself against.
I can't remember what their version is on bears and wolves.
I can't remember if they're vegetarians or not, but hypothetically,
they could have been and sure, then yeah, that's how dumb is that?
I mean,
Yeah.
Does that extend to like non, like living things too?
Like if, if, uh, rock is rolling towards you, do you have to stand there
and take it to, or can you smash the rock?
Like,
I'm pretty sure anything without sentience is fine.
What about animals?
I, yeah, I don't know.
That's a good question.
How smart does the animal have to be before you would fight back?
Like, I'm just being like an asshole.
Let's go on.
Can you take antibiotics?
Yeah, can you, uh,
that seems to be like the, the bottom level of where it's okay to resist.
But to get back to, to, to more than a male's question here, speaking of,
which more than a male is a shep is a amalgamation of two words of the
ancient language and wheel of time.
So I think this is the third time you've mentioned it.
Yeah, but the running joke on we've got ward is that Scott will plug his Twitter
handle and then fail to pronounce mats in a different way every week.
So it's, it's, it's funny.
Sort of an inside joke, but at least two people on the inside get it.
So, uh, so I thought it was just a fun question that I don't know if we have a
quick answer to, cause we did talk about a bit, like the, what was his name?
Alex Jones saying some letters to these people, the, the actors who pretended to
have kids that got shot at this fake shooting or whatever.
That, that's not, I think you even considered that that was like, that's
just harassment.
And so yeah, shoot, you know, take them off for that.
Right.
But then I guess it's weird.
Cause when we were talking about like the punching Nazis thing, if it's just
someone talking about a peaceful reclamation of, of white culture or something,
they could go up there and make all the right noises that sound perfectly
nonviolent, but there's no such thing as a peaceful, what amounts to a peaceful genocide.
Right.
Which is what you would say.
You would respond with, there's no such thing.
Here's why that's ridiculous.
And yeah, but then they, they could still make the same complaints about like,
I'll, as D platform, just for expressing my, my desire to not be multicultural.
He won't, he's not multicultural.
Multicultural, multicultural.
I mean, he's not the platform.
But if you responded to him, right?
That was just you saying things on your platform.
Right.
But what if they took him off Patreon?
I don't know what, what Richard Spencer High makes his living, but if he was a
podcaster or something and that this was his message, could they, would you be,
would is that cool to kick him off for being like that?
It's hard to say.
If the president gets up there and makes noises about not wanting to,
you know, concede our, our way of life or the, this insidious threat of the others,
whether it's the Mexicans or the Muslims or the whatever.
And then somebody runs and shoots up a synagogue and says the exact same things
about the Jews he just massacred.
Like one's just saying, oh, we don't want to, we're, we're, we're for threatened or
something.
But then it seems like the very natural extension to feeling threatened is to act out
against it.
Right.
I actually think if someone did do that, it would be valuable to point out their
speech and say, this is, this is what he said.
This is where thinking and saying these sorts of things will get you.
It'll turn you into homicidal maniac.
This did happen.
Yeah.
I was talking about shooting at the synagogue in Pennsylvania.
Right.
Yeah.
And, and you know about it.
And then that's what you can say to people who are like, no, I'm, I'm for the, the peaceful
reclamation of, of America for the white people.
You're like, people who listen to what you say, go and shoot up synagogues.
They quoted you in their tweet just before they did it.
And therefore we're taking off Twitter.
Is that, you know, no, no, not in there for taking off Twitter.
That is helping people see why you don't want to say and think those things because
it drives you into becoming a homicidal person that kills the innocent before he
kills himself or has the police got him down.
I think the person who says those things and inspires those maniacs is fully aware
of what they're doing and they're doing it on purpose.
And so they're not going to be dissuaded by the fact that people are actually
running with what they're saying.
Okay.
They'll, they'll make noises about, oh, they shouldn't have done that.
That's not what I meant, but, or maybe they mean it, but for my thought experiment,
whatever, pretending that they're not.
I see.
You think he's secretly happy because that'll make people of that minority scared to live
in this country and move away.
That sounds like the kind of thing that sounds super plausible.
Yeah.
And if it's not plausible for a real person, which I think it is, then it's plausible
for a fake person for the sake of argument.
Right.
And then at that point, it's, I think that's sort of like, is that sufficiently harmful
to say, all right, cool, fuck you.
We're taking away your, your access on our platform.
It's, it's, it's slippery.
And I, I don't, I didn't bring this, I didn't want to talk about
more than a male's submission because I thought it was an easy one.
I thought it was just kind of fun.
Yeah.
Now this is a good way to reframe that discussion we had too.
Like, uh, we were pointing out a bunch of specific examples about this, this would be
bad and push should be punishable.
This seems fine, but like, yeah, if, if you can make rules about what kind of speech
should be banned and versus not, but uh, yeah, then I don't know, you get into all the stuff
that you guys were just talking about, like there's ways that you could, uh, have plausible
deniability.
Yeah, it gets weird.
I think at some point you would be able, once they've said enough things to make a case that
they are complicit in it.
Yeah, that would be like evidence against them.
Yeah, I mean, I'm thinking specifically, uh, Eliezer has on more than one occasion said,
don't ever, ever do any violence to anyone based on something they've said that argument
always gets counter argument, never gets a bullet.
So in everything I've ever seen of him, he's been very explicit about don't do bad things
like shooting up places, don't ever enact violence against people.
And I don't think you could ever make a case that he is complicit in something like that,
whereas I'm pretty sure someone like Richard Spencer, you wouldn't have to dig very far at all
to see him saying things like, yeah, you know, I'm, I'm kind of glad they're scared now.
I hope, I hope that continues.
And at that point, you could probably not actually in, in our society, but ideally you
could take someone to court and say you are threatening people.
Yeah, you're inciting violence.
Yeah, you're inciting violence.
They wouldn't be like a bunch of rules that you would have to write ahead of time.
And then you could judge each individual like, you know, thing that a person says,
you'd have to actually look at the history of what they've been saying and then what the
cause is.
Yeah.
So, but that's probably like a more sensible way to do this actually.
Yeah, I think being able to make a good case that someone is actually inciting violence is
what we would need.
Although I do agree that I don't think that executives of companies or the PR departments
of companies are good at making those decisions.
I think that they're just in it for whatever will make them look the best to the majority
of their user base.
Yeah.
Like I could easily see someone kicking off Liam Neeson for being like, oh,
that racist asshole, we don't want him on our platform.
Sure.
Right after he said that.
But like you said, they've got to make a reasonable case that this person was like this,
right?
I mean, under a due process system, yes.
But if right now, Patreon or Twitter, no, they wouldn't have to, they'd be like,
oh, he said this thing, he's out of here.
We have all these people calling for his blood.
Yeah.
And he confessed to doing something if that were a court, if you went and confessed to
doing a crime, like.
He confessed to wanting to commit a crime.
Yeah.
But that's not illegal yet, is it?
No, but talking about, yeah, I don't know.
That's not illegal, but it might get him banned from a platform for like doing wrong speech.
In his specific case, he wasn't saying, and this was awesome, go, you know,
I hope people take this message and go forth and beat people up.
Right. No system of due process would ever find him guilty.
I think even like a reasonable public process shouldn't either, right?
Like, because again, his message, you know, due process might not find Richard Spencer guilty,
which is fine.
Due process should be, should be limited that way, probably, you know, whatever.
I'm not a lawyer, but it should be, it's hard to get somebody convicted of a crime.
That should be the case.
But with Liam Neeson's thing, he couldn't have, I can't think of a way it could possibly have
been better, given that he once thought bad things for a few weeks in his youth,
in the, in the middle of, you know, the IRA car bombing Ireland in 40 years ago.
Like, I don't know, man, who, who in 60 years hasn't had a bad thought, right?
There was a great thing I saw it on, might have been on not wholesome memes.
It was not wholesome enough for wholesome memes.
So it's some nice subreddit that was like, decent memes.
Yeah, we're okay memes.
But, but it was just like somebody's, it was a capture of a tweet that was like,
progress happens, people change 15 years ago.
I was lightly transphobic.
I was passively sexist.
Like just because you grew up with ideas, then you overcome them.
And I've had, I was raised in an environment that let, that had me instill some bad ideas.
And I shook them off, but God forbid if I had a podcast 20 years or what, how old am I?
10, 20, 15 years ago, who cares?
And I had said some of these things back then, right?
And I wasn't like, I didn't have the power or just, you know,
was never in it enough to advocate for whatever.
But people, people grow and change.
I don't know what I'm trying to get at here, other than I think I've gotten distracted
because you weren't drawing an equivalency between, you were trying to, I think,
point at how muddy the line is, because whatever Robert Richard Spencer falls under,
Liam Neeson might fall under it too.
But I, I, I can't see them as more different.
No, no, I agree that I absolutely agree with you 100%.
The way that the mob treats the two of them is almost identical.
Yeah.
And for that reason, since the, the social media PR departments respond to the mob,
I don't think they are a good arbiter of this sort of thing.
Okay. I see what you're saying.
I think so you're saying censorship isn't the way to go from the,
from the point of view of the, of the platform owner.
Right.
Because they're going to do whatever the mob wants,
because the mob uses their platform the most.
All right.
But the, the rational, the sensible.
There are some things that are actually, yeah,
that should be stopped from being spread.
Fair enough.
Such as direct incitement to violence.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And there are things that shouldn't be stopped from being said.
Yeah.
Cool.
Even if they're shitty things, if they're not hurting anyone.
I mean, even if they are hurting people like race,
saying racist things does hurt people.
Yeah.
And I still think it should be okay to say that.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
Or yeah, like hurting people's feelings shouldn't be illegal,
unless it's like a harassment campaign or something.
Interesting side note.
More than a male brought up the, the standard example of,
we all agree that yelling fire in a crowded theater should be punishable,
which I'm sure we all do.
But assuming the theater isn't on fire.
Yes.
Yeah.
Apparently this was the thing that happened a lot,
where there were bad theater fires and just hundreds would die,
either in the fire or in the stampede to get out.
Anyways, this came from a Supreme Court case,
where a justice pointed this out that that should be punishable.
The Supreme Court case in question was a man being tried
for saying that the draft in World War One should not be a thing,
that the draft was unconscionable and we should move away from a draft system.
And they sent him to jail because he said,
I have freedom of speech.
I can say this thing.
And they're like,
this is the equivalent of yelling fire in a crowded theater.
You're going to jail.
So that's a slimy way to, to, to employ that sort of reasoning, isn't it?
You know, I think we all think so nowadays.
It's yeah, it really shows you how much society has changed
and how good arguments can be used in bad causes.
Yeah, that's, that's a danger.
I mean, that's, I think,
because we did eventually get rid of the draft
because we do think it's unconscionable.
I mean, that's something that, you know, like he said,
using good arguments for bad reasons is something
that I think every aspiring rationalist tries not to do.
That's sort of like the inverse of that dendern thing I've repeated over and over
of like, bad arguments for positions I agree with.
It's like good arguments for positions I hate.
But that's, that's different because you can't quite do that
because that's not really, I mean, I guess now in today's context,
that's not the same.
The fire.
The government decided that he was directly endangering people's lives
by saying that people shouldn't be pressed into the military.
He was threatening the security of the nation by doing this,
which is as bad as yelling fire in a credit theater.
It's interesting in the context of World War I,
they make a somewhat compelling point.
Oh, World War I wasn't the same as World War II.
No, but I think, and I guess I'm not a historian,
but just in the context of like, we need bodies.
The world wasn't at risk because we don't have nukes yet, but whatever.
Our way of life might have been something like that, right?
I don't think we have to get involved.
I'm not, I'm not a historian, so I'm speaking up my ass,
but I can see a context in which that thing kind of is defensible.
Like, look, you can't be telling,
you can't be making these really good points about how people shouldn't be joining
because we need them to.
So you need to shut the fuck up or we're going to make you shut up.
I can imagine a world in which that is a good argument to make,
not saying that our world is it.
In my world, I would say if you really think the war is both this important and this just,
you should make a counterargument to that effect
so that people will agree that the draft is a good thing,
as opposed to silencing me and throwing me in jail for talking.
Yeah, like, appeal to patriotism instead of appeal to, like,
here's some facts about future predictions.
But we don't have the time during the war to engage you and your platform and your discourse.
We're currently fighting.
We need to throw more bodies into this clusterfuck.
Yeah.
War is weird.
Glad the draft is gone.
Although I did get and subsequently throw away without opening my,
like, you've been enrolled in whatever you call it.
Selective service?
Selective service, yeah.
When I, on my, I think, can't even write them,
like, the week that I turned 18 too.
We are going to cut this from the podcast because that is technically illegal.
I just got the letter saying I was enrolled.
How did you get enrolled?
Because I was a guy and I turned 18.
They just sent it to you?
Yeah, they just sent me a thing that, yeah, you're in this.
If we call a draft, we might call you.
When I turned 18, they had a whole bunch of things at our high school saying,
all right, everybody's got to sign up for this now.
Interesting.
Maybe they automated it.
I don't really know.
Yeah, maybe they have.
Maybe because I didn't read it.
I don't really know what it said, but my brother opened his and I skimmed his, so.
Okay, and it just said you're in now.
I'm pretty sure, but now that you've pointed this out,
I might have been wrong.
Maybe it said you need to call us and sign up,
but no one ever came by to my house to arrest me.
It's absolutely unenforced.
No one really cares.
It's been unenforced for decades.
Well, I mean, you can leave that in or out.
We talked about drug use before too, so.
All the ones.
That's true.
Yeah, who cares?
Yeah, you're right.
There's more people in jail for drugs than the zero people that have been hurt by this thing.
We should get to the less wrong stuff and get to the rest of the feedback later.
I'll just go say that, yeah.
All right, we've got almost a couple hours worth of feedback,
so I think it's time to move on to.
We have more feedback, which we will get to later.
There's always more feedback.
Maybe next episode.
Maybe we'll do an episode of something else and then get back to feedback,
but yeah, there's more.
We're sorry we didn't get to more.
But thanks for having conversations on stuff.
It's nice.
There are, I already saw some stuff today on GPT2 on the subreddit, so.
Yeah, there is a lot actually.
Yeah, it's exciting.
By all means, go forth and continue saying stuff and talk with each other and us,
and we're happy to engage as often as we can, so.
Heck yeah.
If you can find other people in your town to talk with, that is even better.
And if you can't, there's a subreddit, so.
Exactly.
Alrighty, on to our less wrong posts.
All right, so the previous ones are kind of setting up like what's a bias.
You should tell our listeners what we're doing that we hadn't mentioned before,
three instead of two.
Oh yes, we are doing three.
I think I put this in the show notes.
I can't remember.
We're doing three.
Sequences posts.
Thank you.
Three sequences posts this episode, because the second two are both pretty short,
and the third one's really short, and it really fits with the second one.
My thousand foot view of all three of these is that, and the last couple,
is that Yuzkowski's just setting up like what a bias is.
What is, what are biases, and then the context of what he's talking about.
You know, it's like not math, not statistics, not analysis,
where he's moving into talking about cognitive biases,
and because he's going to spend the next two years writing about them.
So I think he wants to make it dead clear what he's on about.
So with that in mind, the first post we're talking about is useful statistical biases,
which is the opposite of what we talked about in the last post.
Who's our statistician who wants to talk about this one?
None of us.
I think you.
So Yuzkowski says that bias in humans means a particular tendency, trend, inclination,
feeling, or opinion, especially one that is preconceived or unreasoned,
and then says bias in statistics means a systematic as opposed to a random distortion
of a statistic as a result of a sampling procedure.
So those are two different meanings of the word bias, and I think that this is kind of
just tackling the fact that people confuse the one word for the other when they start
talking about like tackling biases or how we can get rid of biases.
He points out that sometimes biases in statistical analysis are useful for simplifying
and removing noise from things, which makes your estimate ultimately slightly less accurate.
But on the other hand, it also reduces crazy variances.
If one particular subvariable has large swings, it'll possibly move your data
more than you want it to move based on that one little thing.
And so you'll underweight it a little bit, which is a statistical bias,
which also makes things easier to model and to predict.
And so he said sometimes they can't be useful in statistical modeling.
Gave a bunch of math to it too, which it's hard to get into on the podcast,
especially with three non-math people.
Yeah. And for me, my eyes glaze over at that because I take the message and I'll
take his word for it on the numbers. Yes, it's lazy, but it's also, I don't know.
I feel like if he was pulling the numbers out of his ass, somebody would call him out by now,
and I'm pretty sure that that's not what was going on.
So yeah, I think he's a math nerd.
To him, that's probably easier than talking in English, and he's good at talking in English.
So I don't have much to say about it other than he's laying out that there are cases
out where statistical biases can be useful in this specific context of statistics.
Yeah. It's accepted because you can't get precise data.
You can't measure the biases, directions, and magnitude. Otherwise, you'd subtract it out.
So you'd try to get rid of bias and statistics too, if you were able to.
With cognitive bias, you do have some idea of the direction of your area,
and the whole point of rationality is the attempt to subtract that out.
Yeah. That's probably all we need to say about that.
Yep. Moving on to...
Error of crowds.
The error of crowds. So this one is a direct response to The Wisdom of Crowds,
which is a really fascinating book. Have you guys read it before?
Or do you know about it, I guess?
I know about it.
I haven't read it either.
Yeah.
Basically, it gives a whole bunch of examples about places where everyone was trying to figure
out something or guess something, and every single person was individually wrong,
some more than others. But when you averaged all of their guesses, I guess,
for lack of a better word together, the average was startlingly close.
Like, in a surprising way, in one case, they asked a whole bunch of people who were...
Not experts in the subject, but who had some knowledge in the subject about where a...
I believe it was a Russian sub went down, because no one really knows where it went,
but they know where there was last contact with it and what the secrets were,
and there have been some efforts to find it before, and everyone was off by quite a bit.
But the surprising thing is, if you averaged what everybody said, the actual location was
really close to that average guess, whereas everyone individually was off quite a bit.
And the idea, the explanation was that, most likely, everyone had some little piece of data
and a whole bunch of noise that they thought but were wrong about.
And when you took everybody's guesses, everything that they were right about,
all kind of pointed in the side direction, everything that they were wrong about,
kind of pointed randomly, and all canceled each other out in the wash,
so you just sort of get the useful information left in the end.
This sounds like a very humbling and inspiring message that we should be more modest and just
taking everyone's opinions and then amalgamate on the truth. Is that the way I should take this,
That is exactly how you should take it, Steven.
At the very top of the post, he links back to an old, overcoming bias post where the author says,
I've kind of decided that I'm just going to take the average human population position on
everything because I'm pretty sure I cannot do better than the average of everyone.
Therefore, God is real.
You know, right? And if he was around a few hundred years ago, therefore, slavery is okay,
et cetera, et cetera. Yeah, which, on the one hand, kind of strikes you as dumb,
but on the other hand, if you take this logic far enough, it's like hard to argue with him.
We've got a sign on the, it's kind of a long little thing. It's on this cool scroll thing that
my fiance got, and we put by the front door of our home. It's a long quote, but the end thing is,
and it uses the word crazy in a way that today wouldn't be acceptable, but it's an old quote.
And it's like the crazy ones are the ones who are willing to go out on a limb, and they're the
only ones that make change and make progress. And this modesty argument here sounds like a great
argument against that. Coprenacrisis crazy sort of thing, right?
It looks like you were trying to say something too.
Actually, like I just lost my train of thought because I was thinking about that.
I got sidetracked thinking about the sign being like crazy people are the ones who make
change. And you were saying that that was not a accepted use of that word. But like,
I feel like the people who are the people that make change tend to be like non-neurotypical.
So like, in a way, it's still kind of correct.
There was a guy who wrote a book, and he was on Julia Gillis podcast. It wasn't about this
controversy. It was about the actual content of the book, which I can't remember the actual name
of, which tells something about it. The original name was how to think like a crazy philosopher.
And there was enough pushback against that's ableist language and that's that's putting down
people with mental illness and stuff. And I think it's very clear from like the message of like,
you know, how to think a crazy philosopher, like, I get exactly what you're trying to say.
And I feel like no one can say in good faith that they didn't get what he was saying. It was just
whatever Twitter mob, not to say that there's not a mean way to use the word crazy, but that's
not what I'm doing. Yeah, that's not using it as a pejorative. I don't think so either. If anything,
it was like, you want to think like crazy philosopher, not like you want to have manic
depression, right? So anyway, yeah, that's what I was getting at with the crazy on there being
not necessarily something everyone would be on board with. It's interesting the words that
become taboo over time. Yeah. Yeah. And in 10 years, somebody will be Twitter mod for using the
word crazy in a tweet in 2019, right? So I don't think it'll take 10 years. I'm pretty sure it'll
be next year. Anyway, in the area of crowds, Yuckowski talks about prediction diversity,
which is the squared error of the collective predicting, equaling the average squared error
minus the predictive diversity, meaning the more diversity in a group, the smaller the error of
the crowd. Then he asks, why should the bias variance decomposition be relevant to modesty?
Because it seems to show the error of averaging all the estimates together is lower than the
typical error of the individual estimate. But then he goes to say that you shouldn't be more
modest and compromise a little based on this, because predictive bias assumes that actors
aren't predicting like Bayseans. A quote, as Einstein put it, insofar as the expressions of
mathematics refer to reality, they're not certain. And insofar as they are certain, they don't refer
to reality. You've got to do it in a really offensive German accent. Oh, no, that's fine.
Do you want to do that? I don't want to do it. No. Whenever I hear, whenever I do, I say, I hear it
kind of in his voice or like the way that I've heard his voice portrayed. Anyway, the real
modesty argument, Oman's agreement theorem, or Alman has preconditions. AET depends on agents
computing their beliefs in a particular way. AET's conclusions can be false in any particular case,
if the agents don't reason as Bayseans. And then he goes to this example about the students
and the math problem. Somebody else want to go? Sure. So he uses a lot of math here. And I kind
of stopped following it. And I found that the for the last this week and last week, it's really been
useful for me to read the post, then put it aside and just do something else for an hour or two,
and then come back and read it again. And it seems to have like filtered in or something,
or maybe I got the past the initial intimidation of the math. But when I came back and read it a
second time, it worked better for me. Yeah, that's how like you solve hard math problems. A lot of
it is actually done in a what was there's there's a terminology for this, and I'm not having a good
brain day subconscious. Yeah, basically, the subconscious. There was I called it shower thoughts.
I guess. Oh, it's a diffuse mode. Okay, there's like focused mode and diffuse mode. And apparently,
you kind of like process stuff with the front of your brain. I'm not even sure if it's actually
like the front of the prefrontal cortex or whatever. But like, there's a part of your brain
that's like focused on like, concentrating on something and working on it. And it gets tired
quickly. But then there's like this background part of your brain that is able to work on things
and chew on them for much longer. I had been banging my head on a programming problem this
afternoon for like an hour. And finally, like, all right, finally, I'm gonna get up and get it
get some water and take a break. Less than five minutes. I'm like, wait, I should try this and
I got it fixed. Nice. Is that kind of thing? Yeah, that kind of thing happens all the time. It's like
how your brain works. Just give it a chance to get away from that stuff. That's why you have ideas
and inspiration through dreams sometimes to kind of dreams are weird, actually. But I see what
certainly moves to good night's sleep. And then you come back to it on a fresh brain,
but one that you didn't know was exercising all night in weird ways. And then boom, thoughts.
So what I got out of this after I got past all the math was that Eliezer really dislikes this whole
wisdom of the crowds thing and thinks that, well, he said in the previous post that he suspects
these might be cherry picked examples. And this isn't as useful as they were claiming in the book.
But he uses math to reduce this to an abductio ad absurdum, which I think wasn't really needed.
Because in the very top of the post, he linked to that guy who said, I'm going to take the average
of all human opinions on everything in all seriousness. And Steven and me were both like,
aha, well, that shows how ridiculous this is. That was our reductio right there. We didn't
need all the math. But he goes and he posits this. I think he's proving his case with numbers.
Exactly. He went and posits this case where it's a very specific case with a math problem and a
classroom. And the math problem has like a gotcha in it. So all the students will get the wrong
answer, but they'll all get it in one direction. But they don't know which direction it's in.
And the score that the teacher will give them is based on the square root of their error,
which means that what all this piled on top of each other means that if the students have the
option to either talk with each other about the problem and try to figure things out,
and get a better answer, or to plug their ears while everyone else is talking so that they
can't hear anything and just go with a random answer such as their own, that they're better off
plugging their ears. Because in all the other examples given, once everyone pooled everything,
pooled their data, pooled their guesses, they came up with something better. In this case,
if they all did that, they would come up with something worse since the score was based on
square root of the difference. Anyway, it's a bunch of complicated math stuff. But Eliezer's
reductio here is that here is a specific situation where increasing your knowledge of something
will also make you worse off. So the best thing you can do is not get more knowledge and go with
the dumber answer that you had. And I see how he did that with math. And I can see how if you've
proven that in one case, this is absolutely absurd, you have just proven that this is not a rule
that always holds, but I didn't really need that. And it was such a fringe edge case that it also
really didn't do much for me. I think it's much more compelling to people who are high into math
and would understand this on a more intuitive level, why it's so breaky. Whereas for me,
just that top blog post was more impactful than obviously it was for Eliezer.
Yeah, I'm not super mathy, but I actually wasn't really convinced until I got to the math problem
part. Oh, really? I think then that's why he put it in there. I think you're more mathy than you
give yourself credit for. If it landed for you, that's the way it was intended. Maybe he wasn't
just flexing his math. I actually summarized this article as Yuckowski's annoyed by some commonly
held notions of prediction diversity and decides to destroy it with math. At the end, he does point
out that he thinks the students should actually talk to each other, but then goes on to say that
that says something more positive about the value of conversation and not about averaging answers.
I think it just annoys him that this idea of, oh, well, we should always average answers.
That's not how you would solve a math problem. That's not how you should solve problems
of reality either, because you might come across one of these kinds of cases where there is some
kind of gotcha in reality. The evidence does all lean in a weird direction for some reason.
You want to actually be calibrating as best as you can and not just going off of your
realistic, like, well, if we just average everybody's answers, then it seems to do good.
He's spent a number of posts now kind of laying the groundwork for
sometimes the massive people are wrong and you have to be revolutionary and think in weird ways.
Yeah, and that's going to be kind of a recurring theme over all those sequences.
So next one. Yeah. All right. Next one's short. And it's just sort of another example
or another framing of the previous post, as I wanted to lump it into this one.
Yeah. Okay. Can I summarize this one? And then we can do our experiment.
Let's see if I can do a short version. In this article, Ykowsky...
This one was called, the majority is always wrong.
The majority is always wrong, which is about kind of pondering the anti-majoritarian effects,
by which he means instances where the most popular idea or tool is not actually the best idea or tool.
So, like, of course, he noticed it. He was talking to a co-worker about probability
and thought that it was really odd that frequentism, which is the predominant view
in mainstream statistics, is the worst of the three major alternatives.
He brings up another example where the Dvorak, I don't know if I'm saying that correctly,
but it's a keyboard structure, which is seemingly easier on the fingers than the ones that we all,
like the standard one we use, the QWERTY.
Dvorak was specifically designed so that the keys that are used most in the English language
are directly under your fingers. And the less often a key is used, the further away it is,
as opposed to the QWERTY keyboard, where only one of the vowels is directly under your fingers,
which is ridiculous. You have to reach like a madman for some of these letters that are used
a ton, whereas you barely have to reach at all to use Q, which whoever uses Q, right?
Yeah, he then asserts, in any case where you've got, one, a popularity effect,
it's easier to use something other people are using, and two, a more dominant alternative,
plus a few small initial alternatives, then the most dominant alternative will probably be the
worst of a lot, or at least strictly superior to none of the others. And then he asks the
commenters to think of counter examples. He gave the example of Max and PCs, which this was back
in the day, younger listeners will have to remember that PCs were really popular and were used by a
ton of people. Max were kind of a niche that not too many people used. And there was an old saying
that Mac users had that saying if Max really were worse than Windows PCs, no one would use them.
The point being that there is a big popular thing that everyone uses, and there's a small
thing which only some people use. There's a lot of pressure to use the thing that everyone uses
due to network effects. Everyone is using Windows, everyone is using Word and Excel,
so you can transfer files between those easily. So the popular thing has a lot of staying power.
If there is a smaller group that is worse, no one is going to use that because in addition to not
having the popularity drive behind it, it's actually worse. It would have to be better than
the popular thing for anyone to use it at all. And just like now, Macs are always more expensive.
So if you're going to shell out three times the cost for a computer that's also worse,
then they'd all be idiots. And so they're just observing that if it was worse and more expensive
and didn't have all these benefits, nobody would be doing it. That proves that there's
something there. What else could explain it? Some weird hipsterism? I guess people listening
to records. Kind of. Robin Hansen had a pretty good answer to that in the comments. He said that
less popular choices must have advantages to compensate for their unpopularity,
but it doesn't mean that they're better. Many small religious sects are bound together stronger
for being persecuted minorities, and that bond may well be the advantage that they seek.
And you can probably think of more examples in that vein where something being small and niche,
you like that kind of hipsterism? Yeah, that was actually a good intuition pump. I didn't read
the comments. That would have been giving me something to think about because yeah, I mean,
I think the records thing might be something to run with a little bit there. Because then at
the end he challenges people to think of their own examples, and I threw out some jokey ones,
and one serious one, but. What was the serious one? I think Ford versus like Honda and Subaru.
Is Ford more popular? I don't know which is more popular. I guess I should have looked that up,
or at least had some idea before I think about it. I just know that people buy Ford,
people buy Hondas. Since the cost is roughly about equal to me, it's a no-brainer. I don't know a
ton about cars, but I've worked on some of several kinds, and I've just seen how long they last.
And my understanding, I haven't lived long enough to drive a lot of cars to the grave,
but if your Ford isn't going 150,000 miles, that's like really good. If your Honda makes it
300,000, that's really good. It's like you're getting twice as long of life out of this car.
But yeah, I think, I don't know, people still buy records, but they're not buying it. Well,
I guess they're buying it A for the signaling value of yes, I listened to records. Cannonball,
Jenkins was on and made a joke about that once. He said he has listened to his record. Yes,
I listened to records, I'm better than you. But he did it. Yes, I am better than you.
He did say that, but he was doing it in a nudge, nudge, wink, wink way. But I mean,
there's something about the audio quality. People aren't, I don't think anyone can maintain that
like it sounds more like listening to the music in the recording studio. It sounds like listening
to a record and that has this authentic-y feel to it, and it does. So if that's what you're going
for, that's that's not a good example. There were a lot of comments pointing out that there are a
lot of cases where the most popular thing is the best thing. I think that's fair. Yeah, I mean,
that sounds like it would be also sort of tautological, right? Like, of course, the best
thing is going to win out a lot. So I don't know, I don't have a great example. I didn't,
I thought we could handle this on the fly, but I'm way more tired than I thought I was going to be.
Yeah, I kind of was able to think of examples where somebody might want to buy something because
it's cheaper. I don't think that's like maybe what Eliezer was thinking over, but like I would
be willing to take a hit on quality for something if it's cheaper to an extent. Yeah, depending
on what it is for sure. Or to like reduce decision fatigue. Yeah, I think the whole PC Master Race
thing is kind of an example of this. PCs really are better for gaming, but they're harder to use
and they're a lot more expensive. And their interface looks crappy. And that's why everyone
buys consoles instead. I was going to bring up that example too, but I thought that there's
conversation there, I guess, because I don't game on a PC because I don't own a PC, but I guess I
don't play games enough to invest in a good gaming PC. Like, I could buy a $400 desktop PC and game
on that, but then I'm not getting what the real true gamers are getting out of it. I need a $700
graphics card just to play the ultimate res that only the PC can visualize. But that's more just
like I play games for casual fun. And for that purpose, and the controller is comfortable,
but you can plug your controller into some of the stuff too. And if I was practiced at a keyboard
and mouse, I could do that even better. The controller is specifically what I have issues with.
The keyboard and mouse is just such a much better interface system for gaming that
there's no comparison, which is why I don't think it's even that important to have the best gaming
card. I mean, you can if you're really into it and you want things to be ultra beautiful, but
even with not the top of the line graphics, I still think PCs are better. I'd rather have
a PC that costs more and has worse graphics than my PS4 or my Xbox than to have the Xbox,
because I could use a controller, not a controller, but I could use a mouse and keyboard.
I just value having my video game separate from my like work.
That was the reason that I would get a console. So it's in another room and it's got this specific
video game time context. Yeah. I guess I've been a console gamer since I was a kid. Like,
I got my first Sega Genesis when I was under 10 years old, well under, I think, and there wasn't
Sonic the Hedgehog on a PC in 1996. Like, I doubt it. No, I don't think so. You know, I think it was
just sort of for me like historical effects and then Cascades for the rest of your life where,
you know, you mentioned that like co-workers are like family and stuff. So when I was at the
pizzeria, the only reason I got an Xbox one was because all my co-workers are getting it and I
wanted to continue playing games with them. So since you couldn't play from any other game console
or gaming platform, whether PC or whatever, and play the next Call of Duty with your friends,
then I had to get the Xbox. Yeah, I don't know. I would have been able to think of examples or make
case for like maybe iPhones over androids or something, but that case is getting flimsy and
flimsy over the last few years. So I'm out of steam. I can't think of one. We should wrap this up then.
Probably about time to do that. Yeah, we got some stuff covered here. There's a bunch of other
feedback I want to get to, especially Mordinomail's awesome thing about static time and why things
matter, but we should get that next time because it's late. That was a good one. Yeah. That was a
really good one. All right, well, we'll hit all this stuff at some point. Everyone stay in there.
Yeah. All right. Some point soon even. Yes. Yes, coming through the rest of our notes. We've got
like, you know, video game section movies, which we talked about plenty. So I don't know that we
need those sections. No, I put those in there back in the early days of making notes here.
And then Steven stirred the pot. I feel like we did that with Liam Neeson. So
all right. Yep. Oh, wait, before we thank the Patreon, what is an omelot and how do I
I think it's the O with the two dots over it. Yeah. How does that pronounced? Usually it's
pronounced by drawing it out a bit. I've heard the best way to think of it as an American is if
that letter was written twice, such as in cooperate in most other languages, that would be an O with
not over it instead of two O's. I think yeah, you said O instead of A, right?
Then you just draw it out a bit. Okay. Like instead of Motley Crue would be Motley Crue.
Fair enough. Okay. All right, we got this. So
so our patron for this episode is Simon Coder. I did that terribly. There's a little note that
says the O in Coder has an omelot and I don't know. I tried. It's late. Thank you, Simon.
We're sorry for butchering your name or for not being. Thank you, Simon. Yeah. God, it's late.
But we do want to especially take time always out to thank our patrons because it really does
help us. Yeah. I've said that a lot. I feel like a broken record when you get to this part. It's
hard not to, but the sentiment is the same. It's like for me, it's, you know, the money is very,
very helpful and very thoughtful. For me, it's the fact that people care enough to actually,
you know, want to support this financially. And I don't know. It, I think you know, I
choked one time that, you know, it's the unit of caring and that proves that you guys
appreciate it. And that's pretty literal sense that that means something. Yeah. So
and it is, we are reminded of that caring every single time the episode comes out,
which is, which is nice because like people don't have the energy to comment every single time or
be like, Hey, great, great show guys every time. And honestly, we couldn't read all those emails.
People did all that. We can't even get their feedback. Yeah. Right. And to people who don't
have the means or desire to support financially, that's totally cool. There's iTunes,
leave a rating and review. This gets, you know, more notices in the iTunes algorithm store or
whatever. My understanding is that it also wants like a review, not just a rating for some stupid
reasons. So, you know, I think either one is good, but yeah, but if you have a chance to write a
sentence or, you know, anything, just, I think that helps the dog rhythm, but that's not really
super important to me. Just put like good podcast, like a thumbs up emoji and like that's fine.
Exactly. That's all we want. And I think, like I said, that makes it easier to find and it shows
up better and like, you know, trending searches or something. But the other way people find it is
by being, by hearing about it. So, you know, if you like the show, you can share it, you can talk
about it, all that stuff we've talked about. So that's all I've got. Do we do another thing at
every episode? I can't remember. I don't think so. I think we're good. I think we're good. All right.
Turns out there was actually one thing we forgot to do. The less wrong posts that we will be reading
next week are knowing about biases can hurt people and debiasing as non-self-destruction.
Thanks for bringing with us, everybody. You're going with me. We're gonna go to bed. Yeah.
Good night, everybody. The Blizzard here has this all tired, hibernating mode. So,
all right. Thanks again. We'll see you in a couple weeks. Peace out. Bye.
