Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky, I'm Steven Zuber, I'm James Dickey,
and today we are going to continue where we left off last week, but this time we are
exercising discipline, so we do not get on such crazy digressions.
We are still allowed regular digressions, but no longer can we have digressions off
digressions.
Okay.
It's five o'clock on a Friday and it's thunderstorming out, so just a recipe for a rotten brain,
but one way to warm up the rotten brain is by reading the sequences on Lesserong.com.
And let us jump right into that, the first one being Explanations, explainers, sorry,
explainers shoot high, aim low.
Yeah, this one was like, I feel like maybe we should just read it.
I also summarized it last week, or last episode, because we were talking about Neil deGrasse
Tyson was on Sam Harris' podcast, and Harris said, I think your book is perfect for like
a young adult who comes to science, and he's like, that's fun to hear because I wrote it
for adults, because adults told me that they feel like it's written for kids if they understand
everything in it.
Right, yeah.
So it's like.
If I'm not confused then.
Yeah, I'm not confused.
This must be too easy.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But apparently, I mean, the short version is basically like, you're explaining something
to somebody, or rather you're drafting an explanation they're going to give to somebody.
You're like, all right, an elementary explanation of this will hit the lay person just fine.
And it goes, it's too dense and confusing over their head, or you didn't cross knife
in frontal distance.
So like, if you're aiming for high schoolers, you're not going to hit high schoolers aim
for like fifth graders, and you'll hit high school.
Yes, or even worse.
What are you going to say, Anish?
Oh, well, the anecdote, that's what I was looking for.
The anecdote that he leads off with is that he was talking to a scientist who wrote an
explanation in his field aimed at like a very low technical level.
Like he thought it was, he was writing basically for reporters, maybe some scientists that have
no knowledge in this field.
And it ended up being his most popular paper within his field, cited more than anything
else he'd ever been, he'd ever written.
And Eliezer said he had the same thing happen when he wrote an intuitive explanation of
Bayesian reasoning.
He was aiming for basically elementary school, which he admits now was kind of dumb because
he was using words that elementary school students probably don't know.
He had assumed the reader knew what a probability was.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So he's like, okay, maybe, maybe that was dumb of me to assume this is aimed at elementary
school.
But the point is he was trying to write to an elementary school level and it ended up
being really popular among undergrads and other people who are significantly older than
elementary school.
Well, it specifically, he says, let me find it, I regularly get fan mail from formerly
confused undergrads taking statistics classes and journalists and professors from outside
fields.
Yeah.
So like...
Not elementary schoolers.
Yeah.
But I mean, actually like undergrads taking statistics classes.
So like not even, you know, like people who are actively trying to study this, like,
Oh, this is a great explanation.
Yeah.
Which I felt that way about the next one, we don't have to jump to it yet, but double
illusion of transparency.
Yeah.
He did say that he wants to note that this is not because your audience is more stupid
than you think.
It's because your words are far less helpful than you think.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That and this all ties back to the previous sequences that we talked about where the...
Inferential distance thing.
Inferential distance, illusion of transparency, self anchoring bias, all these things where
you, you already know what you know, and you assume much more.
If I was explaining this to me, I'd understand it.
Exactly.
That's basically how it's going, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Actually it was, no one knows what science doesn't know.
It starts off with like, I tried to do this real simple explanation and it turns out that
you didn't get it.
Well, should we move on to the next one then?
I just was going to say, I thought that it was a great explanation.
Oh.
But anyway, though, yeah, we'll get to it when we get to it.
Was there more to say explainer?
That kind of summary.
Yeah.
It's a brief one.
What I like is the double illusion of transparency, which in my one sentence summary is where
Inyosh says something to me, I think I understood him and he thinks I understood him, right?
Yeah.
All right.
Right, okay, yeah.
Well, no, I'm sorry.
The, I guess the last part of that is, turns out we're both wrong.
I think we both misunderstood each other.
We were just speaking before the microphone started rolling about how you nodded at a lot
of things that Brian said.
And Brian thought that meant you understood, but oftentimes nodding and understanding are
not correlated.
They're all anti-correlated.
And this, in this sequence, he says, I thought that if I said, hey, guess what I noticed
today, Bayes Theorem is the secret of the universe.
And someone else said, yeah, Bayes Theorem is the secret of the universe.
Then this is what a successful teacher-teacher-student interaction looked like, knowledge conveyed
and verified.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And he did say that, like, it started out with them talking about Bayes in a IRC and
the guy didn't quite get it.
So he took it to private chat room, explained the meat of prerequisites, guy didn't get
that, explained the prerequisites of that, guy didn't get that.
So we went all the way back to the foundations of Bayes Theorem and turned out that the guy
had issues updating probability that a fruit is a banana based on observing that it's
yellow.
And he keeps mixing up the probability of banana given yellow and the probability of
yellow given banana, which I thought was hilarious because, hmm, are all yellow things
bananas?
Well, I have one example.
So yeah, and that was that this one sort of comes out in, is this the one that comes
out in, um, yes, I think it is.
This is the one that comes out in favor of, of university schooling because, yeah, I
was surprised by that.
Yeah, because it says that professors have the advantage of being able to directly query
their audience right there in the room and, you know, get feedback from them as they're
talking.
Pull out this.
It doesn't really sound odd, but until that very day, I hadn't realized why there were
such things as universities.
I thought it was just rent seekers who'd gotten a lock on the credentialing system.
Which like, yeah, mostly.
Yeah.
I've got this like awesomely romanticized view of, of university.
I think of, there weren't the academies that like Aristotle put here, you know, so like
that's just, I feel like this, oh, this is, this is scholarship.
This is a pursuit of reason and knowledge.
I feel that when I'm on a campus, even though it's just like, we're here to collect your
money and make you watch football games.
Yeah.
Well, actually, like, yeah, I found it.
Um, I hadn't realized why there were such things as university.
I thought it was just rent seekers.
Why would you need teachers to learn?
That was what books were for.
But now a great and terrible light was dawning upon me.
Genuinely explaining complicated things took months or years and an entire university
infrastructure with painstakingly crafted textbooks and professional instructors.
You couldn't just tell people and like, didn't we, I think it was just two episodes ago
that I came out saying that if someone was really dedicated and wanted to learn something
that they could figure it out, they could learn most things in a matter of months or
a couple of years at most.
It sounds like Elias or disagrees with me here.
Yeah.
I think that doesn't describe most people, though, like in order to understand a really
complicated subject onto mechanics or whatever, um, I think that you do, if you're, if you're
like a self learner, autodidact, uh, like the thing that you have to do is honestly watch
a bunch of YouTube videos of different people explaining things different ways or read a
bunch of different books and like, you start to be able to build a complex model by examining
it from different sides.
So, you know what, shape it.
It's a weird metaphor.
Uh, but, you know,
That was a good metaphor.
Yeah, I thought it was perfect.
Okay.
I, I am the kind of person I learned at least 10 times faster if I'm sitting talking with
somebody for 30 minutes than if I'm off watching videos because I can ask a question and like,
oh, that clears it up.
I don't have to watch this 90 minute YouTube video to find the answer or only to find that
the answer wasn't in it.
Yeah.
That's what I was trying to get at where it's like, you totally can learn quantum mechanics
on your own.
It's just going to be a lot harder because you're the one that has to find and curate
the information and you don't know what you don't know.
And you can't question the guy on YouTube.
Maybe could, but it would be harder, uh, or, and you can't question the textbook.
I guess he's saying genuinely explaining complicated things took months or years and he bolds explaining
to put that emphasis on it.
I think that's probably more, more true because when I was, when I made my statement a few
weeks ago, I was thinking that genuinely learning something doesn't take very long.
And I think there's a distinct difference between trying to explain something and trying
to learn something and you're trying to explain something.
The other person is usually far less engaged and isn't doing a lot of their own work.
If you're really trying to learn something and you're putting in, you know, hours every
day for weeks at a time, you cover a lot of ground fast.
And if you have like a fucking teacher to help you out and ask questions, coach you.
Good Lord.
Yeah.
I think that'd be my ideal learning environment.
Well, that's kind of what I try to do at work when I can grab somebody knows what they're
talking about.
I try to leash them down for 20 minutes and explain something to me.
Explain this like I'm five, please.
I literally wrote that sentence today or this week.
Um, I was, I was it for someone who's obsessively paid as a web developer, I don't know how
the internet works well enough to fix internet related problems.
So like we're, we have a lot of issues with domain names, not pointing where they're supposed
to with certs, not validating properly and SNI and SSL and lots of other TLA's three
letter acronyms.
Lots of acronyms.
Yeah.
And, uh, so I, I put in this chat and I was like, all right, look, I'm trying to solve
this problem.
If, if one of you two experts can jump in and just explain, and I said, you know, ELI,
five, you know, for 20 minutes with me, I'll get a good start on this.
And that's really like, I think that's the main thing that I get out of like an educational
system that I don't get out of just having all the resources in the world.
Cause like, I don't know what part of my problem is to start Googling first.
Yeah.
You don't know what you don't know yet.
And I'm like, you have to dig through all this stuff to get the prerequisites that you
need.
And there's a lot of this stuff that's superfluous to what you actually need to solve, but like
you can't pick and choose what you like read in a textbook because if you don't know, if
you don't know what you don't know, then.
In an idealized educational environment, somebody would give me like a stack of a bridged
textbooks and say, read them in this order.
Right. And you're like, yeah, you can skip this part, read the highlighted sections.
And then that, that would be it.
Right. And then maybe they're there to consult and that's kind of what college is.
Oh, I want to, if you squint, I think that's, yeah.
I think that's the difference between like, because Eliezer is his goal, which he is
telling us in these posts, literally, is to explain what AI is to people and why is
dangerous, which is a very different thing than like, if I wanted to learn how to start
programming it in AI, like, I mean, obviously I couldn't learn that since no one knows how
to yet, but, uh, explaining to a general audience, this is what it is.
And this is why you got to worry about it is a just completely different task than
trying to learn something because you're interested in it and want to do it.
If you're, yeah, also something that somebody, in order to get a passing grade, that person
might not like actually care about the thing.
So you do have to also engage them.
Like there's, there's small real quick.
I want to actually like suggest a thing that reminded me of Derek Zivers, who I love.
It's like entrepreneur writes cool books and stuff.
He has a thing called the do this directives.
Just post a link, I guess, because the URL is bizarre.
SIV, SIV.rs forward slash d1.
What is dot rs?
Does he have like a Russian, I don't know, URL anyway.
Well, just a link.
But the whole thing was he's trying to figure out how to, uh, compress information or as
like an experiment.
This is just a free thing that you can read.
And I highly recommend this and all of Derek's stuff.
But it has things like how to be useful to others, how to get rich, how to thrive in
an unknowable future.
And like each of them just have a very, like he's tried to cram all the stuff he knows
into the smallest amount of time.
And interesting.
That's, that sounds, maybe we could do a show about this.
Oh yeah, that'd be fun.
But sorry, that just reminded me of that.
And this is where we get the secret reveal that all along the reason he's been writing
these sequences is to teach people about AI.
And he has had to go way, way, way, way back to the beginning, because apparently just
going to the beginning isn't enough.
You got to go back to the beginning of the beginning.
And when I read this, I left because I was like, you got to, you can't just tell people
about AI.
You got to trick them into thinking they're learning rationality and then slip it in there.
In fact, you can't even do that.
First, you got to trick them into thinking they're reading a Harry Potter fanfic.
I was like, wow, actually, like took his own advice.
I don't even know if that was like sort of his intention for writing methods of
rationality.
If he'd like internalize this, it was allegedly on our last episode, he had
said that it was he just wanted to write a Harry Potter fanfiction.
And I'm like, I don't just, I don't just, I just don't believe you.
I'm sure he also wanted to write a Harry Potter fanfiction, which is why he
chose Harry Potter, but he is the word just, I think.
And I'm like, I don't think that was just it.
But, um, but maybe, you know, I remember him saying that he was trying to write, I
think, I think he was trying to write the sequences or the book that was supposed
to be.
Yes.
Yeah, that was it.
He was originally trying to write a book about rationality and.
And that's where the sequence realized that, yeah, like he could post in this sort
of like serial way and get like and keep his momentum up.
But like when he was trying to sit there and just put it all down into a book, the
motivation was hard and that was even easier when he was like, what if I could
just make this a Harry Potter fanfic?
Like that was sort of just a getting unstuck from writer's block experiment,
which worked out really well.
And I mean, so much of it has to do with feedback.
Cause when you're writing a book of any kind, you get no feedback for sitting in
a room for hours by yourself, like, man, I hope people like this every day for at
least six months, usually nine or more.
And yeah, you, you hear nothing.
Whereas if you're posting online every one to two days, you get feedback in the
comments section every single day.
It's interesting feedback from intelligent people that have cool things to say.
It's, it's very socially rewarding.
It's why a lot almost.
So every author I've ever met and pretty much anyone who's been born in my generation
or later has written fanfic and posted online.
And most of them say it is far more fulfilling than actually writing novels because we all
have these souls that are just screaming for affirmation.
Please somebody like what I'm doing and you get that so much online, especially
when you're writing Marvel fanfic or Harry Potter fanfic or something people want
to read anyway.
I think that, you know, there's probably the selfish motivation, but also we're
just, we're social animals and it's hard to get the motivation to keep doing a thing
yourself.
There's also the commitment and consistency of like, I said, I would do this five
times a week.
Yeah.
You're peer pressuring, you're committing to being peer pressured.
And I think that's a great motivator.
The only, the only fanfiction I could think of that I've read of yours is the
Cain and Abel story.
Okay.
Yeah.
I mean, so.
Is that a fanfiction?
I mean, that's, that, that if I, if I, if I squinted, that's, yeah, I mean, Amazing
Man is, um, yeah.
Chuck Tingle, Amazing Man 2 is Chuck Tingle fanfiction.
A host is basically Evangelion fanfiction.
Oh, I didn't read the last one.
I mean, cause you hide your, you hide the details and you're like, see, no, this is
an original world, but no, everything's fanfiction.
Harry Potter and the methods of rationality.
Right.
Yeah.
If he had just made up, could you imagine like the, the, the, he just makes up like
he changes the names of everybody, which is the exact same story, except, uh.
That's apparently how, uh, 50 Shades of Grey came to be.
It was a Twilight fanfic.
Called Masters of the Universe.
Yeah.
And she just changed the names of all the characters and changed some details and
was published as its own original book.
And then, and then chopped out the vampire business and then boom.
Yeah.
But I think that the fanfic had, I mean, I don't know, I haven't read, I haven't
read the fanfic, the original fanfic.
I haven't, and I tried to read 50 Shades of Grey and I couldn't do it.
It was so bad.
The original fanfic is just as bad.
It was, I was listening to the audio book.
But it's got Edward and Bella.
So, you know, heart eyes.
I guess.
I'm more of a Jacob, Team Jacob.
No, no, I'm not.
Uh, I didn't like either of them.
They're both, they're, she just shouldn't date either of them.
Pretty much everything.
They're both like crazy controlling weirdos.
You know what?
We have now gotten onto a digression for digression.
So we got it though.
All right.
Yes, we did.
Let's pull out back to quick emergency evacuation.
Um, so, um, double illusion of transparency.
Yes.
Moving on.
Uh, what else was.
Oh, no, that was, that was basically a double illusion, right?
Unless anyone else has something I had and have much left to learn about
explaining, but that's how it all began.
I like it.
He's a fun writer.
Well, you know, we mentioned that every fifth episode or something, but I also
just dig his writing style.
Like content, the content's great too, but there's some writing that engages me
really well, probably doing important Mary stuff and shouldn't write another
like methods of rationality length fiction.
But if he wanted to, I would, you know, occasionally he'll still write small
things on tumblr and I love his writing.
People need personal lives too.
You can do the writing, you know, in the time that you're not, I just, I don't
want to take him away from important AI research for my own leg.
Yeah.
But if you stick them on important AI research for all his waking hours, he's
going to burn out and die.
Yeah.
Couple, couple of weeks ago on the HPMR subreddit, someone cross posted to some
other subreddit and it was a fun, rational and short story.
And someone's like, that's great.
But what was this?
They're like, check the top comment of the thread or it was a link to a tweet.
Yutkowski wrote that under suit and into see if he was identifiable by his
writing style.
And he wasn't.
And he wasn't.
I didn't, I didn't catch the result of that.
Well, that's, so people are thinking that he, because he's writing something
under suit in them now, right?
Isn't there a plausible candidate for that?
Yeah.
There's, there's some rumors as to what it is that he's writing, but given that
it was like two years that this fanfic was out and then he finally came out and
said, this is, this is the short story that I wrote under a pseudonym.
I am greatly updating away from people being able to identify, uh, authors by
their writing style, because I was sure people would be able to identify this in
moments and not one person even suggested it might be me.
You know, I don't know if I could do that.
It takes me a while because I feel like he has such a distinct voice.
Me too.
But then I look at, I'm thinking of worth the candle.
If you told me all that as I wrote it, I would believe you.
And if you told me that, uh, Alexander Wales wrote methods of rationality, I
would believe you.
Like, they feel so like, like all the buttons, the hit for me, they all hit the
same button.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, one of the most good writers can write in different ways.
They can, but one of the most prolific writers of our lifetimes who actually
wrote his own stuff.
Cause don't, anyways, uh, is Stephen King.
And for a long time, he published under Richard Bachman, uh, partly because
publishers had this thing where they just didn't want to publish too many
books by the same author in a year.
They were like, Oh no, audiences will get burnt out on them.
And turns out that's completely fucking wrong nonsense.
Yeah.
Look at how many James Patterson speaking of people who don't write their own things.
I was about to say he's one of the, but moving away from douchebags, uh, you
can just, you keep hitting a high and so James Patterson doesn't write his own books.
Oh, a lot of them he doesn't know.
He just comes up with the outline and then he's like, go to work typing monkeys
and I will take all the fame and most of the money.
When I worked at a library for like, every time we got like, you know, there's
a monthly budget for, here's the new books like that, you know, sorry, backing
up that was totally incoherent.
Uh, you get a monthly budget and then you purchase new books and you have to sort
of look at the statistics of your circulation to see, okay, who do people
want to see?
And it's all, you know, everybody wants the new James Patterson book and there's
like a waitlist of people before the books even out to put it on hold.
But like, I just remember unboxing our book, like deliveries and having to
like catalog and put stickers on all of them and stuff.
And just like, huh, like three James Patterson books.
Does he write three books a month?
What the hell?
And then trying to read some of them and being like, man, uh, there was a series
of his that I started and it started really good.
But you could just straight up tell the point where James Patterson is like,
all right, I got to write my other six series that I'm working on.
So here you go.
Go straight or you finish this because it just suddenly like characters
were completely out of character.
Whole plot threads were dropped.
Like one character developed a superpower that was never mentioned again.
Well, we can't let any discussion of books and authors go by without
be mentioning Wheel of Time.
The last three of which were written by Brandon Sanderson.
It was the last three.
Uh, it was the last book, but he broke it into three books.
So, um, it was a very dist, I don't even know if it was aiming for,
or, uh, Jordan style voice or not, because it was distinctly different.
It wasn't, it wasn't worse.
It was just like different.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Did it like throw you off or were you fine with it?
I knew it was a different author.
Okay.
Yeah.
I mean, I.
But basically every, every single, um, author who has been revealed to be
writing under a pseudonym, it's never been because someone figured it out.
It's always been a leak by a publisher or someone who knew them.
So you're saying Rowling wrote some adult books that were just apparently
got awful.
I mean, they were fine.
But she published them under, but they were just the same thing.
I heard some bad things about them, but a shrug, but she published them under.
What the heck was it?
Um, some, some dude pseudonym because like they were like, Oh, what if I, I think
she actually was like, I'm going to like, see if I published this and like, see
if my writing is actually good or if people are just like, Oh, that's the
Harry Potter person.
You got to read that.
And like, nobody likes their adult books.
So I feel like that's kind of a bummer for her.
I would just publish it under like LM bowling or something instead of J.K.
Rowling make it, make it kind of obvious.
But I mean, you know, wouldn't get that successful, like just go forth and
mess around with whatever you want.
If you don't like your other stuff, cool.
I'm going to ride my laurels on Harry Potter for generations to come.
So I don't like J.K.
Rowling as a person, but I do appreciate or I have to respect the like, let me
test if I'm a good writer or if I happened to find like a formula of people
like, and now just attaching my name to anything will make it popular.
I mean, it's the latter because a lot of people who really are good writers
will never get famous.
I mean, there's a huge amount of luck in it.
So yeah, like, like, you know, Sprotsky, for example, who has written
all of one book, I mean, come on, several short stories, short stories.
No one reads short stories and never is, is, you know, that has yet to be proved.
You know, so you said, you said, never get popular.
Oh, right.
Yeah.
Well, we'll have to wait on this entry before we just human whether or not.
I will have more news about this at the end of the episode,
but I am actually going to be starting on my next novel here in a month or two.
Fuck yeah.
Yeah.
So we just did this, but I'm seeing y'all like to hear them.
All right.
So we I was trying to think of some some way to tie this until we don't know
what we don't know, but no one knows what science doesn't know is the next post.
I think we just let's just go into it.
Didn't we talk about this one before at some point?
Remember having done so.
It's I mean, a lot of these are very familiar.
Yeah.
It may have just come up in conversation.
Well, can I read the beginning because I actually really liked his example.
Sure. At a family party some years ago,
one of my uncles remarked on how little science really knows.
For example, we still have no idea how gravity works.
Why things fall down.
Actually, we do know how gravity works.
I said my father, a PhD physicist, was also present,
but he wasn't even touching this one.
And I just have to say that's the wisdom that you have with age, I guess.
We do.
So my uncle, yes, I said, gravity is the curvature of space time.
At this point, I'd still swallowed Feynman's line about, and this is a link,
being able to explain physics to one's grandmother.
It links back to the double illusion of transparency.
We're so sad that that he had mistakenly at one point believed that
you should be able to explain a complex thing to your grandmother.
Well, you don't.
I believe Feynman's line was you don't truly understand something
until you understand it well enough to explain it to your grandmother.
Yeah, something like that.
But he was like, he's like, I used to think that this was basically this is what he's saying here.
So I continued, you could say that Earth goes around the sun in a straight line.
I mentioned a curve that shows both space and time.
So that a straight line shows steady movement and a curved line shows acceleration.
Then curve the graph paper itself.
When you try to draw a straight line on a curved paper, you get what looks like acceleration.
And then the other was just like, what?
But I love that.
That was like a really good visual representation of gravity, I thought.
But then again, I also have prerequisite knowledge of that.
I guess the uncle didn't.
So he was just like, what the hell are you talking about?
Why are you folding graph paper?
Yeah, what does that have to do with the price of tea in China?
So it goes on to say, and then I have, I have to like sort of do my annoyed thing
about Eleazar, I think, assuming too much, going too far in the direction of Evo Psyche.
When was the last time in history when it was possible for a single human
to know the knowledge of the most advanced civilization?
I've seen various estimates for this, usually in the form of polymaths,
nominated for the position of last person to know everything.
One plausible candidate is Leonardo da Vinci, who died in 1519.
Shortly after the printing press began to become popular and shortly before
Copernicus inaugurated the scientific revolution.
But in the ancestral environment, it was possible to know everything.
And that's why I was just like, oh, come on, da Vinci didn't know everything.
Like they had higher math in the Middle East that he probably didn't know about.
And there was like advanced medicine and surgery and China and India
that he probably didn't know about just because like, yeah.
So that's my nitpick about that.
And then my nitpick about, well, in the ancestral environment, there were like
bands of 200 people and everybody could know everything.
And I was like, bullshit.
No, like, you know, flint napping is actually kind of difficult.
People specialized since we like first started understanding things
and like developing skills, which I'm going to like end my rant
and then like not bring it up again about that.
But just I get what he's saying.
I think it's just not really simplistic and also is kind of treating ancestral
people as dumb.
They were as intelligent as us.
I do think you have a good point that probably there was already way too much
knowledge for anyone to know everything.
Even before history became a thing that was recorded.
I kind of take this point more that if anyone in that, if anyone back
in ancestral lands, if anyone knew how to do something, then everyone at least
knew that someone knew it, right?
Like if there was the knowledge of how to, yeah, rocks into arrowheads,
then you may not have it yourself, but you know that this is something
that the human race knows.
And and like his example was that there were people in the human race
that were alive that knew how gravity worked, but his uncle literally
thought that nobody alive knew yet.
And and that, you know, was news to his uncle.
And that is basically the point of the post that you don't know what
someone somewhere might know, because no one can know everything that not
just know everything, but know everything that is known.
Right.
So it'd be one thing for me to understand everything in the world.
I'd have to be very, very old or have a godlike brain, right?
It would be a less, it would still be a monumental task and still unattainable,
but much less unattainable for me just to know all the things that are known.
I've got a big list in my head of all the facts.
And I don't, not the explanations, just all the knowledge, right?
It's amazing to this day.
And by to this day, I mean to last week, when I last saw this happen,
there's still people getting hung up on the Copenhagen interpretation
of quantum physics.
And I'm like, oh my God, many worlds has been around for so long
and you're still hung up on this observer effect thing.
He also brought up the movie, What the Bleep Do We Know,
which I have had the displeasure of watching.
Oh, I'm so sorry.
It's as bad as everyone says, right?
Yeah. It's complete woo.
It's basically Deepak Chopra explains quantum physics where he's just like,
oh, you know, we don't understand why light, you know,
so light is a particle and a wave.
And that means that you can basically do anything by believing in it hard enough.
And you're like, wait, what?
That's obviously what it means.
Well, you know, the observer effect means that you have to observe
something in order for it to have happened and the wave form to collapse.
So the power of observation must be magic.
Yeah. No, that's that's not what that means.
If anybody thinks that I'm going to observe myself getting younger right now.
He's listening to this.
Think that, right? Yeah, maybe they do.
I this he does have the quote in here, which is one of his quotes.
I didn't realize it was in this post, but I often use it.
He says, if we are ignorant, ignorant about a phenomenon,
that is a fact about our state of mind, not a fact about the phenomenon
phenomenon itself, which is a great quote.
Maybe he said the same thing in different posts, too,
because I know I've brought it up before.
It's I think that that was him just, yeah, calling back to an earlier sequence
where he said that.
But like, I like the reiterations, all this stuff ties in in different ways.
Also, I just want to read one more paragraph because it's hilarious.
My uncle's not an isolated phenomenon.
I've met people who think that science knows nothing about the brain
and that thought is a complete mystery to us.
My favorite was the fellow who confidently asserted that neuroscience
had been unable to assign any function in scare quotes, like to the cerebral cortex,
at which point, I just burst out laughing because the cerebral cortex
is the majority of the brain.
It's like the things that aren't the hippocampus and the amygdala.
I think basically it's like
it's the whole new part of the brain that like humans used to do.
All the human stuff.
As Tom McCabe put it, anyone who claims the brain is a total mystery
should be slapped upside the head with the MIT Encyclopedia of Cognitive Sciences.
All 1096 pages of it.
And I was just like, I felt that I feel that so hard.
That's a mood.
I've heard the same thing before about, well, science doesn't really
understand the brain.
And I was like, can I please put my consumer grade
EEG on you and then show you your brainwaves and then hit you with them
somehow because like we know things.
We don't know all of the things, but like it's not a mystery.
We know tons of shit about the brain shut up.
He does again have the inspirational stuff near the bottom where he says,
today, the absence of knowledge is a fragile and temporary condition
like the darkness in a closet whose door happens to be shut.
A single thought can shatter the absence of thought.
Every scientific every scientific discovery ever made
destroyed an ancient absence of knowledge dating back to the dawn of time.
And then no one knows what six, six billion people don't know today
and still less does know what seven billion people will know tomorrow,
which made me think, wait, where was it around six billion people when he wrote this?
It was.
Date was 2007.
So I looked it up because I was like, what are we at seven point something?
I looked it up seven point nine.
Yeah. We're almost eight.
Yeah. Fuck yeah.
In in like 15 years, I guess like
do overpopulation problems, but fuck yeah, like science will solve those.
And we're going to go colonize the stars.
God damn it. I mean, so far we haven't had mass starvation because
because of science. Exactly.
And also fuck your organic food.
An unrelated topic that I could rant about.
But I don't know why you were looking at me specifically.
Oh, no, I wasn't trying to know.
I know you weren't.
OK, I don't even know where you were looking because I was looking down.
But I was actually looking in your direction.
I wasn't aiming it at you.
I was just like, you're both sitting to my right.
Yeah. And I'm talking to the two of you.
Well, that was our sequences for the day.
Yeah. Did you have more to say, Steve?
No, I think I'm good.
OK. You had an expression like I was I was holding back.
Like I'm one kind of like joke on organic food, which like they always say
like pesticide free, which I just read as like full of bugs.
It is though.
I once I got like some cilantro that I forgot.
Or I didn't pay attention to the fact that it was organic cilantro.
And it fucking wilted immediately and was full of bugs.
And I was like, good job, organic food.
I tend to not buy organic whenever I can avoid it,
mainly just so I don't encourage those people.
It's more expensive and it's worse quality food.
Also, it's a digression on a digression.
But it's more powerful to people who want to buy them.
So, you know, not shitting on it.
It's not too much money and it makes you feel good.
You could we have a twenty thousand dollar catch we can sell you.
Well, no, I'm going to be thirty thousand, right?
That's right. Yeah. It's that one.
It's a relic. That's right.
Yeah, it has been set on by official rationalist butts.
So, yeah, I'm suddenly confused about where the conversation went.
It went over there.
All right. So, yeah, do we have sequence post lines up for next episode?
We do. Do you have them written down or should I read them?
Read them. OK.
So I think we should do three again because they.
These are. Oh, are you sure?
Because individual IQ differences is one that we can talk about, at least.
I.
Well, because then the next two are motivated stopping
and the motivated continuation, which kind of go right hand.
I'm good with either whatever you all want to do.
Stephen, we can handle three.
OK. Yeah. Growth mindset.
And if we spend so much time on one that we have to stop,
then we can just do push the other two off to the deal.
OK. So possibly the only one we're doing next week is why are individual
IQ differences OK, but we might do three in which case we will also do
motivated stopping and motivated continuation, which is one post,
and a case study of motivated continuation.
So looking forward to it.
All right. Some good one.
So, Stephen, last time you were trying to talk about how kids these days are
a bunch of sensitive, whitey crybabies.
It's no flakes, one may say.
If one wanted to be particularly inflammatory, one could say that.
And why we should take away their toys and make them sit in the corner.
I don't know. Is that what that article is saying?
No, no, it's not.
It's just I've been talking with people on Discord
about how they should always take away kids toys and sit in corners,
which is a gross, a gross misstatement of their actual position.
I just have a microphone right now and they don't, which is one.
I have the power. Exactly.
Everything I said is a lie.
Stephen, what are we actually talking about?
Well, I was going to say about the kid thing is I've spoken with actual
parents who think that you guys are crazy. OK.
I think we're going to try and continue where we were heading last week
or last episode, but I don't remember exactly where we left off.
And I don't listen to this podcast.
I know, I don't either.
We should spend so much time recording the podcast.
I don't want to listen to it again afterwards.
Right. They're basically like the the the article talks about the three great
untruths, what doesn't kill you, makes you weaker, always trust your feelings.
And life is a battle between good people and evil people.
And did we say that it's called the Coddling of the American Mind?
And it's by Greg Lukianoff and Jonathan Heate.
I mean, we said that last time, but I feel like, yeah, John Text.
And he put you happens to be listening to the first episode of the Vedic conspiracy.
Totally. They did an article in the 2015 Atlantic, which will be
linked to an episode, and that was turned into a book in 2018.
And I only read the article. I didn't read the book.
I feel like it's one of those books where it just expands in the article.
And the article had me sold already.
So although that's out, I'm sure it's a lot more examples and updated stuff, whatever.
But anyway, you know, he talks, he gives a bunch of examples of like,
here's where things have gotten a little off the off the rails and in his assessment.
And, you know, he cites like other academics who say, well,
this is how they would, this is how they define something like labeling or something.
You know, so it's not like he's just making up his own terms or working in a box.
In fact, we co-wrote the co-wrote the article, right?
So. Yeah, this is like C.T.
Yeah. But I think we were talking about the the first one.
And so it's worth just kind of.
Did we not even get first the first?
I can't remember, but we can we can power through and talk about any parts that sound interesting.
So because this is something that, you know, and then we can think
of any examples that are worth discussing.
But the idea of what.
So the other reason he calls these the three great untruths is because.
And I say he even it was they who wrote it because I mostly associate this with height
because I've listened to him talk about it on podcasts.
The the three great untruths are called such because they basically via this is
like the new norms of what people are trying to live their life of sensibly
are trying to live their lives by.
But they go against everything we know about human psychology going back to
ancient wisdom, to modern understanding of therapeutic techniques.
And so the idea that, for example, what doesn't kill you makes you weaker.
Like the idea that people are fragile in a way that makes them susceptible.
Just like you can make somebody's psychology worse by upsetting them.
The more you upset, some are just going to like curl up in a ball, die.
Yeah. And especially if you keep reinforcing the idea that that's what you're supposed
to do if you're upset, then people are going to do.
But it does teach people that.
Yeah. Sorry.
You're I think I don't know what you're going to say.
But like there's this this mentality of just basically pure helplessness.
Like if I if I'm exposed to a scary thought, oh, my God, my day is ruined
and I've got to I've got to shove on my day is ruined.
And I've got to I mean, I'm not sure at what point it's it it it goes from
like just signaling to like actually internally being true for yourself.
I think that like I know these stuff or I've watched them as sort
of the Donna Justice, I have these friends that are totally reasonable,
cool people and then a few months later, we're like posting hashtag kill all men
or like in all caps.
If any of you fuckers dare post a picture of Thanksgiving, Turkey on Thanksgiving,
I will be I'm going to unfriend you because I'm vegan and I'm triggered.
I'm just triggered thinking about that.
And I was like, yeah, triggered what happens?
Triggered the thing that I don't I mean, I understand because everyone knows
everyone knows of somebody or has met somebody maybe with post-traumatic stress
disorder. That's not what it means anymore.
Well, they it's like pre-traumatic.
It's like pre post-traumatic stress disorder.
No, or that was being triggered was actually it used to mean we'll give you
a panic attack or like a PTSD flashback.
But now people are using it to I will be very upset.
Well, or they'll say they're having a panic attack just thinking about
Thanksgiving dinner.
But if that's really the case, what in this is what Hyde argues to as a as
a social social psychologist that are social scientists, sociologists, whatever
it is, the brain man.
Yeah. Well, and what I think just is true of of psychology, that if that is
really how your brain works, we're thinking about Thanksgiving dinner,
sends you into a panicky spiral, you know, your heart is constricting,
your palms are sweaty, you're you're you're going to panic disorder.
You feel like you're going to die every time, multiple times a day.
And well, even interestingly, it can be it can be super seldom, at least
from one person I had an experience with, but or heard about an experience with.
Well, I had panic disorder, but people can have panic attacks.
Right. Yeah. Disorder means, yeah, it's and my understanding, too, from panic
disorders, it can just come out of basically nowhere.
Yeah. There's usually some inciting incident, but in my case, it was actually
just chronic stress from working at Disney for like 11 hour days and having
my boss call me God, I was like having dinner with my it was like, I think
all the holiday or a weekend or something and he like calls me the CEO.
No, actually, it was or rather, whatever.
Well, it was not Walt Disney himself.
He is called back out of the grave.
But he's like, call me.
He's like, hey, we need to talk about the fonts on this.
And I was just like, dude, and the Jews, too.
I like sort of let him rant for a bit.
And I'm like, OK, like I I'm taking note of the fact that not even my boss,
like that it was he was the CFO of the company.
I was trying to remember his title.
So I just thought we were talking about Disney.
No, he was dead when I was.
Yeah, but I was like, OK, I know that you're upset about these fonts.
Like and you need to talk to me about that when it is not Saturday
at 8 p.m. and I'm not out at dinner with my family.
I think one of the things that annoys me about the triggered phrase
is because like the classic example, I know the classic example is,
you know, an actual war veteran who like a balloon pops near him.
And all of a sudden, like he has all the stress reactions of someone
trying to kill him because he went through that.
And that's like a flashback, literally, like is I mean,
you can have PTSD about being raped or no, no, I know.
I mean, but like you feel like you're you're back there.
Like it's not it's not just like what I'm very upset.
It's I honest, like I think I'm back on the battlefield being shot.
Yeah, but they don't the thing is people who have those disorders
generally don't go around demanding that society conform to them.
Like if I'm going to walk into a restaurant,
I want to make sure there's no balloons there because I could get triggered.
Or if I'm going to like you sue McDonald's
because like some kid had a balloon or something like exactly.
Like, yes, this is a thing that sucks about your life.
This is why you don't want to have PTSD and you feel bad for people to do.
And hopefully they can find some way to treat it.
But, you know, you don't go around attacking other people
for having triggered you because of whatever Jesus Christ.
Like I the hashtag kill all men thing where like I was just like,
what the fuck are you talking about?
Like, well, you know, when I say all men, I don't actually literally mean all men.
And you should know that.
But like I'm a I'm a rape survivor.
So I get to say whatever I want.
Just call them transphobic next time you want to kill all trans men.
That's fucked up.
Actually, it's funny because I was not like I didn't
identify as a trans guy at the time.
And I sort of wish I could go back in time and be like, oh, wow, excuse you.
Like I got to unfriend you.
I guess you're going to kill me, right?
It would have been a good move.
I haven't heard someone say that in years, but I've also been on Facebook.
I probably haven't heard someone say that since I left Facebook in 2015.
So according to Scott, like said, you're like everybody's upset about race now
and the gender stuff is over.
So yeah, that's race is the huge thing.
Yeah, we can get to the race, too.
And we get to this thing because basically it's just well, there's
specific topics that people get especially upset about for understandable reasons.
I don't want to sort of like the age of conversation we were having.
I want to make it real clear that like I don't want to trivialize PTSD.
And I think that that like originally social justice, I was all behind it
when I heard about it.
I was like, that sounds awesome.
Yeah, I recall myself as a social justice warrior.
Like it sounded like such a cool thing to be back when it meant a good thing.
But like it, I totally think that like people, you know, that there is
not enough awareness of things like panic disorder and how common PTSD is
because you don't just get it from being in combat.
Like you can get it from, uh, man, they're gone.
Well, like samples.
Yeah, well, yeah, there's actually a lot of people have PTSD
about childhood, not even childhood rape, molestation.
There's a lot of bad things that can trigger it.
Yeah, it can get triggered, Rosie, but like that is totally reasonable.
And I do want there to be more awareness of that and more like, I don't know.
I might my thing with trigger warnings is that like I was sort of for them
when it was like, OK, um, hey, I'm I'm your college professor.
We're doing African-American studies and we're going to read Huck Finn.
But like I want to put some trigger warnings here to let people know
that they're going to have like the N word a bunch of times.
And like the idea was here's the sort of opt in, opt out.
Like if you can handle this cool, I'm just like trying to look out
for if anybody might like, you know, but it doesn't mean ban the book.
Like I think that was actually an example in this article where they said,
like, well, like Huck Finn is banned now because it might offend people.
Honestly, I can see books like Huck Finn or Uncle Tom's Cabin
or really any book that contains the N word still be required reading.
You just tell people up front, look, this has the N word in it.
It's for a reason.
Yeah, like it's not going to be comfortable,
but it's an important book for this class, for this reason.
And we're going to read it.
What's interesting with the discomfort thing, I guess I've got two thoughts.
Well, and a meta thought of kind of just blanketing the last 10 minutes of,
you know, the I think the mentality of many of the people in this domain
is is well intentioned, you know.
Hey, we're trying to make people feel safe, feel better or whatever.
Are you against without looking like an app?
Well, and that's kind of why I'm caveating it.
But I do know that like a large part of what some people enjoy about it
is like just the the fun of being in a dog fight that like the thrill
of being in a fight that you know, you can't lose because because you feel like
righteous like crusaders against evil and that can be a dangerous mindset.
Yeah, I think that like we're talking with triggers and PTSD,
like this is a quote from Article 2, but like avoiding all avoiding all triggers
is a symptom of PTSD, not a treatment for it.
Right. Actually, it really is.
Like, I mean, you mentioned a warpet.
Like I remember I was at the gas station 10 plus years ago and it was raining out
and the guy was like, oh, yeah, he was checking me out,
but there's already somebody else there and I don't know how it came up.
I don't know the guy because, again, I'm just hanging out waiting for the rain
to stop and like, oh, walking home.
And he's like, no, I just I don't drive in the rain.
The going over the puddles, watching the splashes reminds me of IEDs
and it freaks me out.
And that's that's just where I'm at with this.
But he said it just nonchalantly like this is that in his treatment of it.
You know, he can drive again.
He can do stuff, but he's he's like, yeah, driving in the rain.
Just not not I'm not there yet.
And like that.
So, I mean, and, you know, one person's suffering doesn't mean someone else
should have the same threshold of suffering.
You know, this is this guy.
There is a highly sedative person HSB thing where like, and actually
the book, The Buddy Keeps the Score is really great for a lot of things,
but has it was the psychologists do first sort of like figured out
effective treatments for PISD.
And well, like exposure therapy is is a is a not
bad way to go about treating PTSD.
The example from the article was, you know, imagine a woman who got
stuck in an elevator and had a panic attack, felt like she was going to die.
And then if you want to ensure that she can never operate in an office
building again or have a normal life, you can make sure that she never has
to go on an elevator again, right?
Then that that's kind of what this this mentality leads towards is let's
never assimilate you, you should never be uncomfortable.
Yeah, let's let's just accommodate your entire life around your elevator
phobia, but instead what you really should do is do this with or without a
doctor like physically present, but under the advice of a doctor, start by
looking at an elevator again, maybe from like the safe distance of the lobby
of a building and then, you know, approach it, watch people come on and off.
You know, just the idea of reconnecting with it and we're like, oh, yeah,
this isn't scary every time.
In fact, it's almost never scary.
Maybe take some MDMA under supervision as well.
Oh, I'm so excited about the potential of MDMA therapy.
Yeah, I don't want to.
Yeah, it's going to awesome.
I'm so glad they're actually researching that.
I the thing is, I don't want to be the asshole.
Like there are actually people, I guess, with this highly sensitive person disorder
that that I think it's not it is just a people.
There's a very what is it about her from a threshold of distressed tolerance?
If it's impacting your life to the point where you cannot interact
with the normal world, then it's a disorder.
Yeah, textbook.
Yeah, that's how that that's how it's defined.
But like, I think there's not actually a
I don't think I don't think like everyone should just be like, oh,
just toughen up, you snowflake.
The problem that I have with it is not the people who actually have
disorders that could use some help and that I hope, you know, they can get help
and I can be accommodating of them.
It's more the fact that now literally everybody is like, well,
I'm highly sensitive about this thing.
So you have to do whatever, you know, it is that I'm demanding of you.
It's basically an exertion of power just because, you know, this is a power
that I can flex and I'm going to do it.
And what are you going to do when you're like, oh, I don't think you're
actually a highly sensitive person when you're already somebody who feels
really powerless that probably really empowering.
I do like understand where people are coming from and why they like I heard
on there's a lot of discussion of social justice, but somebody pointed out
that somebody who's been bullied their whole life now has the power to bully
others, basically, that this is like, it gets, it can get to a point of just
outright being bullying.
For example, this person who was actually writing, this was the person who
was a professional artist and had their career ruined because they posted
like aged up versions of cartoon characters, like making out or something.
And they were like, pedophile, chase them off the internets.
Also, they're, they're like, also they're anti-Semitic and transphobic.
And I was like, this is literally a Jewish trans dude.
You guys, I don't think that people knew that.
It was like, they just needed to start like finding evidence for, it was a
witch hunt at that point.
And like Steven said, it's one that you can't lose because I know if I were
to say something like that, like the, you know, I'm annoyed about people
flexing power as opposed to I don't have a problem with helping people
with actual disorders, then you're like, well, you're gatekeeping mental disorders
now, who are you to say I don't have this?
Or sort of putting the onus on everybody else to like pamper this
person and also to like predict what things you'd think might trigger people,
which is you sort of pointed out, like you can slip on a banana peel.
This is a really stupid example, but like then have PTSD about bananas and
nobody's going to predict like, hey, trigger warning, this photo has a banana
in it and somebody might have slipped on a banana.
Like there's just, you can have all kinds of bizarre things that are associated
with.
Dude, I remember there was a state star codex post where he posted a picture
of a spider.
I don't even remember why it was some kind of joke thing.
And it was edited within an hour or so to take down the pictures.
Like, sorry, I was informed that people, yeah, that there's people who are
triggered by pictures of spiders and they were reading my article and
suddenly had a panic attack.
So it's taken down now.
And I'm like, really?
I can kind of sympathize.
And so that's, that's, that's where this becomes interesting.
You know, like, again, you can sympathize with like the response, the, the
ick response to a spider or just the, oh my God, that freaks me out.
But like, not with the like, but like people, I get to control other people's
content with my like objections.
What I might have done, and I didn't see this article, if I was a frequent
commenter, which I've never commented, I might have said, you know, I don't
know what that spider picture to do with the post.
Like, you know, it was related in some way.
Okay.
Yeah.
I mean, if it did something, I might be like, that fucking sucked.
You know, like I, there's a separate I like called.
Oops, all spiders.
No, thank God.
No, no, it's one that, that never has spiders, but it had one.
And I, it's called no spiders here.
I forget what it, I forget what it's called.
It's all spiders wearing mustaches pretending they're not spiders.
Oh, it's r slash.
Hmm.
And, uh, anyway, probably three, six months ago, there was one that had this
horrifying spider in it that I'm imagining was photoshopped or something.
But wasn't expecting to see it.
It's still with me right now.
I'm still not in love with it.
But like, that's the, you know, again, somebody with, with way more arachnophobia
than me may have been actually like, you know, freaked the fuck out rather than
just made severely uncomfortable for six months, whenever they thought about it.
But like, it's not, uh, I think that, that was, that was the thing about just like
you said about, or like you said about, uh, people having to accommodate everything.
I think that it's, it's under, like in your own space at your own house.
You know, if you want someone to not bring over meat because you're a vegetarian,
more power to you.
It's your price.
Yeah.
Um, if you go over to their place for dinner and I mean, you know, they are
inviting and like their spouse is cooking a steak outside and you're like, no.
Well, that's what, that's the grill over, you know, because, because most of my
friends in real life and the people I interact with aren't of this variety.
The, the super majority of encounters have had, had with them are online.
And it's just that the, the weird sense of like entitlement, you know, you go
into someone else's corner and you're like, I demand you clean this up and put
these signs up and it's like, but it's not your house.
Like I just don't understand that.
Yeah.
The entitlement, that's, that's a good, that's trying to articulate where I think
that I, so I've been invited to a, uh, acquaintance friend, almost friend.
Yeah.
Sure.
I say to friends house, uh, I say, uh, on next week and they're vegan and said,
you know, feel free if you do bring anything, not to bring anything.
That's not vegan.
Right.
I'm like, yeah, I mean, that's your house.
Totally makes sense.
But like the kind of person who would post, wait, sorry, any pictures of
Thanksgiving turkey to me feels like just the exact same kind of person would be
like, Hey, I'm going to bring my beef jerky to your house.
Even though I know you're vegan and you explicitly told me, I wouldn't like not
to have that stuff in my house.
It's like the reverse behavior, but the same asshole-ishness both ways.
Yeah.
Um, God, I had like a thing about the entitlement.
Um, I'm sure I'll come up again.
My brain is doing.
No, you're good.
There was something that I remembered from a minute ago too.
I wanted to put out, which was the idea, you know, Huck Finn is reading
Huck Finn is uncomfortable.
I don't like reading the N word, you know?
And I mean, and I've never been, uh, in a population that was subjugated to it,
right?
So it's just like, it's, it's a, it's a gross reminder of, of bad parts of the
world and especially bad parts of history.
But to make, I guess, like, if you're going to move mountains or like reform
the education system to make no one ever uncomfortable again, you got to rule out
a lot of history, like actual history, maybe you can skip Huck Finn because
it's, it's fiction, but like, if you can never talk about slavery or the
Holocaust, never talk about slavery.
That's doing the app that that's going to have the opposite effect on future
generations was like, you're not teaching them about the mistakes we made in the
past and then they're going to repeat them.
Yeah.
I mean, you know, I don't know, I don't know if these people will become the
next Hitler, but like, but the point stands of just like, you know, is the
world too scary?
Is the history of the world too scary?
The history of the world is scary.
It sucked.
The world can be scary, but I guess, you know, and again, I'll put caveatting it,
but yes, some people have actual issues like, and disorders, whether or not this
hypersensitivity thing is called a disorder or not, it seems to fit the
definition of impacts my life, like on a day to day basis.
I think that's just basically what constitutes a disorder.
But the, I was just, there's like a diversion of that, but that definitely
like, I dated someone who had, who was a HSP and they didn't like having it.
We would watch movies and they'd have to like go leave the room and hyperventilate
if like they saw a scene where a character hits in the bed, happened to them
and then they would feel it happening to themselves.
Wait, how can you watch any movie if you can't watch something bad happening
to someone? That's the whole point of fiction.
They mostly watched like My Little Pony and Scooby Doo and like musicals.
They did like things that had like, I don't know, they just liked the fact
that they had this because they're like, I like drama and like murder mysteries
and stuff like I wish I could watch these.
It's just like they could never predict when something was going to actually trigger them.
I guess you're right.
My Little Pony didn't have very much in those terms.
I mean, there was still some conflict, but you always knew that they were going
to win through the power of friendship at the end.
I think, yeah, like I used to actually have to.
Like Avengers.
I used to have to.
That's a damn, Avengers is basically My Little Pony for adults.
Wait. My Little Pony is basically Avengers for children.
Sure. OK.
That works too.
That's the whole point.
That's what I love about all of these.
You know, it's a solo movie is fun, but it's like, no, really, it's the synergy
in working together and being able to do things as a group that you can't do alone.
All of that, it's the magic of friendship.
It's perfect.
I would love to see a parody where just the Avengers are all ponies.
But anyway, I'm sure there's 34 of it out there somewhere.
Rule 34 is porn specifically.
But I know I'm saying not only does it exist, but there's also a point of it.
A pony, a venture porn because he thought of it.
Gender swapped porn version of this pony parody.
OK. Yeah.
According to the most basic tenets of psychology, helping people with anxiety
disorders, avoid the things they fear is misguided is one of those pop out quotes
from this article and I did rather than just complaining about social justice.
Like last time, I want to, as Stephen suggested, talk about this from the lens of CBT.
Apparently, I'm the resident expert, which well, no, I have an expert on everything
brain. I'm serious.
I've got more brain questions for you that remind me.
So but those are do ask me brain questions.
I will big neurology nerd.
Perfect.
But yeah, so you were talking about exposure therapy.
I was talking about the body keeps the score, which was talking about somatic therapy.
Well, literally, like the title of this book, I really recommend this book to everybody.
It's awesome.
Is that like so so things traumatic experiences are actually stored in the body
a lot of the time.
He was the author whose name I don't remember was describing.
What was the name of this book?
The body keeps the score.
He was describing his work with traumatized patients.
And I think a possibly a like voluntary, you know, when you voluntarily institutionalize
yourself, they were at some kind of like clinic for people that were just like, yeah, no,
I need to, you know, go to a mental health clinic.
Things aren't good.
And the they couldn't figure out what therapy to do with them.
They were trying to do yoga and people would like start crying and run out of the room.
Like he had a bunch of he said, like, you know, female patients who had a sex molestation
rape based PTSD.
And so, like, in one case, it was something like, OK, and then, like, put your left knee
on the ground and this one like runs out of the room crying.
And this isn't I'm not remembering the details exactly, but it was like, oh, like later,
she's like, sorry, my abuser grabbed me by that knee and held me down with it.
Like and then raped me.
So like reminding myself that the my left knee exists by doing yoga triggered that.
And again, that's the whole like, you can't predict that there's no possible way to predict
what any possible person might be triggered by because it can be totally random shit like
that. It's connected to a traumatic experience.
But what this person developed was a somatic therapy system where you're working with the
body first in order to just reacclimate yourself to the feeling of being in your body and having
those emotions basically sort of an exposure therapy there on with, you know, in a safe
setting with guidance. Same thing with like Stephen was talking about with exposure therapy.
If you have arachnophobia, you don't just want to go like, I'm going to challenge my
arachnophobia and going to go to the zoo and going to look at all the tarantulas.
And now that's that makes a recipe for freaking yourself the fuck out.
Like, yeah, you want to do it in steps.
You want a professional guide to do this sort of thing.
Yeah, I mean, I don't know.
Yeah, that's the thing is I wouldn't be prepared to guess on like the appropriate treatments for
most phobias, right?
Yeah, but it's an important ingredient that you like actually try to treat it, especially if
it's actually ruining your life.
Yeah, no, you're the person who's that freaked out by thinking of Thanksgiving dinner.
Like, you're and you're actually suffering.
That's the thing. If you're if you're scare quotes suffering on Facebook for upvotes or
whatever. Yeah, that's that's one thing.
But if you're actually suffering, you should do something about this.
Do you guys remember when we were fighting to basically what I remember was fighting
to get gay people the right to marry and be treated as equals?
I think that was for him largely.
OK, I mean, they were still even older.
People could probably remember the fight for getting a non whites in America.
Yeah, in a racial marriage.
Yeah, it did not be that wasn't that long ago.
Was it? It was like there's people right now that still remember it.
Yeah. But I was like, what?
At what point did the social justice wheels fall off the wagon where we went from trying
to actually make life better for minorities and make the world more equal to where it
is now where it's just trying to to beat people up and basically perpetuate race?
I think it was a runaway process, you know, like, and I'm not and I haven't dug into
the history of this.
But like it everything that you see now can be seen as a as a reasonable evolution
of things that were being advocated for 20 years ago.
I see it as something getting coopted by signaling and politics.
That too. I don't think it's reasonable at all.
But I do think it was coopted by people who want power or who are racist.
Yeah, I mean, I mean, I mean, sorry, I was going to say like an incremental
understandable step by step evolution in that sense reasonable, not a rational evolution.
Right. Yeah. I mean, there's a lot of people that I knew and that I were friends with
that I'm sadly not friends with anymore.
And a lot of it was about them just getting more and more sucked into this.
And at some point being like, huh, it turns out you read Scott Alexander
and you're a Nazi, so I'm not sure I want to hang out with you anymore.
I'm like, well, I do read Scott Alexander.
I don't apologize for that because he's not a Nazi and neither am I.
And Scott Alexander is a sweetheart.
I'm so upset when people try to say that he's problematic.
Yeah. And like the.
Well, I haven't met him personally.
For all these readings, he's a sweetheart.
Yeah, you have. And even just but even just reading his blog.
Right. The only people who could say that are people who don't read him.
And oh, my God, I mean, that's that's the distressing part.
Like at some point I turned around and I was like, wait a minute,
this has gone off the rails and it's bullshit.
And a lot of people haven't got to that point.
And I don't know when they will.
Like, how do you how can people get to that point where they realize this is not
raising the sanity?
And I mean, I know it's happening more now.
And I've been very hard to hear that lately in college campuses,
there's been a bit of a, I don't know if I would call it a backlash exactly,
but people saying like, this is fucking crazy.
And oh, yeah. Yeah.
So the new teens are going to save us all.
Thank God.
The new teens are like so out of fucks to give.
I think that they don't even have the energy to be
social justice warriors of any flavor.
Yeah.
I wanted to point out last time we were talking about this,
but then like it's my own fault that I forgot because tied up
anything about social justice.
I almost did it again because you were talking about losing friends,
digital justice, and I wanted to bring up this ridiculous story about that.
But I'm not going to.
Instead, I'm going to say that heterodaxacademy.org is the thing that exists.
And it is, well, it says on site, a group of 5,000 plus professors,
administrators, K through 12 educators, staff and students who believe
diverse viewpoints and opening query are critical to research and learning.
And this was actually somebody in the rationalist community
and in my Philly group told us about this and we talked about it for a while.
But this was like a backlash against the what is it, like liberal bias that they have.
Well, the books, but like it was not even really about that.
It was like professors losing their jobs for having like conservative
political opinions that didn't even come up really.
Or I mean, it was it was, I think, just as much about professors
leaving losing their jobs for having liberal opinions that weren't liberal enough.
That too.
Yeah, this was an attempt to, like, I don't know, form sort of a community movement.
Yeah, but the heterodaxacademy is mostly like older people, people who are ready,
you know, in their 20s, 30s, whereas I was thinking there are students who are.
Yeah, OK, I was I was more I'm always more happy to see things
where there's actual people in their teens organizing and stating these opinions
because because that makes it feel like it's more that the future is not lost.
When it's younger people pushing for it rather than like old wise people,
that it takes 60 years to get this wisdom, but wouldn't that I'm long to share it?
Yeah. So I'm sorry, we're cutting you off.
I'm just reading a part of their site again.
They're saying the problem, our commitment to heterodoxy within the academy.
So yeah, it is like this is focusing primarily on college and its college
professors, but they did say that they've got K through 12, they've got students.
Has taken shape as a response to the rise of orthodoxy within scholarly culture.
When people fear shame, ostracism or any form of social or professional retaliation
for questioning or challenging a commonly held idea,
we believe the best way to prevent orthodoxy from taking root within the academy
is by fostering three key principles, open inquiry, viewpoint, diversity
and constructive disagreement.
That's the my is that my primary.
I think that might be my primary objection to the social justice
or whatever they were talking about, the coddling of the American mind, I guess.
Is that, yeah, you don't you don't solve problems by just censoring them.
Like you have to have the constructive disagreement there is like, you know,
you know what really broke me?
I had been a supporter of the ACLU for many, many years because they're
the Rachel DeLisle thing. I don't.
Wait, was that the ACLU?
Anyway, sorry, go on.
I mean, like I the word literally slipped through my ears because I was just thinking.
Yeah, the the ACLU thing where they were always the people
like don't censor anyone ideas are best when they're refined
and people can talk about them and there's no such thing as a thought crime.
And this is what we're all about and we'll fight for everybody's rights.
And, you know, one of their lead lawyers has gone on record
saying that there was a book that they want banned and burned
that no one should ever be allowed to read.
And I'm like, you've literally become the book burners.
Like, how did this happen?
And they still send me mail every now and then me like, hey,
why aren't you supporting us anymore?
Did they break the angry letter back lead lawyer?
Just one person or is this a company or an organization endorsed position?
Well, it's one of their lead lawyers speaking publicly for the company
for the ACLU and they didn't ever disavow it or any.
Yeah, I mean, because I, you know, if whatever,
the a C level executive of Apple or something came out as a race,
it doesn't mean Apple's racist means that guy is right. Right.
Oh, that's another thing, though, like is like now sort of standard
to call for that person to be fired or pun some way. Yeah.
Yeah. And there's there's another weird wrinkle with that, too.
Well, I guess one thing I was going to mention about maybe this turning around,
like there are cases of professors and other university staff
getting students expelled or suspended for the exact kind of same weird bullshit
that they're trying to get teachers fired over.
Like some of them are in this.
Some of them are in this article.
Like one professor or dean or something,
they wanted a parking garage built on campus and students didn't like it.
So one student put like a Facebook collage with a joke about like,
look, it's going to be a memorial parking garage
because the guy said it was something about his legacy.
And so that the guy pretended to take it as I took that as a threat to my life.
And I felt scared.
And so the kid was was severely disciplined or expelled.
So like the thing is, this is like
it's becoming 1984 here.
This is a weapon that that you can't just swing one way, right?
And it's it's going to be if you're if you're if you're enjoying the feeling
of like taking down the powerful by being one of the historically powerless,
like the powerful are going to stay powerful.
They're going to just take your tools, right?
And it's going to be easier for them to do it
because they've got a bigger platform if they want to stoop to that level,
which again, there was other cases like that in the same
in the Calling of the American Mind essay.
It's it's one was a picture of on Instagram
of one of the other co-workers daughter and her shirt said,
I'll take what I want through fire and blood or something from Game of Thrones.
And they deemed through some meeting that this person needed to have that fire.
Well, that clearly meant an AK-47.
And right.
So it's so it's it's that kind of madness.
Yeah. And so I mean, the quote is literally
one about using violence to get what you want.
But I it's clearly like if you put if you have it on a shirt,
it's like I like Game of Thrones.
Yeah, this is maybe metaphorically, I'll do this.
But I think it's not this person is proclaiming
that they're going to use violence to get what they want from the school.
It's a shirt showing that they like Game of Thrones.
Well, and if you want to just take it one level higher,
it could just be a sigil of how stark or just the Game of Thrones logo.
And they could say that shows about getting what you want through violence.
I think that means people did a rape in that show.
That means that you're endorsing rape by wearing that shirt.
Right. So I mean, you know, the buck's got to stop somewhere.
It will eventually like, and I think it's slowing down.
The Google trends for all these key terms are going down,
at least on some of the the metrics.
Well, there was that Scott Alexander post,
and I feel like maybe we should have brought that one in conversation
where he was talking about the feminist movement,
the new feminists becoming a big thing.
There's a big spike and then now things have shifted to race.
So like nobody's talking about Elevator Gate or whatever anymore.
Or like they did actually have graphs there showing the like rise
in popularity of certain terms and then those falling.
I don't know.
Maybe this is just a thing that's cyclical that happens.
And I hope not.
Like I do actually I want to sort of bring attention back to
Heterodox Academy and I wanted to talk more about CVT
rather than just complain about this and catastrophize about it.
Yeah, which well, that would have been a good segue to CVT.
Let's talk about catastrophize catastrophizing then.
Yeah, if I could have made a joke because CVT is I was talking
about the somatic therapy, exposure therapy.
Those are sort of tackling the issue on more of the visceral level.
And then CVT is honestly sort of using rationality to overcome
your brain's glitches.
I love it.
It's I've gotten so much bang for my buck out of it.
And the cool thing is that you could find, I think, the CVT workbook
for free or like really cheap online and just like apparently
again, Scott Alexander did some rants on poll or found some research
showing that just reading the book and doing CVT yourself is about
as effective on average as like doing professional CVT with a psychologist.
So like if you don't have insurance or, you know, there's not a CVT practitioner.
Apparently, this is just a completely legit option.
That's all I did at a combination.
I've done a little bit of CVT with some therapists, but mostly
it was just reading the exercises and then practicing them.
Probably depending on where you're at, you might need like a professional
to help get you started because it's one thing to just read the book
and be able to say the words, but then another to internalize it and do the lesson.
Yeah.
So if someone's talking, if you're in a conversation with somebody
and I'm going to call it your conversation and say, hold on, you're doing that thing.
You know, you're catastrophizing, you're spiraling on this or whatever.
And you're like, oh, yeah, shit, you're right, where you kind of maybe
it just helps to have someone groove those into your brain, help groove those into your brain, right?
Yeah, this is actually like it gives you CVT gives you a toolkit of basically
like I liked it because it looked a lot like or basically is cognitive biases
that you can identify yourself doing.
You basically carry around this list of cognitive distortion.
You know, we didn't, I think, talk directly on great untruth number two.
Always trust your feelings.
Yeah, let's talk about that.
What do they say about trusting your feelings?
This gets complicated because you never want to say to somebody your feelings are wrong.
But if you're using emotion in place of facts to inform your decision making,
you're just doing things incorrectly.
And that's not like, that's not just my opinion, man.
That's, that's dialectical behavioral therapy.
Feelings aren't facts.
And it's important to keep that in mind.
And so like this is like one of those things where if the intent of somebody's words was
and there's like that popular case, this probably came up with the last episode
where this Dean was at least forced to step down or got under heavy fire.
I always forget who got fired.
Some kind of punishment.
Yeah, she got in some serious punishment.
Somebody at the school wrote her letter.
It was one of those rich kid schools where like 2% of the population who goes there
came from poor backgrounds.
So like nobody's struggling when they go to Yale, except for 2% of people.
But it's, it was like, you know, I don't feel welcome here.
This school didn't really like wasn't made for me.
It was a minority student.
And I don't feel like I fit the typical mold of the student here.
And the Dean wrote back was like, you know, that I really appreciate you reaching out.
It's important to me and to the entire college name community that we make everybody feel included.
I'd love to sit down and talk with you about, you know, what you feel it is that we can help
like make the help better fit the student mold to encompass people or something.
And I miss phrasing it a bit because I'm drawing it from memory, but it's essentially
that message.
But if you squint and look at it through as uncharitable a lens as possible and like
this person did do that and then share on Facebook and say, well, I guess I don't fit
the mold of my college or something.
And then I invite your feedback and suit that out to your, your, your Facebook friends or
something.
Did they not know that they weren't white?
What?
The student?
No, the student was not white.
Yeah.
Did the student not know that they're not white?
They knew they weren't.
And they knew that they were going to Yale.
Well, they wanted to go there and express that opinion, I guess.
Okay.
Yeah.
I mean, because I mean, I don't see how you can possibly complain about not being white
in Yale when you knew you weren't white in Yale.
It's like you get there and you're like, wait a minute, no, it's in a mirror before.
I think they might have had like, I don't know, it sounded like the Dean's response was
what might help this kind of thing instead of caving into, because like, you know, it's
the people fear, um, witch hunts, they fear mobs, they fear getting fired and shamed publicly.
But if more people sort of had the courage, I guess, to be like, Hey, uh, it sounds like
you're upset.
And I'd like to hear more about like why you're upset.
And then maybe we can get together like a think tank and think of ways that we can try
to, you know, make everybody here feel better.
Like, let's discuss this and literally don't understand because the Dean was like basically
saying, you're not comfortable.
I hear that.
I would like to work with you to make you feel more accepted and more comfortable.
And the person's like, he just admitted, I don't fit the traditional mold.
I'm like, did you want him to lie?
And say, did, oh, did you want the Dean?
Is that her?
Yeah.
I only bring that up because she's also in a minority group.
Okay.
Did you want her to lie and say, Oh, I'm sorry.
I couldn't tell that you don't fit the mold because you looked very white to me.
Like what?
It's impossible to know what kind of response would have been accepted if this one wasn't
it, because it sounds like they didn't want like to, they didn't want to solve the problem.
Yeah.
They wanted to stir shit.
Yeah.
And I think that's what really annoys basically everyone who isn't someone who's trying to
just be this kind of person.
It's the fact that they are trying to do something about it and you don't actually want help.
You're not asking in good faith.
You're just trying to be an asshole and it's unfortunate because a cooperative Dean
who wanted to make the campus a better place was, you know, pushed out because he wanted
to make a shitstorm out of it's not, it's not clear why.
Oh, so wait, I think I forgot the, in the beginning of that sentence, you had started
it with or that story, this Dean had been punished after this, right?
Yeah.
Absolutely.
So the initial complaint wasn't about a person.
It was just like, I don't feel comfortable here.
Yeah.
And it was like, let me, you know, me, the Dean of the school who's busy, I would love
to meet with you.
Let's make the school a better place with your input.
And yeah, I mean, so then that was the person who ended up getting called out and tried
to either successfully or unsuccessfully cancel or something.
Yeah.
I mean, cancelling, yeah, the third of canceling is the thing that makes people not respond
in this way and just like cave in or try to cover their asses.
I think that the Dean's response is what like people should commit to doing if they're in
positions of authority or whatever, or like, I don't know, say I'm running a Facebook group
and somebody's like, yeah, people keep, I don't know, it's a Facebook group about cooking
and then somebody gets all upset because people keep posting pictures of meat and they're
vegan and they need to put trigger warnings on those and maybe ban those people.
And like, I feel like
Go join a vegan group.
Yeah.
As like the Facebook like community manager, whatever they call that thing, the mod, I
don't know, could be like, hey, like, you know, private messages them, I see that you're
upset.
Can we talk about this?
And then just keep responding that way.
If there was like some way that we could actually get coordination around, this is the way to
respond to this.
And just people only have the power to bully you if they know that like, you're going to
cave into their demands or that like, you know, that they're not going to experience
repercussions.
But like, honestly, like, if you're going to come at me with a complaint, I'm going to
say something like, okay, like, what, what are we going to do about this?
You know, it might just be like, wait, what, you want me to help you solve it?
I just wanted to complain and have all my problems taken away.
Well, like, yeah, I think just keep replying that way.
And the people, the person can freak out at you and like, you have to be like, wow, you
seem really upset.
And I'm sorry that, that like you're feeling bad.
I think your feelings are valid, but let's, but seriously, let's talk about how we can
fix this problem.
I mean, there's a couple and just keep doing it.
I think that the two main problems with that, because it sure is nice and that would work
on a one-to-one basis.
But on the one hand, this person, when you're, when you refuse to capitulate immediately,
they can just go grab 30 of their friends and start a tweet storm.
Yeah.
That's why I was talking about coordination problems, because like, you can't get everybody
to, there's no way I, like, you can get all college professors to make a pact that like,
we're not caving into this shit.
Right.
But even then too, just being the target of harassment is stressful and you want to leave
anyway.
And so like,
Who, who I really blame about this whole thing is Harvard.
Like some students are going to be shit heels.
No two ways about it.
But then they sacked the Dean instead of standing by her.
Yeah, that's coward.
That's absolutely coward.
Coward, true.
Whatever school this was, I forget.
It's an or Yale.
I think it's the post and if it's not an institution, this was yeah, but the other, the other problem
with just trying to engage this person one-to-one is that if they're not coming to you in good
faith, you'll just be burning six hours a day talking to somebody who just loves wasting
your time.
And it's weird because I've had conversations like that where I thought these were good
faith conversations only to like, realize after the fact like, Oh no, this was never
meant like as a, this was just meant as somebody rehearsing cash arguments that they'd heard
just to try and kick up shit and apparently calm engagement at serious consideration didn't
work.
So they went another route.
Yeah.
I mean, it's, it's, I don't see a good solution to like on the individual basis.
You know, I mean, frankly, if it's the Facebook, it would be a case by case thing, right?
If it's a Facebook group, you just say, yeah, the vegan Facebook or the vegan recipe group
is in the sidebar, like over there.
You can go make your own vegan only group.
But this is my Facebook group.
Yeah.
Like, you know, I'm not going to let one person tell me how to like, you know, as long as,
you know, the world is not your safe space.
As long as they don't complain to Facebook about you being a transphobic racist and managed
to get you kicked off Facebook and your group band.
Yeah.
I mean, it's, it's weird because that I, but just the idea of burning any more time than
just like directing them towards like the place of the internet that already exists for what
they're looking for.
I don't know, like, I think there's no easy solution to this.
This is a hard solution.
Like you, you do have to, I think, tank the sacrifice of be willing to talk to people.
And then like, eventually you can be like, hey, I've like tried to work with you and
you just keep being belligerent at me.
So I'm not going to have this conversation anymore.
Come back when you want to do a productive discussion.
Oh, look, Jace just said that I can't have a productive discussion.
I guess it's because I'm black.
Like, I mean, there's no way that this can't be spun into a fight against you, right?
So as soon as they get bored of wasting your time or you've shown them that they're not
going to waste your time and that you're not going to waste your time with them anymore,
they'll just come out of a different way.
Literally the only thing you can do in response, though, I think is just do the right thing
each time.
And I like that.
That's why I try.
You can also document the hell out of it.
So if they try to get you fired or something, you can be like, this is completely unreasonable.
Like, look, look how hard I tried to work with this person and it seems pretty obvious.
I don't know.
Maybe I'm putting too much.
I'm just basic.
I'm basing this off of actually, like I was talking about CBT, but DBT, dialectical behavioral
therapy is a moddit, a moddit, a modification slash edit.
I tried to say both words at once and it came out as moddit, a modification of CBT specifically
for personality disorders and more specifically borderline.
That's why I know about it.
I have a partner of borderline, family members, et cetera.
And that's specifically around targeting thought distortions around emotions, which personality
disorders are triggered by specifically emotions.
And then borderline, very specifically, it's feelings of abandonment that comes from a
childhood PTSD thing.
And there's a genetic component, but it's the whole teaching yourself and internalizing
feelings aren't facts.
And then being able to sit there when you're experiencing extreme distress and go through
the tools and be like, let me just sit here and see if feels like I'm going to die if
I have to put up with this feeling.
But look, I've sat here and I've thought about how upsetting this was for five minutes and
I'm not dead.
You build resilience that way, like exposure therapy.
You learn tools for evaluating, is this a true thought or is this a feeling that's causing
me to think that, you know?
It's interesting that you say feelings aren't facts because, I mean, in a way they are,
we've had at the episode about emotions before where a lot of the feelings that people have
internalized and rely on are because of things they have learned in the environment and
their feelings can be useful, they can be adaptive, but they aren't facts.
Yeah.
Well, the trick, the facts about how you feel at the very least and how you feel is often
based on things that you know and you've experienced.
I guess the problem is that like any other thing in life, like your eyes sometimes lie
to you.
Sometimes your ears lie to you.
Sometimes your feelings lie to you too and it can be hard to figure out when that is
and you have to learn when that is and how to deal with it.
There's ways.
There's like, you know.
There's optical illusions that you can eventually understand and work around, audio illusions
of the same way and also, I guess, feelings illusions for lack of a better term where
it's like you're having a panic attack even though there shouldn't be any reason for a
panic attack and eventually, hopefully, I guess the point of the therapy is to try to
understand why, where the disconnect is between what the feeling is and what the reality is
and how to deal with that.
Both CBT and DBT are just, they, it's some tools that I'm going to do CBT because I have
actually pulled up the list of cognitive distortions.
So when you're having a lot of distress about a thing, you can pull out your list and go,
is this all or nothing thinking?
Is this over-generalization?
Is this a mental filter, like the opposite of an over-general?
This sounds like a list of what to do if you want to be a woke, outraged person.
Discounting the positive, jumping to conclusions, magnification, emotional reasoning, short
statements.
Seriously, literally like a playlist.
That's why this was so overposed.
Well, the thing is, these are the bad ways of thinking.
These are the cognitive distortions and you, like.
Yeah, that's what I'm saying.
This sounds like a playlist of what happens when people get into those.
That's exactly it.
Like, if somebody is like, okay, well, I feel like I've been personally attacked by
somebody posting Thanksgiving, like, that was the thought I was having earlier, where
there's a difference between being able to recognize this person is not trying to attack
me specifically, personally, by posting a picture of their Thanksgiving dinner.
There was no harm intended here.
I think it's reasonable for that person to go on Facebook and say, like, hey, I'm vegan
and if friends wouldn't mind, I think it'd be really cool if you could just put trigger
warning, there's pictures of meat, if you're going to post like meat or put it behind a
read more.
But like, you know, it's on me, obviously, to manage my own stuff, but I just think
that like, you know, I would appreciate it if people would do that.
Hey, thanks versus all caps.
I will unfriend you immediately and like docks you.
I think the hard part is the social proof thing, because lots of times if you aren't
sure you're seeing something, you turn to somebody like, are you seeing that over there?
Is it just me?
Or like, if you're getting a weird vibe off someone, you turn to someone else, you ask
them, like if someone goes absolutely nuts and everyone else in society is like, you
know, chill out, man, you're freaking out and authorities are like, we can work with
you, but you're having an overreaction, maybe, you know, try the CBT thing, whatever.
But like, if literally everyone around you is like, yeah, yeah, you are being unfairly
maligned by these racists and transphobes, and we got to do something about this.
And that is basically what Twitter does because Twitter enjoys that kind of thing.
It is the entertainment of the Twitter.
Yeah, that is, you know, the social proof is a lot of the promise.
Like you look and you're like, do you see a witch over there?
Is our neighbor a witch crafting spells to curse us?
And everyone is like, holy shit, yeah, she's a witch.
Then all of a sudden you think there's a witch.
Well, and if you don't say it's a witch, then they'll think you're a witch too.
I mean, and the other, the worst part of this is that there are people who are unfairly
maligned for these sorts of things under like actual aggressions, right?
And wait, what do you mean?
I mean, you know, if I just didn't press there.
There's a difference.
Like there are there are actual witches.
OK, yeah. Right.
The thing is, is when you have too many fake witches that you're
running at the stake or just, you know, lands for sacrifice, accusations.
There was a whole thing for a while of I mean, it was it wasn't continues to be
a huge problem that people don't believe rape victims, but then
woke people, promoted, always believe the accuser or the victim, I guess.
Listen to victims.
They say victims, but they mean accused.
I mean, either way, honestly, like it's kind of interesting
because you're sort of presupposing that, I don't know, accuser sounds like.
I mean, they say always believe the victim.
But if someone is leveling a false rape charge, then the victim is the person
who is having a false rape and like the thing is that like the statistics,
they based that on like a statistic show that is actually pretty like unusual.
It's kind of rare for somebody to falsely accuse someone of rape.
It doesn't mean it literally never happens.
Right. And like that we shouldn't investigate, though,
because that is just a recipe for disaster.
Oh, hey, guess what?
Like, you know, the feminists have made it so that now we can make false
rape accusations, whatever we want.
And people are obligated to believe it.
You know, like, well, this is this is one of those things where, like,
it's coming from a great place and it's coming from a is trying to
write a historical wrong of like this has been fucked up for way too long too far.
Well, like it ends up with hashtag kill all men.
Well, or it just takes you right back to to kill a mockingbird.
You know, if you don't like your black co-worker because you're
you're a white racist person, you say, oh, that person raped me
and they have to believe you.
And that person has to get fired.
You're like, great, I purged my my white my workspace.
And now it's nice and white again.
Like that is the kind of of weapon you're handing out.
And it's this is like mutually assured destruction at this point.
Well, it's not not all that mutual.
Yeah, I think the way Steven just described it, it's like, you know,
if somebody is a bad actor, they can accuse somebody of being anti-Semitic
and transphobic and then like if nobody's going to investigate or like that
they raped me or said, you know, so like this is this is just madness.
We obviously don't want this to continue to be a thing.
Did I ever tell you about the P.Z.
Meyers thing? Oh, I'm not sure which thing you're talking about.
So P.Z. Meyers wrote the Ferella Wrangula blog,
which was a great atheist blog way back in the day.
He was support was obsessed with that blog.
He was he was really fun to watch
because he would punch theists a lot verbally and it was great.
And I was there for the boxing.
But wait to get an example of his of his flavor of new atheism.
I remember he posted a video of him torturing or at least smashing a step
and a cracker, a cracker, a communion wafer.
But that was in protest because some kid had not
he like disrespected the wafer or something.
And they were trying to like,
were they trying to like arrest him or punish him in some way?
Where like because they were like, you literally desecrated the body
of Christ, which we believe is literally his body and like he needs to be punished.
And P.Z. Meyers was like in in protest.
Hey, look, I'm doing it too. Punish me too.
This is way back in the days of 2006, give or take.
Anyway, what was the.
Oh, the thing was he at one point,
he related this on his blog because it scared the fuck out of him.
A female student came into his office
during normal office hours and closed the door and basically threatened him
with a face with a rape accusation.
If he didn't do I was some kind of a great change, something right?
And he said, I got right there.
It's something like that.
He said, well, I'm right there and he left and immediately and went straight
to the principal and was like, this is happening.
She's in my office right now.
I don't know what to do. Please help.
And like, that's terrifying.
Yeah, it was absolutely terrifying, but they jumped on it.
They handled it very well.
And the thing is, like later on, he became one of the like
hard left, new feminism atheists.
And I remember like three years later, he was making a comment
and he was in the hashtag.
It was like, believe, believe Victor, believe victims or something.
And he says, there is literally no such thing as a false rape accusation.
This has this is so unheard of that it's basically drinking the Kool-Aid.
And I'm like, dude, it literally happened to you.
You blogged about it three years ago.
How do you not remember that?
No gods, no heroes, no idols in the comments or something.
I mean, I don't know, I didn't.
I bet he would have just deleted the post because couldn't live with the dissonance.
Yeah, I didn't.
I mean, you know, I don't want to get hung up on the false rape accusation thing.
I mean, no, no, because again, it is a very rare thing.
And it's it's a it's but it's taking it way too fucking far.
If you make the new norm, they don't exist.
Yeah. So therefore, like, I mean, you have to have some kind of
reasonableness in your like, like, OK, this is a problem.
Like rape happens a lot.
And rape culture is a thing.
And those are bad.
And like, how are we going to solve that?
Well, not by like cracking down so hard that you leave all these loopholes
for people to just exploit.
Like, I remember during the Mueller investigation of Trump's ties to Russia
that and like the the shenanigans with the election that I at least heard about,
but it never went anywhere.
Like people had tried to pay women to say that that Mueller assaulted them.
And I remember that like that.
Then again, this might literally be fake news.
I don't know where where it came from.
And I don't so I can't send by it.
Substant, I can't like, yeah, I should say, I remember hearing about that,
not like that it was true.
Well, the thing is, I think that it wasn't so quickly just went nowhere.
But that's the kind of thing that just would happen.
I mean, like, hey, this political guys give me trouble.
This this this pesky investigators going to going to turn up some dirt.
Here's a thousand dollars.
We go on TV and say he assaulted you.
You know, so like it's it's not that like I want to say we need to demand evidence.
And this like, again, this is a very important historical wrong that needs correction.
But I guess I said I don't want to get hung up on it and I am.
So, you know, it does kind of tie in well, very loosely, if I'm forcing it,
it ties into the third grade on truth that life is a battle between good people
and evil people. Yeah.
And this this is where, like, even the people I disagree with on this stuff,
like, again, I know that most of them have their heart in the right place.
You know, some people just get off on the fun and that's not the right place.
I don't think you live a good life that way.
But the like thing that came up when I was thinking of PZ was like,
he got he became radicalized.
He like, I was all on board when he came out as like, hey, I know that,
like, you know, we're the atheist movement.
But like, I also when they were making a plus, I don't know if you remember this,
they tried to do a thing where as sort of a response to people saying that,
like, new atheists are evil and have no morals.
It's like, what if we make atheism, like a movement that is not just about
we don't believe in God, but then also is like, and also we believe in science
and that people like human rights and like that we will, you know,
we believe in equal rights for all humans, regardless of their color or sex.
It sounded awesome. I was like, oh, man, I want that like bumper sticker.
I will join that group.
It's like the group that doesn't believe in God, but then also like does believe
in things like justice and equality and stuff.
But then like, yeah, you radicalize it.
And then it's just when you start this black and white thinking,
which is I think actually one of the cognitive distortions from CBT
or all or nothing thinking.
Yeah, I think a lot of people, I mean, so the the inclination
to have this fighting on the good side of history is not like something new.
Like when people were purging the Jews or or keeping the bloodlines pure
by not allowing interracial marriage, they were fighting for, you know,
the good side of history.
They thought that they were keeping civilization from falling apart,
keeping bad things from happening.
And it's the exact same impulse that motivates these people now.
And I mean, the reason I say that is because some of the things they do
are so obviously racist that it's just like, do you not see the parallels?
Apparently you don't.
And it's just it's that same motivation of I am doing the correct thing
and because all these people are evil and they must be evil.
Yes, we must use all your weapon.
Wasn't there a sequence about something like that where arguments are sold?
Yes.
But it just seems like there's always this inclination in human nature
to think in us versus them terms and to beat up on the them
because it is the right thing to do and it is what will save the human race,
which is us because the them aren't really quite human.
And and it's just I guess people need to find that outlet.
And if it's couched under anti racism or whatever the fuck terms,
they'll still they'll gravitate to something just to have the us first them
tribalism and and keep the cycle going.
They're done truth again.
The life is a battle between good people and evil.
OK, yeah, yeah, that's Italy ties in with like the, you know,
you you need to dehumanize your enemy, basically.
Like if if I guess that's like the the idea that like, OK, say you're
say here, trans guy and it's like actually like kind of scary being out in trends.
You know, there's a lot of like trans people commit suicide
and incredibly high rate for harassment.
They also get killed a lot and like if you have that like I fear for my life
or I don't know your block for it, there's real bad stuff out there
that like does exist.
But if sit there and like just, you know, let yourself let your fear take over.
You end up with this like all white people are evil and racist.
And we need to fight them.
And you lose all shades of gray when you have the black and white thinking.
And like, honestly, you know, stuff is complicated.
People are complicated.
The worst part in my opinion, even the shades of greats,
the fact that all all people are judged by outward characteristics
that can lump them into groups rather than treating people as individual.
The hashtag kill all men.
We're like, well, like you should know that I don't actually mean all men,
but like they would not really that so much.
I saw that discussion and it like.
I I mean, that's just got to be just like a loud badge that you get to wear
that says I'm in this group, right?
And I'm with you guys.
But the what you mentioned about interpersonal marriage reminded me
because I mean, that's the thing about, you know, facts or feelings or feelings
over facts and, you know, what matters is how it made me feel.
And I felt offended like people have been using offense to silence people
forever and to shut things down.
And like, I don't and we keep realizing over and over that that's not
the right way to do civil liberty or life.
You know, people were offended watching black and white people hold hands.
Right.
Like I don't get well, no, no, this time this time my offense
is this this is the right time to use offense as a as a weapon to stop somebody.
But like the people 50 years ago felt the same way about their bullshit
that none of us agree with anymore.
Performative learned helpless an excuse for attacking whoever you want.
In the worst case, yeah, like the the whole, you know,
what doesn't kill you will make you a mental like, I guess,
when I was talking about see that the thing of like in that way,
I think there's not like a simple solution to this.
This is actually sort of a species wide cognitive distortion
that we're all susceptible to the the whole arguments or soldiers
like greens versus it's core like rationality 101.
Yeah. And we can't just go fix, like go, you know, we can't yet
pull down the console for a brain like, well, I've got to fix this cognitive
distortion, but like, but there are ways to do it.
The thing is, though, that you can't force people to do CBT or DVT,
who are being controlled by these cognitive distortions.
You can cash, you know, you can calmly like have a conversation with them.
I wish there was some way that we could all like coordinate so that every
time this comes up, the response is validate the person's emotions.
Like, oh, I understand that you're feeling really upset and that like
you're scared for your life, maybe like talk like, you know, the kid that said,
like, I feel like I don't fit in at Harvard or wherever.
I feel like sort of bad if it's not Harvard.
I think we've said both Harvard and Yale.
We should call it Princeton next time.
OK, that's from New Jersey.
I'll make some of them happily.
No, actually, Princeton's cool.
So the Columbia student who had this thing.
Yeah, this student of color, they specified saying like, I don't fit in
and you need to do something about it.
And it wasn't even that you need to do something about it.
I think it was just directing anger at them.
And I don't even think that the initial letter contained that much anger in it.
It was just like an expression of how they're feeling.
It seems super. Maybe this is a bad example for what I'm trying to describe.
But I think it's a good example of like the kind of way that this just went
weird because it seemed like, hey, you know, I'm feeling this way.
And I don't even know who the dean was of the college I went to.
Do you do like state universities have deans?
Probably. Yeah.
But like, I would never think to like to write my dean.
I might write an instructor or my, you know, or the campus therapist or something.
Or the entitlement.
I mean, that could be part of that.
But the fact that they were like, you know what,
I'm going to escalate this to the dean because I'm feeling this way.
And then the dean's like, you know what, I'm going to take time and let's
engage with you and talk about it.
It seemed like it could have gone so right.
You know, I think the fact that it didn't go right that one time
doesn't mean that we got to stop trying.
No, but part of what you're saying about like, there's no other way to do it.
No, there is there's one way that I think help.
And I don't know.
I'm curious when you guys just feedback on this because like, you know,
we you can't solve racism, right?
But what you can do is you can institutionalize ways that make it
really hard to be racist or at least to give power to racists.
So like, for example, you make it illegal to legislate, you legislate
that it's now unlawful to not let someone wrench from you because they're black, right?
So it's you can you can legislate good behavior in like the highly visible ways.
You can't legislate that somebody not shoot a dirty look at black people
if they're racist, right?
You can't make this person not feel like they fit.
Oh, yeah, like you can't like hypnotize them or something.
And then be like, wow, now I feel like I fit in great or make everybody
else change their behavior to accommodate this like there's things you can do.
Sure.
I definitely think that we should do the things that we can do, but you can't
make a bunch of laws about like, you know, basically like trying to prevent
microaggressions from happening because the problem is that one of the problems
people get outraged about something that they interpret as a personal attack
where most of the time if they had actually like, you know, had a CVT
workbook there and like they could sort of go like breathe for a bit.
Do they like distress tolerance skills and then be like, OK, is it more likely
that this person who I don't know, yell that thing in the hallway
because they wanted to traumatize me or that like they're just an asshole
or maybe like I misunderstood.
Maybe they made a racist joke, but like it was sort of one of those in-joke
things where like gay people make fun of themselves or whatever.
Like, like, man, you're so gay, dude.
And like a person I know uses the word gay pejoratively as gay.
And he's I mentioned that to him and he's like, yeah, I own that.
I'm like, all right, good to you, bro.
You, speaking of microaggressions, you had some good things to say about them.
Well, I wouldn't phrase it that way.
I was going to defend my microaggressions as a legitimate concern.
OK, I wouldn't say I have good things to say about them.
I guess I phrased that poorly.
They are real and they can be really upsetting for people to have to
tolerate this from experience. Exactly.
And so that you can't legislate it away.
Well, because they're micro.
It's just like, you know.
So, well, I mean, to clear up what I meant by legislating is
like you could pass you could pass at least in if it's not a law,
you can pass a a university initiative that like we will never fire
an employee based on a mob from the internet.
Like not like so this isn't something that you you push through the state
legislature, you just say as a as an organization, we will never do this.
I don't. And we might open an investigation.
OK, we'll look into stuff, but we will never just like, oh,
shit, the kids are mad at us and fire somebody.
Like that's something that's just one idea.
But I mean, what I'm thinking about though is a microaggression
that I experience a lot is just being misgendered by like cashiers
where like I hand them my idea, I'm buying alcohol.
It says male, I'm presenting male.
And then they'll be like, oh, sweetie, like that's going to be this much.
Like have a great day.
And like, you know, do you think they check your license for the sex on it?
No, they don't.
They look at the, I don't know, people can't do math,
which I think is really funny, like they'll say I should always have the date
up in the store. No, they'll like grab the that or like, I've seen people
like grab the idea, look at it, have a brain fart and then like scan it.
So like because they have some kind of computer thing that says of age or not
of age, because like, oh, God, I can't see math.
I've been there when I've been cashier.
I mean, what as long as we're on that note, I don't mind
belaboring this for a minute.
If you're over 21, your idea is horizontal and like I see Colorado in Colorado.
Is that not a nationwide thing?
I think that's generally the just how all IDs are.
But in Colorado, if you're under 21, it's vertical.
Right. OK, that was super, not a thing in Jersey.
It might be now, but like it wasn't even a thing in Colorado back when I was under 21.
Well, in any case, the the person at the bar I go to isn't much older than me.
You know, so they if they see a horizontal idea, they know what that means.
The other thing is that you glance at the date and if there's a nine in it,
you're like, oh, here you go.
Like you don't have.
And it's 86, right?
But we're not we're not past a 19.
Well, yeah, if there's a 19.
Oh, I see. Yeah, sorry.
Yeah, my bad. 2019.
Well, then that person is, you know, if they've got an idea,
if they've got a state issued idea at two, you know, I think they've earned their booze.
A drink, yeah.
Congratulations, man.
I was wondering where the number crunch is coming in, because it's like, look,
I think I think on the the the sane end of the the the license checking thing is
that if the person sells the alcohol and if it's a fake,
if it's a if it's a convincing fake, if it's your older sibling who looks
just like you and you stole their ID, that person still is liable for,
well, a, they'll lose their job because the store is still going to get fined
like five thousand dollars.
So I can see why they spend so much time analyzing it.
But I do just notice that that's weird every time I go out.
What were you going to say about microaggressions, though?
Jace put it more succinctly than I ever could.
It was we were talking about, I'd said, like, you can't legislate away,
basically, somebody calling me sweetie.
And even that is just like.
But you were going to say, like, micro something about microaggressions
are generally, oh, look at these things.
But you were like, but they're actually kind of valid.
Oh, well, Jace, I think put it that way was that, like, there are people
who endure these annoying things that one once in a blue moon would be an annoyance.
But a couple of times a day is like an actual annoying strain.
You know, a not uncommon one is people wanting to touch black people's hair.
And like, if you're like most people don't want strangers fucking touching you,
like that almost, you know, I hate to fall into the group of people
who overuse the word aggression, but that's almost aggression.
Like granted, I'm not I'm not trying to hurt you, but it's like you're you're touching me.
Yeah, it becomes a microaggression when it's like like that.
You almost can't even say that people are acting in bad faith.
Like per se, like I still look real femme despite having been on testosterone
almost a year and it's like not somebody's fault if they they're not trying to offend me.
You know, the the person I don't know, some old lady like, oh, wow,
I can't believe how like amazing your coronars are and like touching some girls'
hairs because that was like, you know, maybe this is like an 80 something year old woman.
And the social norms were different in her time.
And she's trying to compliment this person or like, you know,
but like that comes off as just incredibly like humanizing and fantasizing.
Like I think the thing I dislike about microaggressions is just the word
because it implies, first of all, a level of aggression where lots of times
there's no actual person feels aggrieved.
But like, yeah, I see what you're saying.
But like what I'm saying to you is a lot of the time,
it's not somebody actually trying to piss you off.
It's an accident and on top of that, it has the word micro in it,
which makes it sound like this is such a small thing.
You literally need a microscope to see it.
So why are you getting so upset?
Because there's a thousand.
I know, I know, but it's a stupid word.
I like the term just disrespect by a thousand cuts.
When you point out to someone, look, you're kind of being disrespectful.
Like everyone can get that.
Why are you calling it a fucking stupid microaggression?
I don't know if I love the word either, but I can at least differentiate.
Why I would explain why disrespect wouldn't work in at least some cases.
Like if you're if you have an unusually pronounced name,
especially like if it's a cultural and it's it's when you have no idea
what it's like to have an unusually pronounced name.
I was I was I was trying to think of a way to bring the point home to you.
But, you know, so like, I don't know if, you know,
ran into a lot of anti Polish people in your upbringing, probably not.
Because I don't know if people can spot Polish people from across the street.
But not really.
Every now and then you're like dumb pollock joke.
It used to be more of a thing like the white like lower class white people
were treated poorly, but then we got people of color.
And then they're like, oh, that's a much easier target to identify and harass.
Like, yeah. But what were you saying about the name thing?
I was going to the name mispronunciation thing
because it ties well into my my my bimonthly recommendation
for everyone watching Key and Peel.
There's a couple of segments where Key and Michael Key's the substitute teacher
and he's mispronouncing everyone's name.
Oh, I remember that.
And, you know, Balak instead of Blake.
Yeah. It's like nobody's raising their hands
and because he's because they're saying the name wrong.
But then it starts freaking out.
Yeah. So like, that's the that's the inversion of the thing of like,
if you do have an unusual name and a professor mis mis mis
pronounces it on day one and you say, actually, no, sorry, it's Balak, not Blake.
You're like, oh, you got it, dude. Sorry, my dad.
But like that that so that that is.
But then every single person you talk to that day also.
So that that's where like it gets to be.
OK, so I don't know if I'm unusual, but I've never in my life been upset about that.
Even people who like meet me several times over the course of a week
will mispronounce my name because it's a tough fucking name.
I'm not upset about people gendering me if they do it by accident.
But I've there are some trans people who get very upset about it.
And sort of I think it's this misattribution of intent to harm someone.
Right. Well, and Charlie's points, I think the important part
and that's probably where this term came from, you know.
Well, no, actually it didn't.
I think it did come from like the little things
like asking where someone's from for this phenomenon.
And what they're trying to describe with microaggressions
is just the experience of constantly having this thing that upsets you.
Yeah, I think it's the impact, you know, whether or not it's intentional.
I think, you know, like the person at the diner calling you, you know,
from Texas, they do to everybody.
But like I've even heard that people wearing the wrong clothes is a microaggression.
Like they're just they happen to be in the same room as you and they're wearing
clothes that you think are, you know, those are my people's clothes.
You're not allowed to wear those.
That's a microaggression that I'm not affected by accident.
I would be kept doing it intentional, but like we can't tell the difference.
And then like it sort of doesn't matter if like you're Asian American
and you just like keep getting your name mispronounced and like people being like,
oh, well, you must be good at math because you're, you know, Japanese or something.
And then like, but like it's I think it's just the experience of being in that environment.
They're talking about trying to describe the thing of death by a thousand cuts
where it's like you can't tell whether somebody's trying to fuck with you or not.
It doesn't matter.
You still feel fucked with at the end of the day.
Well, hang on.
Could we mic?
We could other mic if you want to be on our.
I think microaggressions are is an apt term because sometimes people are purposefully
being subtle with their aggressions towards you.
It's a form of bullying.
And I think that as someone who's experiencing it, it's usually a pattern
that is causes anxiety and sometimes legitimate concern, because in the past,
these small, almost easy to almost easy to misinterpret things have led to accelerations.
I don't know.
I'm a good way to address aggressiveness, the actual aggressiveness.
Yeah, aggression.
But I think I look at microaggressions as a form of bullying.
It's unfortunate.
We can't like engage back and forth because Charlie's got our arms full
and it was leaning forward for a mic.
I'm not sure how much of our previous conversation will be salvageable.
But yeah, I think that that's valuable in like in context of certain kinds of things.
Right.
But like I said, if a professor mispronounces your name on the first day of class
or misgenders you because they're, you know, whatever, the administration
system didn't put it in right or whatever.
You know, something like that.
I don't look like I don't know.
Well, yeah.
So but like as long as it's so like, I guess I'm just saying that this is where
like in there, you know, one of the other tenants of this, this, this bad
pattern of thinking is that like intent doesn't matter.
It's all about impact and it's, you know, microaggressions, a unique case
where it's sort of both, you know, because if, if I didn't mean anything by it
because I mispronounced your name and I never do it again because I now know better.
It's, it's hard to, I, I mean, I'm, I'm using me as an example.
So like it's hard to blame me, but I would say that, wouldn't I?
But it's hard to blame somebody if they make a very, very reasonable
mistake and correct for it, right?
You know, but, but I think Charlie's talking about a different kind of class
of activity where it's actually racism you're just trying to get away with.
Right.
And, you know, so consistently doing it, you know, needling, being annoying.
I just, I want to make the point that it does.
Like, I mean, like, I think that this is a phenomenon to describe the experience
of having lots of micro, like lots of small interaction people throughout
that remind you that you are not like the majority, that you are going to be misunderstood,
that people don't like, you know, that even, that you're in danger.
I mean, so I hate to say it, but a lot of that is just the fact of being weird and an outsider.
Like, I mean, I don't, I'm assuming we've all had that experience, but I know
when I first came to America, I had a really strong accent.
Everybody knew I was Polish.
I kind of got picked on it up until God, I don't think my accent really
cleared away to where it wasn't noticeable until middle school.
But I mean, that's just what are they not going to notice that I have an accent?
Like, come on, I mean, it's just something that you, you deal with because you are different.
Yeah.
I mean, like, I don't want to go as far as saying like, suck it up, you baby, because
people do have those different levels of sensitivity and there are really toxic
environments where I grew up in the township of upper, upper township.
There was also a middle and lower town and that's where all the, you know,
upper middle class white people lived and my family was poor and we had to like perform
into the upper middle class because like fit in.
So like, I don't know, but like, I got made fun of for having like clothes that didn't fit
from the thrift store.
And that's actual bullying, right?
It can be or it can actually just be like, maybe it's never like, they're like,
why the hell don't you're gonna close your bad at buying clothes?
But like,
I guess if you're young enough, you might not know yet that that's rude.
But what you're describing at just like sounds like bullying to me.
Um, yeah, it is that that's again, it's both.
There's the component of people actively trying to make you feel like an outsider
and there's the people just being ignorant about stuff.
Like a lot of times I would get asked, you know, hey, where were you from?
And people couldn't pronounce my name sometimes for a dozen times after they met me.
And that's just like, that's the thing that happens with having a weird name.
That's the thing that happens with having an accent.
I never was I upset about it.
I'm like, yeah, you know, I come from Poland.
We came here when I was old.
And yeah, don't worry about the name.
It's really hard.
It's well, you even go by in-yosh and not in-yosh.
An ash would be the technically correct.
I fucked up even after having, oh, I haven't heard it pronounced in a couple of years.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, because, you know, that's what was easier for kindergarten kids to say.
If I'm trying to, you've even come like even after updating your name,
you still get it mispronounced.
But it's like, you know, people aren't being malicious about it.
Right.
Wait, what now?
You've moved it from the Polish pronunciation to like a more Americanized pronunciation.
Yes.
But people still struggle with that.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
I was just remarking on that.
Okay.
Yeah, I didn't have much to contribute there.
Okay.
Yeah, maybe let's, I don't know, start to wrap up or move on to a different subject.
I feel like we're not solving the problem of microaggressions.
I think by moving on, you guys are microaggressing against me.
Would you have anything more you'd like to add?
No, I don't.
Now I feel microaggressed.
I feel like you're fucking with me.
I was just trolling you actually.
I think that's a macroaggression.
Well, I prepared for a megaaggression after the show stops.
An aggression right to the face.
That's right.
Well, I think that, I mean-
Suggression won't stand, man.
You know, that reminds me.
Thank you.
Because I was going to end on a sort of duties to note.
So, you know, the last one about good people and evil people, like I,
the last thing I want to say on this is like even people I disagree with on this,
you know, everybody's got common ground.
You know, I guess, I don't know.
I mean, this is like the most dude thing that doesn't, you know,
this won't like change anyone's mind until you experience it.
But like, this is true of everybody who used to be a racist and isn't,
or everybody who used to not like this group of people and now is fine with them,
or even somebody who used to hate a co-worker and doesn't anymore.
Like, you find something, you find some common humanity and you're like,
oh, this person doesn't totally suck.
And it's, you know, so until you've had that experience,
you maybe can't generalize it.
But once you do, like you can be like, oh, yeah, I probably feel that way
about basically every human and I can just not de facto hate anybody.
So I advise the people do that.
I think the thing that I was trying to say earlier and then also with the microaggressions
is sort of that there's a complicated answer to what do we do about this,
which is like in some cases it is on sort of, it's the onus of the person who feels offended
and whatever, like to maybe, you know, evaluate, is this a reasonable response to this thing?
Is this a feeling or a fact?
Is this something that I should just let go and learn to tolerate?
Or is this something that like, you know, and sometimes it is that and then sometimes it is
actually like, you know, this, maybe the student, whatever Ivy League school,
who was like the one racial minority there was having an awful time.
And this was really stressful for them.
And if, you know, they had listened to the dean, like maybe they could have actually sat down
about it and the dean could have been like, what is making you feel ostracized in this way?
And they could, you know, come up with, well, here's what we can't do.
Here are some like interventions that we can try to implement and like, let's work together on this.
Yeah, so like, we're not going to solve this problem overnight.
And it's really complicated.
And that's like the whole, yeah, life is a, you know, battle between good and evil.
There's no such thing as good or evil.
Those are subjective, like words that we use to describe someone's behavior
that nobody can really come to agree with.
And like, nobody is in their head being, I am evil and I will say a racist thing
to make people feel bad in the name of evil.
I see you have the alt-right pipeline and the notes that you want to touch on that at all.
That was part of like the catastrophization.
And there was another word for it in the CBT checklist.
Can you describe the thing and then maybe I can find the word?
The idea that, oh, if you're exposed to this dangerous idea that you're vulnerable
and you'll slip right down the path of madness, you know,
you watch one flat earth video on YouTube and suddenly, you know,
I don't know if it's CBT thing per se, but it sounds like
But perceiving everything as that kind of threat is.
Yeah, actually pull up the list and figure out what cognitive distortion.
It's really weird too, because no one ever says, you know,
it's a leaving the alt-right pipeline, because any video, you know,
along those lines could be one leading out as well if you're started in.
I remember having a conversation with somebody who I had previously respected before I
like realized that this was their true and honest opinion and I couldn't quite
put my head around it.
But like the idea that being exposed to any of this content, you know,
so many people are so vulnerable that they'll, they'll, they'll just,
they'll fall right into this and you're right.
They never fall, they never fall the other way, which is weird.
Because it's the dark side of the force.
And if you even look at it, it takes over your brain.
Yeah.
But like humans don't actually have their own brains.
They're just controlled by the evil people that have the evil thoughts.
This was part of like a discussion of whether or not to like talk about,
this is part of a discussion about like whether like to moderate discussion of
Sam Harris on a blog, on a, on a server that wasn't about Sam Harris,
but it was in discussion of his app and it just happens to be,
huh?
What do you mean moderate?
Uh, whether or not, because he's a problematic person.
So is it all right to talk about his meditation app, which happens to be the best on the market?
And, and, you know, it was just a weird situation where somebody was like, well,
yeah, I mean, we should, we should be careful because, you know,
they might Google him and then find his stuff.
And like that, that's the, just the weirdest most.
Again, we didn't, we didn't talk about like the level of, of a paternalistic and like
desperate need of, of authority figures.
That was one thing that I really wanted to hammer home in.
I didn't get around to maybe I brought up last episode, but like always having to like,
you know, the people, you know, demanding that professors get fired,
they demand the school do something.
I demand my employer do this.
I demand the, the server moderators do that.
Like they always want to run to run to the teacher and say, they're, they call me a name.
It's a childish behavior.
And that's a, a lot of, you know, what's behind personality disorders or mental disorders where
like it does put you in this child like state of mind and cause your behaviors to become more
simplified, that black and white thinking, et cetera.
There were two things that like he just said, that's discounting the positive is a distortion
because, oh, because Sam Harris said some problematic things, we need to ban him forever
from everything.
And he's never, because he said some problematic things, he's never said anything good.
Catastrophization of, well, if this happens, then obviously that's going to happen.
That's going to lead to nuclear war.
And if you hear his voice, you will turn evil too.
Yeah.
You got to like, you know, check yourself with, you know, if you're doing CBT,
listen to what you're saying and then like, check, see, is this one of these distortions?
And then like, is it possible that I'm wrong?
And you can run through the checklist sometimes be like, no, I think I was right to be upset
about that.
But like a lot of the time it's like, just you're psyching yourself out and you teach
yourself to not do that by running through this list.
Writing down what like, you know, the, I love the catastrophization is my main problem.
I still struggle with it a lot and I've gotten a lot better.
But when I first started being on this podcast, I had to like, man, I like, I was, I was freaking
the fuck out all the time where I was like, Steven and Nenish really like me.
Do they really want me in the podcast?
They probably just do it because they invited me that one time that it would be awkward if
I kept going back and they're like, oh, we can't really be on it.
So like, did they even like me as a person?
Like, oh, they probably think I'm so, I say dumb things all the time.
I bet they're just like trying to be nice by not pointing out how stupid I, and it's just
like, wait, okay, hang on.
I have to like grab a notebook and be like, how likely is it that Steven and Nenish think
I'm an idiot?
Have they ever said that or like done anything to suggest that?
Okay, there's no evidence.
We actually really, really like you.
Like, and it's like, how likely is it that like, you know, that they don't really want
me on the podcast, but it'd be awkward to kick me off.
And I'm like, no evidence of being the case.
But like, you still have to sit there and then like, write out the catastrophization
and then look at it and laugh and go nice, nice job, brain.
Like, before you articulate it, you just have all the emotions.
So you just like, you're stuck in emotion land.
You're like, I feel so anxious about going on this podcast that I can't do it because I,
you know, because why?
Because of nothing, because of shit that I'm making up because I have these cognitive
distortions.
I think the running through authority figures is specifically because they can't actually
ban people on their own.
They have to, you know, get someone else to do it for them.
They want the validation, first of all, of their emotions and they want somebody else
to go solve the problem for them.
Like, they don't want to have to tolerate distress.
They get validation from their peers, from the rest of the Twitter mob saying, yeah,
you're right.
These people are awful.
Everything's the worst.
There's different.
And then it's the, the exercising of power to make someone powerful do something for you
that everybody knows is fucking stupid.
But they're going to do it because they're, they're worried about whatever the mob could
do, PR, whatever it is.
And that's, you know, that's a huge power boost.
I think that's what it is.
It's the ability to bully the people who you see as power figures.
That's the bad faith ones anyway, but there's also people who, I think, think of themselves
as this helpless nobody who is going to be crushed by this big, evil, dangerous force,
and they need to grab all their soldiers, you know, that you need to use everything
in their power to fight evil because you don't give in to evil.
You really think that the people who are running to the Dean or the server mod or
whoever are like, I'm so weak and helpless.
No, I think, I think some of them are.
I mean, like, I know people like this.
I mean, in that case, they're absolutely fucking delusional.
They are.
No, that is, that's what CBT is for.
It's these are cognitive distortions.
These are actually delusions that you have that don't match reality.
So what I'm hearing is all these people need some serious psychotherapy.
Indeed.
Or sometimes they're right though, too.
Like, again, the student at wherever could have been having a really terrible time.
Maybe there was just tons of people saying racist stuff around them all the time.
Maybe like all of their, I don't know, say it's Harvard again, because who cares,
like all their, you know, posters have white people in them.
If you go on their website to buy some Harvard merch, like all the models are white.
And like, just this sort of like e-racer, maybe like, yeah, like,
nobody has ever pronounced their name correctly or bothers to care and like laughs about it.
And like, it's just, it's a really toxic environment to be in.
And like, I think it was really cool of the Dean to kind of be like, hey, like, you know,
maybe you're exaggerating.
Maybe you're not.
Let's talk about it.
But then the part that made it seem like bad faith was that they took the invitation back from,
you know, the top person at the school.
Yeah, I don't want to like.
Yeah, I don't know the person.
Analyzing whether or not like who was in the wrong there.
I'm trying to just say that like, sometimes like,
I think people have legit reasons for trying to cancel people.
I'm sure you could find some, some old money racists at Princeton or Harvard or whatever
Ivy League school it is we're, we're dumping on right now.
But there's no way that there aren't also people who are very liberal and, and on that person's side
and acting as a support network.
I, it's not like we're in the fifties and this is Jackie Robinson trying to play racism,
sexism, like ableism, all these things do exist and hurt people.
And they're like, we shouldn't just say, suck it up.
That's too bad for you.
You know, but like also we shouldn't sack the Dean without like, you know,
trying to maybe do some like intermediary measures first.
Like, yeah, like, I mean, I don't know.
Maybe secretly the Dean released a public message of support, but you know,
behind the scenes was like, yeah, this student is the worst.
Everybody should gang up on them.
And Harvard never said that publicly because they don't want to look bad.
But I don't know.
I mean, I'm saying, yes, maybe the Dean deserved to get fired.
I, we can't know for sure.
We don't know many of the details, just what we've heard in this reporting and that could be.
This is such a bad example.
We should stop referring to it because like, okay, like, I don't know.
Can I come up with like some fictional thing or Steven sounds like you want to say something?
I think just like we can summarize it at the highest level, which is like,
often grievances can be valid and real and actually felt, but there can be a tempered
response that doesn't involve just immediately firing the person that they're worried about
or even like immediately trying to ruin their life.
Right.
You can, you can, you can move from, hey, you know, this, this person or, you know,
this person teaches a class about, there was a one person in the article, they went and like,
did a sit-in in their class because they was like a,
wait a sit-in as in just like, sat there to investigate whether or not this person was
doing this, no, it was a bunch of students doing a sit-in and then they read from like their list
of grievances and they didn't name their professor, but they were talking about him.
And it was like, I don't think it was English because it was a college course, but it was,
you know, some, some, there was college level English and, and it was correcting people's
spellings and stuff.
And that was, that was a microaggression that was racist because they actually know it's a lower
case eye on indigenous, for example.
And they're like, well, not to me and my truth.
And so like, so the appropriate response there is to like, talk it out, not to fire the teacher.
The teacher didn't get fired in this case, but whatever.
I have one last thing about the alt-right pipeline before I ever get, which was that.
Can I say one last thing about this before we go to that?
Yeah, okay.
I mean, just based on how liberal most universities are and how liberal other teaching staff is
and what I've seen of the, the, the way students react, my priors are to be that this probably
was not a big deal.
And maybe it was.
I mean, I admit that there's definitely racism and sexism.
Yeah, right.
I, there's definitely racism and sexism out there.
And we do need to fight against them still.
But, you know, I'm saying what you're saying sounds like believe victims, like you're saying,
because this is most often nonsense.
It's probably, we should just treat it like it's all nonsense.
No, I'm saying that my priors are along the lines of this is probably nonsense.
Yeah, but you're not advocating just dismiss all like planning about racism.
No, not any more than I'm complaining to fire anyone who's had a complaint against them,
because they're, you know, actually looking into things would be a good idea.
Yeah, but that's unfortunately, like if things are divided into black and white,
good people and evil people, you're not allowed to, you're not allowed to find nuance,
which is just like a problem that needs to be, needs to be addressed.
The last thing with the alt-right pipeline was that it kind of, I just was like,
all right, so now we're putting together a banned books list.
Like actually we are.
It might actually not we, but people are.
Well, the night said it might actually just be shorter to have an approved books list
because, because quite frankly, like, you know, can I recommend Neil deGrasse Tyson?
Well, he's been on Drogon show like four times.
So, you know, if I, if I YouTube Neil deGrasse Tyson and I want to watch him,
you know, chat, just shoot the shit with some moron for three hours and talk about aliens or
whatever, like, well, shit, I'm going to be watching the Drogon experience.
And like-
Wasn't he also on Sam Harris's podcast once?
Twice at least.
Twice, oh my God, he's basically a white supremacist.
Well, but I mean, that's the thing is that, that just like, and I think the person I was
talking to was like, well, I mean, you know, there's got to be edge cases and like, yeah,
but how can you possibly find them?
Like if you're concerned is literally just like the YouTube algorithm being so much
stronger than the average human mind that, that was their case that they would,
that they would watch videos and they recommend, they recommended, but it's like, you know,
it's basically the red scare again.
If anyone learns about communism, they will be brainwashed.
Right.
And so I just, I didn't understand it and I found the whole thing like extremely
patronizing to the average person.
Yeah, can we all agree that censorship is nerve-
Yes.
All right, all right.
Well, you know, there, anyone else have anything else to say?
Because I've got a great segue.
Oh, I want to hear your great segue.
All right.
Well, you know, we're talking about dividing everyone between good people and evil people.
Well, I don't like saying that they're people that are definitely good people,
like this episode's patron, Christian Gruber.
Thank you, Christian.
Do you now have special dispensation from the rationalist popes, even Zuber, to
sin one time because you're on the good side?
I don't think it comes with anything like that.
I think you just get to know that you're an awesome person.
Maybe you can be irrational one time and it'll be okay.
That sounds fair.
No one is allowed.
No one's ever allowed to be irrational.
We run a tight ship here, I guess.
Damn, all right.
I'm joking in case that wasn't obvious, like people are irrational all the goddamn time
and it's fine.
Yeah.
Anyway, you rock and are unequivocally a good person.
Yes.
Capital G, capital P.
That's right.
Cool.
Well, I think, did I mention we're recording this on a Friday night?
So, well, it was an afternoon, so now it's Friday night and I'm ready to get home.
I'm, yeah, we gotta go.
High five, everybody.
We'll see you in a couple of weeks and we'll talk about something like more fun and less
old manuals like clouds, which is an emoji that I am just so glad exists and I added to my company
Slack whenever I'm feeling curmudgeony and I, you know, these, it's nice to cathart these
once in a while, but it's also nice to have fun, so we'll do that next time.
Yeah.
Thanks for joining us.
Bye, everybody.
