Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy. I'm Inyash Brotsky. I'm Stephen Zuber, and today we have a guest, Matt Freeman.
Hello, Matt Freeman. We are here to talk about a, well, what I consider an interesting economics thing that's been going around in the rational sphere lately.
It started with when seeing like a state became a big thing.
Is seeing like a state a book? Is it a series of blog posts? Is it a manifesto?
So seeing like a state is a book. I guess you could call it a manifesto, possibly.
That says the state has an interest in making the people that it rules legible to the state.
And that this destroys a lot of value for the people that are being ruled in order to make that rule possible.
It gave a lot of examples, but one of the examples it gave was that a lot of people didn't have last names in medieval Europe.
And the states imposed that on people and started demanding that everyone in a village have a last name so that they knew who was living there and how many people were there that they could tax.
And you used the word legible.
Yeah, well, there was a distinct problem with the rulers knowing what they are ruling over.
That's a good way to put it.
If you're a mayor of a village, you know everyone in your village. They're within your monkey sphere, more or less. You know what's happening there.
But once it gets up higher beyond that, you're sending in strangers to come into the town and assess taxes.
And they may not speak the same language as the people. They may not use the same measurements as the people there.
And it is very hard for the people to assess taxes and recruit troops and just rule efficiently because they don't know what's there.
They don't know who's living there. They don't know how much money they make.
And the state tries to impose order in a way that the state can read those things and it makes life very difficult for people on the ground.
It gets confusing really fast.
Yes.
And it gets hard really fast.
I think my, so the example I actually like is not from seeing like a state itself.
It is from a blog post on Sam Z. That is the name of the site.
I forget the guy's name. I'll look it up and insert it here after we're done talking.
Lou Keep.
The example he gave was, let's say like a inner city slum somewhere, maybe Detroit or something, where the streets don't really have names anymore.
They've been torn off. No one keeps track of where they are.
People just sort of live and get by in a semi-anarchic state.
And the state comes in and says, you know what, we're going to start giving you guys healthcare.
We want to be able to get ambulances in here when there's an emergency.
And that is a problem for the people driving the ambulances if they get a call saying, hey, so and so is having a heart attack over at this address because there's no street signs anywhere.
The streets aren't named.
They have to stop, get out the ambulance, ask someone, where does Greg live?
And they're like, oh, Greg lives over there beyond John's house, take a right, go past what used to be the rec center until it flooded.
And John's house will be on the left up on the second floor.
This is an issue for the state.
So the state comes in and imposes rules, puts names on all the streets, has them categorized, puts numbers on all the houses.
And that at first doesn't seem too bad, but it's a confusing mess down there in the slums.
A lot of the streets are torn up.
They wind in weird ways.
So they go through whatever.
We're going to come in here, bulldoze a few things, make it a nice, even grid.
We know where everything is.
And while we're here, what is it with this chaos you people got?
We're going to make a residential district and a commercial district.
So you can go to where you need to do all your shopping at once if you have to during the day.
And at this point, they can now assess where all the businesses are.
So they can start asking the businesses to track how much they're making, start taxing those businesses.
On paper, this looks great because before what was a slum is now a nice ordered place with street names.
It's got a grid.
It's got the wealth accounted for.
So before where it was just like kind of a mess of people living, you know how much money is being made there.
The tracked wealth has increased from zero to some positive number.
But the people living there aren't quite so happy.
The old man who lived up on the second floor in a tenement and just walked down to his local store can't do that anymore because now he's in the residential district.
The stores in the commercial district.
He needs help to get to the commercial district.
His neighbors perhaps moved so that they could work where the store is now.
And he doesn't know the people that he works with anymore before since residential and commercial was all mixed up.
There would be teenagers loitering on street corners.
The shop owner could pay them a few bucks to help carry in some boxes or whatever they need.
Now that's gone.
All employment has to be official with forms and W-2s and all that.
So the teenagers can't get as much work.
The old man doesn't get as much help.
Social bonds are broken.
And after a while, people start getting angry and rioting and acting poorly.
So the police come in and suddenly these well ordered streets with the names and everything are really useful for the police state too.
So the police can help impose their order.
And for the people on the ground, everything is terrible because that local knowledge and seeing like a state, he used the term metis as a term, a type of local knowledge that allows people to work it within their surroundings in a very efficient way.
But in a way that is hard for the state to read.
Did any of that make sense?
Yeah, I mean, I'm glad you brought up that specific example because I wanted to.
I'm the self declared devil's advocate in this conversation actually.
And I read that example and I had some issues with it actually.
So I want to bring forth my issues and then you guys can tell me why I'm wrong.
Sure.
So I thought it was constructed slightly disingenuously.
Like for example, bringing out the details like it's an old man and the only line in the whole thing that even admits to any positive outcome from the whole, what would the verb form of legibility be?
Legibilization of the of the area is that maybe he lives a little bit longer because the ambulance can get to him.
And I would say, okay, let's go to his next door neighbor who has a baby and the baby suddenly comes down with a terrible fever.
First of all, maybe the fever wouldn't have happened if they hadn't been living in squalor, if they'd been living in a nice planned out modernized community.
And then because they live on the street that's across from the rec center that was flooded instead of living on first street, the ambulance can't get to them or whatever the scenario is.
You see where I'm going with this, their baby dies and they essentially lose far more value than they would have ever gained by living in their nice community that they had before.
So really the thrust of what I'm getting at in a more abstract way is that the scenario like the one you just pointed out definitely has a lot of truth.
And there are actually real places like Brasilia in real life that are apparently literally that thing happening where it was like a planned community that ended up becoming a planned city actually that ended up becoming a brutalist nightmare.
But in this scenario it's like, okay, in our modern western society we have extremely low infant and child mortality.
And I think people don't realize that they would trade a lot of the opportunity to live in a nice community for not having their children die, for example.
That's just one example.
So in other words, there's no admission of the completely legitimate trade-offs that are being made in order to have this system that's being discussed.
Does that make any sense?
It does make sense.
When that post was written, he actually stated near the end that he did his best to make as ambiguous a scenario as possible for exactly the reason that you brought up to point out both the good parts and the bad parts that happens when the state comes in and interferes.
I would say that there used to be a time before the state came in that the young mom could have maybe taken the baby to the local, not doctor per se, but the guy with medical knowledge and he could help her out possibly in some small way.
Whereas after the state comes in, he needs licensing, he needs to go through six years of school and four years of residency, and he cannot provide medicine to her anymore and she cannot afford the medicine that is available through the state.
Unless the state comes in and gives her money in the form of Medicaid or just straight cash payments, in which case now you've basically taken a community that used to be self-reliant, if imperfect, and made them now reliant on a cold, impersonal state apparatus.
And people in general are not happy in that sort of environment where every interaction is monetized as opposed to the guy you know who's good at medical stuff.
Well, can't you still go to that guy if like they don't want money anyway and they don't have any training, then you could like, across from the hospital as born in, there's still a sign in the yard that says, you know, Reiki, the person there offers Reiki treatments.
So that's all this witch doctor had to offer that sick baby anyway, they can still do that.
The doctor himself probably either was forced into retirement by licensing or went and got all that education and now can't afford to pay his student bills if he isn't charging a lot of money.
I guess I wasn't sure what you were getting at when you said possibly trained doctor.
Yeah, I was picturing some knowledge who worked under another guy with medical knowledge as a kid, not someone with a degree, you know.
I was picturing some charlatan. Okay, so I see where confusion came from.
I feel like there's an empirical fact that the more legible the society, the lower the infant mortality, like that's an empirical claim that I'm making.
And I agree.
I may be wrong about it.
No, because the medicine would be objectively worse if she went to that guy rather than going to the high price doctor.
But quality of life in general is not, it's not often what people want because social ties seem to be a very important thing.
Okay, crap, I don't want to take all this podcast talking personally, but can I go back to a previous podcast when I was accused of wanting to damn the entire human race so I can be a hero?
Yes, yes.
Okay, so I was accused and I will say with some merit of saying that the entire human race should die if humans can't, you know, get it together and be heroic because I want to be able to contribute something.
And that got me thinking a whole lot.
And afterwards I went back and talked to Shelly about this.
I think a large part of the problem, not necessarily a problem, I think humans have a psychology where we generally need to be needed by others.
Like we want to be valuable in some way.
The way I was always taught to do that was like reading The Last Psychiatrist or talking to my parents.
Because they were also, this opinion was that, look, you want people to care about you, give them a reason to care.
Go out, do something, build a house, write a novel, do some good in the world, become president, you know.
No one will care about you just because you're there, do something of value, and then they will care.
And that's all well and good.
But as more and more things get taken by the machines, you no longer are the guy who's the best at hunting the meat.
Because that is something I was taken away.
And then you're no longer the guy who's best at laying bricks because that was taken away.
And then you're no longer the guy who's best at doing accounting because that was taken away.
And as more and more things get taken by machines, there's no longer a reason to be valued in that way.
I think I've come to the inclusion that I shouldn't put myself worth, shouldn't tie that to economic output anymore.
Like I can be valued for other reasons.
But I think if the state comes in and breaks all of people's social ties so that they can't be valuable to each other in any way except through economic transactions,
that brings us back to the whole feeling of meaninglessness where what we do doesn't matter anymore.
When I was renovating a bathroom, my dad came over and helped me with that because he does that for a living.
And afterwards I offered to pay him money because at the time I had recently read Rand and I was very much into all value should be exchanged.
And he laughed at this very uncomfortable laugh and was like, are you fucking kidding me?
You're my son. No, we just do this for each other.
And it took me a while to internalize that, but it seems that like once contributions are reduced to I give you this amount of money for what you do.
And then if you want something done, you give someone else X amount of money, it feels cold and sterile and people aren't happy with that anymore.
And I think the imposing of legibility turns all interactions with other humans into that because the government wants to know how much economic value is in any particular thing
for their own measurements, you know, partly so they can say this is our GDP and also partially so they can tax it.
But I think that's a problem. There used to be a time where God and where a guy went to work, right?
And his wife stayed home and took care of everything. The wife's work was never valued in number terms.
And every now and then you see articles saying, hey, if you had to replace your wife by paying for things, here's how much the housekeeper would cost and here's how much the childcare would cost and here's how much the cook would cost, etc.
But we seem to be getting to the point where nowadays both parents work and they do pay for childcare and cooking and cleaning and that doesn't feel like a better thing necessarily.
And I don't want to go back to the 50s because it's better when everyone can work and do their pursue their life goals in their own way.
But on the other hand, it also it also feels like so much has been monetized and you have to now have both parents working.
Unless one person is really rich. And I'm going to stop talking now because that's been too long.
No, you're fine. I wanted to get on just a couple of quick things.
One, I feel like your outlook that your updated outlook that you no longer need to like keep in mind economic value.
By the way, if you hear construction noises in the background, it's happening outside. Sorry.
Yeah, sorry about that.
I feel like your perspective that you no longer need to focus on the economic output of your being a person as like how you quantify yourself.
I feel like that's healthier not to do it that way because you're right. Stuff's going away.
The other thing I was going to say is that we haven't fully moved into the like the high modernity, which might be the like the verb for or high modernization,
which won't be the verb for legibilityization in that your dad is still able to come over to help build the bathroom, right?
Like those types of transactions still exist.
So maybe we're at the sweet spot where you can pay for goods and services if you want them.
You don't, you know, and it is regulated in such a way that or maybe it is regulated by the state on some level and by like competition on another level to where there's, you know,
you're not completely fucked if you need a new bathroom.
And you're like, well, the only person within 100 miles who does it, you know, charges this insane amount because they're the only person within 100 miles.
So I can't get a new bathroom.
So the regulation and the amount of, I guess, infrastructure there maybe is in one way good.
And it's not like you can't do it on a I doing this because I like you basis as well, right?
Yeah, my my thought on that is that I don't disagree at all that that value is being destroyed through this process of legibility.
It's more that I feel like as creatures, we are extremely driven by loss aversion.
And what tends to happen is without necessarily explicitly making this contract, we as a society and even as a planetary society have been trending toward increasingly making contracts that sacrifice,
call it freedom, call it the way that you would prefer to live in exchange for safety and security.
So you have you have those those gridded streets.
That means the ambulance can get to your house.
That means the cops can get to your house or can get to can get to wherever you are if you're having a problem.
It also means that like this is the thing I was thinking when you said Detroit, like with the whole street names not existing.
Like it means the pizza delivery guy can get to your house too, right?
It's not just for like state imposed services like the police.
It's also for like things you want like Uber or food, right?
Yeah.
Or friends visiting.
Yeah.
So like we again, loss aversion, we're much more terrified of being injured or losing even just losing money.
We've structured our whole society where it's very hard to have money stolen from you, actually.
And that's not a physical thing we've done so much as a social and technological thing.
And the cost of this has, yeah, so I'm not even thinking the position that we haven't lost anything.
We haven't.
We've actually lost some of our humanity, I think.
But the things we've gained are actually not something that I just want to turn my nose at because I like safety and security.
And yeah, I definitely, you know, I think everyone can identify with that alienation of living in your isolated house or whatever.
And just the alienation of modern society.
You know, it's a, I think that's a common topic in the rational sphere these days, actually.
But as the devil's advocate, I have to say it's better than being shanked by a bandit on the highway.
Yes.
Yeah.
I feel like Hobbes' Leviathan comes into play here.
The state of nature that before state imposition, life was nasty, brutish and short, right?
Like you said, any highwayman could come by with a knife and take all your stuff.
And unless you're physically stronger, they just win.
You know, you could have a recourse, but the recourse is like this mob who doesn't work for free.
And, or I guess you could say like, I don't know, I'm not sure historically what it actually was.
I'm thinking like fantasy games, like the fighter's guild, like, hey, I'm being harangued.
Can I hire you guys to come escort me to this place?
I'm actually in this great boat where you're apparently taking, I'm not sure what side of you're taking one.
If you're just laying out the, seeing like a state position and you're taking the devil's advocate.
I'm really kind of in the middle.
I also am just in this weird position where I'm like, eh, here's where I am.
If it could be another way, that's fine.
But since I'm here, I'm not going to burn a lot of fuel thinking about it.
So I might take a side by the end of this.
I don't know.
Okay.
Well, maybe you guys can clarify something for me because this is a legitimate question, I suppose.
Do you guys ever talk about a DPD on this podcast?
I believe we've mentioned it at least once.
Okay.
So DPD, I believe, coined by Daniel Dennett, the philosopher, is this idea of a statement where one reading of the statement is true but trivial.
And the other reading is profound but false.
I have a feeling that maybe this whole seeing like a state thing has a little bit of a DPD at its core.
And here's what I mean by that.
The true but trivial reading of this material seems to be that when an organizing entity makes plans to improve a thing without considering the details of that thing,
the efforts fail and or there are at least some terrible unforeseen side effects.
True, but not as shaking to me.
The profound but false reading is that all attempts at planning on an organizational level fail to achieve their aim and or have horrible unforeseen side effects.
So clearly, clearly that's not true because clearly we make efforts to make things more legible and we reap enormous rewards in some scenarios.
In other scenarios, we get Brasilia, the hellscape.
And it's like, well, okay, then if that's the case, then what is your rubric for determining what is an appropriate domain for making something more legible, more scientific, more technocratic, more technological?
And what is not?
What should be left to the the rural farmers to figure out?
Can I make a horrific confession?
Please.
I think I found myself becoming more conservative over the past years and I don't know what to do about that.
I feel like it's a bummer that that's a horrific confession.
Well, it's partly horrific because I always viewed myself as like very liberal to the point of being in my college days like radical liberals like burn it all down and start over, you know.
God, I don't know if it's because I'm getting older and people just like are resistant to change when they're older or because now I have assets that if people were to riot could get burned down.
It feels like there's something within me that has changed, but I'm more to the point where due to the fact that you can't know all the details.
I believe another example in seeing like a state was some scientific committee or something came into this agricultural town and saw that they were burning a portion of their crops every year.
They said, why the hell are you doing this?
And the people were like, because it's part of our religion that God demands it, etc.
It's not that exact thing, but along those lines.
And they said, well, stop doing that. That's stupid.
And your religion is dumb.
And now we will do things the more efficient way where you don't burn your crops.
And it turns out that there was a very good reason for the burning of the crops.
It helped to replace some of the nitrogen in the soil.
They just, they didn't know that.
They didn't know the reason why it worked.
They just knew that it worked.
The scientists or whoever came to do this analysis just saw that the reason why that they gave was stupid.
So they told them to stop and things kind of deteriorated and went to hell as the soil was stripped of its nutrients.
And since everything has such a high level of detail, which is ungraspable,
I am more of the sort of Chesterton's fence point of view now where, well, it seems to be working.
So let's not change it because there's more ways for it to go bad than there are for it to go good.
Or at least let's fully understand what's happening before we decide to change it.
Yeah, but whenever someone says they fully understand it, it always turns out that they don't.
Well, like the first thing I thought of when you said they were burning crops is like, oh, they're nurturing the soil.
I didn't think that, and then you said they're doing it for religious purposes.
But then I just feel bad for like the old scientists or the old agriculturists to explain this to their co-farmers.
Like, no, look, if you burn some and bury it, it actually helps the next year's crops.
And they're like, fuck you, you're crazy. We're going to eat or sell this.
And they're like, okay, fine, God will smite you if you don't do it.
So like they had to just fall back on convincing them through a bad means.
So is it MEDIS or MEDIS?
I don't know.
Yeah, well, anyway, I'm going to say MEDIS.
Okay.
So that being, that is the mode of knowing that the natives are using to solve their problem.
And I guess the question, and maybe this is just, maybe I'm just like really missing something,
but I'm like, you can't build a space telescope with MEDIS.
No, you cannot.
So clearly there's domains where MEDIS is appropriate and domains where MEDIS is not appropriate.
And I really am not even being devil's advocate.
I don't know that I could just like walk upon a situation and say like, oh, clearly there's deep ancestral knowledge here that I shouldn't mess with.
Versus like, oh, it looks like these people don't know what they're doing.
I'm going to help them using my scientific rationalistic worldview.
And that's why I say I feel like I am becoming more conservative because even five years ago,
I would have said they're being stupid, make them not be stupid.
It's more efficient to not burn your foods.
Whereas nowadays I'm like, maybe the human sacrifice helps something.
We'll just keep doing that.
That's interesting because a few years ago we had a conversation where you're talking about like you're burning it down in philosophy.
And then I was like, I feel like I could get hurt if people started throwing Molotovs through windows and stuff.
And that was my only aversion.
It was like just purely like, I don't want to get killed.
I don't want my parents and friends to get killed.
Maybe an example.
I'm not sure if this is a good one.
You guys can tell me and we can unpack it if it is.
Maybe Western culture coming, not like it happened like this way historically,
but kind of currently coming upon traditional Chinese medicine or something.
You know, one way to approach it would be like, well, maybe they're onto something or another would be, you know what?
There's no such thing as Chi or Meridians or whatever.
So they're all clearly idiots or rather, let's be more charitable.
They're all clearly wrong.
We should give them our medicine that works.
Did you guys read the witch doctors without borders article?
No.
No.
Okay.
Very briefly, there's certain parts in God, I hate to say in Africa because Africa is a massive continent and varies greatly from one end to the other.
So there's a specific country in Africa that is undergoing civil war.
Bad things are happening.
Warlords and arm games are taking gangs are taking over villages.
And there has been a counter meme, I guess, in the original sense of the word that has sprung up that has helped people fight.
Turns out that the armed gangs aren't really all that good at fighting.
They just have AKs that they spray at people and the people don't want to get shot.
So they submit to their will.
But there's a lot of villagers and if all of them just together stood up and like attacked at once and was like, okay, some of us will die.
But no big deal.
It's good.
It's fine for the greater good.
They could chase them out.
But they don't because no one really wants to die.
So there is this witch doctor that a few years ago came up with a bullet proofing potion where...
Oh shit.
Yeah.
Geez.
You take this potion and you become bullet proof for a few hours.
And the problem with the potion is that it's, you know, very expensive and complicated to make.
It doesn't work if you have committed a range of sins in the past year.
So if it ever fails, you can always say, well, that person obviously committed one of these sins that was not allowed.
He just didn't want to tell anyone about it.
And also it's very costly in that it may involve human sacrifice.
I'm not sure about that.
So you don't want to do it too often.
But people have been using it and after they take the bullet proofing potion, everyone's like, let's fucking get these warlords and they chase them out.
And so it's been spreading to more and more villages and has been working as an effective counter to the warlords taking over.
And that's right.
That is an example of Metis.
I believe in that it is something that works even though the given reason is incorrect.
But if you had the true why, nobody would join in.
So they'd be like, I don't want to get shot.
It's the false belief that makes it possible.
So which doctor is selling this bullet proof potion?
Was this a game theorist who thought this is how we can take back our nation?
Or was this just some...
It's a dude that had a vision.
And by dude, I mean like an elderly respected priest man.
Okay.
So it wasn't just some charlatan selling like anthrax homeopathic pills or homeopathic vaccines or whatever.
But even if it were, it would still have the positive outcome that it's had, which is the amazing thing.
True.
But I'm just wondering if this is the kind of...
I guess idly, I'm curious about the motivations of this person.
Because selling bullet proof potions in an area where people are being shot all the time sounds like a great way to make money.
And then if you can just lampshade away or hand wave away all the people who get shot anyway.
Oh, they must have sinned or something.
The potion's not perfect.
That's interesting.
I believe what I was commenting on was that it sometimes doesn't work to have the actual scientific knowledge.
You can't replace it.
So maybe this is an issue, right?
An approach that's discussed in seeing like a state.
But if you're understanding on some level, for example, why this witch doctor is selling this bullet proof potion or why these people are burning their crops.
And you're like, oh, you know what's better than burnt crops for fertilizer?
Fertilizer.
I'll bring you guys some fertilizer and trade you for all the food you're burning.
And then that way, you know, everybody wins.
You guys get more food and this food gets to get eaten.
And then what helps stop warlords is like a powerful state with guns and a militia that can conjump it and shoot them.
I guess there seems to be other approaches than just letting the medists do its thing.
And I think medicine, in other words, another definition that I heard was like practical wisdom.
Yeah, so it seems like there's other ways to deal with it as long as you're solving the same problem that they're trying to solve and you're aware that you're doing that.
I guess the whole point of seeing like a state is that that's a lot easier said than done.
Okay.
Well, I think we have a very good example of it being easier said than done in our own personal lives because the rationalist community is quite aware of the powerful effects of religious community and ritual.
And we've been trying to harness stuff like that for a while.
We've got the meetups going and we've got like some small community stuff and there's even attempts to do rituals like for the solstice ritual stuff to help bind us together.
But they don't ever quite seem to take off or haven't yet anyway.
I would like to do a podcast about building community at some point, whereas the churches seem to work very well.
Like rural America, the church, I don't know if it was in the article that you read.
It was an article you read, right?
That how the church is a basically the economic unit of the rural America.
Right.
And as people lose their faith there, I mean, among other reasons, the community fractures the economic output of an area drastically reduces life outcomes get much worse.
And it doesn't seem like there's a way to replace that yet without the crazy belief in God means tying it together.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, like church works both as a fallback net that, yes, welfare tries to take the place, but welfare is so impersonal and doesn't really do it as well as people contributing their money to the church.
And then the church passing it out to people who are very poor or have sudden shocks.
It has serves as a labor pool for the old people that can't afford to hire people.
Or if someone's house burns down, everyone goes and helps them rebuild or something.
It works as that social safety net that everybody needs and that is trying to be replaced by the state with welfare and other programs and which just doesn't work as well.
The problem might just be like the level of removal from the situation.
You know, your churches are local on the ground and your state is this abstract thing in Washington D.C. or wherever, right?
That is, I think, a large part of the argument of seeing like a state.
Yeah.
So the idea is like what?
Smaller local governments?
I believe that is one of the thrusts of the book, yes, is that smaller local communities are better.
Communities specifically not governments because the author is an anarchist, right?
I don't know if he's an anarchist, is he?
Scott Alexander said he was.
Okay.
So I don't know if he was being hyperbolic or if he was saying yes.
He says something about how his anarchist sort of shown through in the book and that he wasn't at all like he would sort of just like hand wave away like all the amazing benefits of modernization like less dead babies.
Yeah.
And be like, yeah, but look at how bad it was when we made everything on grids.
Which I mean, it's a real, I liked, I didn't read seeing like a state, but I read Scott Alexander's summary because it was shorter and.
I haven't read the book either.
Oh, okay.
So, but you probably read parts that are you sent me that link of blog posts that was about it or something, right?
So you have more into it than I do anyway.
Yeah.
Alexander's essay was, I thought it was good and comprehensive for what I was trying to get out of it.
What's this book about?
And he went about it in this really fun way where he talks about that level of distraction from the top of the rulership down to the bottom makes it really hard to make anything straight because this community over here uses this size basket and this one uses this size.
Okay.
Well, here's this basket.
We're going to use this.
Okay.
Well, are we filling it?
Are we packing it down?
Are we just pouring it?
Are we pouring it from waist height or shoulder height?
Like all these stupid little things to we have to eventually get down to every little minutiae.
I guess what I'm getting at is that, yeah, it's one thing to say, all right, we're going to standardize this.
And it's another thing to like implement that in a way that is at all successful or consistent.
And I hate to keep harping on the same thing, but that makes a lot of sense when you're talking about certain things like anything ecological seems to me hazardous to metal with.
But you don't want every community to have their own like internet protocols or their own like traffic laws.
Yeah.
Imagine traveling.
Yeah.
Right.
So like, there are certain, there are certain things that can clearly be made better by organizational hierarchical control and intervention to say intervention doesn't even have to be popped down.
And there are clearly things that are evolved.
I think one thing about churches is that they're an institution that's had some time to evolve to fill a particular role.
And no matter how smart any person trying to create an institution from scratch is going to do less well than natural selection can do on solving a given problem.
Maybe they create a thing and two generations later, the thing they created has actually evolved into something really cool.
But they're not going to get it right the first time.
And that's all well and good.
But, you know, maybe we'd still be glad that they tried to create it the first time in this abstract hypothetical scenario I'm sketching.
And I got to say, as a person living in a country with decent medicine and air conditioning and the internet, I'm really kind of glad that we went through that whole industrial revolution thing.
Right.
That I mean, we the destroying of all the metis and standardizing things really does create a lot of wealth.
Yeah, exactly.
And I mean, wealth might sound loaded to some people.
It creates a lot of value for like almost everybody.
You know, even the poorest in America, not like the bottom 10%, but the poor working class have like refrigerators, like being able to store food for more than a couple days before it spoils is not something that we revel at how awesome it is.
And yet, if we were tracking down this week's food all weekend and it went bad by Thursday, like that'd be a whole different kind of, I don't know, we've talked a bit about war, like whether people were happier in the past or versus now.
I do feel like there's more to be happy about now because you have time to actually catch your breath and enjoy things and you're not in this constant state of panic where you're chasing down food and then protecting it from bandits who didn't want to chase the food.
But, you know, you're easier to catch and rob.
So, yeah, I think I've I almost think that people were happier in the past because they had more social connections.
One of the major points of the second post that I talked about, the Meridian of Her Greatness is the name of this post is that, yeah, the Industrial Revolution created tons of wealth, and the people who were uprooted from their communities due to enclosure and working in factories in London, their wages kept going up,
going up, but they were removed from their friends and their family and it tends to make people miserable to be this isolated and I think that's a large part of the problem we have with the modern day is the isolation and the alienation is what gives us this feeling of meaninglessness that we are not important to anyone.
And that's an issue.
And that ties into your concern about the AI safety net making humanity less important in like some issues.
I kind of was Shelly was here because I think she sort of maybe got the right track where the main thing she values is other human connections.
And if you like other people because you like to be around them, then their worth is not tied to their economic output anymore.
You're valuable just because you're a human that has social ties with me.
You were friends with me while I was unemployed.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, I don't have an unemployed friends.
My friends need to be able to like, you know, quit pro quo on meals and stuff.
So come back when you have a job.
So I feel like we're sort of at an, I don't know, an impasse here.
You had a couple of things you wanted to touch, right?
Yeah.
Well, the main thing I wanted to, I think maybe this could provide some like concrete examples to maybe go over.
I have here the legibility game, which I invented.
And I think we can go through it pretty quickly.
The game is that I have four questions, four scenarios.
And I say, which of these interventions were examples of terrible overreach with devastating consequences and which were great things that it was really good.
They happened.
Oh, it sounds fun.
The first one is actually a freebie.
It's the demolition of natural German forests and replacement of those trees with trees planted on a grid for logging purposes.
Was this a good idea or a bad idea?
I already know the answer to this one.
So this one, I happen to know the answer because I read the article.
Yeah, right.
If presenting, I hadn't read the article.
I might be of the mind, well, I guess you destroyed nature, which is sad, but like, is it good for us or is it good for the world?
What's the question?
I think that's a really interesting way of framing it.
I mean, so in this case, it failed even on its own merits.
And I knew you two guys had read this one already, but like it failed on its own merits because they even didn't end up making a more efficient logging forest, right?
So they destroyed a forest and probably a lot of resources along with that and they didn't even get what they were after.
So it's just like production went down drastically because it didn't have the rest of the ecosystem that it needed to support those trees.
Right.
Which is one of those things that when a few years ago, if I would have read that proposal, I would have been like, hell, yes.
What do we need all this chaos of the jungle for?
Like bulldoze it, plant what we actually want in nice rows to make it easy to harvest and this way we will be able to not have to disturb as many forests if we just have one hyper efficient grid forest of the tree we want.
You didn't watch Princess Mononoke?
I did.
I thought it was an anime with no magic and druids and didn't really apply to real life.
I thought it was based on historical events.
But what's funny is like you drive around, you see orchards, they're describing an orchard, right?
So what's the difference between this and an orchard?
I guess the difference is the type of tree.
I mean, I'm sure there's some relevant difference that escapes me, obviously, because if I had done this, it would have resulted in a disaster.
But it's like it doesn't seem obvious at all that this would have resulted in a disaster even though it did.
Yeah.
And orchards are beautiful.
Yeah.
So that was example one.
Example two, development of high yield dwarf wheat strains and distribution of those wheat strains in India and Pakistan.
Good thing or bad thing.
Sounds great to me.
Sounds really good to me too.
Can you operationalize before you give us the answer, distribute?
Make it so that the people there grow those strains.
Make it so they grow them or give them the opportunity to grow them?
Give them an opportunity.
Okay, because those are very different.
That's a good point.
The opportunity sounds great.
Okay.
Thinking ahead, maybe they don't know how to grow that wheat efficiently.
And so it fails or possibly it's one of the ones with the terminator gene in it.
So they can't save seeds from year to year.
But it sounds good on this face.
Okay.
Yeah.
I appreciate the fact that you expected a gotcha.
But indeed the use of these wheat strains credited to Norman Burlog saved over a billion lives in the 20th century.
So the reason I juxtapose those first two, by the way, is to say it's really not a good rule just to say let's not intervene in unusual ways.
In ecological matters because then you just lost a billion people if you refuse to intervene by creating a dwarf strain of wheat or whatever.
Norman Burlog, by the way, was credited with a medal from Congress.
I think he's the single person on earth credited for saving the most lives.
Yeah.
And it was, yeah, on the range of a billion, which is insanely awesome.
I'm still pissed at Greenpeace for how much they've opposed the golden rice thing.
Goddamn.
They have those propaganda films where they go through fields and hazmat suits and stuff.
Yeah.
They strongly pushed against it and made golden rice, which was available free.
They put all their research out there for free and was like, here, take it.
Put vitamin A in rice and grow this.
It'll make so many less people blind.
And no, it never took off because Greenpeace is bullshit.
And it's just the same damn thing with vitamin A in it.
Well, they're doing, they bought the gotcha before they saw the results of the dwarf strain of wheat, right?
Yeah.
They were like, oh no, we don't want to fuck with it.
Well, actually, I take that back.
I think it might have been less about not wanting to fuck with other people's ecology and more about like...
It was literally about the GMO.
Yeah, all right.
GMO is evil.
It'll turn you into Frankenstein.
It'll turn your frogs gay, right?
It might.
Who knows?
Sorry.
I prefer my frogs gay.
They're very dapper.
Oh, good.
Then the chemtrails are exactly...
Sorry.
I was having this conversation with work friends and I had to explain to them like they had never heard big chemtrails turn my frogs gay.
So they explained to them both what chemtrails are said to be and where like the frogs gay thing came from and it turned out to be this really funny thing.
I have a feeling you guys are going to know the answer to this one already, but cats introduced to Australia to control the population of pest species.
So you don't know this because we don't know each other that well.
I'm a super big cat person.
Okay.
So part of me is like, that sounds great.
The more cats, the merrier.
On the dance or...
Dude, even if Australia is overrun by cats, that's an upside.
That's better than everything else they've got there, right?
It's fuzzy.
Yeah.
My general vague knowledge of history of introducing new species is that it tends to go very poorly.
So I'm going to bet that way.
What do we got?
Yeah.
It turned out terribly.
I mean, the cats decimated and probably made extinct the number of small mammal species.
Goddamn it.
And that's...
They're murder machines.
It's funny, I didn't quite realize that all three of these first ones were ecological,
but it's like, yeah, we know from experience that introducing new species tends to be a horrible idea,
but sometimes it can just sound so logical.
And also cats are a ridiculously effective predator, actually.
That's one thing that people don't realize.
Apparently cats kill...
I'm going to...
This is going to be wrong and I'm going to be misleading all of your guests by saying the wrong number,
but cats kill something like a billion birds a year.
I heard the same number.
Yeah.
And it's like in the United States too, not even in the world.
So yeah, if you don't pay attention to the details of what you're doing, things can go wrong.
And then my last question is just kind of cute.
The small group of wealthy aristocrats rebelled from their governing empire
and attempted to found a new nation based on completely untested theory of government
just because it seemed appealing to them.
Oh man, that sounds super appealing.
That sings my...
My heart sings hearing that for some reason.
I think it's going to go really well right up until they elect their 45th president.
Yeah, yeah.
I was going to say, I mean, depending...
People might disagree on whether this one turned out well or not, I guess, yeah.
But I feel like it turned out okay for me personally.
Didn't turn out so well for some of the more native populations.
That's true.
That's a great point.
I mean, speaking about legibility, I mean, this government definitely did that legibility thing
to a lot of people and it didn't turn out well for them.
So that's a very fair statement.
I can't think of another of a fifth example for the legibility game.
Yeah, basically, I was just trying to go back and forth and think of things and use Google, of course, to help me out.
Just think of things that had worked out well.
Think of things that had not worked.
You know, I was thinking about putting some specific dam on there.
And that one just was really...
I probably should have put it on actually because the reason I left it off is I was like, this is too ambiguous,
but that's actually a great reason to include it because a dam creates value and provides electricity
usually helps control the floodplain and stabilizes things for humans, at least.
It helps with farmland and irrigation.
But then, of course, you have all kinds of negative effects on whatever river it is you're damming
or whatever the ecosystem is in that area.
It's always a trade-off and I imagine people wouldn't be building dams if it weren't a trade-off
that ended up tipping in favor of humans.
Can we discuss briefly why things tend to tend toward more and more legibility and stronger governments?
I'm struck by the fact that Scott, not Scott Alexander, but the Scott who wrote, Seen Like a State,
makes a fairly strong argument for smaller communities are better.
They're more desirable to humans.
It is what we feel better with and our lives are happier, for the most part, more psychologically fulfilling.
And yet, that is not what has taken over the world.
I think it's sort of an...
I don't want to say an arms race or a race to the bottom or what,
but a society that is better at making itself legible to the state
will be better at taxing, better at conscripting troops,
better at doing all the things that are valuable for warfare and for expansion.
And so, a happy society is one that is going to get taken over by societies
that are better at turning people into units of production and units of warfare
rather than happy humans.
So, Scott Alexander draws that same sort of implication that this does seem like a...
that modernization and the push towards legibility are like a great Malthusian trap
that it's just going to be a race to the bottom until it's this brutal competition that we...
I don't think we've talked about at length anyway.
Bollock.
Yeah.
Anyway, James C. Scott is the author of Seen Like a State.
Yeah, okay.
Yeah, and this all culminates in Robin Hansen's M scenario
of just brutal competition and complete, barely subsistence above being a conscious being,
which I agree that that's not a desirable outcome.
I mean, it may go all the way to Bostrom's Disneyland Without Children,
where even consciousness is too expensive,
and so the societies that strip consciousness from themselves will outcompete all the rest of us.
Yeah, that's a nightmare.
So, I guess like the only...
I'm just to tie this back to what I was saying at the beginning about like loss aversion.
It seems to me that you can model a lot of these processes with loss aversion.
People on mass making collective decisions, essentially,
that are choosing like a certainty of having some value over uncertainty.
Does that give me hope? Does it give me a little bit of hope?
I'm thinking about that because that implies that a society would not actually go right up to the point of literally self-destructing
because then it's like, well, no, why would anyone on an individual basis make that choice
if it doesn't gain them any more safety or security?
I have to think that one through.
So we need like a larger scale witch doctor to provide some alternate bulletproof potion.
Yes.
Oh, man.
Well, hey, first one to think of how to do that and gets to cash in.
I think that's possibly one of the problems with rationalism is
we wouldn't be able to find that sort of thing because it would have to be an emotional, irrational sort of driven thing.
You disagree.
Well, like to say that we couldn't, let me try and think this through.
If it's to be found, there are better and right ways to go about finding it
and there are better and worse ways to like go around implementing it.
And so those will all be found rationally, not by like whatever throwing die or praying or something, right?
Here's a question.
Do you think a society full of rationalists highly educated knows all the game theory stuff
would be able to overthrow a warlord without the bulletproof potion?
Just saying like, yeah, we know some of us are going to die.
Let's do it anyway.
My initial answer is that in principle, the rationalist will be the master of the laws of science
and can just make guns and shoot the warlords back, right?
Or make better guns or make bulletproof structures.
Assuming you don't have access to that sort of technology.
All you've got is the social capital and the ability to talk to everyone else in the tribe.
God, I don't know.
I'm sure there's some way to make this super doable in that whatever betting markets or prediction markets
on who lives and dies or somebody doing something that incentivizes individuals
even though they're going to die.
Because part of, if you could call this a weakness, which I guess in this particular instance it is,
there's a strong reluctance among at least the rationalist I know to die.
And so I wouldn't want to be in the front lines to take to, you know, tank bullets
so that my friends can tackle the warlords.
But I'd want somebody to.
I'd like to be part of that charge.
I don't want to be in the front line.
So, but again, I would like to think, oh, I mean, that's not fair.
I was going to say, I'd like to think that we could just make shields,
but obviously someone tried that, you know, it doesn't take a practiced Bayesian rationalist
to think of like, let's put something between me and the bullets, right?
Other than other people.
You can all just agree that anybody who turns tail and runs,
you're all going to shoot them in the back as they run,
which is a very effective strategy for getting infantry to charge actually.
So it's not, it's not very happy.
But if you have the guns to shoot them in the back,
if the guns to shoot the warlords, and that was one of the prerequisites
for not winning the stab.
You might just have like one or two guys standing in the back with guns
to shoot the people that run away.
I would like to think that we would rush those assholes
and take their guns to shoot the warlords with them.
I hate to keep beating on that point, but that just seems mean.
It would have to be the elderly, because if someone could be charging the warlords,
they should be in the front lines.
But like the old guy in the wheelchair who can't charge will give him the gun
to shoot the people that turn around and run.
But him and his wheelchair would make a great meat shield
for you charging the warlords, right?
Just push them in front of you.
That's some Rick and Morty shit right there.
I mean, so this is part of my issue with like, I don't know,
there's like the classical economics version of,
I'm trying to think of a decent example.
Someone's going to point out how it's really stupid for X, Y, and Z reasons,
but classical economics are things like the model that $110 is better than $100,
so I'll offer you $100 now, or $110 in two months.
And, you know, some number of people will take the $100 now,
and it's like, oh, well, they're just irrational.
So, you know, my model's right, they're just stupid.
But that doesn't seem to take into account that like,
well, I could really use $100 right now,
and I'll have a couple more paychecks in a couple months,
so the extra $10 will make very little difference to me or something.
There are considerations beyond like the easy math.
And so I would like to think, so like that's sort of like the example of
let's build cities on grids, and we'll put all the businesses on this side
and all the houses on this side, and it'll be perfect,
because everything's on straight roads and, you know, intersections and whatever.
So that doesn't seem to take into account the factors that don't seem unquantifiable to me,
but just seem harder to put, I guess maybe, maybe quantifiable's not the right word,
because they are hard to quantify, but they're not hard to consider.
Like, factors that people like living near businesses.
Like, that's just a failure of consideration, like of empiricism.
It's really cool, like I said, being able to walk down the street
and go to your grocer and not having to take a cab three miles into town
and then take the cab three miles back,
and you've now paid for groceries and 60 bucks worth of travel, right?
So it seems like there's a way to do this right, it's just hard.
Is that something that James Scott touches on in the book?
As far as I know, no.
Yeah, this was something that I was thinking about a lot while doing all this reading,
was surely there's a way to do this right,
and when you're reading all these examples of states doing terrible things
and making terrible mistakes, you're like, well, this was just stupid.
I mean, this isn't complicated, they just did it stupidly,
and I think the point of the book maybe is,
look, the state is incentivized to do it in this particular way
that ends up being stupid over and over again.
Yes, you could do it correctly if you had like a giant bag of money
and a group of people who were like committed to the idea of like,
hey, let's actually create a society that people will want to live in,
but that scenario has actually never happened.
It's usually the state wants to control and make legible its population,
and that's not conducive actually to flourishing.
I think that's where my conservatism comes from,
because I used to be very much of the opinion,
well, it's just been done stupidly, let's do it not stupidly,
and let's change things and make them better, just not a dumb way,
and now I seem to be trending more towards,
it's impossible to do it the not stupid way,
because reality is a lot more complicated than everyone seems to think
as shown by the entire history of human intervention,
almost always going wrong, so let's just stop trying to intervene.
I would like to say it's prohibitively difficult and not impossible to do it the right way.
Just the idea of let's make them grow these crops,
because they grow great over here.
That's not a mistake we'd make today.
We would test it under realistic conditions over there
before we just usurp their food supply
and say, you guys are going to grow this now,
because this grows a lot better and it'll be better for everyone over there.
We're going to make sure it actually is first.
The virtue of empiricism and testing wasn't a theme that I saw
in the review of seeing like a state.
That's relatively new, and I like to think that makes us a lot better at doing this right.
Okay, so that we can do it right eventually,
if we do it wrong enough and learn enough.
Or at least the mistakes will be less catastrophic, maybe?
I would like to think that we would make something on the order
of the Soviet farming practices again, right?
I don't think that we're stupid enough to try something that bad,
but maybe I'm wrong.
And then this weird situation where I sound optimistic,
and I sometimes feel that way.
Was it the Sam Z.Blogger that made the point,
it's actually very optimistic to say that all of the horrors of the 20th century
were due to malicious intent,
and the pessimistic interpretation is that all the horrors of the 20th century
were people trying their best to solve problems,
and the horrors being the fair outcome of their best efforts.
Their best efforts sucked.
Their best efforts sucked, and we've learned more since then.
I'm between the two poles, I think.
We have learned more since then.
We're much better at a lot of things.
We're only going to continue getting better
unless something terrible happens.
Well, and a lot of the people calling the shots here
were not people that you would think of as the epitome of rationality, right?
I think it was...
Some of them were really doing their best
with the tools and thoughts that they had at the time.
And some of them weren't. I think it was Mao?
I feel like I read somewhere, and I can't remember if it was Mao or not,
I will try and find out who it was.
Had this bullshit thing where they wanted the softest bed imaginable,
they wanted it exactly 1,000 meters above sea level,
and it turns out the softest down comes from the chin of a sparrow,
so they ended up just destroying the sparrow population,
ripping all their chin feathers out to make mattresses for this person.
That's not the person that is going to also be the best
at implementing their new statewide infrastructure, right?
I think those two things are orthogonal.
Maybe you can be the best and want chin down mattresses.
Let me rephrase that. I feel like that is not indicative
of an all-around rationally-encompassed mind, right?
Maybe his terminal value is ultimate sleeping comfort.
Because he slept so well he could make all the best decisions.
Right.
And didn't it cause a famine because the sparrows were spreading seeds?
Probably.
Yeah, I think I heard part of this story.
It resulted in a famine?
Oh, shit.
Clearly, not seeing all the implications of these stupid desires.
I guess what I'm getting at.
That's the conservative slash Chesterton's fence position,
that you can never see all of the implications,
and so things will always go horribly wrong.
Well, but they just charged through Chesterton's fence without looking at it first,
because they were like, fuck these birds, they're not doing anything.
Let's use their chin feathers for beds.
Every now and then we say fuck mosquitoes,
let's do anything except malaria, let's kill them all.
I feel like we're pretty sure about that.
I agree, and I'm on board with killing all mosquitoes,
but if the sparrows' story is any indication...
But we watch sparrows and watch them do stuff,
and we also watch mosquitoes and watch them do stuff,
and they don't do anything good.
That's what they thought about the sparrows.
I don't know if anyone actually did that investigation into the sparrows.
Oh, wow.
And it seems to me that you could wipe out mosquitoes,
and then if everything goes to shit immediately,
then you just release a bunch of mosquitoes.
You can't release them once they've been wiped out.
Well, you can have some in boxes somewhere, I presume.
Someone's job is to have the mosquito box
after the mosquito apocalypse.
Put a big M on it so they know it's full of mosquitoes.
And the mosquitoes are trying to convince you to open the box.
Someone has to feed them, obviously, so you gotta stick your arm in there.
You don't only feed male mosquitoes like blood?
I think I did.
Yeah, male mosquitoes eat pollen.
Really?
Yeah.
Oh, so there probably is a huge downside to killing them all.
Other things probably do whatever the male mosquitoes do.
I'm assuming they fill a niche, though.
That's actually, like, that put me way off the fence.
Everything fills a niche, but I don't really care
about the living in my intestines and sucking my blood niche.
Well, I do care about the pollenizing niche.
Right.
So, yeah, I mean, I should have, I guess, been clearer on that.
I care about the niches that are good for things,
and not good just for the thing that's eating my intestines or whatever, right?
The larvae also provide a food source for fish,
but my understanding is that they've calculated it,
and even if those larvae weren't there, the fish would be fine.
Probably some other insect would increase in population
to make up the difference.
And even if, yeah, even if the solution was to, like,
throw some fish food in all the ponds of the Sub-Saharan Africa
where malaria is rampant for five years
until the other insects had a chance to flourish there,
that sounds like a solvable problem.
I think that's a lot harder than you're making that to be.
Throwing some fish food into every single waterway in Africa
every day is...
Not every waterway.
Okay, some of them, you're okay with the fish dying out in.
I didn't think this through, but I'm willing to die on this hill.
So, you could then channel all the efforts that are going,
like, you know, for malaria vaccines and bed nets and stuff,
and just put that towards fish food for the next couple of years.
So, like, even if you just keep the fish population
from dropping below a certain critical point,
so you just have enough feeding them.
Or you could figure out what insects were going to fill that niche anyway
and just throw a bunch of their larvae in the waters one year,
and then they would explode the population and probably cause some huge mess.
I need to think this through.
I need a pen and paper.
Look, if we wipe out mosquitoes, it would give me personally infinity utility.
And so, there's really, like, no matter what else happens after that,
it's a positive outcome.
Right, because you can't be infinity.
Right, because I'm a utility monster, obviously,
and I mean that I just solve the problem for everyone.
You're welcome.
You may have to kill Matt.
Well, that would be literally the worst thing we could do.
Yeah.
Then you couldn't get infinity utility.
I believe that it says somewhere in Genesis,
thou shalt not suffer a utility monster to live.
Damn.
I feel like that was a mistranslation.
Translated to witch, right?
Yeah.
They meant utility monster, but they didn't have the concept back then.
God was trying.
I think this is an interesting topic to talk about
because I don't have any sort of answers or conclusions.
I'm just confused and vaguely disheartened
by how not awesome we are at optimizing everything.
I guess I have two intuitions slash takeaways.
One is that we're getting better at optimization.
It doesn't happen overnight.
And if there were some huge missteps, well, that sucks,
but then you get back on course and you keep going
for the right ways of doing things.
I'm not saying, like, individual nation states
get to make gigantic mistakes.
I'm like, oh, you know what?
We'll try again this way instead.
Like, history gets humanity back on course,
not, you know, individuals who kept fucking things up.
But the other thing is that I guess I would need a good argument
that either A, we wouldn't return to some grotesque,
Hobbesian state of nature if we got rid of high modernization
slash legibility enforcement.
Or if we, if you're okay with, you know, just biting the bullet
and say, yeah, that we would turn back into that,
you ought to explain why that's better than what we're at now.
Right?
And the problem with small communities,
tight-knit communities is that they will never be able to create
space shuttles and colonize other planets
because you just don't have enough resources in a small community
to do that.
And there was also one other thing that I meant to hit on,
which was, at least in this, let's just start codex summary,
there wasn't really a discussion of the impact on nonhumans
during all of this business.
And that seems at least worth mentioning that wipe out a jungle
to make a nicely orchard-styled tree farming field
for lumber production.
A, it doesn't work out for lumber production,
but E, or B, for those of you keeping count at home,
it also doesn't work out well for all the wildlife you killed
to make way for that tree farm.
I mean, it's at least some people care about this sort of thing.
It's at least worth mentioning.
So I certainly think that's a cost-worth considering.
I don't know, like, that's sort of my thing,
it's not worth not doing it.
We were sure it was gonna work,
but we had to be really damn sure.
So are we moving on?
Let's move on,
because it has been a little bit over an hour.
And now, as promised, last episode's discussion
of the story Utopia Lol.
If you want to read it, now is your last chance to skip or pause.
All right, so I was sad to find out
that the AI had been constrained
from expanding beyond the solar system.
I was more bummed that, like, the AI manipulated people on purpose,
but I also found that kind of awesome,
because then the guy's like,
yeah, I totally got there manipulating me,
and I'm fine with it,
which is the sign of a great manipulation.
But for me, I was gonna say,
and I guess whatever goes on the air,
then people know I'm a wimp.
I cried for, like, a minute.
Like, I couldn't keep reading
when Keet was at the Met Kip.
Oh, Keet?
Keet?
Wasn't it Keet or Keet?
Whatever, whatever the tour guide.
Yeah.
Realized that, like,
all you're gonna send them off to the stars,
do you want us to go be birds again?
Like, that was, like, oh, my God.
That was the saddest thing I've ever heard.
So, like, that was, I don't know,
I'm not sure if that was written to pack that punch
or if it just hit me hard for some reason.
It wasn't even the fact that it was birds.
It was just, like, you know,
do you want to just throw this away
and we can go keep having fun again?
Like, yeah, like, I'm gonna lose you forever.
Like, let's not do that.
That was super intense.
Dude, that is, if you get a chance,
I would totally go and comment on the story
and say that or track down the author
and, like, send them an email
because as an author, the few times I've been told
I made someone cry have been some of the happiest moments
in my professional career.
Sadest.
Yes.
That is what you want as an author,
that you have emotionally touched someone that deeply.
And very rarely I do people ever let you know
that sort of thing, even when it does happen.
Cool.
Yeah, let him know you will make his fucking week
unless he's had, like, just an enormous week.
Yeah, you bet.
I'll find it.
Why were you sad that the AI was prevented
from leaving the solar system?
Well, like, it's the best tool humans have
and then they're like,
well, no, you can't use this tool
outside of the special zone.
You have to go be weak and primitive out there.
I think, I think I kind of liked that
because it seems to address my major concern
that it allows the humans to have a place
where they will be safe and protected forever
in the solar system,
but it also gives them place where they can go out
and still have risk and explore
and be the deciders and the important people,
even though that's risky out there,
they have taken, they have made the decision
to take that risk and put their lives on the line.
And condemn their children to it.
You know, I mean, yeah, but what can you do, right?
Were you upset because...
What can you do?
Yeah, sometimes...
I'll tell you what you can do.
You can not do what they did.
You can ship your children back to the solar system
until they turn 18 and can make their own decisions.
Even in the archipelago created by Alexander,
children have the option to leave their communities.
Yeah, but they didn't have the option
to be not born into the community.
Yeah.
So the children, I assume,
once they get to other solar systems,
well, no, I mean, eventually,
they'd have the technology to get back to Seoul,
but not for a while,
not for a number of generations, probably.
Were you upset because of the lost potential
of having an AI that was constrained that way?
Or were you sad from the perspective of the AI
who wanted to help beyond this narrow area,
but then couldn't?
I guess not from...
I'm not sad for, like, the AI feeling sad.
I'm sad for the AI feeling sad.
I think I've got a problem with, like,
my empathy's turned up too high,
but it's not where I can't turn it down.
Yeah, I don't think the AI did feel sad
because it was programmed to be happy
with the things the way they were.
Or maybe it wasn't programmed...
Maybe it wasn't sentient.
I got the impression that it was.
It talked as though it was, but that doesn't mean anything.
It means more than nothing.
Okay, more than nothing.
I think the AI was happy to have, keep the solar system
a safe, happy, wonderful place
and to allow humans to have their danger zone, too,
if they want to.
That's true, I was typically minding it, too.
Like, it could be happy with these weird constraints
and it could be as happy as it could possibly be.
Alright, fair enough.
We have listener feedback.
First thing I want to do is
a new segment that we shall do every week.
Whenever we have a Patreon supporter
supporting at $4 or more, I think it was,
we will read one of their names
and say a special thank you to them on an episode.
So, this week we have
Wukasz Stafanyak.
I should, I should ask my parents
because this looks like a Eastern European name
quite possibly Polish.
It has the L with the line through it
and the SZ for the sh sound.
So, Wukasz Stafanyak is
a Patreon supporter
and actually supporting at the level
where he gets to choose,
either chat with one of us for an hour
or choose a topic for us to talk about
on one of these episodes.
So, thank you very much for your support.
Going on to actual questions.
Zeke Aaron, when we had Patrick on,
Patrick mentioned superluminal faster-than-light communications
and Zeke Aaron writes,
regarding superluminal communication
I'm going to need a source.
Quantum entanglement is a commonly used science fiction trope
but the real science behind it is pretty unusable
even for transmitting a single bit.
It is entirely hypothetical
until I read contradictory evidence
and I didn't want to contradict Patrick on the air
because it had been at least 10 years
since I had read anything about that.
I thought maybe he knows more about it than me
but yes, also as far as I know,
quantum entanglement,
it only works for a few hundred bits
out of every several million that they try it with
so not a very high rate
and depending on your interpretation
of quantum mechanics,
it isn't really even all that useful
for sending information.
From what I've read,
you can't really use it to communicate faster
than light because you still need
some traditional communication method
telling people to check their bits now.
I happen to know it's Zeke Aran
as in Samus Aran
not Aaron, just for whatever that's worth.
But yeah, that was my takeaway
and I feel like one of us pushed back a bit.
I can't remember who it was.
Are you sure that's not just quantum entanglement
and Patrick insisted that it was something new and cool
and so I was with you.
I was like, well, it's been 10 years
or some years since I've read a popular science
like Hawking Physics book or something
so maybe there's some cool new thing that somehow didn't hit my news feeds.
Did we ever ask him to send us stuff?
We did get a link and I'll post the link to it.
Most recently the
headlines also said it was teleportation
of managing to entangle
photons which I
I don't consider it
teleportation although technically
in a way it is.
But it's transforming matter that's already there.
Well, I mean
teleportation of an individual
photons sounds like
there's no way to tell photon A from photon B.
Right, so if you make photon A identical to photon B
it's basically like you teleported it.
But on the other hand
if I had a massive matter
in outer space and it became identical
to the table I have in my house
I wouldn't necessarily say my table got teleported.
Yeah, I don't know.
I thought even entanglement teleportation
only propagated at the speed of light
but I don't know what I'm talking about
I'll have to ask my brother about this.
Your brother knows more about this stuff.
He's getting a PhD in physics.
Fantastic.
I know he should be able to answer any of my questions.
This is my interpretation.
And if not he can maybe at least point us to a source.
Yeah, cool.
Deadly Claymore.
When we had our podcast
talking about deafness and cochlear implants
and whether parents should be forced
well not forced
whether parents should put cochlear implants
into their deaf children
and that some deaf parents have chosen not to
Dead Claymore writes
mostly deaf fan of the podcast here
I would consider it child abuse for a parent
to passively block their children
from getting a cochlear implant
I'm assuming parents are responsible for their children
they do not own them
based on that assumption a parent cannot claim
bodily autonomy for someone else
their responsibility is to provide
the objectively best possible outcome for their child
which leads me to
having never had full hearing
and never been fully deaf
I've personally experienced a wide range along that spectrum
it is objectively better
to have more senses than fewer
Yeah, I actually really appreciated that
that perspective and I'm also glad that
we didn't you know the one person who wrote in
that might have something
well I guess we're not going to get a lot of deaf people writing into the show
Probably not.
Yeah, I appreciated that feedback
and I do like the point
and actually I think it was
I think I saw Daniel Dennett articulated this way that
we're not like the owners of our kids
where they're stewards it's not
well it's mine I can do whatever I want with it
it's like no it's your responsibility now that you have one
and that means you know
being sensible to some degree at least right
so and not just about cochlear implants but things like vaccines
I mean there is something
pedantically more senses is better
I don't know 100% if that's true
like if we could sense more
the electromagnetic spectrum we'd be blind
but that's probably not what they were getting at
so it's interesting have you ever
heard of the northpaw
bracelet or anklet rather
it's like an ankle bracelet which
is sort of awkward to wear because
people think that you are in prison
or that you're out of prison on parole or something
but it vibrates
against your skin in whichever direction is north
yeah it is the coolest thing
I've heard it described as basically having a second
well a sixth sense now
and that eventually you start dreaming
in with the sense where you just always
know where north is
and it seemed like a really awesome
ability and I got one and it didn't
quite work for me
and part of the problem being that people did assume
that I was out of
you know on jail I had done something wrong and I was like
I'm just not gonna wear this anymore because
I would love to try it if you still have it
I don't anymore that's okay
so how did it work did it just constantly buzz north
yeah and what there's
I'm assuming there's weights on all four sides or something
8
it has 8 of those little cell phone vibrator motors
and whichever one is pointing
whichever one is closest to pointing north is vibrating
I feel like all the time I get kind of annoying
do you just get used to it
if you don't move for a while
it stops and only
buzzes like once every two minutes or something
really briefly did you let it
like become impossible for you to become lost
did you just like always know where you were
again I only wore it for about two days
because going into the office and having people being like
I see what I was like oh man
I can't do this in accounting
it has 8 small things it looks like an ankle bracelet
an ankle bracelet looks like this big thing
attached to a belt
it has a large motor on the side
it has a little
housing for the computer chip
it has the little sensing thing in it
probably the battery
did I say housing for battery
you said computer chip that has the sensing thing in it
which will also have that
and the battery
that makes it look very bulky
that sucks
I wonder how much they are
I'm always wearing jeans
just right live strong on it
just paint it baseball or football team colors
perfect
I should maybe get another one
but yeah it's $200
that was what they cost a few years ago
or what they cost now
I believe it's what they still cost now
$150 if you do your own soldering
but I would not recommend that unless you are very good at soldering
I'm not so maybe we can go have these
also
Dead Claymore goes on to say
technical note
cochlear implants in order to be maximally effective
need to be installed as early as possible
I'm not sure if that's the stimulus that's coming in
if I found out that my mother had the option
of fixing my hearing and didn't
I would be quite pissed off
all that being said
being deaf isn't the end of the world
I sometimes joke that it's a superpower
for sure and I don't think we came off as
as anti people with five senses right
I hope we didn't come off as anti deaf people either
certainly
A that is interesting to know about it needing to be installed at
childhood I knew that there's some perk about it being installed at
I thought it was something to do with like how your ear developed
apparently it's also brainwiring
which also gives you the opportunity later on if you're like
you know what I feel like I'm an adult now I want this thing out
I want to try being deaf forever
then again every able hearing person
has the ability to do that too right
we all have number two pencils in here
if we really wanted to
are you supposed to go about doing that you're not right
the cochlear implants from what I've heard take quite a while
a lot of it is the brainwiring when you first get them
all you hear is like weird buzzes and beeps and stuff
and apparently there was a
probably
this American life someone was talking to a reporter
one of the early cochlear implant adopters
and as they were talking to a reporter they were like
that's an ambulance isn't it
and the reporter was like yes and they were like
my brain finally made that wiring and I heard an ambulance
for the first time so
it takes a while to for your brain to figure out
what is happening to it
that's really interesting and it had been like a few months at that point
I wonder what that will be like if we ever
get technology gives us new senses
how that if it'll be faster or slower
what that'll be like
it also has to be weird being a baby right
just randomly bombarded with
sensory inputs that you have no idea what's happening
I sort of give babies like some slack now
because like
they're constantly screaming and crying but like
everything that's happening to them is the worst thing that's ever happened to them in their entire life
so like
you know they they drop their thing out of their
stroller and that they lose their minds like that's probably the worst thing
that's ever happened to them and you're right like it's got to be
super intense
especially the first few days I imagine
going from like the soft hum of
utero to
police sirens and flashing lights
must be quite the stress
everything's cold all the time
probably not good for our psychology
being born
I wanted to ask real quick
you said you are both a rationalist and a parent
we also got an email from
Jason who is a rationalist parent
would you be interested in doing like a rationalist parenting episode at some point?
sure that sounds great
awesome I will maybe do that
I bring that up because Jason wrote us an email
one of them is about the rational parenting thing and I'll put that off for later
but
when we were talking about the meaningfulness
of the real physical world
Jason wrote
it's possible the current universe we're in is a simulation
does that change anything
does it make what we care about meaningless
what does it matter?
I don't think I said or if I did
I think I hopefully appended it by the end of the episode
that I don't think that life
without contact with physical reality would be
meaningless I just feel like I'd be losing something
and yes if I learned that we lived in
if we lived in the matrix and there was a real world out there
I'd want to know what that was
so like in that sense and I think anyone who wanted
to know what their old is like would feel what I'm feeling
when I say we're missing something
we're missing what is really happening out there
like I said I don't know if that's a compelling
enough reason not to go into a simulation
especially if circumstances got dire or something
like it was the only way not to die I'd be
I'd be in there in a heartbeat even if it was super
I'm not super boring but even if it was
you know not tile simulator but if it was Middle Earth
right I think the stuff
wouldn't be meaningless because I still
care about the people I care about
but it would feel slightly less
meaningful I would want to know what's out there
do you have an opinion yeah I mean
I always go to consciousness
when I think about this type of thing
and kind of the pseudo
Buddhist perspective of like
I'm much more certain that consciousness exists
than I am that I have a physical body
and I'm sitting in a room so
even if everything is a simulation
whatever is happening
on the level of my awareness is
quote-unquote real as far as I'm
concerned no matter what I learn about
the outside world and I'm just
going to continue operating under the assumption that other people are
real too in which case they do have
meaning even if they are also a simulation
that's kind of where I am
and yeah if I find out that this is the matrix
I'd be interested to know what's outside the matrix
but I wouldn't
invalidate anything about my existence I don't think
you have a child I have three
you have three children would you still
would you feel that their existence is less
meaningful if this was the matrix
no I mean my only concern
for them would probably be like I want to
ensure that they're able to thrive
in whatever way they define that to be
I don't know this is my home universe
maybe they'll want to move to a different one
you'd want to stay in this one I guess it depends
on what the top level universe is like
I mean if it's just completely abstract
and incomprehensible to us then
an ant doesn't need to be made human sized
an ant should be ant sized
you know there's an appropriate scope
for an organism unless you're
going to also like modify my brain in which case
that's a completely different thought experiment
Jason also had some interesting things to say
about psychedelics because he's taken them
this email that he sent us was not
actually text he sent us an audio file so
I'm going to go ahead and throw up that audio file
on our Patreon feed in case anyone wants to hear that
caveat ask Jason first
I will ask Jason first
here's a comment which
feels prescient to me because it
touched on what I was talking about today
Zeke Aron now okay hold on
Samus says last name is Aron
I always thought so
see I played it back in the days before they had
audio in games aside from beeps and boops
so I just said Aaron
in like the ones where they actually have voice actors
does it come out as Aron Aron
I haven't played them since do they talk now
I don't know I assume they talk in all video games now
God we sound so old
like at some point she goes I'm Samus Aron
take this alien
I assume that's what she says before she
fires each bullet
or energy projectile now that I'm
put on the spot I don't know how it's pronounced
although I do think that Zeke told me that that's how he pronounces
Aron okay but
whether or not Samus pronounced it that way
the world may never know okay or the world knows
and we just don't so we're gonna
I'm gonna go with Aron since that sounds better
either way okay
Zeke Aron says when we were talking about
again we were talking about the transhumanist fiction
and we were talking about the culture and how
humans don't matter in that society
the AIs do everything of import
in that universe
Zeke Aron says Enyaar seems to have
lead-eyed feelings regarding the culture
and also a misunderstanding of what it means to live in it
being in the culture means you are
perfectly free from all obligations
duties and survival
he has a little more to say which I will get to
but I think being completely free
from all duties and obligations
is kind of
horrific because
going back to what we were saying about
how what we really care about is
other humans and our relationships with them in our
social net those things come with
obligations and duties to other people
if you are completely free of obligations and duties
then you don't really have any sort
of social network or social
ties so if you're completely free
from them you'd be completely alone
I see we were going with that but I can challenge
that by saying that like I didn't help you move
because I was obligated to
I did it because we're friends
but it's not
like it was an obligation or a duty
right like it's not the duty of all your friends
to help you move otherwise you'd have had an army of people
helping you right so
like it's just the people who are available and want to
and can or whatever so I think being free of duty
and obligation doesn't mean that your communications
break down I feel like it means that you're not doing anything
that you don't want to do so then that way when
somebody helps you you know it's because they actually want to
and not because they feel like they're fulfilling some obligation
I think there's sort of a
sense of duty and obligation to that though
like there are some obligations
that come with being a father
or a son right
well a father obviously
but also a son there is
reciprocal part of that
yeah I've never read any culture novels but like
how would the culture
enforce not having obligations
on a person like
if you take on an obligation
I'm asking I haven't read the novel I
I'm confused honestly so
I believe you just don't have to fulfill it
okay well so I haven't read them either
so like I want someone to help me rebuild
my bathroom I give somebody $300
and they still be by tomorrow and they don't come
how do they just get away with it in culture
like that doesn't sound utopian that doesn't sound utopic
do robots come and do it instead
and then I just wasted the money or do I just
pay robots because they don't they don't flake on
business deals or what or do you not need
bathrooms because that all that also solves the problem
I just think that obligations and
duties to other people are a meaningful
and important part of relationships
there are some things you expect from your friends
and your partners yeah like like the
whole signaling thing like you you
established a relation I mean this is like our monkey
wiring is like oh you have
shown me that you care by doing something
that cost you something
and that may be costing you time energy
opportunities whatever but
if nothing you do ever cost you
anything for me then I never have a credible
signal that you actually care about me
that's that that's the cynical
way of phrasing it I guess but just like you
were saying in this sort of idealized
post-scarcity world it's kind of hard to have
meaningful personal connections I see what you're saying
I feel like you successfully channeled Robin
Hansen in that analysis
and I feel like that's actually something to that
and don't you just have a duty to your fellow citizens
to not shit in public
or make society worse
in some way to defend your friends
and or defend the right
of free speech or public
assembly or whatever it is yeah
I don't I haven't read the culture the culture series either
so I can only assume that they have some way of getting around these problems
because like in a situation
where there was getting around it is that humans don't matter
you can't do anything that can fuck up the world
can you do anything that fuck up one
person nope without their consent that how can you
literally do anything you
if you want to you could like if there's a
table and you want to clean it you can clean the table
but you don't have to it'll clean itself if you
leave it alone so yeah I mean
it sounds kind of horrible and dystopian from
from my understanding of it is like there's like these
super AI over minds that are literally just
basically bouncing humans around like
billiard balls and the humans of course think they have agency
but that's just because the machines are that much smarter than them
like that's that's a dystopia to my
mind yeah that sounds interesting okay
so maybe I'll have to have a conversation
with a Zeke about this at length and he can
steel man the the utopia of the culture
series because part of that sounds great
in that like you mean I don't have to clean my bathroom
anymore you know cool
but if it's like that
with literally everything then yeah what are
we even doing I don't know
what I think what would be a little better would
be like we're kind of doing whatever we want
there's a better safety net in that like
texting while crossing the street one time
doesn't obliterate you from the universe forever
but you can still do dangerous stuff
but if something crazy happened and it
didn't work out then like you're immediately saved or you know
whether you're backed up every morning before you let it
better like you can you can
literally do anything and it will not obliterate
you here you're always fine unless you
specifically take off those safeties
hmm Charles Strauss explored that
once in acceleranda which was really
great they had basically functionally
immortality and so children started running
around with like swords and machine guns
and stuff when they're playing out on the playground
and would literally chop each other up
and shoot each other full of holes and it didn't matter
because they turn off the pain receptors and then
the machines rebuild their body and they're like yay this is
fun and it's kind of bloody and horrific and on the other hand you're like
well shit if I could swing around
a lightsaber on the playground and it wouldn't kill
anyone I would yeah if it didn't hurt and no one
died that doesn't kind of fun yeah I mean
people play paintball now and that's
a simulated version of that so yeah
we like paintball except with real guns and
when you die afterwards they at the end of the
round resurrect you well we also play call of duty
which is like another reflection of that right
so feels like the same thing and
call of duty doesn't isn't very meaningful
people who go to the military will still play
call of duty for fun but they don't derive the
meaning from call of duty that they do from
being in the military well that's because they
aren't real people so I feel like as long as
you're interacting with real in in call of duty
not that military
those aren't people
no one listening to saw this but as soon as
said those aren't real people I gave Stephen the
look as in oh
yeah so I didn't clarify because I felt
like I misspoke a clip because Inyash
gave me a look that said he felt like I misspoke
um yeah you can gun down everybody
in call of duty nothing happens and the world's
no different for it your stats in the game
change but your stats in the game
of earth all of life was like
you could gun down everyone and it wouldn't
matter because nothing changes except maybe
a few stats of how many people you gun down
on the playground yeah how does that stop
the rogue sociopath in culture
in culture
you can't like harm people without
their permission it's like what if you are
swinging a lightsaber and
you're fine swinging it until you hit somebody
and then it just stops working or what yeah
is this a whole world of simulation or just no
no it's it's not a simulation it's physical
world just the culture
and minds are that powerful
damn okay I
don't know what to add to that
Zeke goes ahead and
says because he anticipated
my uh objection here
saying regarding meaning and service
people in the culture raise children
and collaborate on projects which may
include celebrations art games
regular socialization think of the life
of a 20 to 30 something year old
offspring of a billionaire what do they
do do they weep in their bedroom about
meaningless life is now that they can hire a
servant to do literally everything for them
or do they party socialize work on projects
and self-improve and
you know that's that's the counterpoint to that
like in Star Trek no one has to work but a lot
of people do anyway for the fun of it well so
two questions about that well I guess one
caveat and one question one caveat is that
it depends on the billionaire
20 year old but you know a lot of them are
just laying around drinking because like they can't
contribute I don't know of a lot of them there aren't
there isn't a large sample size but I do know that depression rates
are kind of high in those populations which
I guess take that for what it is Zeke said
that they collaborate on projects they make
games and art with that stuff not exist
if people didn't build it because then you're still creating
things of value that wouldn't exist otherwise
and that is an outlet to make you productive
yeah it would still exist okay so speaking as
a temporary billionaire I
have been unemployed for a number
of months now and I
have a small amount of passive income
and I live extremely cheap plus I got
workers unemployment
insurance what is it called unemployment
unemployment and I'm unemployment right now
so basically I have the entire day free
and have had for several months now to do whatever
I want and
it's been pretty great I finished my
novel I am now looking for an agent
I am working on short stories
I'm doing other things that I enjoy with my life
and quite honestly I can see this
going on forever I'm like
this is so much better than having to
get up at 6am every day
slog into work to do meaningless accounting
and number juggling for 8 hours
and then come home and
yeah I don't have nearly as much money to spend but
I'm using my time with what I want to use it on
and I get to socialize with people more often
I get to see you guys I get to see other people
it's kind of great so
I'm sad that I'm only a temporary billionaire
and I'll have to rejoin the workforce in a couple months
here but
it's not something to sneeze at well
so you're in that situation that Zeke's describing
but you're creating things that wouldn't exist
otherwise and that gives you like if you were
I don't know just making the same
5cm cube of wood over and over
you'd probably get super bored
and there's machines that can do better than you can so like
if I was in this position 10 years ago I would have been miserable
I used to be not very good with not
having outside goals to push me
I was in this situation a few months ago and I was miserable
yeah exactly a lot of people who aren't employed
are miserable because you need some
kind of goals and it's nice that I have found my own
goals where I now have the
podcast that I work on and I have the
novel that I'm writing and other things I'm pursuing
but it's hard to find that sort of
self-directed goal
Matt what about you?
I think people need something to struggle against
and most people can't generate their own
thing to struggle against because it
feels artificial but something like
a novel is perfect actually because
from my perspective as someone who likes to write fiction
it sometimes feels like
a story idea is exogenous to you and it comes
in and you have to write it
and it puts demands on you
so that's a great example
of something that does work as
a self-motivating goal I think or potentially
can but yeah I think just
goals I like the word struggle
because of the connotations that
humans do to find themselves by struggle
to some degree or we find meaning in struggle
I'm going to Burning Man for the first time
this year and I get the feeling
life might be a lot like Burning Man
because there's nothing necessarily to do
at Burning Man you just show up and be there for seven days
but people find their own
projects and art installations
and other things to do and service to other people
a lot big part of it is
like the service and gift to other people that are there
I was really into that
when I was looking into it once for about ten minutes until I saw that
it cost a bunch of money now when it used to be free
or at least super super cheap
okay what I guess
it's about $500 for a ticket
it's not too bad but
no it's not prohibited well I guess
I mean I guess depends on how much money you got
yeah and like if you can afford not to work for how many days
Burning Man lasts or whatever but how long does it go
it's seven days and then there's also
you have to bring in everything
that you need to live on so
if it's you're going for the first time
like I will be it's actually a fair outlay
in supplies can't eat barter for that
no it's not a barter economy
it is you are allowed to gift
people things can't you
get gifted those things
in exchange for other gifts
I mean I guess
you could but self-reliance
is apparently a large tenant of the thing
so you're supposed to be fairly self-reliant
when you come in oh that's weird I feel like if I was going to
self-reliant week I would just pack a big backpack
and go into the mountains for a week
and then probably dogs and I could at that but I would practice
with an overnight first right yeah well I mean
you can you can do that too just
Burning Man where everyone is doing nothing except
trying to survive and spend seven days and
do as much cool shit together as they can in that time
and as much LSD as they can in that time
supposedly yeah I probably will not
because I wouldn't want my first trip to be there
that sounds like it would be taxing
you wouldn't know when you came down
right everything's still so weird
there's a glowing skeleton driving towards me
yeah I don't know
culture probably not as horrific as one thinks
but I can see a vast
amount of on-wee and meaninglessness in that society
and I don't think the majority of humans
would get through their 20s
but you would do okay right now
in my 20s I would have killed myself
well the idea is maybe you get psychologically well adjusted people
like better than me better than you
10 years ago to live in these
areas that exist in this area right so
I don't know maybe I should read these books
I'm sure it's quite an undertaking
Sailor Vulcan says
you guys missed the obvious solution to the whole personal autonomy
versus decision making capability problem
difficulty level of decisions
should scale with intelligence
the transhuman gods wouldn't make all the easy
non-god decisions because that would be boring
for them as long as people aren't dying
or suffering terribly for their mistakes
the transhuman gods wouldn't need to intervene
well I feel like suffering terribly
needs to be operationalized right
because is
well if you don't get this vaccine it won't kill you
but you could develop a cough that will
inhibit your fitness for the rest of your life
like is that terribly enough to have the
the transhuman god step in and be like you're getting this vaccine
or is it enough for them to like just
solve the problem before it even reaches you like
by putting in your food or something
I see what they're saying but that also
I guess part of the thing that we struggled
with in that episode was how do we
scale ourselves when we don't know what we're getting into
we had to be kind of just taking their word for it right
yeah and unless
they just didn't want to weigh in and let people
just experiment on it I don't know
the more constraints you put on it the harder it gets
but I don't know what are your thoughts on
autonomy versus decision making
I mean I think the way the comment was posed
I don't think that a god like AI
would become bored by small decisions because
I think that like the scope and depth and breadth
of what it could do would just expand
and it could solve all the problems all the time
so I don't think that's necessarily the thing
but that being said I mean I think
as long as the AI provides like some form
of safety net where you can't make
any decision that's going to hurt yourself
beyond some level of utility loss
or however the AI wants to express that
then you can play whatever games you want
that's sort of where I'm at is like you should be allowed
to wear like whatever color shirt you want like
if you feel like I like red but the AI is like you know what
more people like blue you should wear a blue shirt today
because it'll make people like you more or something
that's a decision that maybe you should be left up to you
but I don't really know where you draw
the line between like you said should you be allowed
to walk through a Jewish community wearing a shirt
with a swastika on it well do I want
the AI god stopping me
or do I want I don't know that's the question
yeah I like so much could you not just
impact like that might make you super happy
but my bum out everyone else and there's
more of them being bummed than you are being happy
so I don't know I guess what I was getting at
those that this is not that easily solved
of a problem right there's something to
that probably but I don't think
it's a solution at least as formed
right now I think there was one of the things
I really enjoyed about metropolitan man
it was at least flirting
with that question in fact not just flirting
I think a large part of Superman's motivation
was I am the
superhuman here how do I
decide what counts as
terrible suffering and how much do I interfere
in people's lives
yeah post to letting them make their own decisions
but still stopping the most horrible consequences
and I think honestly
Superman got a pretty did a pretty decent job of it
well like Lois pointed out though he also landed
at a good time if he landed there
150 years ago and there were slaves being exchanged
at the harbor would he have let them keep
being enslaved does I mean
Superman aware that there's current slavery on earth
I feel like he did his best
to not upset the metis
of the existing population right so
he didn't want to come in and immediately
overthrow the world and be like hey here's a bunch of free energy
and you know super cheap
space travel and that sort of thing so
but I think maybe he was doing the right thing he did try and assess
the situation at length before he went in and started intervening
so maybe that was actually
that does sort of tie into the idea
of not I guess
his goal wouldn't have been enforcing
legibility but it would be in
sprinting through chest of defenses
so yeah
I think humans are easy enough to manipulate
probably that the AI could just
create some kind of like sporting
contest that is a completely
zero sum game that we would all be obsessed
with and so we'd be protected from any
actual harm to ourselves but we'd
feel the drama that we're
prone to feeling just
by having this our whole lives
would revolve around sports we'd either be playing sports
or we'd be watching sports all the time
it sounds like you're just talking about status
because status is somewhat zero sum
and we are very obsessed with that
yeah yeah status is definitely a big part of it
I mean people
love to be part of a team too
even if they're not actually on that team
we live in Denver so I think we all know
those fans I feel like that
you're at least the way I pictured your
expression there manipulating us by keeping
us engaged in things that didn't actually
hurt or harm us really I mean that sounds like
movies and video games and it's like people are already
kind of doing that so I mean an AI is just
going to build a better version of Diablo
4 and we're all going to play that because
it's going to be super engaging I mean I was
never that big into Diablo I played it for like a month
but when I was part of the reason it got ruined is because
somebody came in and spammed a bunch of like
super strong weapons that made the game less fun
I was telling my girlfriend that
you know I think at the time that's playing it like five
people had died playing this game through like
dehydration or whatever
and leaving aside the possibility that they
decided to play Diablo
knowing that they would die because they wanted
they would rather play for another hour than go on living
the rest of their life like the
the other interpretation of that is that they
were just so engaged because the game
is well calibrated to like reward you when you're
getting bored and to keep you into it and it totally
does and so she was watching
like how does this keep people that engaged people
died playing I'm like here watch for two minutes
and see what happens and so like there's a
there's a brief fight with whatever mob
monsters that you struggle a little bit in
and then there's ones that you struggle a lot in
and almost don't make it and then you hit like a double
XP shrine every three minutes or whatever
and so there's incentives every few seconds
well not few seconds whatever almost perfect amount
of seconds to keep you super engaged and
that could be refined to the point where
yeah it's way more fun to play this game than it is
to do literally anything else oh yeah have you ever
played these damn phone freemium games
yeah a little bit yeah yeah
I tend to also be super stingy so those
don't suck me in but I didn't know people that have been sucked in
yeah the same I mean yeah I don't mind
putting in the five I play clash of clans
I'm playing like since launch yeah so
I haven't put in any I think I put in money
around the month that it launched because I found
at work was doing it but it was 20 bucks
one time for the I don't know
shameful amount of hours I put into this game so
I feel like I I probably did that down pretty well
but yeah that in fact I was just
I heard on the way here I listened to a podcast I think
clash of clans made three billion dollars last year
yeah so yeah just through the little
microtransactions you know hey just for a buck
you can get this cool little deal well I guess
what I was getting at is that people are getting dangerous to close to optimizing
that fun game where I hope
an AI would do it non-malicious well
it's not even have to be maliciously we're all going to live
an equestrian line I mean
doesn't sound like the worst outcome right
if it is as fun as it looked so
I think we linked to that before right that
was in that was friendship is optimal yeah
preferably the AI makes the game actually
fun and not just addictive
yes and I think
it did I can't remember it's too many
specifics in equestria yeah and I read
two different versions of that story too
wait what yeah there was one from the perspective
of
like a bunch of people including the
author of the game and like the one who coded
the AI and stuff yeah and there's one from
the perspective of I think an individual player
huh are they both by the same author
they were written stylistically
similarly all I guess I'll have to
make sure that they were in fact two different
things I could have sworn they were
I'll try and find that okay
all right let's jump on
all righty now without incident says in terms of
having kids it seems like going back to previous
episodes Steven and Inyash had agreed
that a potential human life being realized
is a net positive perhaps with some caveats
I was surprised that sort of reasoning
wasn't discussed at all with the focus
being entirely on the motivations of the parent
being good or bad yeah I mean all else
being equal I do feel like more people is
better because then you just get more happiness
as long as you're not you know making the world
worse by doing it which is sort of implicit
in or I guess explicit and all else being
equal then yeah but I think
there's something to be considered like
if I had a kid I feel like it would impact
my happiness adversely and so while
the net positive gain
between you know me and two children
the two children's happiness might overcome
my unhappiness but
I guess I don't feel an obligation to create
as many people as possible as fast
as I can right otherwise
there's a lot of
I'd be spending my time very differently if I thought that was important
I spent a lot more time with the sperm bank
for one yeah I think
to the point about children making
you less happy I know everyone's not like me
and everyone's not the same I think children
to a large degree rewire you
such that
like being with them and playing with them and so forth
becomes like super concentrated
joy juice compared
to whatever else you were doing with your life before that
like for sure and
so that's one thing that is always
salient to me in these conversations where I'm like
I know there's like
research that shows that people become less
happy after their parents and my comment
on that is always like I think there's some peak
shaving going on because yeah when you're
when they're little and you're losing a lot of sleep
and you can't really talk to them because
they're a baby your
life is like worse seen from the outside
but also like that injection of joy
into your brain when they like accidentally
smile at you really kind of
offsets a lot of that and then they get bigger
and then they're just fun it's
this probably sounds somewhat condescending but like
it's almost impossible to convey
like the change in like brain stuff that
goes on between before
being a parent being after being being a parent
for sure and actually talked about that we did have an episode
on child wearing some time ago and that was
something that I was cognizant of that like
I would be reprogrammed in a way that like
pushing my kid on the swing would be super rewarding
in a way that pushing any random kid on the swing
now would be super boring right or excuse me
not in that way so
my hesitancy part of it is like I just
don't feel like I could give a kid the life
that it would deserve right now but like I just
also don't want to shake up who I am
but that's not like I'm not down
to people who have kids yeah sure now I
I get the Gandhi doesn't want to take the
pill that makes him not Gandhi anymore
type yeah well in this context
that like the pill wouldn't make me less Gandhi
would just make me different different Gandhi
yeah so like I don't think I don't think
I'd be a worse person although
we had someone write in saying that they
were after we did that show that they were a parent
and yet it didn't drastically change them
or anything and then they went on to give examples of how it
did I
I was looking for that email actually I we can
I'll find it but you know what we should probably save this for
our parenting episode deal
okay so not without incident says
this is on the alpha go episode
couple quick comments while master
did use a single machine
that machine includes Google's
NN accelerator ASIC
I don't know what that is
which is 50 times more powerful than a CPU
so it's a bit misleading
to say that it runs on a
machine that anyone else thinks of when they think of a computer
also it's a bit misleading because
any use of a neural network can be divided into
two stages training
where it learns how to play and inference
where it evaluates the current board state and possible
moves inference is generally
much computationally lighter and that's
all alpha go has to do during one of those
games whereas the training
takes a lot more power and a lot more time beforehand
yeah ASIC
is application specific integrated
circuit so it's basically a chip that was made
specifically for that computational
task which makes it better at that
not necessarily better overall oh
thank you for telling us sure awesome
the other thing is in the same context
about how a human
could help alpha go play better
I didn't think I did a great job explaining it
master just like earlier alpha go
is still ultimately reliant on
a tree search algorithm it seems
likely that the human partner is essentially
improving the otherwise random choices
of the Monte Carlo tree search component
even if they are much less capable
at evaluating board positions the neural
networks this would explain why a player much
weaker than alpha go can still improve its play
when they work together make sense
I'll just take that a face value okay
cool that is all I had I think
you had one comment that you had also
wanted to read that was actually one about the
child rearing oh it was about the chart okay
so we're gonna wait until next time I can just pull out the
quote because I don't want to make it sound like
I'll give them a chance to respond to me saying that
you said that they said it didn't rewire them that much
and then I said they give examples of exactly
how it did and their quote was exactly
I'll say that I never felt like a real
adult until I had a child and I think that it was
maybe that I felt nothing in my life really
mattered up until that point once you have
someone really important to you that is
completely dependent on you it adds a weight
to your figurative soul and that weight gives your
previous life or makes your previous life feel
inconsequential so that to me does make it sound
like they changed their life and like it rewired
them considerably right like I don't know
if I'd want to be changed into a person that
thought my entire life up until now have been
pointless although that's sort of what we're
talking about with you know upgrading
better brains and minds right we would look
back and be like I can't believe I satisfied
living like that maybe that's what it like being
apparent is for what it's worth I don't feel
like my whole life prior to having kids was
pointless it's just
it was a bit like being a different person I
will grant that not pointless though
I don't know I think everybody's different though
I mean even other parents I talked to
this is spectrum I think
that's good to keep in mind so
I believe we're done at this point I think so
okay you know how she wanted to plug something
oh yes I have
that collection of short stories that is out
red legacy and other stories
and it is available at Amazon and
various other places where you can buy e-books
and physical copy at Amazon as well
cool and I want to thank Matt again for joining us
to do anything you'd like to plug for yourself
yeah sure I co-host a podcast about
the web serial Worm which
I anticipate at least some of the listeners of this
show have read
it's me
a longtime fan of the story
guiding a first time reader
through the story Worm arc by arc
and every week we read a new arc
and we do a close reading of it
plots and opposite
kind of a detailed literary analysis
it's really fun and I would really appreciate it
if you would check it out now
I recall when I read like the first 12 arcs
or whatever arcs are actually pretty damn
long right yeah they get
to be like a hundred thousand words long eventually
yeah how how long does this podcast
go if you do an in-depth analysis
on every arc so far
the average about two hours each and
well so let me let me
some of the arcs we've had to split up into two
episodes and then in those cases
usually the episodes are going to be two hours each
so for example this last week
I believe we released the first
half of arc 15 last week and we're
doing the second half of arc 15
this week yeah four hours
per arc is actually where it's getting up to
pretty it's pretty dense
actually so it was Worm though so that
that's fair yeah
and what was the URL for that or the
yes thank you for asking the name
of the podcast is we've got Worm
we're on twitter at
gotwormpod our website
is dailyplanetfilms
that's D-A-L-Y
and you can find all of
me and my my partners
work in terms of film reviews there as well as the
podcast cool awesome
so you also do film reviews
yeah right now we're
more focusing on the podcast in terms of how we spend
our time yeah I've written some film reviews
and book reviews and
the other guy I work with is
he does a lot more film reviews yeah
sounds awesome dailyplanet
or the dailyplanet
dailyplanetfilms is the website
dailyplanetfilms.com and yeah the other guy's name is
Scott Daly and he started it so it's
sounds great okay so
you can comment on this episode
or others if you want at our website
BayesianConspiracyPodcast.com
or
you can go to the subreddit at
slash r slash the Bayesian conspiracy
or you can support us on Patreon if you want
or leave us a review at iTunes all those
things help a lot we also have to thank
our audio engineer who is awesome that's
right thanks again to Kyle Moore for
finally bringing our audio quality into the
2010s
yeah at least
thanks Kyle awesome thank you all
for listening see you next
episode see you in two weeks
bye bye
I came into this
