Welcome to the Basing Conspiracy.
I'm Steven Super.
And we have a topic, but before we get into that,
I kind of wanted to pick your brain on something.
Oh boy, this is a surprise.
Well, I mean, I guess it is kind of a surprise.
It's just been something I've been thinking about for the past.
I guess basically since we had David on,
but like really sort of hit,
hit home the past few days.
Remember back when religion was bullshit?
Yes.
Like what, what the fuck happened?
I don't know if you were there from the very beginning
for the rationalist stuff,
but being able to see that religion is BS is like,
it's not even rationalism 101.
It's like skepticism 101, you know?
Yeah.
I think we might have talked about that in one of the very,
very early episodes that like,
and I think Yudkowski put it really well on somewhere
on less wrong.
I saw that it was like,
there, there isn't a lot of self,
self congratulation about getting the God question right.
Cause it's all like getting the werewolf question right.
Right.
And it's like, yeah, okay, cool.
Very elementary question.
Right.
This isn't like a big achievement.
I still think there's something to be gained of like,
you know, if you, if you learn some rationality stuff
and then apply that to your religion and left your faith,
that's pretty big move cause that's a big life change.
Yeah.
But, you know, I, I wasn't really just when I found this community
and I don't, there's, there's not a lot of circle jerky.
We're happy to be atheists in this group.
Right.
No, I mean that was,
that was one of the things about rationality that like
struck me as different from most of the other online spaces
where like, yeah, religion's not real.
Let's move on because that is such a simple question.
Why are we even bothering to discuss it?
You know, it's, I, God, I think it was Eliezer,
who said something that, uh, if you're,
there's scientists out there who actually go out
and believe in the Trinity and shit.
And if these are people who are in the lab
and see the way that the physical world works
and are able to test it and apply all those,
you know, methods of rationality as they say
to the, to the world in their laboratory,
but then they leave the laboratory and they're like,
yep, Jesus, this is my personal savior.
Um, the, is obviously something very wrong with their heads.
They're compartmentalizing to an insane degree
and it doesn't make any sense to do so.
And so for a long time, I mean,
we've never really talked about religion that much, right?
Every now and then we mention it.
And we've had like some things on the show.
We had, um, Cannonball Jenkins on to talk about spirituality,
but that was mainly as a drugs, you know, as spirituality kind of thing,
which I can at least get behind in the fact that drugs are a thing
that exists, you know, and actually have physical effects on brains.
And, and we've talked a bit about finding a sense of spirituality
and wonder through science and exploration,
which I'm totally behind too.
And then we had, um, Vivian on and she is like a witch
and sort of believes in magic or something,
but she's not a rationalist.
You know, she's never been a rationalist.
Things out with some of us sometimes,
but that's not the same as actually being a aspiring rationalist.
But then we talked with David and he was like, I do spells.
Like he said that he believed someone called him for a job
because he drew a sigil and it influenced the probability of people calling him.
I'm like, what the fuck just happened?
Why, what is our community degenerating?
Because we don't have a strong enough gate on the, you know,
a religion and mysticism is bullshit thing.
Like I thought we were post all that and I guess we're not.
Is that the open-ended question?
That's my open-ended question.
What the fuck?
Do we need to be more anti-religious just to keep those things going?
Um, I can think of two things related to that.
One, I don't think that David,
and feel free to tell me if I'm wrong,
would say that what he's doing is religious in any traditional sense.
Okay, that's very true.
So like, and I don't know if we can taboo religious
and say like if it's magic,
because magic is religious and religious is magic.
Yeah, I was using the wrong word there,
but yeah, I do mean specifically things that are supernatural.
Yeah, because he's not talking about the creator of the universe
carrying if you masturbate, right?
No, no.
He's saying that...
He can influence probability by drawing signs.
Right, so that's the thing and I,
maybe we can get him to non-Jordan Peterson Lee answer this question.
He made the sounds that someone could say,
that someone would say,
I can manipulate probability with my thoughts
or with my energies or whatever.
I got the impression throughout the entire episode
that he didn't really think he was doing that.
He did say he was going to test it scientifically.
Maybe that's just good rationality.
But I...
Like I didn't even want to touch that because I was like,
we only got an hour.
I wanted to talk about things that are actually interesting
instead of going back to the religion debate,
but now I regret it because now that's out there
without me having like strongly come on challenged it immediately.
Yeah, I...
Maybe it's worth getting a write-in to...
or a sound clip if he's down to do that to give a full answer to this,
but it's my impression that he doesn't think he's doing magic
with a capital M as per Harry Potter canon, right?
Or per...
I brought up the secret,
which is the closest thing that he was talking about.
And he said that was, you know,
people in the community hate that.
And I didn't read a lot of the...
I didn't read a lot of the Rune soup links that he sent.
I read the one on debt,
which to me, that was what captured me about it.
That's what I thought was really fun.
The quote about summoning debt like it's a demon
and borrowing from a probabilistic future,
that was really cool.
That was a really fun way to think about it.
And I was like, that is a really fun twist.
And it struck me as kind of like an original seeing
through a kaleidoscope, right?
I've often considered our modern economy
to be a form of like just ritual magic.
You get a bunch of humans together in the room,
they all perform certain prescribed actions
with these material components.
And at the end you get incalculable wealth out of it, you know?
Right.
Or, you know, we talked about like super organisms.
They're not organisms in any traditional sense,
other than the actions that they do, right?
I kind of got it like that.
I don't think that he would ever say,
if I think hard enough,
I could move this pencil off the table or something, right?
No, but that's not an influencing probability thing.
There's something influencing probability
without actually going out and doing something is it's magic.
Yeah, but I mean, I think if,
maybe this would be better to have him on for
because now I'm putting words in his mouth or just guessing
and I'm probably steel-manning too much,
maybe I'm steel-manning too much.
I think that there's a non-zero chance that like
your water bottle could just flip
because there's a non-zero chance that
the water and it could boil and it could
freak out and fall off the couch, right?
It's statistically not impossible.
It's so close to impossible as that
I would bet my life that it'll never happen.
Right.
As long as we're talking about manipulating probabilities,
I would say that David would say
that I would never think that I could try and ever do that.
There's no law of physics that says it couldn't happen,
but there's laws of statistics that say it won't ever happen.
So it is statistically impossible.
Fair enough. Well, David has a day job.
He doesn't win his money at the casinos, right?
Or buying lottery tickets.
Maybe not power balls, but you could do scratch-offs
and you could look at the seven in the
whatever gas station glass tank there
and pick all the winners because you know which ones it was going to be.
Or you could hit the blackjack tables.
If you really believe you're manipulating probabilities,
that's what you're doing.
I got the impression that this was like a self-help technique.
Like, I'm going to focus.
I'm going to put positive energies out there.
And when I said I would do a sigil, which I haven't done yet,
I thought it was like, all right, I'm going to do some positive vibes.
This is going to be like a meditation,
kind of more in the wishy-washy way that Vivian talked about it.
And I know some people do that,
but they all know it's just psychological tricks
and doesn't actually affect the physical world.
All right, David, if you're affecting the physical world,
let me know. I'm curious.
All right.
So as far as whether or not we need higher gatekeeping for religion.
Well, because I've also heard that, you know,
there seems to be just in general more mysticism
starting to flow into the rationalist community
and there's some people that have converted to various religions.
Okay.
So I've heard of one person that converted to Mormonism
and two people that converted to Catholicism.
So extremely small numbers, right?
That could happen to anyone just out of any group.
Are these rationalists you know in real life?
No.
These are people I've heard of.
So yeah, extremely small numbers out of a larger community
that just statistically will happen with any community
where a few people lose their heads.
But it's weird.
It is weird.
Was it Carl Sagan who said we should be open-minded
but not so open-minded that our brains fall out?
Someone said that.
That was more aggressive than Sagan.
Maybe that was James Randi or something.
Okay.
One of those.
So yeah, like we have a pretty open dialogue.
I think that many of us won't waste our time
talking about werewolves and Jesus and Zoroaster or you know whatever
but we'll spend some time thinking,
I don't know, like there's a slippery slope.
Maybe we'll just talk about spirituality in general
because the skeptic community I think is more resistant to that kind of talk.
That's why it's such a hard sell to do a meditation speech
at a skeptics conference, right?
And be like, this can really ground you.
This is great because it sounds like a complete shill.
Man, just spend 20 minutes a day for the next year doing this
and I promise you'll probably notice a bit of an effect, right?
And many of them charge subscription services for like apps or something, right?
That said, there's some good ones out there that you can get for free
or you can do demos for free or something
and that's guided meditations on YouTube, try them.
And then the other thing too is that meditation is this whole blanket
kind of like religion is, right?
Right.
It covers a lot of ground in that one word.
Right.
And so the stainless version is just,
at least in my limited understanding of it, is something just like mindfulness.
Where really just noticing that you're thinking
and taking a step back from that
and you'll notice as thoughts arise, you'll notice that their thoughts.
You're not just swept away in the current
like that sometimes, but I think I finally figured out
how I got to be naturally kind of okay at mindfulness.
It's a bit of a long story.
It's all skippet, but it was easy enough for me to,
once I noticed that that was a technique
to actually start implementing it fairly quickly.
The other hard part is remembering to do it.
That's why a lot of people set schedules to do it.
But like if I'm having trouble falling asleep,
rather than sit there and just, you know, often it's because I'm chasing a thought
and not realizing that I'm sprinting after it, right?
That's what helps me fall asleep a lot too.
And so I fall asleep fairly easily.
This was a historic problem.
I fall asleep quickly now, partly because I'm super tired all the time,
but the other part is just I noticed when that's happening more or less immediately.
Well, never more than a few minutes.
Like I don't find myself swept away in long thoughts for more than a few minutes.
And that doesn't mean that I can't carry a thought.
It just means that I'm not...
Do you know what I'm talking about?
I totally don't know what you're talking about.
Is there a way to articulate it?
Is the same way that that first helped me finally start getting some, you know,
decent falling asleep skills?
Yeah. And so, you know, I'll just take a minute and check into my body and be like,
hey, I can feel the sheets on my toes.
I can feel my weight against the bed and just, you know,
focusing on something other than your thoughts is another...
is part of the trick or part of the way to get good at it.
That's why people often like focus on the breath because it's, you know,
quote, you always... it's always with you.
It's just it's something that you can actually center your attention on.
That's not a thought in your head.
You know, you can do it at a color.
You know, I've been to a couple of meditation centers where they do it,
you know, with their eyes open rather than eyes closed
because you're focusing on like the swatch of ground in front of you.
Right?
I find that more distracting than closing my eyes,
but I never stuck around for the whole time because doing it for 90 minutes is
super, super boring.
But doing it for 10 seconds every five minutes is great.
That's also one of the reasons to help me fall asleep.
It is really super boring and just drift off sometimes.
There you go. Yeah.
And, you know, if it gets you to sleep, it gets you to sleep.
So I guess what I'm getting at there though is that we're entertaining
something that I think has definite validity and is now showing,
I think there's clinical studies where people are,
it can help alleviate mild depression.
It can, you know, certainly things like cognitive behavioral therapy
incorporate aspects of mindfulness, noticing the kinds of thoughts you're having.
We took something that sounds wishy-washy and, you know, ignore that.
That's bullshit pseudoscience, whatever.
That's missus is a magic.
And so no, no, no, there's a kernel of something super valuable here
that we can all actually use and you don't have to believe anything stupid to do it.
Yeah.
So I think we just, I totally agree.
I think we just got to be careful not to let the stupidness seep in
because it seems to want to get in around the edges if you have the useful thing.
And I think that's, I mean, it's especially harmful for people who don't have
the sort of built up, rationalist immunity already.
Yeah.
And you could totally mutton Bailey it too and just say, you know,
oh yeah, no, when I do spells, I'm just meditating.
It's just for, you know, my personal energies.
But then you can, in the next sentence, retreat and say something like,
and now I can manipulate the world.
Watch this.
And now I will do a spell to help my, you know, my Democratic brothers,
who are trying to get elected against the Republican incumbent.
You know, I'm pretty sure that they've even done large, like this is probably
definitely sort of scientific meditators, but where they'll all get together
and like hope on one thing or think constant one thing,
whether it's influencing random number of generators or trying to make plants grow
or something random, right?
So those things don't work.
But so I guess what I was getting at though is that, yes, we let in what looks
like bullshit and it looks, and it turns out to be pretty cool.
So we have a, maybe we need more than one filter, right?
So we, we're willing to entertain any idea.
Whereas your hard line skeptic might be like, no, I've got my box of real stuff
and bullshit and that's got, that's got a bullshit tag on it.
It's going in the bullshit box.
Right.
So I think it's good to be able to let ideas.
It's like too rigid.
It does.
And because with any miss out on things like meditation or, you know,
there are some, maybe who, maybe some skeptics who haven't read Feynman
that would, you know, shy away from words like spirituality.
You know, or Richard Dawkins can be powerful in that too.
If you read Unweaving the Rainbow or the last,
the greatest show on earth is a evolution book.
There's got to be another, another catch.
You know, we, we let things through once, once they're, there is still a bullshit box.
I mean, unless someone comes to me with a dead werewolf,
I'm not going to start believing werewolves, right?
And even if they do, I'm going to, I'm not going to just look at the body and be like,
that's a fucking werewolf.
I've changed my mind.
Some, some of us turn into dog people every, every month.
I'm going to say, okay, that's super weird.
Let's get some scientists in here to poke at this thing.
And I think that even a skeptic would do that.
So where's the other barrier to be drawn?
It's got to be, I want to say consistent with our understanding of the laws of physics,
but a good humble rationalist will admit that our understanding of the laws of physics is strong,
but imperfect.
Right.
Every now and then when I'm talking with someone who, who believes some sort of, you know,
supernatural stuff, they'll be like, well, you don't know everything about physics.
It's like, no, obviously I don't know everything about physics, but I do know that what you're
saying reeks of all the bullshit that we have found to be not true throughout the past.
Yeah.
I don't know everything about, I don't know everything about this subject that we're talking
about, but I'll buy you $1,000 that you don't either.
Right.
Just because I don't know all of physics doesn't mean I have to entertain your, your assertion
that God had created the universe or something.
Yeah.
That was actually literally a conversation I had a few weeks ago.
And this, that's the standard thing, right?
Every evolution, every anti-evolution debate is somebody saying, oh, can you explain the
elbow joint of the, you know, lesser spotted weasel frog or something?
And it's like, oh, I didn't, I haven't looked into their elbows yet.
You know, maybe I can have a grad student do it.
Aha.
You don't know.
Therefore it's, it's intelligent design and Jesus cares about, you know, who gets married
and who masturbates.
And so it doesn't have to be one or the other, right?
There's, and there's rationalist techniques to avoid that.
There's privileging the hypothesis.
There's being aware of false dichotomies.
If, if I can't explain it, that doesn't mean that your explanation is any more likely.
Certainly if I can't explain it, because I'm an idiot, but if, even if the scientific
enterprise doesn't know yet, that doesn't mean that your pet theory is very, it doesn't
mean that it makes, it doesn't mean that it's rational to believe it just because none
of us, whether it's me, people in the room or humanity as a whole knows, right?
The idea that it could be a God that created the universe is, I guess, not physically
impossible, but it is so statistically unlikely based on everything we know that it is as
unlikely as my water bottle spontaneously boiling off all the water and jumping across
the room.
Right.
And the, which is to say impossible and I reject it out of hand.
And that's fair.
I think it's like there's, there's the problem of a privileging any hypothesis, you know,
even if you just say, ah, intelligent design, but nobody, nobody just stops there unless
they're not in bailing, right?
And in which case they're not stopping.
They're just pretending to stop.
They'll say, look, I beat Richard Dawkins in this evolution debate.
Therefore, you're, you're, you're damn right.
We've, we've got to stop abortions and, you know, this and that because the creator of
the universe wrote this book.
Well, I actually was talking with someone who did more or less kind of stopped there
or at least as far as we, when we were talking.
Yeah.
Cause what's the point of believing that unless you're attaching a bunch of other shit to
it, right?
He just wanted to believe it as far as I can tell.
He was like, I because it, because it meant something, maybe it meant that there's more
chance of an afterlife or that somebody in the universe cared about or something, that
the universe itself cared about him or something or, um, but it wasn't just a random, you know,
it's not like they just, they put a random more generator together, formed a completely
arbitrary belief and said, you can explain it.
Therefore, um, this, this insane random thing I believe is true.
Right.
Um, what was the question?
How do we filter out nonsense?
Yeah.
Basically, do we need to have a slightly stronger, not just filter out nonsense, not how do we
filter out nonsense?
Do we need to have a slightly stronger taboo on, on religious mysticism creeping in?
It's hard for me to see how that would hurt.
Um, anything that I can think of and granted, I don't know that much, but that would pass.
That would get extra scrutiny would still pass because, you know, again, I maybe mindfulness
is too easy of an example.
Maybe it's a, you know, the opposite of a, you know, cow pot or what was the, uh, so
you want to, uh, let's use an example from our personal lives.
Uh, remember the, uh, solstice party that we had, I think like two years ago?
Yes.
And there was, you know, some talk of, uh, Cannonball Jenkins wanted to do like sort
of a ritual like they had over in New York where, uh, people light candles and talk about,
uh, I don't know, things that humanity has done and why it's meaningful and sort of,
you know, like having a sort of community ritual thing.
And the person who was hosting the party said, I am not comfortable having any sort of mysticism,
mysticism like that in my house because they had come from a, uh, very fundamentalist religion
and had managed to finally get themselves excommunicated, uh, which apparently took some work.
But, uh, but no, they were very anti, uh, religion and said, no.
And, you know, I kind of respected that because while I thought it would be neat to try a
kind of ritual like that, and I've heard a lot of good things from people who like them,
I too get really skieved out and like just, I thought, I think we talk about this when
we had the Jenkins on the episode, right?
Where it was like really, I still have a sort of allergic emotional reaction and he talked
me out of it a little bit.
And I think I recall by the end of that episode, I was like, okay, yeah, I'm willing to try
this thing that you've said, that sounds interesting.
But still when I think about it, it feels weird and, and so there's the trade off that
we would be missing out on things like that, which some people genuinely do find valuable.
Maybe it's that I've done things in the last year that's increased my openness to experience.
Um, but much like I've agreed to go to you, to go with you to a club.
I'm inclined to believe that there are aspects of life that I'm missing out on because I've
decided that there aren't fun already.
I'd be willing to give it a shot.
I suspect I won't have a good time, you know, holding hands and uttering a prayer to
Elias Yudkowski.
Um, but, uh, which is what we do now just before we sacrifice the, the babies.
I think it's something more rationalist to sacrifice as we sacrifice our, our bad beliefs.
I don't know.
Okay.
As we, as we evict our beliefs that aren't paying rent.
Um, God, we could make this into a real sermon.
Um, uh, in this particular case, I think it's easy enough to say, you know, the, the host
of the party at whose place at the person's house we're doing it at didn't want to.
It's that easy for me.
Yeah.
Like I'm not going to, you know, say, well, I don't care.
This place also didn't want us to bring meat.
Yeah.
And I'm like, well, I'm not going to bring meat because I think it's okay.
Right.
Like, uh, if you don't want it, it's your house.
That's fine.
You know, if they want to come over outside to do it or something, you know, whatever
it does, that doesn't strike me.
They're not doing anything magic there.
No, they're not.
They're not claiming.
They're not claiming to.
I don't think that's a good example.
Well, no, I mean, it's, it's explicitly not magic.
It's just a celebration.
We draw the line there and say, this, this, this, this is what gets it on the slope to
doing real mad, doing quote, real mad.
That's what I'm saying.
If, if you start introducing the more ritual kind of that stuff, then that kind of cracks
the door open a little bit for the magical thinking to come back in, right?
Hmm.
Or does it?
It certainly could.
Um, I don't want to be making a slippery slope argument because those are kind of bullshitty
too, but.
Well, some slopes are actually slippery.
Yeah.
And sometimes it's not a bad thing.
Sometimes it's okay to slide all the way to the bottom.
And other times, uh.
You can make a compelling point from fantasy.
Right.
Yes.
So that there's a joke there.
Um, neither of us necessarily talk about killing babies, but long story.
Um, the only during our solstice rituals, right?
I don't know.
That strikes me close to the meditation example.
I mean, closing your eyes and thinking positive thoughts or just meditating on the emotion
of love is that sounds about as hipster as they can get, right?
Um, and as we all know, hipsterism is equivalent to religion, you know, if we're going to be
super slanderous and yet I would say that's a valuable way to spend 10 minutes a day, probably
not six hours a day for a month, but banning that sort of mild thing or not banning, but
shunning it, um, or whatever, uh, or not condoning in our personal communities or whatever.
Yeah.
Not, not partaking.
Kind of, kind of looking at it funny and being like, hmm.
I wonder, is this a bad example to say like using drugs that alter your psychologist, like
that alter your state of mind for a day?
You know, like, I know that people, I know people, well, I've met people who don't drink
or, you know, have ever tried pot or, you know, like I said, a shot because they want to be
lucid all the time.
That's, that's the way they want to do it because that's how they can be the best thinkers that
they can be.
I think they're missing out on something.
Yeah.
And, you know, you don't, you don't have to believe in, they do, but they can change you.
Um, you know, they make you a little, sometimes you're more open to experience, you're less
stressed.
I mean, I certainly got much better at the social stuff after I started drinking a lot.
I mean, I think everybody gets that, you know, just cause they, but eventually it became
like a more permanent skill or now I could be social even when I wasn't drinking.
Because now you maybe you'll realize that, oh yeah, nothing bad happens when I'm social.
Or maybe it burned out the antisocial neurons in my brain.
I don't know, man.
Yeah.
But, uh, one way or another, you stopped caring about it and that's probably a positive
change.
Yeah.
So I wonder what, you know, someone like Penn Gillette would say of, you know, like, look,
Ivan's been shown to help treat pretty major depressive disorder.
Do you think that it's a good trade-off?
You know, do you think it's better to lucidly view the world through the, the heavy haze
of depression or do you think it's better to be tripped out for a few weeks, you know,
once a weekend for a few weeks or something to, um, to overcome that.
And then you can be that much better at perceiving everything.
Certainly I think it'd be a waste to spend the rest of my life tripping, right?
Um, and I don't think anyone would want to spend, you know, a long time doing anything
like that, but the goal of what I'm trying to say is that I don't know if I could draw
the line at anything, a priori, um, at least without having given, giving it some thought
first.
You know what?
I think I will draw this analogy and this is probably the last thing I have to say on
the subject.
Um, I am a, in most things, a rather left of center person and basically everyone I knew
was also, so when we would, uh, when I would share things on Facebook, it would be, I wouldn't
share the, the same stuff of everyone else is just repeating the party line.
Right.
I was like, that's boring.
That's echo chambery.
I don't care about that.
But like when I found some cool little article, like on the edge of things, kind of like being
like, and look at this edge case, isn't that interesting?
It kind of challenges some of our assumptions.
Where should, what should we do with this?
I would share those because I thought those were really interesting and, uh, I realized
that for a not insignificant number of people, their primary interactions with me is through
the stuff that I share online, right?
And so some people start saying like, are you like alt right or, or secretly conservative
or something?
I'm like, no.
And they're like, well, you sound a lot like one.
You, I don't know if I want to hang out with you anymore.
And, um, I finally got the advice that says, you know what?
Every now and then do that echo chambery thing, just bust out the old abortion is great flag
and wave it around or whatever flag you, you know, happen to be, uh, really on the left
side of, uh, not too often, but, you know, maybe once a month, maybe twice a month, just
to reaffirm that.
Signature allegiance.
Exactly.
Signature allegiance.
Reaffirm that you are part of this tribe and that they, that you believe the same things
they believe.
And so now, even though I find it a little tedious, I do do that, uh, probably a couple
of times a month and I've, I've noticed positive results.
I think it might be good every now and then just to wave the flag of, Hey, mysticism and
paranormal supernatural stuff is bullshit.
So let's all keep that in mind, guys.
I can see the point you're making.
I think it's a good one, um, for the purposes of getting along with people in social settings
that aren't, you know, one of the, I don't know how you define aspiring rationalist
other than people who, you know, say they identify that way or whatever, but part of
it is the joy of entertaining new ideas and challenging ones.
Yeah.
I mean, like I found, um, you know, Sam Harris, uh, had a, had a blog post back before he's
doing his podcast on, um, profiling at airports that I thought was super compelling.
Um, I didn't, compelling in the sense that I don't know if I thought that I necessarily
agreed with it, but I thought it was a really fun and interesting idea, um, that I remember
that article.
Yeah.
I mean, the idea that we're spending, that we're wasting time making Betty White take
her shoes off, um, when it's almost certain, you know, or better yet, I think we talked
about this in the show, Al Gore got patted down.
We got extra security randomly.
Right.
Did the person doing it really think Al Gore had switched sides?
I mean, if so, then we're, none of us are safe, right?
And there's no point in, there's no point in not checking literally everybody, um, including
you know, the pilots and everybody because anyone, anyone could be switched, you know,
so that seems like a waste.
So like that, if using our resources more appropriately made sense.
And I, if I shared that and I had shared, you know, how I'm more pro gun than my friends
on the left, or if I'm a more anti religion, um, probably than the average person on the
left, there, a lot of people on the left, I think it'd be anti Christianity.
But if you say are anti Islam, then you're, uh, then you're suddenly some conservative
nut job.
And I'm like, even if you're just anti religion as a blanket, there are more Muslims than
there are Christians.
Right.
So therefore I'm, even if I'm distributing it exactly evenly, um, I'm, however many
more Muslims that there are than Christians, I'm that much more anti Islam because there's
that more of them.
Yeah.
So if there are more Christians, I'd be more anti Christian, maybe, uh, if, if all I did
was share those, I, I could see how people would, you know, think it's whatever dog whistling
or secretly conservative endorsement or something.
So I can see the social benefit of doing that.
So like I said, I think it'd be really boring if at every third meetup, we all go around
in a circle and mention how much, so that's, that's what I'm thinking, right?
So that's, that's, that's kind of culted by itself, you know, yeah, we still don't believe
God exists guys.
Yeah.
Right.
So that sounds super boring.
And I'm wondering on what for, uh, on what form another anti religion post would take
place.
Maybe it could be part of a larger topic.
You know, if they're talking about anything remotely spirituality, just to say, by the
way, religion and magic are bullshit, but you know, this, I can't think of another example
of meditation thing.
Here's something that we can glean from that.
And this is a useful, um, example, I could see someone more eloquent than me writing
a, uh, less wrong post about how meditation made it through the filter of skepticism, of
rationality to become something that's actually useful, even though it came from this weird
hokey box.
Um, so if someone wants to make that point, while in it stressing that the rest of the,
that there is a lot of hokey nonsense in that box that should stay in there, is that the
kind of thing you're talking about?
Yeah.
I can, I can see that.
And maybe there should be something like that because yeah, we don't want to become the
group that, oh yeah, rationalists, even those people who think that they can do magic.
Um, I don't think we're ever going to get rid of the people who can compartmentalize,
you know, Yudhikasi talks about it, Dawkins talks about it.
Everybody who talks, you know, Harris talks about, um, Francis Collins.
He was the director of the NIH.
I don't know if he still is or not, but he's apparently a younger, well, at least a, yeah,
I think he's a young earth creationist.
No, no, not young earth.
Not younger.
No, he was the one that, uh, he was possibly intelligent designer.
He was the one that, uh, converted to, to Christianity after seeing the waterfall.
Yeah.
I, I think Dennett came at him hard for the intelligent design part because it was,
I think it was explicit.
Yeah.
No, he's, he's definitely, he used like guided by, guided by God or something in a
PowerPoint slide.
Which is like, how can you possibly disprove that?
Well, here's the mutation and here's what happened.
By the way, God wanted it to happen this way.
Well, getting into the whole thing of like, why would God make things happen through what
looks like random chance that results in tons of misery and suffering for thousands of years,
for basically everything on earth, throwing all that aside.
Like how, how do you get off doing that while doing real science that requires actual thinking?
The answer is some people are capable of, of that kind of compartmentalization.
And another thing that, that I think distinguishes rationalists from, from people like Francis
Collins would be like, if someone pointed that to me, that that's compartmentalizing,
I would give it some thought, hopefully in a few seconds and be like,
shit, I think you're onto something.
I need to figure this out and figure out what I'm actually believing here.
Cause those two things don't make any sense to believe in, to believe in tandem.
So nothing else you'd have to come up with a darn good excuse.
Yeah, for sure.
And it, and it would have to be darn good, right?
It couldn't just be, well, we don't know everything yet.
There might be something to this.
So there might be something to, you know, holding three emeralds in your left hand
and an magic eight ball on your right and, you know, wishing as hard as you can.
Who knows?
So like, you can't privilege one hypothesis over, over any other of the
quadrillion you could think of.
So certainly, if someone's saying you wrote that rune wrong, it won't work,
or that you wrote that sigil wrong, this won't work now.
Then I think that there's, that they've crossed the line into, into pseudo, into, into magic.
Well, into, we can't, if magic is, is, you know, the, the same version,
it's crossed, it's crossed the bridge into insane, what was the word used before, hokey?
Hokey, yes.
Yeah.
If the, if the act of drawing a shape and thinking a positive thought,
and it acts a positive change on your psychology, that could be,
there could be something to that, like there's something to meditation.
I'm totally open to that idea.
If you're saying you drew the shape wrong, so now it's not going to work, there's no way.
Yeah.
Unless you know something about my brain.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Unless it's proven that, you know, counterclockwise circles actually, you know,
with your left hand to do this.
Okay.
Well, if there's a paper that seems compelling there, go for it.
Right.
Probably won't hold up to a repetition, replication.
Yeah.
All right.
Yeah, I'm for that.
We should be politely, not even politely, like there's, it's not polite.
You know, at the beginning of this, I had said that, you know,
getting the God questions right.
I quoted Yuckaski saying that getting the God question right is like getting the
real world question right.
That's super offensive to somebody who's religious.
Yeah.
Well, you know, when religion came with my new team at work,
we'd talked about some other stuff, or it's just comfortable saying,
hey, they'd ask like, are you religious?
And I, you know, I always should think of how to say it.
Because if I say no, that's not enough.
So I say, I'm as convinced of the truth claims of the Bible as I am that unicorns are real.
That's to say, certain, or almost certainly not, right?
Enough that I'm willing to bet everything, you know.
But it, and by putting it in the same bucket as literal unicorns,
if one of them was really, really just, that could be offensive.
So I'm not saying we should be inoffensive,
but I don't think we should waste a lot of time.
But a bit more time, I think does sound useful.
I'm convinced.
Okay.
Huzzah!
Huzzah!
See how we got onto our actual topic?
I'm down.
Cool.
And then I did have a good pick for this episode
that I wanted to spend at least a few minutes on.
Okay.
Or a rat chat, excuse me.
Not a, not a rationally speaking pick.
Everyone listened to Julia Gales podcast.
All I will say while we're killing time, I'm listening to some,
I've had a hard time getting through like the last few months or the worth of episodes.
I find them less rationally speaking and more just her talking to cool people.
Okay.
Which is great.
But it was, I kind of, I told Julia Gale if this at a conference once that I was like,
Hey, I just wanted to say I agree with you on almost everything and disagree with Massimon
almost everything.
And she's like, Oh, you read my Facebook post.
And I was like, what Facebook post?
And she looked like me like as an idiot.
And she's like, I made a joke like verbatim that someone come up to me at TAM and say this.
And I was like, Oh, I didn't see it.
And then I spent the rest of the elevator ride awkwardly trying to find out on Facebook
while we're sitting there together.
And it was just, it was, it was kind of uncomfortable.
But what I'm getting at is I miss his input.
You know, he, I don't think we agree.
Me and Massimo agree on many on really anything maybe on some,
like the basic times of like the virtue of science and this and that,
but like any, anything that like rationalists believe he doesn't believe it seems like.
But I found him fun and I found his counter positions to things and his way of approaching
things that brought a bit more dynamicism to the podcast.
Now it's more like an interview show.
Although Julia holds her ground a lot in like asking great questions.
I think I'm just finding them less about exploring the borderlands between reason
and nonsense.
I guess the tag of the show and more just talking about really cool stuff
with Julia asking fun questions.
Okay.
Like the one I was listening to on the way over.
Episode two, two 11 Sabine Haasenfelder on the case against beauty in physics.
Oh yeah.
I remember hearing, did I actually hear someone interviewed her?
Maybe I heard Julia's interview with her.
Yeah, it might have been that one.
It was so far it's good.
I'm half, I'm three quarters through it, but like it's not so much on like,
is this nonsense or not?
It was just, but Julia's asking great questions.
Like, how is, I can't even think of how it is.
I don't know how she thinks of these things on the fly.
I couldn't think of them.
He gave me a week, like she's crazy genius at this.
Dude, do you remember the question?
It was basically Sabine had said something and Julia had kind of asked back with another example
and said, how is that any different than like this weird thing that I'm,
this weird example that I'm generating on the fly.
And she had said, or then Sabine replies,
you know what?
You're right.
I didn't define it carefully enough.
And so like, she can, she can nail those down really well.
So it's valuable for that.
But I was just killing time until he found what you're looking at on your notes.
So, did you want me to start then?
Yeah, totally.
But I'm just saying everyone should listen to rationally speaking.
Yes.
Okay.
I need to set up some background for this post before we start.
Is that okay?
Totally.
Okay.
So the needed background for this is Newcombe's problem.
I'm pretty sure you're familiar and I know we talked about it once before on the episode,
or not on the episode, but on the podcast.
But that was a while ago.
People might not remember.
Some people may not have heard that episode.
So I'm going to go over Newcombe's problem again real quick.
I think that was one of our worst episodes ever.
That was the game theory one.
Oh, okay.
Wasn't it?
I don't remember.
Oh, well, it sounds like a game theory thing.
So anyway, let's go over Newcombe's problem.
Alrighty.
Newcombe's problem.
Hold on.
Sorry.
Quick introduction.
When I say it was one of the worst ones ever,
I meant that that particular podcast of ours,
we meant to have a guest for.
And I think you'd led well,
but I wasn't the least prepared for.
And I think we kind of all floundered
and we got feedback of like,
that was not a good coverage of game theory.
And I was like, yeah.
So anyway, if you haven't heard that one,
you're not missing out.
Yeah, cool.
So all the more reason to cover it briefly right now.
Please.
Okay.
Newcombe's problem is this.
You are approached by a predictor.
We will call this predictor Omega.
Omega has some access to your decision making process.
Perhaps you are an algorithm and it can look at your source code.
Perhaps you are a human and it's just really good at reading human psychology
or it can actually scan your brain or something.
It's a predictor.
It shows you two boxes.
One box is clear.
You can see that within it is a thousand dollars.
The other box is opaque.
You don't know what's in that box.
Omega says to you, I have made a prediction.
If I predicted that you would open only the black box,
then you will only get what is in the black box.
And I put a million dollars in the black box.
If I predicted that you will open both boxes,
I put zero dollars in the black box.
Here's the two boxes, make your choice, and then Omega walks away.
So at this point, you can open just the black box,
in which case the thousand dollars in the clear box gets incinerated or something.
You don't get it.
And you get either a million dollars or zero dollars
based on whether Omega predicted that you would open only one box or not.
Or you can open both boxes.
In which case, you get the thousand dollars in the clear box,
and you get either zero dollars or a million dollars in the opaque box
based on whether Omega thought that you would open only one or both of them.
And the question is, what do you do now?
Someone who hasn't heard this problem before,
one of the common replies might be,
why do I trust Omega's judgment?
What is Omega doing that makes me think that there's anything to their prediction?
We can say that he's done this a lot of times in the past
and has always been right before.
Cool.
Or at least 99.9% of the time he's been right.
And so whether or not that's through, like you said,
brain scanning, I'm a super intelligence, I'm literally God.
It's the point is, is that...
He's pretty darn good at this.
For the postulate of the thought experiment,
are they all knowing or just really fucking good?
Just really fucking good.
Okay.
But good enough.
Basically, yeah.
Mistakes are extremely rare.
Extremely rare as in one in a hundred or one in a hundred thousand.
At least one in a thousand, maybe less.
Okay.
Then yeah, I'm a one boxer.
I don't...
Okay.
But I'm sure that there are some people who disagree with me
and maybe because I don't know anything about decision theory,
but I hear this and I'm like,
this predictor tells me that they scan my brain
and if I'm a one boxer, I get a million dollars.
Well, then by God, I'm a one boxer because I'd love a million dollars.
Right.
So...
And the people who disagree with that say that that is backwards thinking
because the choice you make now cannot affect things that happened in the past.
Like whether Omega put the money in the box or not.
But Omega's probably making the decision based on your reaction
after they told you what happened when you walked into the room or something, right?
Well, they know they put the money in the box before you showed up.
Right.
But they're telling you this saying,
I know how you'll act after I tell you this.
Yes.
Because they've already set the room up.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's considered a difficult problem by many
because of that backwards causality thing,
even though most rationalists have the same opinion you did.
You know, if I only choose one box, I get a million dollars.
So fuck you.
I'm only choosing one box.
Marginal cost of taking two boxes is another thousand dollars on top of a million.
To me, it's not worth it.
Right.
Maybe we should do something like make it 100,000.
I think that's how it usually is.
Yeah, it is.
It is a thousand.
But like, then the idea is like, well, it's a bonus thousand.
And...
Who cares about a bonus thousand if you're getting a million?
Well, no, no.
But the idea, I think the point still stands.
But to me, I'm willing to gamble away that thousand for saying I have a one and...
Or I have a 999,999 chance out of 100 or out of a million or whatever
of getting a million dollars.
What if they were both one million then?
I see what you're saying.
It would have to be more in the black box.
Right.
Yeah.
Some amount to make it worth going for the black box.
So three million then.
Three million and one million.
You're guaranteed one million.
You might get four million or you take a chance to get either three million or zero.
Take a really good chance to get three million though, right?
So it is.
It is.
Yeah.
Supposedly a really good chance.
I would still be a one boxer in that situation.
Okay.
All right.
It is often been compared to not often, at least one time.
I saw it compared to...
Often.
Once.
I think it just stuck in my brain really strongly, which is why I was like,
it's been often kind of like, no, it's been often in my head.
There you go.
Been compared to Calvinism.
John Calvin, I think his first name was John, was...
They're all named John.
Yeah, right.
Was a theologian who believed in predestination, i.e. when you are created,
God knows whether you're going to heaven or to hell,
and there's nothing you can do to change that.
So the common reply to that is, well, if I'm already either saved or damned,
regardless of what I do, what is my motivation for not going out and,
you know, killing, stealing, raping, whatever I want to do,
because it doesn't change what happens to me in the end?
And his answer or the common answer is, well, if you were going to heaven,
you wouldn't do those things.
That you are demonstrating what sort of person you are by doing those things and
making it obvious to everyone else where you're going to.
This strikes me as a clear example of him having this predestination theory where,
of course, he's one of the chosen and so are all of his best friends who supported his religion.
Maybe, I mean...
But then this was like a post-hoc reply.
This doesn't sound like the kind of carefully thought out,
like it was all written down at once, then shown to people that way, right?
I'm pretty sure that he thought it out beforehand,
just because he was a very, you know, think-y guy.
Well, I thought he was a...
I guess I only learned about Calvin in high school.
I thought he was a crank and like a lot of religious people and that this was...
Well, he was a crank and that he was a religious.
Well, but he was a smart religious dude.
So it was really written out like in the way that, you know,
like people like Darwin would anticipate people who disagree with them and say,
well, then this is why.
Then what's the fucking point?
I mean, that's the exact same argument of what's the fucking point of taking one box?
Well, because it's the same problem, right?
But why would you believe that?
Why would you believe what?
The predestination thing in the first place?
Or is that too far afield?
No, that's just...
Why would you believe it is more along the lines of because God knows everything
and it is part of the dogma?
But in this case, Omega told me this, right?
And so, I don't know...
But God has also said that he is all-knowing,
which must mean that he knows the future,
which must mean that he knows if you're going to heaven or hell, right?
And he knows whether or not you can do the right thing when he made you.
Yeah.
I used to joke when I was de-converting as a teenager,
my mom...
My parents are vaguely religious.
I think I mentioned once that my mom articulated Pascal's wager to me
without knowing what it was called.
She had said something once about just like,
I'm just worried about your soul.
And I quipped that I'm as God made me, mom.
If I'm an unbeliever, that's because that's the way God wanted me to be.
I don't know...
It would be bizarre...
This is just my problem with theology.
It'd be bizarre to be punished for something you had no control over.
Yeah.
So, anyway, I feel like I'm going to hung up on the wrong part of this problem.
Well, I mean, that is entirely a tangent and not at all related to what we're going to talk about.
But I really like the fact that Calvinism is basically another version of Newcombe's problem
that God knows your decision algorithms and knows what you're going to do.
And I'm giving a skeptical look.
I think that's why you drifted off.
I think it's a much less compelling case.
Really?
Totally.
Okay.
I mean, there are other reasons...
Well, you asked me if Omega was all-knowing, right?
But God is the Omega that is all-knowing.
But in the Calvinism case, no one actually talked to God.
People just said they did, right?
Well, you have to give the thought experiment a little bit of leeway.
There's no actual Omega either.
We're just assuming that there's an Omega for the person of this experiment.
But I'm also not picking a real box, right?
Right.
So, but in the...
I mean, we're also not Calvinists, but I still find this interesting.
But in the heaven health thing, if I'm a Calvinist, I am picking a box by deciding what kind of life to live.
Yeah. Well, I mean, if you're a Calvinist, you're kind of fucked anyway because you're Catholic.
The other thing I'd say to that is there are benefits to living a good life outside of going to heaven.
Yes.
And I guess there are benefits to one boxing in that you get $1,000, which maybe is the point
because $1,000 is small pennies compared to an afterlife of eternal bliss or whatever.
But I would think that why do you not murder and rape people?
Because you're not a happy person if you do that.
I go to the Play-Doh answer, right?
Yeah.
It's...
The non-virtuous person isn't happy.
They're conniving and they're miserable and they're confused and scared or whatever, right?
A lot of that's armchair philosophy, but I'm sure some of that pans out in actual experiments.
Well, I'm confident enough to assert that without having actually looked.
I'd bet that in more...
Well, I know this. I've met people who...
People on the wrong side of the law are people who have done terrible things and are racked with guilt.
They're not happy. They're not flourishing.
So that's why you do the good thing.
And if God's going to send you to hell forever, then fuck that dude.
So anyway, yes.
Newcombe's problem, I'm a one-boxer and I'll choose to have a good life whether or not I'm going to hell.
Okay.
All right.
The...
Where was I?
Oh, okay.
So Newcombe's problem is considered usually by most people as sort of a esoteric thought problem
that doesn't really have any effects on the real world.
Like this ultimate Omega predictor person comes up and offers you this random opportunity
that you have no control over the outcome aside from the sort of person you already were, right?
It's kind of not fair, but it doesn't matter because it's just some stupid thought process,
thought experiment.
There's this wonderful post that says, oh, Newcombe-like problems are commonplace.
And I was like, that's interesting.
I would like to read this.
And it makes the argument that we are in fact surrounded by predictors.
Anytime we interact with another human, we are interacting with someone who not only has
usually a lot of motivation to predict what kind of person we are,
but also has a lot of experience in predicting what other people do just through a life lived
and has, you know, many, many eons of evolution behind them also helping with the predicting
of the humans that they interact with the most.
And so actually we run into Newcombe-like problems very frequently where people are trying
to judge you based on what they think that you are going to do.
I think the example given in the article was a job interview.
If you go into a job interview, all very bold and confident, people will pick up on that
and will assume that you probably have some idea of what you're doing.
Whereas if you go in as a shy person who is very unsure of their skills,
they'll pick up on that as well and are less likely to offer you the job.
And the thing is, if you are someone who is very unsure of their skills
and not at all confident in yourself, it's really hard to fake the boldness and confidence.
And if you're a bold, confident person, it's less likely that you have no idea what you're doing.
Every confident person will act confident.
Most every, almost every confident person will act confident.
Yes.
But not every shy person, most shy people can't act confident.
Yes.
Okay.
And so I was going to say, because I've performed well in interviews that I did not feel well equipped
for, but that might be an outlier.
And everyone who is well equipped will perform like that or better.
Yeah.
Okay, gotcha.
Yeah.
And also, I mean, you may have performed well enough for them to offer you the job and
they could still tell, well, he doesn't entirely know exactly what he's saying,
but we need someone to do this and he looks good enough.
That sounds like about right.
They're willing to settle for a little less.
Right.
Perfect.
Yeah, another example also in the post was that this person, the post author specifically knows
two people who are really unpleasant and untrustworthy people.
And whenever they are in situations out in the real world, they always think they're
picking the best option of what they have at the time.
They, like in a standard sort of defect or cooperate scenario, they're like,
I don't want to be a sucker.
This would make me a sucker.
This is the best option at the time.
So they pick the thing which is not the most cooperative thing.
And as a result, even though they're picking what is the best option at the moment,
they are not presented with better opportunities.
Their lives would be far better if they were the kind of person who cooperates,
but they can't fake the ability, they can't fake being a cooperative person.
They, the only way to actually give off the vibe of being someone who is cooperative and who
helps is to be that kind of person.
If you are the sort of unpleasant person who defects whenever you think it would be to your
advantage, that comes through and people pick up on it and you just don't have as good of a life.
I found that very interesting that we do have those sort of newcomer problems all the time,
and it put the whole thing into greater perspective for me.
I liked it.
We're talking about Valentine on less wrong, the post.
Actually, that was a precursor to the post of Valentine's.
Which precursor was that?
Because I only read the other one.
It was the newcomer-like problems are the norm.
Oh, okay.
Right.
So is that the one we're talking?
Or is that the lead up to?
Yeah, that was just another precursor that I had to talk about first.
Oh, no.
That's great.
And that is really interesting.
And now I can totally see how it leads into this.
Because having just heard that, I'm not convinced of the fact,
like what do you mean we're a newcomer, I needed more explanation.
And that's what, that's the one that I read.
The follow-up that dove more into that.
The other, the only precursor I read to that was the one called Kencho,
which Kencho is spelled like Kenshin, but oh, instead of in at the end.
And it's a Japanese word that, what was it, three episodes ago,
two episodes ago, where I went on that random tangent about like meaning and,
or not meaning, but like my outlook on life.
And I had like this kind of perspective.
I think that's what Kencho is.
It's the thing that's hard to articulate that I can say,
but it doesn't, the sounds don't really encompass it.
You can hear it, but you can't understand it.
That post was really fun.
So I strongly recommend that.
And I finally have a word to describe that intangible thing.
I was trying to explain.
So I recommend that.
And I'm going to read, I think everything that Valentine wrote,
unless wrong, because I really liked that post.
And I really loved the, the post we're talking about today,
which the name just lit my brain again.
The Intelligent Social Web.
That's the one. Thank you.
Yeah. So now we're on to.
The Intelligent Social Web.
Yes. Okay.
So the Intelligent Social Web, if I'm following the lead-up,
is the Omega in our Newcombe-like problems in our day-to-day lives.
That is exactly it. Yeah.
Great. So, so what's the Intelligent Social Web?
The Intelligent Social Web starts off by talking about improv real quickly.
You're familiar with improv comedy, right?
Yes. And I actually keep coming up, keep coming across it in different avenues of,
like from different, from more than one rationalist,
from other places that aren't like just people who want to get good at acting.
I'm like, I should definitely go to an improv class at some point.
Five years ago, Stephen would never have had the confidence to do this.
Ten years ago, I wouldn't have had the confidence to have this conversation with you.
So I want, I think that there's no, no harm in trying something that's cheap.
I want to give this a shot.
Excellent. Let me know if you do. I might go too.
All right. I'll Google it. I'll make a note to Google it.
Yeah. So improv, as most people are aware, but we'll cover real quick,
is when a bunch of comedians get together and have random prompts thrown at them
from an audience or something, and they have to use those to entertain the audience.
And it's, it's really just stuff that you can't prepare for this beforehand,
which is what makes it both impressive and fun to watch.
You like yell out something from the audience, you're in a garden,
you find a stuffed teddy bear, go. And, and then they have to work with that.
I'm sorry. I was going to say one thing that makes improv so uniquely fun here for the person,
you know, probably getting around to this, but that really struck out me when reading this
was that you as the person in the, that is improving, you, you, your character that you're
playing knows what's happening because they have to because that's, that's part of what makes it
a show, right? But you as the actor, you as the actor don't, right?
So you're playing somebody who knows what they're doing, but the person, you,
the person playing them don't, don't know what's happening. Yeah.
It puts you in this really weird state where you're playing somebody who knows what's happening.
I, I keep saying this over and over, it's like, it's making it more clear, but
it was really interesting. Yeah. Yeah. It was a great, his example was that like,
the first actor says, oh, there it is. I found it. And so now you know, okay,
someone has found the bear and that it was lost before. And then someone else says about time,
we're almost late. And now everybody knows, oh, they, they apparently have somewhere to go and
they are running behind on time. And then another person says, what do you care? You're always late
to everything. And then like, oh, so now we know the specific character is a really late, tardy
person. And this other character is annoying at them for it. And so things keep building like this.
And it just sounds really fun to do. We do got to get together and do this at some point deal.
But the point is that everyone is working together to build a scene. Everyone is in this sort of
network. It's, it's, they're a node in a network that's making the scene. And they all have these
constraints on what they can do. And they're trying to figure out what they can do. But
all working together, they get to make the scene without there being any director even any real
director, any real script, they're just working off each other to get to a goal.
And they have to do it in a way that coheres with the other players.
Yes, right. Yeah, they have to work together. They have these roles that are emerging.
This is sounding more and more like real life.
Right. So the post goes on to think that this web can sort of be thought of as,
as a distributed system that computes the relationship and guides everyone within the
node, even though there's no specific director, the interaction of them working together works
sort of as a director to move them in a direction as long as they are all
cooperating and working within it. And non cooperation in improv is
jarring and uncomfortable for everybody involved. Yeah. And doing it in real life is just the same.
Yeah. So I mean, I can cite an example of bad improv from what's that show that every
rationalist really likes. There's a number of big bang theory. Oh my god.
I see all the hate mail coming in. That was a joke. But you know, I like to
unironically, but the first few years it got worse and I get like it was complete.
Like the best term I heard for it was nerd blackface. Yes, but it, you know,
it was comedy with a laugh track. Like that's how it was going to be. That's true. But there's
a part where I can't remember what the point was, but Penny, the one of them that wasn't a complete
socially attached nerd and the one who was trying to be an actress
was trying to teach Sheldon to like fake confidence or something. So he tried to
give him an improv lesson and she, she opens the scene and she's like running a shoe store.
And he's like, can I get a chocolate frozen yogurt or something? And she's just like,
right, we're a shoe store that also sells frozen yogurt. It was that like you could see her,
you know, he's ruining it. And I don't want to keep cutting you off your,
you seem like you're on a roll, but this, this post was like the best exploration of what
Yudkowski talks about in the sequences and in the methods of rationality as of roles.
This is what you're supposed to do. They use the phrase at least a couple of times in methods
reading from a script. And that's because, well, as the stern administrator, you're supposed to
say this, you're supposed to feel this and you're supposed, this is the role that you're playing.
This is what everyone's expecting of you. And therefore what you're expecting of yourself.
And going off script is uncomfortable and weird. And the point, and the post points out that this
is actually, or Valentine says specifically that this is just sort of a guess and not actually
borne out by any research, but that in the ancestral environment and not really even to this day,
any individual survival depends on them being part of a group. Like humans on their own,
generally don't live very long. It's the fact that we are in a group and can work together
towards goals that makes us able to live. And you know, that's also true as long as you are in a
community, generally individual people don't starve, they aren't put out to starve. If, if the
community is starving, everyone is starving equally, because there's no one person holding,
hoarding all the food while someone else dies. It's, I mean, some people might die sooner because
they're more susceptible to disease and the other stuff that happens during a famine. But as long
as you're in a community, you know, you're not going to be the guy that dies of starvation if you
have a bad few days out in the field. Going with the script reading and the roles and stuff to
imagine being the one farmer who had an adequate yield that season or something, right? And you're
like, I have exactly enough for my family. And everyone in the community would get together and
lynch you to, you know, lynch you and your family. If you had said, no, we're going to lock our doors,
we're going to be fine. Sorry guys, y'all had bad luck. And to an extent, many people would feel
pressured to say, you know what, we'll all suffer, but none of us will die if I share. But my family
would get by great if we had kept what I have. But this is sounding more political than I'm
meaning for it to. But what I'm getting at is that this is a two-way street. And no one has to
articulate the role that the starving community has and that the lucky person had, right?
Yeah. But if we take a step back and instead of looking at it as individual people, looking at
it as a person interacting with the network of all people, like the quote unquote director that
we were talking about earlier, the person needs to be accepted within the group. So they need to
fit in in order to survive. And the group needs to know what to expect from each person within
this network. So they know what they can do with them. They know what roles that person will fill.
And as you're saying, it's a great distillation of the concept of roles and why they work and why,
for example, people keep getting into abusive relationships over and over and over again,
because that is the role they know how to play. They know how to play the abused husband or wife.
And so once they get out of that relationship, unless they have learned another way to
interact with the network, they'll just fall right back into that again. Because some roles
really are shitty. I can think of one from real life. And this isn't too personal. I think my
dad would probably just own this. He has hated his job since he started there 35 years ago. Maybe
he liked it in the beginning. Maybe he just liked it less. But he works as a maintenance and
I don't know what you call it, an engineer at the Water Treatment Center in Fort Collins.
They treat wastewater. The stuff that comes out of your toilets goes down the pipes and lands
at his work. And he builds the machines, he maintains them, he deals with all the other stuff.
But he hates his job. And he's hated it, I think forever, because it's a crappy job and it's
physically demanding. It doesn't pay as much as it should. The only benefit is that it's a state
job or a city or whatever government job and it has good benefits from that. But it's his role
as the provider, the man of the house, that part of his script says, you hate your life.
And I think it's only been the last few years that he's given himself permission to have fun
and enjoy things. Because otherwise, it's part of my position. I've got to be part of my position
is misery. And this might be a tad uncharitable, but I don't think it's entirely, I think most
of it's right. It took kind of a catalyzing event in his life for him to realize, you know,
shit, I should be having fun. And that that was such a weird shift because he had spent
decades saying fun isn't my place. You know, it's my job to go to work, hate every minute of it,
and then come home and, you know, deal with kids and not get enough sleep and this and that. And,
you know, I remember even like as a kid, my mom would, you know, she went out to visit her friend
in California, she's gone for a week. And rather than him like enjoy the week off and do
something he wanted to do, he like redid the kitchen floor and put down tiles and stuff.
And he like didn't enjoy his time. And he like he took the week off of work. But
how am I not paying this picture correctly? Because it sounds like this is something he
wanted to do. He would say things like, no, that's what I think, you know, my wife would want me
to do was, you know, do something like this. Not like, hey, I should take the week off and go do
something fun. You know, he didn't have hobbies. Now he's got hobbies and he does fun stuff. But
I'm trying to make this a well rounded point. I feel like I'm going to just taper off because I
can't remember where I was going with this. So an example of a role in real life that was obvious
to me before I knew what the word role meant in this context. Okay. Sorry. No, no, no, no, no,
it's okay. That was that was a cool tangent. I just lost my place. Oh, okay. And so taking this
back to Omega, the post likens the intel, the social web that you are within that is guiding you
and that needs to know what you're doing to Omega. Omega is always trying to predict what you will
do. And actually spends a lot of computational resources trying to predict you the network does
in ways like, you know, gossip, small talk, speculation about you, also just, you know,
observing your body language, that kind of thing. There's a lot of work that the network puts into
being able to predict you and to tug you into the roles that it wants you to be in. And it will
reward you oftentimes for playing your role. And I think that was that was the thing that
I'm putting my notes aside now. That was the thing that I most got out of this particular,
this particular post is that humans in general, as far as I know, and certainly me specifically,
I need to feel like I am useful. And I think most people need to feel like they're useful. And I
think it's it's a deep human need, which has been put into us through the process of evolution,
specifically, in order to fulfill these roles in order to keep our community going,
in order to keep, you know, our genes procreating and the human race moving along,
because when we all work together, as as a larger network, we can survive and thrive and do amazing
things. And the way that we can motivate humans to do that is by having this instinct that you
have to feel useful. And that's what roles gives us, it gives you a way to feel like you are
contributing and you are valued by your community. And I think that is one of the things that is
most missing from the modern world. It's like, my community is spread out among three cities right
now, we get together once a month, really, to see each other. And the rest of the time, I'm kind of
alone, like the physical community I live in, are all strangers, I don't know any of my neighbors.
I guess the guys next door, I've talked with once or twice, but they're not my community,
they're not the network that models me and relies on me. And the modern world seems to have tried to
replace the approval of your peers and the feeling that you are fitting into the the network by,
by giving you money instead, it's like, okay, you're doing a good job. The network is using
you, here's money. And I mean, money is great, it gives you comfort, it gives you food and air
conditioning and stuff, but it doesn't fulfill that need to feel like you are valued in a community.
And I think that's why life seems so empty for so many people right now, is because we are,
we don't have these roles. And I kind of want to, at some point, work out some way to have an actual
rationalist community built up where we kind of can have both a community that needs everyone and
has some way for everyone to contribute and feel like they're useful. And I just don't know how
the fuck to get that without all living in close proximity. Because I really am starting to get
the feeling that being able to see people on a at least weekly basis, if not every few days, and
be like, Hey, I see you, you're a cool person, I read your body language, I'm giving you a
smile because I remember the thing you did for me last week or yesterday or whatever. And
we are all in this together, I think is kind of psychologically important. And we can get by without
it as you know, the past century of America suburban living has proven, but it doesn't
necessarily make us happy. And I think this post kind of clarified why because we have that
need to fulfill roles deeply ingrained in us. That's an interesting take. And I see a lot of
the points you're making. I didn't draw that point. I took well, it's not explicitly in the
post. No, no, yeah, no, yeah, for sure. It's the way you took it. And I like that. It's interesting.
I took I took it in other ways. But I guess just find that there's a couple of things like,
on one hand, this ties into, you know, Hansonian signaling, it's not enough to
just be helpful. It's, it's, it helps you feel good. And Plato might say that's enough,
Aristotle might say that's enough, but it might make you feel good, but not as good as you would
feel if you, if you helped conspicuously. You know, if you were, if you were secretly
funding some important project, you might be like, huh, that's happening because of me.
And that might help you a bit. But if somehow accidentally everybody found out that you were
the one behind it, oh no, now you've got all the social capital and everybody knows that you've
been helping. That's much more important. That's my, that gives this bigger rush.
I think that's why it feels so much better to volunteer within your community than it does
to send a thousand dollars to AMF. Cause you don't see the, the people that are being helped by
the malaria nets, they don't come up to you and say thank you, you know, and you're like, yes,
I know objectively I just saved half of a life or whatever it was, but that's not the same as
giving a sandwich to, to your buddy who forgot his lunch and need some food.
Totally. And it's, it sucks because, you know, Peter Singer, I think is, is absolutely right.
The person, you know, think of, think of the good you're doing the life you've saved versus,
you know, even if you spent a thousand dollars and went around, you know, and bought,
I've been thinking of doing this just, I don't, this isn't a good use of charity money
to everything that I preach, you know, putting together like gallon ziploc bags of like
supplies to hand out to homeless people, you know, things like change, toothbrushes,
tampons, condoms, you know, socks, hand warmers, all that stuff, right?
And spend 500 bucks or whatever, get a bunch of these and start handing them out, right?
Because you, you know, you get a lot of thanks and all that.
And those people are marginally better off for having those and sometimes way better off for a
little while. It's not going to solve all their problems, but, you know, warmer for a night,
whatever, a more comfortable period. But, oh, my point about Singer,
Singer to point out that they aren't dying, right? They're suffering and that sucks,
but their suffering is less than the people that you can't see. And just because you can't see them
doesn't make them matter less. And yes, on a life to life basis from a God's eye view, totally not.
But from you as an evolved primate, a social primate, it just does and it's kind of just a
drag of our psychology. I mean, so as far as ways to solve that problem, I mean,
somewhat easy thing that I've tried doing is like actually befriending people that I work with.
And it happens to be that I work with people that are capable, that I'm capable of befriending.
You know, like my, whoever it was, I knew somebody who worked at a bank and their only
three co-workers were women in their 50s and they were a 20-something guy. And it's like,
we have nothing in common. You know, what am I going to go to your grandson's graduation with you?
Like, you know, oh yeah, I went to my graduation a few years ago. We can share that in common,
but you can't, you know, so you can't befriend people too distant from you, right?
I don't know. I'm good friends with a number of older people like my book club.
Because you have something in common.
That's true. Yeah, we both like the same kind of books.
Yeah, you're not forced there by proximity because you have a similar job.
Right.
So the other thing I guess would be like finding something that you can contribute to
that you can conspicuously contribute to that you don't have to be physically present for.
For example, at my work, my team was reassigned to a bunch of old boring shit that none of us
like doing and it's not fun for anybody. So on the side, we're not doing it at work because
we've all seen Silicon Valley, but we're building an app that one of our co-workers came up with.
So we're in the planning stages of that now. We're going to start actually putting,
you know, fingers in our keyboards for this in a couple of weeks.
But then we'll all be contributing in a way that is super obvious. Did you do this yet?
We're going to have, you know, a Kanban board where, you know,
I'll pull this story down and I'll have my name on it. People will see that I did it and it'll be
done. It seems doable to do things like that that aren't necessarily coding related as far as other
stuff. Maybe that's something that we could dedicate our local community to, to thinking of things that,
you know, you could gamify some sort of charity thing. You could, you could, I can't think of
ideas right off, but it seems like the kind of thing our community be good at thinking of
solutions to. How do you do something? Community building, where you get a sense of community
with the people that you're hanging out with in the room when they're not in the room.
The other way to take the, one of the things that I, one of the other things that that,
that post mentioned was that this, this, this social intelligence web forces you into roles.
One way to like notice that for yourself, if you haven't yet is just think about many people
acts differently when they visit home, if they don't live at home. This is super apparent for me,
even in ways where I didn't think it was, like I had a friend that I haven't seen in a few years
come visit. We went out to dinner and my partner pointed out that, Hey, you acted like a younger
version of yourself hanging out with that guy. And I was like, I did. I didn't even notice and I
couldn't put my finger in any of the behaviors. I don't think she could either, but it was just
the, I was, I was playing the person I knew four years ago that he knew four years ago.
So it was not to violate his expectations, right? So part of what I've been doing the last year or
two, and that's probably because I have more slack in life and et cetera. There's all kinds
of fun ways. This all ties together. It's great is I've stopped doing that for the most part.
Oh, I've tried. I've made an effort to stop doing that to stop doing which playing, putting on
masks, putting on for different, for different places. Okay, I'm more or less the exact same
person at home in my parents kitchen. I'm visiting them as I am at my house or at work.
So like I've brought my real self to work. Mine has a couple of the parts that, you know,
don't fit in. Like I can't be, you know, super cute at work, like I'm at home because you know,
Rachel and I will, you know, say super adorable things that would really turn off my co-workers.
No, it would make everyone's eyes turn into hearts.
Well, we'll see. So part of that, you know, just wouldn't, would, would be so unexpected as,
and this, this is part of like why roles are important, but I think also why they,
like, I'm making it, I'm kind of making opposite cases here. I'm saying that I think at least for
me, I like having less variance between the roles that I put on. I find it's more relaxing.
And I am, it is still different, you know, if, if, if Rachel visits at work and
It can be a little uncomfortable having those two worlds collide.
Well, it's, it's at the point now where it's not uncomfortable, but it's interesting and it's fun
in a way that is, but there are ways, you know, some people are very different and that would
make it uncomfortable. And then that, that, I think that's the stress that I'm trying to do away
with by, by being more of myself all the time, but I don't hold anyone's hand at work. You know,
I don't, I don't say cute things, right? Or something like that. I'm trying to think of
other things, but you know, you get the gist. Oh, you meant literally hold hands.
Yeah. Oh, okay. Right. So, you know, if Rachel comes to visit and she comes to lunch with me
and the team or something, I'll hold her hands during that because I like doing that because
I'm with her, but they don't know me as, you know, the kind of like, you know, the person who does
that, right? Right. I'm not sure. I felt like I did this probably with every other thought that
I have. I feel like I was onto something and then I forgot it. That's okay.
But no, I think, I think you made a good point about it's better to not have as many roles
that you have to switch between. I think when possible, I mean, obviously, like,
if I was the kind of guy who went to nightclubs, I couldn't bring nightclubs even to work.
Right. Right. You don't also want to like kill nightclubs even because he doesn't fit in with
the rest of your life. Right. So some parts of that are really, are really valuable. But maybe
have as much cohesion as possible. Like there's a good case for this in a completely different
context. But in Sam Harris's book on lying, he talks about, you know, he's going against all
the, he raises all the cash examples of like why people say it's okay to lie sometimes.
And he brought up like the example of like a used car salesman who gives good deals to friends
and family, but not to strangers because they're how to make a buck. And, you know, that's part
of the job. But then that puts you in this weird position where it's like, oh, oh, you're Karen's
sister. Oh, you don't want this car. You know, let me give you one of the good ones or let me
give you an actual deal. I told you I was giving you a deal, but I wasn't. So like,
that person doesn't have the slack in their life to like, you know, not try and make money when
they can. They can't, they can't treat every customer like family because they wouldn't walk
away with any money. But it's that kind of disjointed connection, right? So I guess when
possible, reduce that variance. But the other thing for me was to, to notice when you're doing
things, uh, I had it, it was like a week long incident in, it would have been in like November,
December, where for a week at work, I was acting, I had just been, we had just changed teams and
started a new project. And I was acting, I think I mentioned this on the show before, I was acting
like a co-worker that I really emulate, that I was, I was emulating a co-worker that I really
admire rather. And I was pulled aside by one of my teammates and he's like, you're not fun right
now. This wasn't you two weeks ago. What the fuck? Like this, you're, you're kind of making,
working with you a huge drag at the minute, at the time I was like, well, that's just because,
you know, reasons. And then when I thought about it that night and I kind of realized what I was
doing, I was playing another version of Steven that turned out to be less me, less what they were
expecting. If I was always like that, then, um, and the guy that I was emulating isn't an asshole,
but he was more dedicated than I was, than I am typically and more than my team was.
And that's what I was going for. Okay. And so we managed to nudge you back into the role they
wanted. Well, and into the role that I wanted. Yeah, yeah. So it more just pointed out to me that
like, I think because they, to run of the metaphor, saw me pick up the script and start reading from
it. And they're like, those aren't your lines, right? Nice. These are your lines. That it was,
it was an obvious example for me to, to notice an update from that. And then moving back was a
lot less drawing work was more fun and working with them was more fun. That's awesome. So
is there a takeaway here? I guess hopefully someone can lean something from that. I was trying to go
somewhere and I, I never wrap up, but there's something to get there. We, yeah, we got to
work on sticking the landing somehow, but I'll start the journey is fun though. Yeah. I did want
to say that the post did have one thing that I thought it was going a bit too far with where it
said that most people will never come to change their mind unless their network is either pushing
them or pulling them in that direction. The reason it's so hard to get people out of religion is
because everyone that they know is in their religion and pulling them that way. And I think
that takes away too much agency from people. I don't know about you, but I left my religion
despite basically my most of my life being, you know, in that religion and being taught about how
it was. And I was married to a fundamentalist Christian for a good six years and I never was
even slightly tempted to slide back into religion. There's, there's a lot of things where I think
you can just stick strong against the network. And sure, there's pressure on you to, to backslide.
I don't think people are quite so at the mercy of Omega as, as he was pointing out in there.
So did you have no other community that you joined by leaving your faith, whether it be
one person that you really admired or one really compelling argument that
you wanted to be seen as the kind of person that could be persuaded by arguments or.
Well, I guess by the time I was leaving, many of my friends were leaning in that direction as well,
but I think you could have been, I had sought that out, you know.
I think I, I might have a problem with how little agency I signed to most people much of the time.
Not, not, not most people much of the time with many people. Some of the time has the way to put
this. Yeah, the, the post says it looks like one of the greatest challenges of rationality is that
people change their minds about meaningful things, mostly only when the web tugs them into a new
role. Actually thinking in a way that for real changes your mind in ways that defy your web
given role is socially deviant and therefore personally dangerous and something you're motivated
not to learn how to do. I find just to play devil's advocate to you. I think that I find that's
somewhat compelling. We happen to be in a niche community that, that does endorse that unless
they're believing in magic, in which case we're going to shit on them for 10 minutes on the podcast.
So, but like, no, no, I mean, and I brought that up as tongue in cheek, but like, I was
pulled into cryonics by the web as trying to move into when I was first discovered rationality
and this, this community and all these geniuses were into it. I'm like, okay,
I'd heard of this mostly from places like Futurama. So this is something that some people actually
believe. And there was this couple of years of disconnect where I wanted to be into it, but I
wasn't convinced yet, but I really wanted to be there. Maybe that's what it's like to like
want to believe in a religion or something because I think I signed up before I fully bought it.
I signed up because I was convinced enough to and enough to even proselytize for it,
but kind of shyly. I wonder if that's what gets a lot of people into EA too,
is that their friends are into EA. That's probably a lot of veganism seems to be contagious.
Yeah, maybe similar kind of thing. It could be. And if you're, if you're the only vegan in your
group of 100 friends, there's probably some part of your web that rewards you being that brave
outlier, right? If it really was just you being the one person and literally no support, you'd
probably drop it. Most of the times there are some, you know, some, some heroes who would,
who would be able to pull through. But like, I think that, you know, using the veganism example,
if you're getting, if you're getting joked up by your coworkers in a way that's not funny to you,
it's, it's enough. You have somebody to go complain to and they're not complaining to go,
to go report this too. And they'll be like, you're being so brave. That's awesome. And you're like,
I knew it. I'm validated. I would like to think that people can pull away from their social
pressures, but I can see, I can see both. I think, I think people do it more often than the post
gives them credit for that. Yeah, it is hard to fight the web and maybe in a lot of things,
you go along with it, but I think there's certain things that people are just willing to fight for
and believe like, no. Well, also, we have a weird web is kind of my other point. Right. So like,
I'm trying to think of an example from my life where I've stood up against the crowd
in a place that didn't reward setting up against the crowd. And nothing's coming to mind right away.
If I did, like I said, if I did, and I was the one weird person at school talking about Crownix,
well, I don't think I ever went back and told my Crownix friends about the jokes that people made
or something, but I knew that I had like the vindication. I don't know what to make of that.
At the very least, we can aspire to be the kind of people that could stand up against,
you know, or that can, because again, you don't want to take random stances against the web either,
right? Right. Because the web is pretty useful. The web is super useful. It also gives you that
role that gives you a sense of fulfillment in life, which is neat. Yeah, that. And like,
that's part of the reason that I wanted to work to cultivate like a local physical community
of rationalists was, you know, you could go to this group of people and meet them in meat space
like this, and then say, this is this thing like, oh, cool. And you get some real life feedback
from that. And like when we met Robin Hansen, he asked a couple of times, like, what does your
meetup do? You know, I've gotten some less wrong meetups where they, you know, their community
is doing this and this one's doing that. And I was like, we just hang out. But that wasn't a
really good answer. The good answer would have been like, this is a local community of people
that hold us hold us to norms that we all want to have. Oh, that's a much better answer. Well,
didn't come to me until a couple weeks later. But that's the goal, right? I want to have a group
of people and having the scheduled meat space meetups helps keep that community alive. Whereas
if it was just an email exchange list, then, you know, you stop reading them. But if you feel
compelled to go meet them once every month or two, then you're more in this community. And, you
know, I want a community that holds me to the norms of being able to change your mind or being
confident enough to stand up to bad positions or bad opinions or something, right? So it wouldn't
seem totally out of the blue and like, please validate me, Robin Hansen, I'd write him that
answer. But we can trust trust that he listens to the podcasts. Oh, he probably does not.
I'm joking. There's no way. You may want to write him, actually. That was interesting. You may
find that of use. Yeah, maybe. I feel like I'm just looking for him to validate it. But you can.
Or maybe next time he's in town. Ooh, that's a good idea. Yeah, we got to get him back in Denver.
Totally. I did have listener feedback, but we've been going on for an hour and a half. So we should
probably wrap it up. I did have a rat chat for this episode. Oh, yeah. That would be fun. Do it.
So I read an article on a fun rationalist blog that you guys should all check out called
death is death is bad. And it was called the tyranny of biology. And the author's position
seems to be that they said that they're now a single issue voter on the issue of reproductive
freedom, that if the candidate is anti-abortion, they're anti-that candidate. And they drew a
long historical case from somewhere, I want to ask them about that, that reproductive freedom was
really what broke us from the shackles of a shitty society, the short, brutish life that
Hobbs described. So I agree that reproductive freedom is super important. And I could see it
being a great limits test for being a single issue voter, because it's unlikely that I'm going to
want to endorse anti-candidate who's anti-abortion. So I could see it for those reasons. What I
remained unconvinced of was that was really what I felt like were the strong claims that
the latter that dragged us out of our shitty, no one has enough resources, everyone's miserable,
everyone's scraping by life was the ability to control when you had kids. Luckily, I've got the
author in the room. And I wanted to ask you to explain that maybe I misunderstood something,
or maybe you can convince me. Well, as someone who has spoken to this author before, I think I can
maybe speculate on his thinking when writing this post. So no one's confused, Ian Yashor,
this article. I did write this article, and I should not plan this at all. I didn't know
that Stephen was going to bring this up. So I am taken by surprise here. Oh, good. I got a gotcha
you too. Yes. But I don't want to say that it is the only thing that is responsible for dragging
us out of the misery of deprivation that we had as a species for so long. I think that there is a
lot to be said for the scientific method, and agriculture and industrial revolution, and all
those things that have made us a better species. But I think that that is a absolute reproductive
control is a not sufficient thing to get us out of the misery we're in. But it is a necessary thing.
We can't have that without the reproductive control, because until that point, we are still
shackled to women cannot be full and equal participants unless they choose to be celibate,
because they could at any time be, I don't want to say afflicted. But if it's not something that you
wanted and we're planning for, it can be kind of an affliction with this burden that first
distorts your body and has huge ramifications for your biology for the next nine years, but also
permanent effects on your body thereafter. And on top of that, now saddles you with a human that
you are responsible for. And yes, obviously, they give you meaning and love and all that too. But
your life is drastically changed once you have the responsibility of another life. And that is
a lot of fucking labor to take care of a small human. So getting the ability to choose when you
want to do that, as opposed to being forced into it is, I think necessary for human flourishing
to get us past the point where every woman has to pair up with a person that can help with that whole
child rearing process. Can you explain the last part? First of all, you said nine years before
you met nine months, I think. I did nine months. Sorry. So that's fine, just in case anyone had
picked. The second part is that you are extremely vulnerable, both when you are pregnant and during
the first several years of a child's life, where it's usually good to have someone else with you,
both providing resources and providing childcare and possibly protection. And that doesn't
necessarily have to be a father or even a male, but it does make you, it entails your ability
to be an independent human. You need somebody else who's not also pregnant to be able to fight off
saber-toothed tigers while you're holding this baby. I don't think you used anything
like necessary, but not sufficient in the post. No, I didn't. So you made it sound like it was
the only thing. That was my nitpick. I was trying to put forth a very strong argument, but I also,
I admit it is, and know and acknowledge it is not the only thing, and trust that my readers
probably knew that as well, I hope. This reader thought that you were making, that that was your
thing, that like, no, this is it. It wasn't anything else. So I'm an idiot. Well, I mean,
I don't think it's, you're an idiot. I think I was also particularly passionate about that,
because we aren't in danger of losing agriculture or the benefits of dust realization. And yet,
there's still some asshole idiots out there who want to remove the benefits of reproductive
freedom. So that's a really good point. Yeah, we're not in danger of sliding back into not
having enough food, probably in the United States, but we're not unless the fucking homage take over.
I don't think we got enough of them right now. Right. So, but we are in danger of
modern civilized people advocating against something that can involuntarily, you know,
shackle your life and people and not just shackle one person's life, but it restructures all of
society around these considerations. It makes society less free because there is a social
infrastructure that has to be in place to address these problems. You mean like
adoption centers or something? No, no, no, no, not adoption centers. I mean,
for lack of a better word, this society becomes more like a patriarchy specifically to address
these issues. And the ability to break out of the old patriarchal system is predicated on
there being this reproductive control. Okay, I think I'm, I think I see that. I mean, I do see
that. But I think that that answers my confusion. I'm just checking to see if there's any confusion
left. I think it's much easier to have a free and open democracy when you have a possible full
participation of all citizens as opposed to a society where you treat women more like baby
factories, which I know that's not the entirety of patriarchy. And that is painting it in a very
grim light, but that is part of it. And that sort of society is much more ripe for things like tyranny
or general dictatorship-ish qualities. I can see that, yeah. And, you know, we talked about at the
last meetup that, you know, having kids isn't something that like you add to your life,
like getting a new house. You know, it's not something that like, I have my old life
and this new house. It's like, nope, my old life, I've taken this way. Now I'm on the life
where I'm carrying a kid for the rest of it. And, you know, people say for 18 years, it's not. It's
for the whole life. You know, my mom still calls her mom, you know, probably not as much as she did
50 years ago, but it's, or 40, I don't know how old people are. And it happens to be a fact of our
biology that like, you know, you and I could theoretically sire hundreds of kids if we were
just totally pimping. Sorry, it's getting late. But we could do it without ever knowing. Whereas,
you can't mother 10 children without being aware of it. You're, you're, you're, you're impossibly
aware of all of them, right? Like I said, since it is a, not just a life addition, but a life
refactor completely. If it's the kind of thing that this can happen to half of you over and
out the others, then yeah, it makes things unfair.
Right. Has massive ramifications. Yeah.
No, but thank you for bringing it up. That was, that was interesting. I've, I don't think I've
discussed one of my own posts before like this, or at least I've had someone question me on it on
the podcast. I'll see if I can surprise you again in a few months out of the blue. Well, first I
have to write a post that's worth talking about again. Well, I just kind of started actually
trying to make a point of reading sources that I like again. So plus I have like the free time
at work to do it. So not like I don't have free time out of work. I'm just, you know, not very
productive at home. Was there a line in there, something along like this might make women even
supportive of the patriarchy because it gives something or whatever?
Yeah. Well, I mean, the patriarchy did have some benefits for women too.
You should probably caveat that.
Okay. Going back to the whole roles thing, as long as you were
not always the case obviously, but for the most part, if you played the role of the,
the mother and the home maker, baby producer kind of person, you could expect to be provided for
and taken care of. The man had a lot more power obviously, and you could get some really shitty
deals if you have a bad person, man that you didn't know was bad, or if someone just changes later
on in life, you know, or decides, you know, I want to abandon you. But given the fact that you are
forced by biology to take these risks with your body and have these obligations put upon you,
it is of some benefit to have a society that is structured in a way that makes,
that the default and makes some provisions for you to be able to do that with your life,
to be able to live while that is a thing that you do.
Gotcha. In a world without reproductive freedom, you're better, you're often better off allowing
yourself to be shackled because it meant more chance of success for you and your offspring.
Right.
Okay, yeah.
Even though it's shitty, it can often, it's usually better than the alternative.
It was the only game in town, yeah. I mean, so imagine, you know, a single mother trying to,
you know, hunt and gather on her own while cradling a baby in one arm, right?
And that just, just because of the, you know, situations, both technological and social,
the way they were, I believe it was, I think it was Scott Alexander, but I don't remember exactly.
I said something along the lines of, if you take 10,000 modern day enlightened liberal people
and dump them back in the Nile Delta, 3000 BC, with the technology they had 3000 BC,
within one generation, they'd be back to worshiping god emperors and building them pyramids,
because that is the social structure that works for surviving in that environment with that technology.
Seriously?
Democracy would not work there, they would all die.
So put another way, the patriarchy couldn't be, can't be shattered in a world where there's
no reproductive freedom.
Yes, patriarchy is, is necessary for survival.
In a world without, in a world without reproductive freedom.
Yes, yes, yes.
And I knew that was implied, but I was-
Both without reproductive freedom and with the technological levels we had before.
I knew that was there, but I always kind of joke about like grabbing a soundbite and like,
you know, the patriarch is necessary for survival or something.
And I was like, yeah, that's gonna be, that's gonna be the, you know,
it's just text message noise when you text it.
Do you know what, what can you do?
Some people want to quote mine you, it's, you can't copy out every single sentence.
Even if you did, they could snip out that part.
So, yeah.
All right.
Really?
Well, I think, thanks for, thanks for indulging me on that.
No problem.
All right.
Well, thank you for to our Patreon supporter, Jesse Butterfield.
Whoever you-
I think we know exactly who that is.
Whoever you are, we really appreciate it.
All right.
It means a lot.
So other than that, thanks to Kyle who, who makes this,
that makes the sound quality more palatable for human ears.
Thanks also to David Gruyer and Sumerci Project for providing music for the podcast.
And, you know, anybody who wants to, you know, if you've just came across this somewhere,
you can subscribe on iTunes or other RSS feeds.
You can leave a review there.
You can leave reviews on the website, TheBasinConspiracy.com.
I don't think you leave reviews there.
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
Comments per episode.
Yeah.
Um, also at the time this episode goes live, I want to put together a, um-
And you can come in on the subreddit as well.
Yes.
The subreddit.
That's why I'm going to put this together on r slash TheBasinConspiracy.
I'm going to put together like a ask us anything sticky thread at the top.
I don't need-
To where like, if there's a random question you have that you don't want to go through
the trouble of digging up our email and, you know, doing it that way, you're on Reddit already.
And it doesn't pertain to an individual episode, so it doesn't fit for that thread.
Be like, what's your thought on this?
You guys, we'll put those together and get a good round of those.
That's a good round of them.
That's a damn good idea.
So that'll be available.
And, uh, yeah, that's it.
Feel free to find us on Patreon or, you know, share this episode with your friends.
