Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, I'm Jess
And today we have with us, oh, I'll go ahead, we've got Rudy Hoffman, who if anyone's listened
to every episode of this, so far you guys will be familiar with his name, he was the life insurance
agent who got me hooked up with cryonics, and he's also the author of The Affordable Immortal,
which I do, which I guess doesn't matter to our folks as listeners.
No, right, yeah, we're, again, still doing this all distantly. So we're all doing this over
a web conference, and then in order to maintain some semblance of actual communication, we've
got webcams on. But for listeners, it is a physical book that you can buy, called The
Affordable Immortal. And Rudy, why don't you tell us about the book and about you and what you do?
Outstanding, delighted to, Stephen, and thank you, and thank you for listening, everybody
out there. It's exciting to be talking to a whole lot of wonderful invisible human beings
in non-real time. The science fiction lifestyles are obviously really existing as we speak.
I've thought for decades about how cool it would be to have multiple conferences where
here we are, and I'm literally looking at myself and three other people on the video
screen in front of me, and talking to thousands of people in a non-real time basis. So science
fiction is not science fiction, it's actually real. And along with that idea,
Quranics, of course, is the cooling of human beings to minus 196 degrees Celsius in order to
preserve us for future technology. That was a hell of a segue. That was a hell of a segue.
Yeah, thank you. And I have actually written the book, which I'm cleverly holding up, which is
helpful to at least three people on the planet right now, but since there's no video for you,
but there are listeners that say basically the title of the book, again, is the affordable
immortal. Maybe you can beat death and taxes with an exclamation point by Rudy Hoffman.
It's published on Amazon and available through Amazon in both Kindle formats and paperback
formats, basically about 12 bucks. I got a quick question about that subtitle there.
Okay. Does it have anything about how to beat taxes in it? I was going to ask that.
Yeah. Oh yeah, thank you. Yeah, as a matter of fact, there is. And the title is obviously a riff
on the well-known Ben Franklin quote, which is nothing is certain in this quote. I actually
started out in the book and says, in this world, nothing can be said or be certain except death
and taxes. So yes, the idea behind what we have the funding mechanisms we use, basically a life
insurance policy also in addition to funding your crowd preservation also has inherent tax
advantages in it. So they're actually that is, it's not just a clever title designed to riff on the
beating death and taxes quote by Ben Franklin. It also happens to be
based in the reality that there's tremendous tax benefits and advantages to life insurance.
Okay. Little bonus sticking it to the man while we're at it.
Absolutely. And with $2.2 trillion being recently as recently as this week,
shoved out to try to keep things from going to compact completely.
The taxation factor is liable to be much more extreme in the future.
And so that those tax benefits are not insignificant. Be happy to briefly life
insurance has tax-free death benefit, tax-free accumulation of the money while it's growing,
tax-free access to the money while it's in the policy.
So it's one of the reasons why a lot of smart, wealthy people stuff money into life insurance
policies. But the really, really smart ones use life insurance to fund their cryopreservation,
which means that this amazing new technology that is an emerging science is not just a good
concept, basically an accessible and affordable technology for a whole lot of people.
Not everybody, but for something like a dollar a day or two or three dollars a day,
money that a lot of us blow in a Starbucks whack when you could go to Starbucks.
By the way, for those of us who hearing this, we are recording this, of course, on what is this
April the 2nd of 2020, about 32 days into the zombie apocalypse.
And for the future, when we listen to these podcasts in the future, we'll say, oh my goodness,
do you remember how rapidly that happened that all of a sudden everything completely changed?
But we can talk about the COVID-19 thing, which hardly goes, I don't think it's a conversation
occurring perhaps in the planet, does not mention that. But as a point of information,
that's one of the reasons our crannics inquiries have actually stepped up, because the
eminence and reality of death in its most ugly forms has become more obvious.
Do I think all of us, I talked today with a video conference, one of my clients who
happens to be COVID-19 positive. And along with her two out of the three of kids are COVID-19 positive.
So it's, again, it's not theoretical, it's real. People do get sick, people die, people have accidents.
And to my way of thinking, every one of those deaths is like a library burning down a true tragedy.
If you think about the amount of information that's composed in your brain, in each of your
brains, and it puts a library to shame, it's basically, we have trillions of bits of information.
And each of us is kind of an irreplaceable part of the universe, and to have that consciousness that
whatever it is that makes us, us, go away almost certainly permanently, because there's no evidence
that any of the silly superstitions people call religion is accurate. And to have that go away
permanently is just a true tragedy. And for those who are, go ahead.
I'm not even sure, like, library is a good analogy anymore, because nothing in a library
is unique nowadays. It's more like, if the library of Alexandria burned down, which was...
Oh, brilliant. Yes, thank you. Yeah, the library of... Yeah, well, there's truly irreplaceable
information. And so if we think of ourselves as everything that has gone into making what us
we are, and are in the old verbiage, we'd call it a soul. You know, those of us who are hardcore
rationalists and realists, you know, to typically reject that term. But there is something that
makes you a unique special entity. And the whole concept of cryonics is that by simply preserving
the brain, you, in the brain pattern that you are, there's a reasonably good possibility,
we think, that a future technology can fix what we died of, fix the damage caused by the process
itself, and restore us in some form, in some mechanism, to vibrant and levels of good health
and bliss that we even only dream of now. And that is the dream I sell, if you will. And it may
come across as a little flaky. But we try to be, you know, while we try to be hardcore rationalists,
I think it's also incumbent upon me as a promoter of cryonics, and I'm unabashedly a promoter of
cryonics, to basically explain that our mission is not simply to come back in the format that we
might die from. Obviously, we don't want nobody wants to come back near death and feeling awful
and old and age and decrepited and have the full of cryo protectant, full of cryo protectant,
which is by the way, still fairly toxic. Instead, but the premise of cryonics is to actually come
back feeling as good or better than you felt the best day of your life when the miraculousness of
being alive, of having some of it being existing, was just really obvious. And, you know, I would
love to say I have a whole bunch of days like that. I don't know if about you, but I don't.
But every once in a while, you do have one that's close, you say, oh my goodness,
this is what it's about. I used to have, yeah, pretty darn good days until I injured my back
about, God, almost a year ago now. And it's been eye-opening to see what it's like to live with
pain. And I didn't realize, I didn't quite realize what it was like for people that had to do that.
Wow, it is paradigm shifting, I suspect. I mean, I feel so much worse for everything Steven's
ever gone through, because I know he's got the same thing. And yeah, it's, it makes you
hate our monkey meat suits even more, you know? There should be some way to get this stuff replaced,
fixed up. Yeah, I agree completely. I maintain minds a little less severe. What was that a
reference to, Steven? I didn't quite... Oh, you know, I should have mentioned that you felt bad,
because I've had back issues for, let's see, it's April, coming up on nine years, I guess,
but it's not as severe as what Inyash is going through. So I just wanted to make that clear
that he's been more, he's been enduring more than I have. So I don't want you to pretend like I'm
doing a whole lot, Inyash. I just, I needed that out for posterity. But yeah, so I like the,
I guess I'll let you keep going with your, with the just by all means, please continue, Rudy,
as I enjoy your... Oh yeah, thank you. Well, thank you. I think, you know, the concept here we're
talking about is the bliss of how, you know, potential bliss. And I think a lot of smart people,
including some of the people very possibly listening to this podcast have speculated that
in the future, we won't just be, have levels of misery. And quite frankly, the human condition has
enabled levels of misery that are just shocking to most of us. And Inyash, the, to have that paradigm
shift where all of a sudden your back hurts is, you know, is helpful to me. I mean, it makes us
realize, hey, and I've had a situation where my wonderful wife has both of her knees just hurting
virtually all the time. We're basically, and that is pretty, you know, it's a drag. Let's face it,
we've got the human condition has some pretty awful components to it. I much more understand why
youth was so valued in the past, because, you know, 100 years ago, if you had this sort of injury,
you're just like, Oh, okay, I'm broken and much less useful to everyone around me for the rest of
my existence now, plus all the pain. And at least 100 years ago, you had like alcohol and opium to
help you through the pain. Go back a few hundred years more and you got nothing. You're just
But at least now, at least now you can still contribute to society and you're not just having
to run around lifting heavy things and carrying, you know, dead animals and stuff, you can contribute
to value your mind. Incredibly tough. Yeah. Yeah. But of course, they didn't have a choice. It wasn't
like there was a choice. You know, you think about how much better life is. And I think, Inyash,
that's a reasonable, you know, jump. And some of us, I'm sure some of you are listening to this,
I've read one of my very favorite books of all time. By the way, Bill Gates said this is my
favorite book of all time. And it's not my book, unfortunately. Harry Potter and the Methods of
Rationality. Yeah, almost. That should be another great book. But the book, of course, is by Stephen
Pinker called Enlightenment Now. I see that Inyash is shaking his head. Yes. Well, I haven't read it,
but I know of it. Oh, it's absolutely brilliant. I've read it four or five times. List the audio tape
four or five times. But the subtitle is the case for rationality. It's the case for reason, science,
humanism and progress. And I suspect that the niche market that comprises your podcast
listeners appreciate those values and cryonists and transhumanists of all sorts, you know, resonate
with those values. The thing is, we now have the technology to do stuff that was clearly science
fiction in the past, including this conversation that we're having. And we also are really close
to having the technology, although we can't prove it works, to cryopreserve people. And I think it's
an important distinction here to make the very important distinction between the thing called
proto science or early science or emerging science and pseudoscience. A lot of folks, including the
people who many would call themselves hardcore skeptics, might lump cryonics into the pseudoscience
arena. A matter of fact, even Wikipedia, which is usually a wonderful bastion of great
wisdom, for lack of a better word, and helpful information, has been taken over by trolls
in the cryonics arena. There's a couple people out in the world for some reason
that really, really do not like cryonics. And for some reason, and I'm not sure exactly why,
they have managed to take over even the Wikipedia entry. And instead of saying,
this is an emerging science in which the very best technology is brought to bear to preserve
human consciousness. Instead, they say this is freezing corpses. And most scientists think this
is completely ludicrous. And there's some just some verbiage in there that's really kind of
off-putting that's not even handed at all. To be fair, it is technically freezing corpses.
Yes. And that's a very important point. I see that hand, Ms. Jess. Go ahead.
I was just going to say, all, what was it, 4,000 listeners, you go edit Wikipedia,
you're listening. Oh, yes, thank you. Yeah, because we've had some...
Like when... Go ahead.
Like when Stephen Colbert saved the elephant population.
He had his audience going, like, add a zero to the number of elephants in the wild. And he's
like, we did it, we saved it. Wow. I like it. Although this will be less, this will be less
dishonest. Yeah, exactly. That's a great, great analogy, though. And the... Yeah, that is a...
But the reason I'm bringing that out is because Wikipedia, in my mind, has been one of the most
amazing emerging technologies that enable, has enabled collaboration of some of the best
information. And I'm not negative about Wikipedia, by any means. I am just... It's just an
anomaly having to do with the current way that cryonics, if you could look at cryonics and
how it's perceived on there. In contrast, of course, we have an open letter by signed by
hundreds of scientists that shows cryonics that says cryonics will almost, you know,
has a very good chance of working. We can't guarantee it works any more than your doctor
can guarantee your heart operation is going to work. You know, the reality is there's lots of
variables can go wrong in any technology and an emerging technology. But conceptually,
there is... We have good reason to believe, and we have actual positive documentation and
photomicrographs to show that brain structure, or your actual structure, is preserved with a
high degree of fidelity, down to not just the cellular, but even intracellular level. And,
you know, that is the whole concept of vitrification, which is not freezing. And it's
important distinction. We're not, quote, freezing corpses. Two wrong concepts there. One,
just to call somebody, the difference between you being near death and all of a sudden being
pronounced dead does not mean your brain pattern goes away. We know that from many people who've
been brought back. And it turns out their brain pattern, if it wasn't more than 10, 15 minutes,
is still there. And if they're cooled down, if you fall in the ice someplace, you can... That's...
We have half an hour, 45 minutes, hour, hour, sometimes two hours, people have been brought
back with their brain pattern still intact. This is hard science. This is reality.
A corpse is defined as, you know, when legal death has been proclaimed, and that's just
someone saying, yep, this person's dead now. So...
Great. Excellent.
It's a gray line.
Precisely.
But you're not dead. You're not dead until you're warm and dead.
Yes, and your brain pattern starts to really go away, which is not saying that if you die some
place and have, you know, an hour and a half or three hours or two days of warm temperature ischemia,
that's not a bad thing. Obviously, we don't think there's... You know, we don't...
At some point, there's a concept called information theoretic death that'd be pretty difficult to
come back from. But the whole idea that death is a single binary event is simply, quite frankly,
ignorant. And it's ignorance that no way we should not have given the current information that people
have clear access to. So we're not... One, a corpse is not a corpse, just because some
medical professional says he's dead. The other thing is that the... We're not freezing people.
We're basically cryopreserving them with the best medical technology we have, which still is not
perfect. But the new vitrification protocols, especially when properly executed immediately
after a pronouncement of legal death, preserve structure with a high degree of fidelity.
And that's an important concept. And I think it's an important concept our listeners should
understand. So I know there's been... Well, actually, I don't remember how many exactly. I know it's
been over a hundred people that have been vitrified so far. Do you know how many of those were
really good cases? Because I know some percentage of them were less than ideal when they were getting
vitrified. And I don't know how many were in good conditions.
Yes, thank you. I will make sure that you get your observation in there,
Jess. But the... Right now, the status of cryonics is that it's still... There's
less than 5,000 people signed up. There's probably about 150 people at Alcor and who are cryopreserved
about that same number at the cryonics Institute. To answer your question, earlier cryopreservations
a lot of them were bad, quite frankly. The mechanics and logistics were simply not there.
The cryoprotective agents and earlier protocols were simply primitive, quite frankly.
In direct response to your question, I just spoke with Diane Cremines, the Alcor director
of a membership person. And I was asking her that very question. What percentage now are getting
good cryopreservations? And their statistics for the last like four years is about 82% are getting
really what we call good cryopreservations. At bedside pronouncements where the cryonics text
with their profusates and their ice are literally right there the minute and moment death is
quote pronounced, you're immediately cooled down. So that's a long answer to a short question.
But right now, basically 80% of people are getting good cryopreservations. And Jess, that's a really
good, I'm sorry, go ahead. I want to make sure that I respond to Jess is she's you can't see it
if you're listening, but she has her finger up, which I saw it's nice. Yeah, we've been trying to
make hand signs. So we're not just talking to each other all the time. It's harder to see on the
camera. Unless you unless you talk, you know, because you don't have the strip up top. I don't
have the strip. I don't know why it's not there. Anyway, yeah, go on.
I'm curious what makes what makes cryopreservation more than just freezing now? And like particularly,
what was the what made the old process bad? And that has been improved in the new process?
That's a reasonable question, Jess. The big distinction, what I'd call a real bright,
shiny line, and that it's still just now emerging into popular consciousness,
is that the distinction between basically straight freezing, I either take you and I've any of us
right now, your heart stops beating and we throw you in a freezer and then throw you in liquid nitrogen.
Basically, a thing called freezing occurs, you know, we're about 70 or 80% water when,
you know, we know that you put a tomato in the freezer and freeze it. It's not the same tomato
that it was, you know, when you bring it out. That's because a whole bunch of bad things happen with
freezing. And so the concept is to instead replace the water in our systems with a vitrification
agent. The new vitrification agents basically replace that water with a vitrification solution.
In essence, a biological antifreeze. That means when things cool down, instead of having ice
shards, instead of having a whole lot of pressures and osmotic pressures as a function of the cooling,
the everything kind of classifies in place, if you can think of like a plastination process.
Now that does that does not mean we can still any bring any people back or even
we don't have cats and rats and dogs yet from chronic temperatures.
We do have vitrificated vitrified organs that are viable after being carefully vitrified.
But to answer your question, that distinction has to do with the current vitrification agents.
And that actually occurred about 10 or 15 years ago. All the current iterations are better and
less toxic reduce freezing damage, even greater as a iterations improve. Was that responsive to
your observation or question? Yeah. How do they prevent cell rupture, these new agents?
Yeah, it's my understanding that basically the freezing process requires basically water.
And the idea is to do initial washout with a washout solution that washes the blood out,
because blood will coagulate and become acidified and slower. And then in a separate
process, promote through the vasculature, through the carotids, the vitrification agent that basically
goes through our entire vasculature, which you probably know is 100,000 kilometers long.
We've got a whole bunch of wiring in us. And utilizing the existing vasculature in our system
that perfuses goes through our system and gets pretty much to all of ourselves.
Now there are some areas that are hard to perfuse, the inside of your eyes and your inside of your
blood marrow, bone marrow. So it's not a perfect process yet, but our main thing is to get our
brain perfused. And that's what the distinction now is. We now have photo micrographs of what
happens with good cryopreservation to brain structure, where it shows all the neurons and
dendrites basically still there. Now warming them up, of course, is still a problem because
there's a separate set of damage upon warming them up. But the point being, we're preserving
cryonics works if you define as preserved structure even today. Cryonics does not work if you say
the definition is can you take people down to liquid nitrogen level and bring them back
with no damage? No, no, we can't do that yet. But we think there's a good reason that we have
good reason to believe we will be able to. Are you familiar with the Kinectome
preservation project? Yes, in general. The guy that wrote the book on Kinectome, I'm trying to
think of his name, come on, Brain. He spoke at one of the Alcor conferences. I don't remember
the name either. This is the, and I know there's a prize for the Brain Preservation Prize that
has recently been won by a fellow who worked for 21st Century Medicine, basically, an
organization that does cryonics research. Robert, it's his first name. I think you guys interviewed
him on an earlier episode before I was on the podcast. Robert McIntyre. Yeah, exactly. He's
Robert McIntyre. He spoke and he'd used a combination of plastidization and cooling down to
preserve brain structure. The challenge there being that that plastidization is hard to actually
It's destructive. Yeah, it's destructive. And now it may work if you can weaken
micro-scan them and upload us to a computer, which is another good possibility. And that's,
you know, most of us are quite open to that. This meat puppet, was that your
your verbiage there? Yeah, me too. This meat puppet infrastructure and is prone to way too
many problems. I agree. We need to find a way to upgrade this. And, you know, most of the people
who are signed up for cryonics are really forward thinking smart people who realize that basically
this particular thing that DNA and we've evolved to is not the end in itself. It's just a clutch
that's been put together and how we happen to be here. It's evolution in action, but it doesn't
have to be the end of evolution. We got to continue to evolve to much more possibility creatures.
I think most. Does that make sense? Yeah, I think most children, if you were to ask them to improve
the design of the human could come up with a bunch of ideas. Like, definitely this is a model.
Let's start with the back that hadn't hurt with knees that don't screw up all the time.
Anybody else want to join the you could join a class action suit because of all the glitches in
their body and maybe question is who do you sue? I was thinking the Pope. I'd like to do that guy.
He's got some money at least. He's a representative of God who allegedly designed
this. So I think he should be held responsible for all the fact they fucked up so much. It's just
ridiculous. Hey man, we were perfect before the fall and then maybe that was it. Then God got
really vengeful and introduced a bunch of errors, I guess. It's like rolling back to the prototype
version. But the main idea I do want to get across to our listeners in their limited time that we
have is that not only is cryonics a real legitimate emerging science, but that it's available and
affordable to most people listening to this podcast. Even though there's a fairly high cost to it,
basically $200,000 at Alcor, about 150,000 at CI for the whole package, that cost is typically
borne by an extra life insurance policy that might cost 80 cents a day or a buck and a half or two
dollars a day. Some kind of, you know, some older depending on your age, depending on type of coverage
you have. And we have people spending four or five, six dollars a day, but a lot of times those are
policies that actually accumulate a cash value, that have that tax benefit of a cash value in the
design to go forever. They're permanent indexed universal life policies. But the point being,
instead of, you don't have to have 200,000 bucks to be signed up for cryonics, you just need to
be able to qualify for a life insurance policy. And the actual mechanism to find out that out is
simply go to rudyhoffman.com, fill out a website form, forget some quotes and get some ideas to
see if this might be a fit. So excuse me for sounding a little bit like a salesman, but I
happen to be a salesman. I was about to give you a sales pitch and point out that I got on
with Rudy would have been something like six or seven years ago. And I think I was paying 27
bucks a month. And that covered the cryonics members, or the, not the membership, but the fee
for the cryonics institute, as well as suspended animation incorporated, which is the company
that flies out and actually gets your body ready for preservation and flies you out to a tank. And
if you're at the cryonics institute in Clinton Township, Michigan,
sometime last year, you contacted me about getting on one of those beat taxes plans too. So
that's, that's the one that like you said, there's like an crude interest that I could
to capitalize on whenever I want to cash out on it. If, and if I wait till I'm 90, it's in the
many hundreds of thousands or something. I do have a question. I don't remember the numbers
question about that. Well, I'm mainly we want to cover a lot of the logistics of how this works.
But since we're on this topic right now, you have to sign over ownership of the life insurance
policy to the cryonics institute when you get it, right? Yeah, great question. You know, the
both Alcor and the cryonics institute do require that they either be the owner or the joint owner
of the policy, which is pretty much the only way they can be sure the policy is in place at any
given moment. Yes. Because they do have to scramble the team, etc. before the before the actual money
is there. But the great news is that the carrier main carrier I'm working with now, for the last
10 years or so, enables the best of all possible structures, I think called joint ownership,
where basically you were the first owner. And she was the first owner of the policy and CI or Alcor
is the second joint owner. So that way you can check on the status of the policy, the actual
cash accumulation is 100% yours. It doesn't mean that you cannot change your mind or walk away
or take all your cash value. Yeah, that's the thing I was going to ask about that. If they're
joint owners, how do you get all the cash out if when you need to access it, if you need to access
it? The short answer is there's a secondary document that's the both cryonics orgs have
that clarifies that you, even though they're joint owners, the entire cash accumulation and
the entire ability to control the policy resides and stays with you. Oh, good. Okay. So it's been
eight years since I signed that. And I just got to thinking about that a few months ago. And I was
like, huh, I know I was comfortable at the time, but I don't remember why. Yeah. And it because a
lot of times people are of larger policies, like older folks might want to have a big, you know,
stuff larger amounts of money into the policy. And if you were putting tens or hundreds of
thousands of dollars into a program over time, you want to make sure that the cryonics org is not
going to basically cabbage onto it. They are both very, very legitimate organizations. But even though
we might intuitively feel that they would do that, it's not, that's not good enough.
Everything is very much in writing. There's a document that specifies that you are the sole
owner of any cash value and you maintain full control. Okay. So if someone is like, hey, I want
to get crap reserved when I die, what, what does that entail? How does that work?
It goes, it's obviously we need to get you signed up while you're alive. And a lot of,
well, this is such an easy thing to put off quite frankly. And as, as people are listening to this
podcast, I want you to take a moment and realize that right now, wherever you are, at any given
moment, something could happen to you. If you're driving in the car listening to this, if you're
bicycling as I listen to podcasts while, while bicycling, all of a sudden somebody could come
out of left field and boom, there you are, you're gone. The point being, life is simply risky. And
what you need to do is get your cryonics arrangements in place early while you're young,
while you're healthy, when you can qualify for life insurance, you qualify for life insurance,
not just with your money, but with your good health. And all of a sudden something happens,
whether it's a, whether it's a heart glitch, whether it's high blood pressure, whether it's a
cancer glitch, which by the way I had a few years ago, and all of a sudden life insurance may not
be available or it may be available at a much higher cost. So the mission here is to realize,
if you're really smart, you get ahead of the curve and grab this stuff, why you can get it
cheap and easy and cheap and easy. I want to, I want to double back on that cheap and easy part
thing, because I'm of the opinion that if you get killed in a car accident, you probably are not
going to be successfully cryopreserved. It's just, at least in my opinion, unlikely that people will
be able to get to you in time. But the vast majority of Americans die knowing that they're
going to die. They die often in a hospital under supervision or in hospice care, well over 90%
of people. And by the time you know you're dying, it's too late to get life insurance, because
obviously no one's going to ensure someone who's guaranteed to die as anytime soon.
Yes.
The thing that really like broke my heart was I knew of a person who was in the
rationalist community and she got brain cancer. This was like 10 years ago or so,
just a little before I signed up, I believe, and she didn't, wasn't signed up, didn't have life
insurance. And I don't remember if there was enough donations made to get it funded before she
died. But yeah, there's things like that that can happen. You just something acts up and you're
like, oh, great. Now I have early cancer in my young age, or even if you're not in your young age,
like if you're 25 and you sign up for a 30 year life insurance policy, anything, a lot of things
could happen before you hit 55. So getting it while you're young and it's really cheap is a great
idea because generally life insurance companies are like, haha, he's 25, he's getting life insurance,
we're just going to get his money for free because he's not going to die in the next 30 years
and they give you super low rates. Great, great observation. But I think you're probably referring
to Kim Suwazi, if I'm not mistaken, the 23 year old. And again, if you're listening to this, I
suspect you're probably you may be older, younger than 23, but most people think 23, there's not
much existential risk. She basically got inoperable brain cancer. And she did through herself on the
part of the Reddit community and the compassionate arms of tyrannosis everywhere, including me,
I actually spoke with, shared the platform with Kim Suwazi. I spoke immediately a few minutes
after she spoke. It was hard to get the audience, you know, basically to follow her where she basically
says, I know I'm dying, I'm going to be dead in a matter of probably weeks. It turned out to be a
few months after that. There was actually a New York Times reporter that followed that whole story
from roughly a year and a half from her trying to finding out that she was had the glioblastoma
to find and she acted her boyfriend had called and see if we'd get a life insurance. Obviously,
we could not. I was looking at to see if I could find the sheet. As you were talking about that,
I got a call. This is what this is Wednesday. It was this Thursday. It was two days ago.
And basically, the guy was desperate to get life insurance. And he was wanted to sign up
Procranix. And so he signed up. He went to Rudy Hoffman.com, filled the website for him out.
And I called him up and he says, well, I want to get this done right away because I have a
I have a lung cancer that I'm going to die. And he was, you know, late thirties.
I won't use his name because that would be inappropriate. But I did later, of course,
until I had to tell him immediately, I'm sorry, you're completely uninsurable. No insurance
carriers gonna gonna touch you with the with interoperable with basically lung cancer. And I
went and looked at my records. And this is a moving part of this story. And I wish I could
use his name. That'd be tacky. God damn it. Three years ago, this guy had called up,
asked for a quote. We kind of we got him a quote. He wound up messing around and not doing anything.
And here he is three years later in desperate for life. He didn't care what the rate was. He
just needed some insurance. And so the point being, if he would have followed through three years ago,
we would have covered him. He would have a, you know, once you're covered, the insurance company
can't change their mind. I have 11 policies totaling $3 million life insurance on myself.
Most of them are written in a preferred health category. I had cancer three or four years ago.
No insurance company would touch me the 10 foot pole now. But because I had the policy
early, you lock your you lock whatever health category you're in there. And they cannot
insurance company cannot change their mind. You can change your mind. So I don't want the coverage.
It's called unilateral contract, but the you can you can change your mind, but the insurance
company can't. So at the risk again, sounding of sounding back in an ambulance up the door and
sounding like an insurance guy trying to, you know, basically scare people into doing something.
The reality is you ought to be scared. If you ain't scared, you ain't thinking straight. You're
basically rationalizing and thinking that the rules did not apply to you that you're never
going to die. You're never going to get sick or bullshit. I don't care how good a care you take
yourself. I don't care if you're vegetarian or vegan. It does not matter. There's a very,
very, very high probability that you're going to need to get coverage. We're probably not going to
get unless you're super, super young. I doubt that we're going to beat aging and time for you.
That's my message. I got a well, I'm assuming you're insured for a good long time. So I guess
this is more a question to Steven. Hey, Steven, did you get the 30 year policy or what did you get
with yours? I think I got like the life policy. I'm not really sure. I should know this on the
top. The documents are in the safe in the closet behind me. I can probably respond to that. Basically,
Steven, Steven started, I believe, with a term life insurance policy that's really,
really inexpensive, especially in the early years, which is not an unreasonable place to start,
especially if you're under 35 or so. And when I signed up as delivering pizzas part time,
so I didn't really have a ton of expendable income. Right. So basically, here's somebody
delivering pizzas part time, who was able to afford to sign up for Chironics. And maybe I just did a
25 year old a day. He bought 250,000 of a 20 year level term. It was $270 a year.
So I got, but to go back to Steven, what is your plan after the term runs out? Because
my my bet when I signed up was that either at that point will be much closer to me not needing
life insurance anymore. Or since I got the the one that builds and that caches out at the end of
the 30 years, that would get me a good third of the way to being able to self fund it. And maybe
after 30 years of savings, I'd have the other two thirds needed. Do you have a plan for what happens
when the 30 years runs out? I don't think I'm on a term policy anymore.
That's exactly right. Yeah, that's that that's what I was getting to. And your question is
absolutely brilliant, because term insurance is great in the early years, the super cheap in
the early years. It's super cheap in the early years, because the odds are you are not going to
die in the early years. But the term insurance that I work with, and to be fair, most other
insurance guys do as well, is a thing called upgradable term, which means you can lock your
term, your health in, you buy a 20 year term or a 30 year term for two, three, four, five hundred
bucks a year. And what that does is lock your health in. But it also gives you a window because
you can upgrade that term anytime in the first 20 years. Basically, you can upgrade it as Stephen
has done to a permanent policy where the premium is going to be higher, but it's never going to go
up. It will lock in level and then stay and actually just pay itself at about 17 years.
Is the permanent like literally up until the point that you die, even if it's when you're 95?
Even if it's 100, if it's your hundred, 125. Basically, our policies go to and past age 120.
Oh, damn. And I take it, Stephen, that the upgrade in cost was not all that great then,
because I thought that the ones that are permanent are really expensive.
It's not, I don't have a good metric since I've only had the two policies. My first one is 27 a
month. This one is within a dollar of 60 bucks. Oh, damn. Yeah, no, that's not bad at all.
No, I didn't think so. I mean, I pay more for Comcast and Excel Energy. I mean, I need those
too. I don't know which I need more. I need internet or a life insurance more when I try to
think of it. But we hope you want to make that choice. Yeah, related to that, you know,
cash is the fact that newer index universe of life policies are simply not only better,
they're simply cheaper than traditional whole life policies. And it's not magic. It's at the
cash accumulation because there's an indirect, indirect exposure to the standard and poor 500
index, the actual growth on the policy is in the area of 6 or 7% and the cash value. And what that
means is that acute cash accumulation enables the policy to become paid up earlier in about 17
years. So you can pay 60 bucks a month and then maybe 17 or years, 17 or 18 years, there'll be
enough money in the policy to pay it forever. You achieve escape velocity in your policy where
you can stop paying premiums, but the covering stays in place. So it actually is in place in
the later years when you need it. And that's what's again cool. Again, it's a new technology.
The technologies we have are better than the old technologies and a lot of everyone knows that
with reference to their iPhone or their cell phone and their computer, but a lot of folks don't
realize financial services has had an equivalent upgrade where basically the newer programs are
simply a whole bunch better. And that is why, you know, if you were my own brothers or sisters,
I'd say, this is what we ought to do. You know, get start with probably maybe start with the term
insurance if we need to for cash flow purposes, but try to upgrade that thing in the next five
or 10 years to where it'll be in place forever. Was that responsive? Yeah, that was great.
So I want to get cryonics. I just filled out something on your website. Do I need to contact
CI or Alcor as well? Normally, the actual protocol is initially filling my web,
go into Rudy Hoffman.com and look in the videos and fill in the website out. And then you get
your policy in place. And then I send a copy of the original policy to you. And then we send a copy
digitally to CI or Alcor. So then they know that all the stakeholders have their funding in place.
And then there's a separate set of paperwork you do directly over the net directly with the cryonics
org. Does Alcor work with local morticians? Because I think CI does still, right?
Both CI and Alcor utilize the same crowd preservation team, which is called Suspended
Animation Inc. That is technically a segment that's actually not bundled together when you do CI.
Alcor has it all bundled together and it accounts in $200,000 for full-body crowd
preservation. CI has bundled it separately where the CI portion is only $35,000 or even $28,000
if you pay them $1250 a year one-time lifetime membership. But that actually is only a part of
it because that's only the CI component. What you have to have is make sure that there's a
mechanism to get you from where you are when you're sick or dying to where you need to be.
And that is a separate team called Suspended Animation Inc. And they basically, their part's
about $80,000, so we normally would do a CI package that's cryonics institute,
suspended animation, and private air ambulance. That global cost is $143,000, call it $150,
and it's still good to have another. And since you can buy a quarter million coverage at $25,000,
there's a quantity discount at $250,000. So basically you can get a $250,000 policy for
two or three hundred bucks a year if you do start with term. And that way you're overfunded,
you've got crowd presence, you've got the full transportation piece, you don't have to try to
rely on local morticians, which is suboptimal in my informed opinion. I want to dive into that
quite a bit. So my wife works in hospice care as a social worker right now. And I know, right?
It's, I believe we're at this point every time it comes up, but it is remarkable work that I
have zero aptitude for. And since now we share, well, I have this room, which has the other room,
but we, you know, we share a home as our home office. And I can hear her working and it is,
wow, blows my mind hearing her talk to people. She works with people who literally die. She's
literally working with people who are dying over a period of time. I don't have the goodies for
that either. I respect the fact that she's been, she's been present to what they call made deaths
where people basically opt in for physician assisted suicide. You need a doctor nearby,
but not necessarily next to you. They give you a cocktail and you take it and you die
in some time in the next hour or six. Really? Is that that's a doable deal? That's that's legal
and what in what's Colorado? Colorado. Oh yeah, you guys are progressive. Luckily, that's legal
here. Wow, it should be legal everywhere. I think it's ideal for people who want to get
cryopreserved because then you know exactly when you're going to die. Precisely. So that's what I
wanted to ask about was I'm not 100% sure on the legalities. Well, because when I was talking
with her about it, she's very interested in signing up. She will get life insurance policy at some
point and I'll get her a chronic policy. Like we'll make that happen, but she was skeptical
because she sees that you know, she'll occasionally. So basically someone's on hospice,
they've been determined to buy a doctor to be like they're going to die in the next three months.
You can't have to spend an animation and sit by your bedside for three months.
And so if you're going to die at some point of whatever is killing you in the next 90 days,
usually what will happen is she'll get a phone call. Hey, so and so died. Oh, okay,
let me start making phone calls. And then she calls the mortuary, the doctor,
et cetera, et cetera. And it's not uncommon for the mortuary transport people to take two hours to
show up. And so obviously that's way longer than you want to wait for suspended animation to fly
out and get you. So she was just curious, like how on earth can you put all these pieces together
to have this thing in place if you're if you're dying under these conditions. And it sounds like
obviously the best way to do it is okay, well, I'm going to take my cocktail at 4 30pm on Saturday
be great. You know, suspended animation could be there at 4 15 just in case and
have it be ready to rock and roll. But what is the what are some of the logistic troubles of
getting people preserved under optimal conditions? I should also mention that when you're signing up
with the Crown Ice Institute, I think there were four boxes and of like, all right, what conditions
do you want us to preserve you wonder? And one of them is like, do whatever you can, no matter what.
If you have to scrape me off of off the sidewalk with a shovel, put that I think I am probably
paraphrasing that wrong. I think there is a that's exactly what it said. Right. I checked the box
that said use your own best faith estimate. So Crown Ice Institute won't preserve me if I,
you know, get my head blown off with a shotgun by somebody who you know, whatever attacks
around the street, or if I get run over by a car and they find me the next day, they're not going
to pick up the pieces and throw the biggest parts in a vat. And then luckily, there's a rider on my
policy now where my wife is the beneficiary should Crown Ice Institute not collect, she will. So
it's just I guess it's worth pointing out that you get you get to pick the conditions under
which you'll be preserved as best you can in advance. I guess, yeah, I wanted to get that
long-winded question out of what what can you do to maximizes your chance of good preservation?
Yeah, that's a and we can do that with or without a hospice situation. Yeah, you brought up a lot
of really important points there, Steven, as have you folks as well. And that, you know, the optimal
cryopreservation is not a black and white thing. It's a continuum clearly. And one of the things
we can obviously do is avoid what I'll call existential risks. You know, if we're, if you're
signed up for ceramics, it probably is not an ideal thing to go do climbing mountains and
fall in a crevasse because we aren't going to get you, basically, or you go down over water
and in a plane and you, you know, there's simply no getting you. There are a number of
circumstances that basically make cryopreservation impossible. First of all, as you point out,
it's important to realize that life insurance does not go to still goes to someone. You buy a
half million dollar policy from me and you die by any old way, basically, including suicide after
two years, by the way. We will pay that $500,000 to a series of someones. But the, with reference to
getting the best cryopreservation, one of the reasons why Alcor is shooting about 80 plus percent
of good cryopreservations is, as you pointed out, Enosh, most of us have some lead time.
Life is a lot safer than it used to be. We're not dying of accidents, nearly as high percentage.
Most of us, 80 plus percent, are dying of things we have some lead time on. You die of cancer.
We're dying of cardiovascular issues. And, which means, the, of the dozen or so
cryonics claims I've paid, nearly all of them had some lead time, physically got their ass to
where they needed to be to the hospice slash hospital near their cryonics facility and consequently
got really good cryopreservations. Related to the suicide question or the assisted suicide question,
which is something I've been pounding the drum on for decades, and we're finally,
that was why I was so interested, even that it's legal and doable and actually being done where
you're at in Colorado. The very first cryopreservation occurred with assisted suicide in California
about two and a half months ago. Yeah, it was a red, the red letter day for a cryonist because
basically this guy was able to do what rationalists understand we ought to be able to do, which is
determine the circumstance of your deanimation and because you can choose the time and the place,
etc., it was a, you know, it's a good cryopreservation. Obviously it's not available in all states,
you know, there's, and we, cryonics is probably controversial enough without adding assisted
suicide to it, so it's, but at some point, interestingly, I don't know if this is an aside
or not, there's two crazy little mention, but the person that was having to be speaking with
today, who is signed up for Alcor and has COVID-19, was at one point willing to fund a very large
amount of money to help us do a court case where we would find a cryonist who is dying, who would
sue for the right to do a basically assisted suicide for cryopreservation, and once we get a
case like that, then there would be a set precedent. Unfortunately, it was too early in the curve,
basically, and the odds I couldn't get anybody to sign on to this idea because it's too early.
I did have an individual who actually was dying of Parkinson's, and he was okay to do it, and then
his brother talked him out of it, but the point being at some point, we will have a, you know,
a more rational way that you can decide about the circumstances of your death, which make cryonics
a much more viable system, where all those logistics concerns, which are very real,
will be much more minimized when assisted suicide is more of a standard of care.
I know that the cocktail they give in Colorado is heavily damaging to basically every system it
hits before it kills you, and my wife wasn't sure if it also hit the brain. I sort of suspect,
I mean, it must hit, you know, if it's in your body for six hours, it definitely does, but I
don't know how much damage it would do, and I don't know if there are other options for
self-made deaths in Colorado, other than this organ shattering cocktail. I wonder,
I guess without any details on that, I couldn't speculate on whether or not that would hurt your
chances, but yeah, that is a good question. I know there must be things that can kill you that
don't necessarily hurt your brain that much. This week before Christmas, I took one of our
three dogs to be cryo-preserved. I took it up to a cryonics institute. Her name was Hermione.
We shot a picture around here. Anyway, Hermione is a sweet dog, and I will talk about her in
the past tense, but either pretty good chance she's not been in the past tense. Basically,
it was, I put her in the plane with me. We flew up to the cryonics institute. Two in the morning,
I was driving a rented car through a snowstorm to get the cryonics institute, got to the veterinary
clinic where I was literally five minutes from CI. Tremendous service levels at CI. There's a
really caring, compassionate people. Here's the point related to this. So the dog literally dies
in my arms. They bring a little injection, and the dog dies, and within seconds she's being cooled
down. So it was quite frankly, it may have been one of the best cryo-preservations in the history
of time. I don't think even other pets have gotten that good a cryo-preservation. Much less humans.
So basically, until when we can do humans, when we can have the same kind of compassion and
intelligence that we deal with our pets, we'll certainly get better cryo-preservations, but
we can't wait. Don't wait to sign up till that day, but it's nice to know that the life insurance
policies we sell will pay even if you suicide. That coverage that you have, Stephen, on you,
if it's past two years, you can suicide, and your policy will still pay out the full death benefit.
I do want to warn... That is a selling point that I don't want to push.
Yeah, and I want to warn people against that too, because unless it's one of those doctor-assisted
suicide things, in some states there's mandatory autopsy laws if someone commits a suicide,
which would mean you cannot be preserved at all.
Yeah, great, great point, I'm not suggesting people suicide. As a general matter, of course,
I'm simply saying that when assisted suicide does become more of an option,
that will not be a stopper on the death benefit being paid out. But thank you for that cautionary
observation. You're absolutely right. One of the reasons you don't want to suicide if you're a
cryo-insist is that it's almost mandatory autopsy in most states, so don't be stupid, be smart.
It's interesting. Now that you mentioned it, because yeah, I feel for you, and I know that
that was a tough day with Hermione, we put a cat down. She's would have been three or four,
five years ago maybe, not quite that long. And it's tragic and heartbreaking, and she is the
opposite of preserved. She's in her ashes or in a small box above our fireplace.
I respectfully suggest that won't grow back. That's right. Unfortunately, she's annihilated
from the universe, which is terrible to think about, but this is just pure. We occasionally
tangent on this show. I wonder why the cocktail they give you when you have a physician-assisted
suicide in Colorado can take hours, but the shot that they give inmates in death row and that they
give pets, I'm sure it's different shots for pets and inmates, but those ones take 30 seconds,
if that. I wonder what the difference is and why one gets the long one and one gets the short one.
Although actually, I do know that part of it, the cocktail and I'm sure I could look up the recipe
for what they give you in the physician-assisted suicide. I know that there's large amounts of
opiates. You're not laying there in pain for hours. It's, if anything, a controlled opiate death.
I don't think we're worried about addiction at that point, but yeah, that is an interesting
question. No, no. Yeah, that wasn't the thing I was making. I was just making sure that it was
clear that these people weren't laying there in agony as their organs are being destroyed. They
were riding an opium high. That was probably the best they've felt in a long time. I want to make
sure it's as humane as possible. Jess, you had a question or observation. Yeah. I'm trying to
regenerate it. I was wondering if you knew the origin of or you or Aneash, the
required autopsy if you commit suicide? I don't actually know, but I assumed that it was because
suicides can often be faked, that it was actually murder and they want to rule that out. That's
my guess. Mine as well. I guess so. And again, if it's, I paid a death claim on a suicide,
but it was six months after the two-year exclusion, the suicide clause expired. So,
basically, if it would have been inside that two years, the insurance company would have simply
added paid all the premium back, but they would not have paid the claim. So, it's remarkable to
declare that after two years, insurance companies do pay on suicide. A lot of folks do not realize
that. But with reference to the question about the autopsy, obviously, an autopsy is what I want
to think that you want to avoid. As part of your crannics paperwork, there's an option to basically
say I'm a religious objector to autopsy so that it reduces. I checked that box too and I felt
vaguely dirty by doing it. Because you ain't that religious, you heathen.
Well, that's the thing, is it would be nice to say I'm a conscientious objector or I'm an informed
person who's opting out, but there isn't a legal form like that. There's a legal form that says,
for religious reasons, I don't want an autopsy. I like to think of my rationalism. Not everyone,
obviously, but me personally, as it almost a sort of religious aspect, the way it guides my life.
I didn't feel as bad. I was like, there are people who call themselves religious that check
this box that have far, far less knowledge about the philosophy that is supposedly guiding their
life. They're just like, oh, yeah, I'm Christian or oh, yeah, I'm Jewish and I don't do anything
with that in their lives. Whereas I actually know what my philosophy entails and it guides my life
in certain ways. I was like, I'm more religious than those punks. So sure, why not? Absolutely.
How about you, Jess? What's your religious feelings or feelings about religion?
There's a rabbit trail we go down for a long time. Save me, Jess, rationality isn't a religion.
Well, I was going to say maybe transhumanism. Yeah, that's,
there's a whole lot of smart things we could say about religion. It's not a surprise to any of
I'm sure of, or your listeners, I'm sure, Steven, that, you know, most of most people signed up for
Quranics are not just claims, skeptical, the claims of religion. Most of us think it's one of the
worst ideas that's ever come down the pike. The idea of believing things without good reason is
faith should be the new afterward. We should, you know, use it as a, it's an embarrassment that
intelligent educated humans still are placing a high, high premium on something that is so
obviously bad as believing something without good reason.
I got a question about if anything's changed in the past eight years. And I guess also sort of a
advisory notice to anyone else listening to this. People who might have been your next of kin,
someone who may have been able to inherit your stuff, whether it be children or parents or
brothers or a spouse, can sometimes dispute claims, life insurance claims or whatever.
And I know there's been at least a few Quranic preservations which have been completely screwed
up because somebody's greedy ass kid or spouse said the institute should absolutely not get this
money. This money should come to me and it goes to court and the body is just put in a drawer
somewhere and you're screwed. So the, yeah, the paperwork in CI said very specifically,
hey, this isn't a requirement, but everybody should talk to their next of kin, their family,
tell them, this is what I want. It should not be a surprise to anyone. And if you can at all,
get them to sign on, not to sign on, but to at least say, you know what, I love you and I respect
your wishes and I will not stand in the way of this because you want, you want people to know
that like this is important to you. This is not desecrating your corpse. This is what you want
done. And they have to kind of be on board with that if you don't want legal challenges. I was
wondering, do you know, has anything changed in that regard? Is there more legal protections for
us? And I should bless your heart for bringing that up. That is a really, really important
point. And I want to, you know, emphasize that whole section there. If I can just kind of summarize
some of the things you've made, made reference to there. One is the relatives affidavit, both Alcor
and CI have a document that they don't actually require that you have your relative sign. They
think it's simply a good idea and they do everything they can do to encourage you. Basically,
the relatives sign off saying, yes, I understand that my brother is going to be crowd preserved.
So there's not a big secret. They don't find it. But the other component is how in the world
you structure things so that they can't do it. Basically, the way we structure things,
you cannot, your relatives cannot fuck it up. Excuse my language. The, the basically here's why.
Life insurance has some really unique components. One of those is by operation of law, the money
goes directly to the named beneficiary does not pass go, does not collect $200, does not go to any
potential litigants. And it goes, it avoids probate basically, which is a part where litigants can
jump on it. So the, now that we should not mean it's not possible to sell, screw that mess things
up. The, but what we do is structure the life insurance policy to where it goes direct, the
beneficiary goes direct to the, to the cryonics organization. And we also may structure it in
a way that the family understands if they can test, they are not likely to get anything. We
put verbiage in the, the trust and verbiage in the process that says basically, if you, if you
can test this, if you do not cooperate, if you do not make the appropriate call, you are not going
to be getting my estate or assets. So there's two components to that. One is the fact that life
insurance proceeds go direct to the name beneficiary and do not, are not subject to creditors.
And two is the fact that if you're, if both the Alcor and CI paperwork have some verbiage
that basically states if my, if my family does not cooperate, they are hereby basically cut off.
That's not completely enforceable in all states. It's, there's, that's verbiage that I've been
talking with the attorney I'm working with. I'm working with an attorney who basically,
her and I are writing the book on cryonics estate planning. It's the second book and it's called
the cryonics estate planning handbook. Maybe you can take it with you and it's on this exact
issue. Basically, how do you, how do you make sure that your family, one doesn't slop it up and two,
if cryonics does work, how can you wake up stone wealthy? So that's another issue. It's a whole
new, new, new, uh, rabbit trail to go down with the power. You know, maybe some people may be
thinking, Hey, this thing really works. Would it be possible to not just maybe wake up poor,
it'd be nice to wake up with a whole lot of options. So yeah, there's a whole lot of questions
about that. But we, some of us have been working about 20 years to try to put together cryonics
trust, uh, arrangements that sidestep laws against perpetuities, that sidestep family,
um, people who might try to slop it up or take your money that have a corporate trustee whose
job it is to protect you and grow your wealth over time so that if cryonics works, you can wake up
with a lot of money. Uh, that's interesting idea. That's why I have one reason I have three million
bucks of life insurance on me. These cryonics trust, again, you could have without being wealthy,
just like you can be signed up for cryonics without being wealthy. You use a life insurance
policy to fund the trust. Is that cool or what? I mean, it assumes that money will still be a
thing in the future, but it might be. Yes, that's a reasonable question. And I promise you that is
something that we talk about at length in our, in the book. And, uh, we, I, I think some form of
money is, you know, and I could be wrong, but some of us, uh, I would rather think, you know, some form
of resource allocation is inevitable in any society. I think I'd rather, uh, assume that money is
still going to be a thing. Yes. I think it's a reasonable and safe assumption. Because if it's not,
then you're probably fine anyway. Yeah. Yeah. But so yeah, I know I, I know. When in doubt,
bet on things staying the same. Yes. Or, or at least that they're the human nature
staying the same. And, uh, human nature basically is avaricious. Human nature also, you know, we
clearly are all widely in the lives that are so much wealthier than, than most people have lived
throughout the eons. Yet most of us don't feel like we quote have enough. We still envy the person
who's got 14, uh, computer screens instead of 12. So, you know, it's not rational. I'm not saying
we're not saying humans are rational. I'm saying both humans are humans. And the point being,
it'd be nice to have some options. Wouldn't it be nice if you can find a way to buy the new set
of lungs to let you breathe water? Oh, yeah. Or maybe you want to have a nice, uh, nice little
DNA thing that could let you grow wings so you can fly around. You know, I suspect that might take
some money. I could be wrong, but it should be nice to have a couple billion dollars or throughout
the problem. And, uh, with my three million bucks of life insurance and a cryonics trust,
it grows to about a billion dollars in just 66 years at a reasonable growth rate.
So we have been going a bit over an hour. We should probably wrap it up here soon.
That works. Does Steven, Jess, either of you have any questions or comments for Ruby?
I've got one if you're, uh, I can't see if you're thinking of thought, Jess. What do you,
do you have one or do you have any? I have one. You can go first.
No, you go ahead. Probably more ridiculous. We want the, we say the most ridiculous for
last, even, but go ahead, Jess. Your question will be perfect, Jess. I have one that's,
I think, a legit question, but also a very silly one, which is what is the benefits to
freezing your whole body versus just your head? Oh, that's not a silly question at all. There's
a question. That's a question that cryonists argue about at, at Infinitum. Um, the, I'm signed up for
full body. I'm, I'm happy to disclose my bias there. I think there's a, I think it's a, it's a
well dis, well informed bias. And here's, here's why. Uh, at one time there was a al, alcor,
as a matter of fact, still some legacy data on their website saying that, you know, we can get
better cryopreservation with neuro only. Uh, and at one time that was the logistics that had to do
with, uh, perfusion and malarity concentrations of cryoprotective agents. They couldn't access the
carotids and properly get you perfused, your brain cryo perfused, uh, if you're doing a full body.
But, uh, now they can. That's the, the, the new cryoprotective agent is not as viscous at cold
temperatures and they mechanics can of the, of the perfusing process, meaning we can get full
malarity of CPA in the head, even a full body cryopreservation. But the other component there
is there's a pretty good, you know, that I don't, none of us have a chance to interview somebody
who's a, used to walking ahead. So we can't tell it. We can't say, you know, hey, do you feel like
you're still you? There's a pretty good chance that our sense of self may be in our, um, as well
in our spine or torso. Um, even those of us who are, who believe in, who are hardcore materialists
and think we're mostly in our brain pattern, my clients who are neurologists and brain guy,
brain scientists, they're all signed up for full body because they know they tell me that my brain
parts go down to my toes. So all that's my rationale for a full body is a better option.
If they don't need that body, they can throw it away, but I'd rather send more information forward.
Is that responsive? Uh, I guess I was even thinking about things like gut bacteria,
which are also part of it. Yeah, great point. Or my microbiome, certainly clearly,
hey, I want those trillions of gut biomes to come forward with me. Do they also get cryopreserved?
I think they probably would. They tell me there's a whole lot more of those than their human,
human cells. Yeah, it's a great point. But yeah, they, so it's not, by the way,
C.I. does not give you an option. C.I. is full body, uh, period. There's also a, a yuck factor that,
um, is pretty, uh, just like the aesthetics of others people. They don't want to be
cutting people's head off is exactly, uh, you know, most put, to put, to put Graham's head
in the jar is, is a, is a bridge too far for a whole lot of people. Whereas freezing a whole
body, I think has a lot less societal, uh, pushback. And that's another reason why I think it's a
smarter direction forward for cryonics as a whole. But I still am happy to write people who choose
to be neuro only. Um, but I, I thought my bias is for the full body. And I think there's good
reasons for that. I think it's good PR for the company too. Um, certainly, yeah, like you said,
uh, you picture a be heading and then the, then the process, I think people get kind of shy about
that. It's, it's, it's sorry. It's yucky. I mean, I'm a signed up Cranus for 27 years and it's still
a little bit yucky to me. If it's yucky to me, I know it's yucky to a lot of other people. Right.
Yeah. My, I feel a sense of, of, uh, kinship with my, with my meat suit as well, such as it is. So
I'll, I'll keep that and then, uh, upgrade or, or, you know, modify as needed after the fact. Um,
that's, that's my, my expectation anyway. I guess I wanted to end on, uh, well, and of course,
whatever last sales pitch you'd like to do, I, you know, Rudy Hoffman.com, everyone be sure to
remember that. But, uh, what is, uh, what's your best, maybe your best and your, what's your
other and lower bound estimate for the likelihood of cryonics working? I think that's a catching
point for a lot of people. They hear, well, like, well, sure, but then like these 10 things would
have to go right. And that sounds like way too improbable. And I'm like, well, if you're, even
if you're fairly pessimistic on all of them, that's still like eight, eight to 10%. But that, that's
my own guess. So I guess my, my own best informed Bayesian estimate, but what would you say yours is?
Yeah. That speculation is certainly a really great question. As a matter of fact, I'm actually
working on, you've heard of the Drake equation. I'm sure, I'm sure you're well informed listeners
are familiar with the Drake equation, which took a whole lot of variables to, and multiply them out
and then figured out, you know, to get a result. Um, yeah, there's a lot of things that have to work
well for cryonics to work, but it's a lot of things that have to work well for the people hearing
these words to work. Can you think about the amount of things in the chain, the amount of components
that enable the conversation that we're having right now? It's incredible, but human beings are
clever and we can put things together. The odds of your, my cryopreservation working, I'll speak
personally, I think they're reasonably high. I'm going to give it over like 40 or 50%. And that's
because I work really hard to make sure I do get a good cryopreservation. I don't, I don't take
existential risks. My wife is not only signed up, but fully supportive. Everyone I know knows that
knows I'm a cryonist. I wear my bracelet all the time. I have a pretty good eye sense that
if I were to get sick, I would know, I would know exactly where to go. And that at least
composes, covers the logistics component. There's other variables that have to work together. Yes,
we know that. I think it's certainly better than 10%. If it's a 1% chance, it's still an incredible
option. And what the, if it works right now, if it makes you feel better that I've done everything
I can rationally do, I suspect those who are listening to these words are really smart, highly
educated, super rational beings. We're trying to make the best decision they can about this thing
called death. It's the big one. This, it doesn't get any bigger than this. This is life or death
decision. You're making this instant as you listen to these words. And I suspect even if there is a
reasonable chance of a 1% or 5% or 0.01% or 0.0001% of cryonics working and you could afford it,
you should give it a shot and check this thing out. So in addition, you could do, put cryonics in a,
if you forget Rudy Hoffman.com, hit cryonics or cryonics funding. Basically, you'll pop,
you'll pop up cryonics organizations and you'll pop up my name. I score pretty high on this stuff.
So hopefully that is a good wrap-up sentence and a wrap-up idea. Basically, the odds are unknown,
but if you don't sign up, the odds are 100%, it won't work. Is that pretty, is that a strong
close? I think so. I'm sorry, I'm a closer. Hey, you guys have been wonderful. You guys have been,
I really enjoyed this and I hope people of listening have found some value in this. And again,
you can pop onto Amazon for affordableimmortal.com. Do the download. I'll pay your three bucks if you
don't like it. All right. Let's put this thing in the can and you tell us how to handle it from here,
Steven. Sounds good. Well, we'll wrap this part up and once again, thanks again, Rudy. This was
great and I've been shilling for you and for cryonics for years. This isn't me just being
nice because you're on the air. I've been this way every time the subject comes up for the
last several years. Well, thank you. It is my own best faith assessment. I know Enyaush managed to
get this together without a life insurance agent who was on board. He basically just had to push
everything himself. When I contacted you, you said here, yeah, let's set you up with a policy and
that was it. I got some paperwork through the mail and had to sign it. I did never had to think
about it again. This is a fairly easy process if you get the right people and the only right person
I know is Rudy Hoffman. So thank you very much. We do absolutely do our best to make it as seamless
as possible. Thank you very much. All right. Well, awesome. Thank you for joining us. This has been
really informative. Yeah, excellent. Thank you. And Jess, thank you. And Steven, thank you. Have a
wonderful evening and good luck and stay safe and sequestered out there, everybody. You too. We sure
will. Bye. Okay. I'm not sure if I should say welcome to the Bayesian conspiracy again. We have
reconvened a few days later and welcome back to the Bayesian conspiracy. All the people who paused
and waited a couple of days to be in sync with us. We appreciate it. Your dedication to the show is
noted. Heck yeah. And now we are going to be doing the sequences. Yes. I believe so. That's what I'm
told. Of course, I could have missed it. Maybe there was some illusion of transparency going on.
Well, I mean, we were the ones who told us so we can change things if we don't want to be telling
us like this anymore. But I think this is a good thing to do. So let's do it. Also, I was trying to
make it a segue, but it didn't really land. I got it. And thank you. Yeah. I get one chuckle.
One chuckle a week and I could survive. It was more of a swerve where they joke. Yeah. So
we had some good ones this time. Illusion of transparency, which like, yeah, and then expecting
short inferential distances. And I feel like they actually would have been really good ones.
Hold up just one second. Aren't we doing, what was it? Molecular technology,
scientific and scientific evidence, legal evidence, rational evidence?
Not according to the website.
Should we, should we like, maybe? Well, we'll chop that.
No, I mean, should we maybe like reconvene a different day?
I can't. If this is going on on Wednesday, I record, we want more tomorrow night. That takes
from like, usually six to nine. So crap. You know what? No, no, no. I've read both of these a number
of times. I know them all. Let's, let's keep going. All right, you got it.
Yeah. So I was saying that we have some good ones this time. Illusion of transparency and
expecting short inferential distances, both of which would have been really good to go along with
talking to strangers, especially illusion of transparency. It's very much in line with
the major themes of that book. Someone want to summarize it or shall I go?
I think you're doing a good job so far. Go for it.
Okay. So illusion of transparency in hindsight bias, which was the previous one,
people who know the outcome of a situation believe that the outcome should have been easy to predict
and advance. So related to this one is the illusion of transparency, which is we always
know what we mean by our words and we expect that others know too. I think I've also heard this
called mind reading. I forget if that's from, I think that's a thought distortion on the list of
like the CBT skills. It also just sounds like a popular nomenclature for like this, this thing,
right? Yeah. How am I supposed to read your mind? Well, I meant this one, this and that and the
standard rejoinder is how am I supposed to read your mind? You know, when all I got here is what
you said. Yeah. Well, I kind of want to dig into it more, but I'll keep summarizing. There was
an example in here. So June recommends a restaurant to Mark. Mark dines there and
discovers A, unimpressive food and mediocre service or B, delicious food and impeccable service.
Then Mark leaves the following message on June's answering machine.
June, I just finished dinner at the restaurant you recommended and I must say it was marvelous,
just marvelous. And so this was a scenario that was presented to a group of subjects.
I'm trying not to laugh. Sorry. It's just a funny situation.
I know. Marvelous, just marvelous is a phrase that I should use more in my life.
So I think that'd be marvelous, just marvelous. When this was presented to a group of subjects,
59% thought Mark's message was sarcastic and that Jane would perceive the sarcasm,
importantly. And among the other subjects told scenario B, which by the way, they're saying
the ones who were told that he had unimpressive food thought that it was sarcastic and that Jane
would perceive this sarcasm. And Jane, huh, there's a typo. Maybe we should report it.
Apparently Jane and June are used interchangeably in this. But anyway, notice. Yeah, the subjects
that were told scenario B that he received great service and food, only 3% thought that Jane would
perceive Mark's messages sarcastic. The study seemed to indicate that an actual voice message
was played back to the subjects, which I guess is not clear. It seemed to indicate.
And that's even, it makes it more surprising though, that people could get such different
impressions from a voice recording. Yeah.
So I think it's very important that it is a voice recording because if it was just written down,
you could imagine the tone of voice to be whatever you wanted. But if there was an
actual voice recording, everyone hears the same thing. Yeah.
Yeah, I think I like this and it's illustrating a point that we don't necessarily have to
generalize too much from this, you know, the specific example, just because it's, you know,
one study and all that. But this general phenomenon stands whether without this study,
but as far as this goes to large parts of like whether I'd assume it's being sarcastic
would be my priors on Mark's usual, like, behavior, if he's a sarcastic person,
if he's the kind of person who's ever used the word marvelous before.
Little things like that. But yeah, I think the gist is that if the group was told, hey,
look, he's being sarcastic, or rather that the food is bad, they assume that he's being sarcastic.
And of course, they would assume that they know that he believes the food is bad,
but that they also believe Jane would perceive the sarcasm. And so what I like about this too is
this was done in 1994. If you run that into text messages today, you get to just go completely
hog wild with this. Yeah, what emoji did they put? So it's really important to use emoji.
Is that a sarcastic wake or a serious wink?
There was another study he cited from 2002, which I thought was even more interesting,
because they told a person to say an ambiguous sentence to an audience. I think one of the
examples given was the man is chasing a woman on a bicycle, and the speaker is given a picture to
show that it's a man running after a woman that the woman is on the bicycle, as opposed to like
the woman is running and the man is on the bicycle. But when you first hear it, it could be interpreted
either way. Anyways, they were told to say the sentence to an audience and estimate how many,
how much of the audience understood what they were saying. And they always overestimated how
many people understood them and underestimated how many people misunderstood them. And I got
that that was extra interesting because then the speaker had full control over how they would
utter the sentence, right? And they're looking at the audience. So maybe they're getting some kind
of feedback from them, but they still just were wrong, guessing on how many people actually
understood them. And as we know from talking to strangers, you can't even trust what feedback
you're getting from the audience. Yeah. So if you want to test this at home with your friends,
I forget if I even heard this from the lost wrong community or somewhere else, but if you tap,
if you tap your finger on the table to like the tune of happy birthday,
or the Star Spangled Banner or some tune that you would expect people to know and then ask them
what song was that? Nobody will know. It'll sound exactly like out of Jingle Bells to year or whatever,
but it's just random tapping. A good example. I remember at Julie Galea mentioning that one
just like five years ago and rationally speaking. And I never forgot that. It's another good example
of like, no, no, like this couldn't be more clear. I'm clearly doing happy birthday. They're like,
I don't know, man, you're tapping your fucking fingers. Is that ACDC? So, I mean,
okay, this is going to be a spoiler for Harry Potter Methods of Rationality. So if you haven't
read it, skip forward two minutes. But Eliezer intended it to be incredibly obvious whether
or not Coral was Voldemort like he was in Canon. And I'm not going to say if he is or not for
people who didn't skip forward, but it is not at all incredibly obvious to the point where
the community was the readership at the time he was writing was very much split as to whether
or not Coral was Voldemort until the reveal was made later on near the end of the book.
And like to Eliezer, he was just like, how are people not getting it? This is the most
obvious thing in the world. It shouldn't even be a discussion.
In all of our defense, even if it was obvious, which I maintain that it was less obvious than
he thought it was, but part of the reason for that is because like it was, if I think it was too
obvious, yeah, it was no way would be laid out that clearly if that's really what was going on here.
I, you know, I agree, but it's, it's a thing that happens a lot with, with writing or you think
the audience is going to get something and they don't and then you over correct and like really
over explain things and people are like, don't spill it out. Like I'm an idiot, you know,
I can read into the text a little bit. It's, it's a very difficult line to walk.
Yeah, that's why beta readers are really important.
Yep. Yep.
That's what I'm appreciating a lot about reading, wrapping up a ward right now is that the author
has, you know, to tie all these loose ends together. And I think do it to the satisfaction
of the raging mob and the mob, at least the only mob that I see and listen to, which is like the
subreddit and the discord, they are, it's hard to summarize, but they are much more like you picture
mobby than like Reddit, where Reddit will just like, you know, is happy just to fling shit across
the fence. It'd be like, ha, ha, this sucked or whatever. These ones will jump down your throat,
but like, I can't believe you would say that, you know, you would put heroic sacrifice on this
pedestal. Really, it's just like suicide. That's terrible. And this is awful. This shouldn't be,
you know, lauded or whatever. It's, I can't, and Brian brought this up in the last couple of episodes
that we want more, like having to write in front of an audience that is dissecting your work while
it's in progress, I think would add a whole new dimension to it. I can't even do it when I'm just
trying to like have an imaginary audience. I end up second guessing myself. I'm like, is this too
dark? Is this, am I talking down to my audience right now? Is this going to be, I don't know.
The post ends on a real world example with huge consequences, where two days before Germany
attacked Poland, kicking off World War Two, Chamberlain sent a letter that was intended to
make it clear Britain would fight any invasion that occurred. But it was phrased politely and
in diplomatic speak, and Hitler thought it was conciliatory. So the tanks rolled right in.
Those polite Brits.
So yeah, the main lesson from this post seems to be when you have something in your head,
you may think things are very obvious, but they are not necessarily in any way obvious.
They very much are not.
The best thing about that is that you can never really be sure someone actually understood you.
Like the premise at the top of this is like, nobody knows, you know what you meant to say
by your words and expect others to know it too. Sometimes if you're not 100% sure what you meant,
then that's obvious that the person probably won't know what you meant if you didn't.
But even if you do, and they tell you back in words that make sense to you,
you might have this kind of like double illusion of transparency. But that is like way less obvious
than a literal double illusion of transparency where I just didn't communicate exactly as
clear as I thought, and then you repeated my miscommunication to me. I don't know,
this can kind of go on at this weird recursive level that to me is just kind of fun and wild
to chase down. But it is, I'm sorry, go ahead. There's two different frameworks that I'm thinking
of just off the top of my head, where people try to mitigate this effect. One is the CFAR's
double crux communication style where, and then there's also the Gottman slash
Gottman rapid pour intervention, which is a relationship counseling thing. And they
both have the same kind of structure where one person speaks, the other listens,
the other person has to repeat back what the other person said, but in their own words.
Or like, what I'm hearing is that you feel like this, and that's making you feel that way. And
I can see that you're upset about this by like, your expression, is that right? And you're not
allowed to move forward until you feel convinced that the other person understands you. Like,
you feel like their ability to rephrase it back to you is, yeah, that's what I meant to say. Or,
I think, with the double crux example, it's supposed to be like, even kind of a steel man
where it's like, yeah, that's even better than what I was trying to say. I guess that's the ideal
version. Yeah, that was in PrepoPor's rules of like civil discourse or something. One of the four
rules was, you should be able to repeat back your opponent's argument in such terms that they say,
wow, I wish I'd thought to put it that way. And I feel like if you could do that, that is the apex
of having a good conversation with somebody to disagree with. It shows, at the very least,
that you understand them well enough to simulate what they're trying to say. And
that means you're prepared to engage them. I think it's great. Yeah, it's also, although I've
tried to have these kinds of conversations, and it takes a lot of practice, and it's very unnatural.
First of all, it makes any conversation take like a million times as long. So,
it's the reason why people don't just speak like that all the time.
Right. I think, I don't know. The other reason, I'm sorry, go ahead.
The other thing that I tried to do, which I've talked about before, is the radical honesty
thing of, especially with people close to me, that there's less inferential distance.
It's like a segue. I was going to do the segue too, yeah, but I wasn't going to use that one.
I was going to say that I think that would work to resolve confusions like Mark and Jane were
having about the restaurant, right? Because you could trust that Mark would accurately
represent how he felt about the restaurant, rather than like, is he joking?
Yeah, like, is Mark a guy who's sarcastic all the time, or does he never make jokes?
But most people are kind of in the middle of that. I don't know. I like to use radical honesty,
say things clearly and bluntly, as much as possible. Totally.
And some of the times that the reason that we can suspect that short conversational supplies
for a long conversation is necessary, because we expect short inferential distances.
Yeah, we should probably...
You believe I didn't write that down first? That was a good joke.
I could hear the audience laughing, give me a minyash. All right, there, finally cracked a grin.
All right.
Oh, jeez, I'm sorry. There must be a long delay between when I'm doing things to,
to when you're seeing them.
No, I'm giving you guys a hard time. That wasn't an avarorious laughter joke.
Anyway, expecting short inferential distances is one of the ones I didn't have to reread,
but I did just because it stuck with me really well when I first read it.
The short version is that basically, when you're explaining something to somebody,
you have a well-grounded intuition that a short explanation will suffice,
because in our ancestral environment, short explanations were all that was necessary,
because we all basically had all the same prior knowledge.
Whereas now, if you're trying to make a nuanced point and a difficult subject,
and you give a short answer like a tweet, it's extremely reasonable to understand that somebody,
or to expect now that someone will completely misunderstand what you're trying to say.
Yeah, like he gives the example that since you grew up in bands of no more than like 200 people,
maybe, all knowledge was passed down by speech or memory, and so like no one was that far removed
from you in knowledge. If you discover a new oasis, you didn't have to explain what an oasis is,
or why it's a good idea to drink water or anything, like almost everyone knew almost everything that
everyone else knew. There was not a lot of distance between you and other people that you had to bridge,
and now we have what he calls abstract disciplines with vast bodies of carefully gathered evidence
generalized into elegant theories transmitted by written books. Their conclusions are 100
inferential steps removed from universally shared background premises.
Yeah, we have really intense specialization in everything.
Yeah, so sorry to interrupt, but I wanted to get that out real quick before you went to the why
something that's more than one inferential step away seems to be crazy or lies or something.
No, no, you're good. And I brought up Twitter because it's always, I'm not on Twitter,
but I see tweets once in a while on Reddit, or I'll hear about the fallout sometimes.
I don't know if Dawkins uses Twitter less, or if he's just slightly less insane on there, but
for a while he was just totally tanking his reputation. I think by trying to have nuanced
arguments in 140 characters, and now they've up to, I think to 280, so he was able to get out the
whole sentence like, there's every reason to expect that eugenics would work from a scientific
perspective, but that doesn't mean that we should do it or something. And the thing is,
like with Dawkins, and with a lot of people, they just assume everyone knows basically the
same thing that he knows. That's my point. Yeah, that's exactly the point. I'm speaking to an
audience of my fellow scientists here, right? And it turns out, no, with Twitter, you're speaking
to literally everyone. Yeah. And most of them don't have that knowledge. Yeah, so I mean,
there's nothing scientifically controversial about the fact that it would be super easy
to breed in traits into people if you really want it to, right? If aliens visited Earth tomorrow
and said, if humanity on average is to foot taller in two centuries, we'll blow up your planet,
that wouldn't, that would be not, I mean, it would be an inconvenience. It would be hard,
but it wouldn't be difficult. It wouldn't be really impossible. I'm not gonna say that it would be
super easy for alien inconvenience. Yeah, right. So it might not be, it would be definitely an
inconvenience, but it's not like we would have no idea how to address this challenge, right?
It would be totally doable. I'm not hung up on the eugenics thing. Also, it's a very loaded word.
It was just, the idea that I think of is it always seems like Twitter people have,
you know, they try to make a nuanced point. That's what, I was on Twitter for like one summer
and I got to jargon with somebody about like female and male genital mutilation
and I realized that we're just talking past each other and that it was impossible to have a
conversation. I'm like, this is the worst platform ever for talking to people. Why am I here? And
then like shit on there for like Twitter. Yeah, movie reviews, jokes, I think is the absolute
platform for it. You can get great one-liners and zingers on Twitter. I think that's a great
place for it, but as for the rest of it, man. Twitter was a fun social experiment that we did
with the world. I'm not sure fun is the term I would use. Yeah, no, I don't think so either. I
worked as a social media manager for a bit and that was just like the worst two years of my life.
Yeah. I mean, that's an exaggeration that I have had worse things happen than having to be on
Twitter, but it was up there. Yeah. Just like the inanity, I just like.
Yeah, the, so to go back to the post, it says that in the ancestral environment,
there, anyone who said something with no obvious support was either a liar or an
idiot because there was no knowledge that everyone else in the band didn't already have.
Or couldn't easily get. Yeah, yeah. And conversely, if you say something that you think is blatantly
obvious and the other person doesn't see it, then that other person is an idiot or they're
being deliberately obstinate just to annoy you. And, and on top of all that, if someone says
something with no obvious support and expects you to believe it and gets all indignant when you don't,
then they must be totally crazy. So this, the issue of not having this common ground between
each other is, you know, a recipe for horribleness because listeners still assume that everything
should be visible with one step, maybe two. So they take two steps back to explain maybe three on
the outside and not realizing just how much distance there is in from universal knowledge to new
knowledge. So this is so many professors, or just probably teachers in general, but I remember
in college there would be like the sign of a good professor or somebody who understands
inferential distance. I think a lot of teachers like good teachers who care about the teaching
process are really skilled at this too. Like that that's probably the field where you need to know
it the most any, any field maybe where you're the main thing you're trying to do is communicate
something to an audience that's unfamiliar with it. But I remember just having really bad professors
who are, they start their PowerPoint, you're like, okay, you're taking notes on the first slide, like
alright, I'm following, wait, what? The next slide is just completely like, and then there's this vector
thing. And I remember I started out majoring in environmental science, I had this professor who
did that sort of thing, I have a page of notes, like before I dropped that major and switched
for like a bunch of reasons. But like, there was a page of notes that was just like slowly
devolved into a bunch of doodles. And I remember Vector Kitty was flying over the environment.
And just like, yeah, I don't have no idea what's even going on anymore.
Something something. I think I think it was the worst teachers were the ones that didn't
remember what it was like to not know the subject or teaching. Yeah. And so they start talking. And
to them, it's they've been doing over 30 years and like, yeah, this is old hat, I get this,
you guys will get it too, because it's really easy. But I don't remember 30 years ago when
they're open the first textbook, right? Dude, you it's surprising how quickly that sets in.
So taking just a stupid video game as an example. In World of Warcraft, you have to learn boss
fights, there's all these little mechanics, you got to do things got to watch out for it takes
some practice, right? And before you have it down, it's freaking hard as hell, you're learning all
these new patterns and tricks and things to watch out for. But once you have it down, it is super
easy. It is barely an inconvenience, as they say. So once people have beaten bosses, moved on to
other bosses, all the time, you see people saying, how was anybody stuck on this earlier boss,
they're super easy, just kind of blow through it. And like, literally, maybe two weeks ago,
they were in the position of, Oh, my God, this is impossible. How will we ever do this? Because
it's, you know, everything is impossible until you know how to do it. And then it's just trivially
easy. Yeah. And it's amazing how quickly you can flip from one to the other.
That's really hard to, it's hard to get in that mindset when you're a new learner as well.
That's something that I've kind of been reading about and struggling with, like when you're an
adult and you're trying to learn a new skill, it's really hard to be in the position of I'm an
idiot who knows nothing about this, like, I don't know, programming or, or I'm trying to teach art
to people. And I think the sequence actually gets into this too. But you the, the teacher also can
get really frustrated with people who don't understand what seemed like basic concepts to
you. But like, there are things that seem like basic concepts to me, because I learned them
when I was a kid, like I've been drawing forever. Yeah, I remember trying to teach like,
some older folks at the library, like, okay, like, here's how you draw a face. And
not under, like, that's another thing that's really funny.
Describing the anatomy of a face was like, okay, you have to like, you do the oval, you divide
the oval in half, that's where the eyes go, your eyes are halfway down your head. And like,
the seams, I'm trying to explain like the cognitive things going on. I'm like, this seems
unintuitive, because most people look at faces, and they don't look at the rest of the head.
So you think the upper third of the face has the eyes, but actually the middle of the head,
you have to draw the whole head that this part's covered with hair, no one looks at that. But
like, even as I'm describing all this stuff, and I'm trying to like go step by step as slow as I
possibly can, I'm walking around the room and people are still drawing the eyes on the top of
the forehead. And like, no, bad. Look at me, where are my eyes? Are you going to put them up here?
How weird would that look? Right? Yeah, just just bring it down. Yeah, it's, I think,
I imagine, I mean, part of it, that sounds, to me, that just sounds like a hard subject. I can't,
I, since I can't draw, maybe that, maybe I'd be a good art student, because I know I suck at it,
but I wouldn't be confident in my ability to do it right. Whereas other people, the part where it
could be maddening, he uses the example a lot of like scientists, trying to explain things to
not scientists, and how like, simplest explanation is a magic word of power among scientists,
because they've been inculcated with the, the legendary history of science from Newton to Einstein.
And it's like, so you hear a biologist say, Oh, it's the simplest explanation, but a physicist
who doesn't know biology can be like, Oh, okay, I will add a lot of credence to that,
because we are also scientists. They know how important that is. Yeah. And so that's,
like the annoying part is when you give like a long explanation of something to somebody who's not
in the field that you're, you're profounding from, you know, evolution to a layperson might be a
good example. Like they, you can explain everything, and they're like, Okay, yeah, I think I'm following
you. I think you're an idiot, I think you're wrong. Okay, well, then you weren't listening,
and he didn't follow because this couldn't be simpler. And you're the idiot. So that's not
how I feel. I'm saying that that that explanation to feel that way makes perfect sense. Yeah,
it's like very much, I think you get in this headspace easily of this person's an idiot, and
they're not listening to me. And the other person is thinking like, this person thinks I'm an idiot,
and that I don't know like basic stuff. Because like the thing about drawing is that people think
they know how to draw a face. And like, you know, even kids with crayons are usually drawing faces.
And it's like, I know how to do like eyes, nose, and mouth, you know, like, come on, but like,
you don't, that's, it's so hard to get in the headspace, which is like, actually, we don't know
this stuff. Yeah, you have to be really humble. Yeah, in the post that that to a lay audience,
it's the simplest explanation may be interesting, but that's hardly a knockdown argument. But from
the biologist's perspectives, they can see how, you know, it might sound a little unintuitive, but
when they reject evolution, even after they've had it explained to them that it's the simplest
explanation, they're just idiots, and there's no point talking to them. And it's clear to you that
this isn't what Eliezer means, you're either he's saying that that's the feeling that one gets,
because they're expecting short differential distances. When you correct for that, then you,
then you no longer view the, the unable to follow you along layperson as an idiot, you're like,
okay, I clearly didn't actually explain myself. That's why Richard Dawkins book explaining evolution
is, I don't know, 350 pages long and not five. And if to somebody who has the, and even that it
could be twice as long, if you wanted to explain, he probably does a bit of spending years since
I've read it. But like, if you wanted to explain little things like, here's why we value
short explanations, here's why we value replication, all the, the foundations of science,
if you wanted to dig into all that, then the book could be much longer. But I think he,
he probably does a bit, this is meant to be a, you know, top to bottom book. But that's my
point is like, you can explain evolution in three minutes, if not less, depending on who you're
talking to. But if you're starting from scratch, from somebody who has no idea what you're talking
about, then sometimes you need 300 pages, right? Yeah, I have a, go ahead.
Okay, but the joys of Skype. Yeah. Okay, well, then I guess I was going to say that he also says
that if people see you visibly attaching greater weight to an argument that is justified in the
eyes of the audience at that time, then they also think you're crazy, because, you know,
you shouldn't put that amount of weight on that evidence. So you have to go back and
first explain why the evidence that you're about to explain is, as weighty and important as you're
about to, you know, lay out with, and that takes explanation in itself. And so he's saying there's,
there's a very long chain, but you can't, you can't drop any hints that maybe you're working
a dozen inferential steps away from the audience, or that you have special knowledge they don't,
because then they think that you're condescending and arrogant.
Yeah, it's like, you know, trying to explain to somebody why astrology isn't a thing. And if you,
if somehow, you know, she believes in astrology, but we shared everything else in common, I could
just be like, you realize every physicist on earth thinks that it's bullshit, or knows that, you
know, had, would bet their lives on that being bullshit, you would immediately change your mind.
It like, you're like, oh, I, okay, if all the physicists who actually know everything,
there's no about stars, or everything that humanity can know yet so far about stars
thinks that it doesn't, you know, that the constellation stone impacts my life, then I
guess I'm wrong. I think to actually believe in astrology, I would first have to not know enough
of physics to not care what this is saying. I don't know, people are really good at compression
analyzing. I know, well, once you know that stars are giant gas balls and that they're so
freaking far away, what else is there to know? People are very good at compartmentalizing. I
have religious co-workers who, you know, spend their days like bioengineering cells.
Oh, God, don't these bioengineered cells look intelligent? Is it designed? It's like,
yes, because we made them here in the lab. That's not the same and you know it.
I think what this all comes down to is the punchline at the bottom he says, and if you
think you can explain the concept of systematically underestimated inferential differences briefly
in just a few words, I've got some sad news for you, which first of all is a reference to the fact
that this entire post is pretty long, but also to the fact that it links to three other posts
that he's made beforehand. And while he doesn't give it away in this, I think at this point,
it should probably be clear to most people that the purpose of the sequences and their, you know,
several Bibles length worth of word count is to bridge an inferential gap that he saw
at the very beginning when he was like, here's the mass audience of everybody in 2006,
and here is this conclusion I have reached. And I have to convince people of this, but
oh my God, it's going to take a while. And this is a freaking impressive project that one person
said about to bridge this massive inferential gap. Like just the fact that he thought he could do it
is kind of amazing to me. And then the fact that he actually did it is just crazy.
I'm very impressed by people who try to do hard things. I get pretty frustrated when people
shit, I don't know, generally I dislike haters, like in any field, but especially when people,
you see themselves as critics or badmouthing, like some artwork or project that someone has done,
or like, okay, what have you made? It's generally. Yeah.
All right, I guess that is the sequences. I do want to point out that somehow we accidentally
skipped over several dozen sequence posts to get to these. I'm not sure how that happened,
maybe an accidental pagedown or something. So we're going to be backtracking quite a bit.
And next episode, we will talk about the posts scientific evidence, legal evidence, rational
evidence, and is molecular technology, quote, scientific. So we have skipped a few inferential
steps to get here, but hopefully we can backfill them without too much trouble.
It seems like these were in the order because we just did hindsight bias and stuff.
Yes, we did. And if you go to the list of all the less wrong posts in order, the illusion of
transparency and expecting short inferential differences are a few dozen down from hindsight
bias. Huh. Yeah, I don't know how that happened either because we've had these listed as the
next ones for a while. But oh, well, we'll figure it out. It was good to talk about them and, you
know, it's set up for later and then we won't have to read them later, right? That's right.
Or we can again, we'll just do it really fast. Okay. All right. Well, this is fun. I know that
it's probably some patience on the listener's part listening to poor sound quality and the constant
overlap of our voices whenever any one of us want to start talking next because of the considerable
lag time on Skype. This will be the show for a while. We'll try and mitigate that as much as
possible. But anyway, thanks for being with us. Hope everyone's having a good evening here. So
hope everyone's having a good time wherever they are and whenever they are. I don't have
anything else to add. What about you guys? I do have one bit of listener feedback that I don't
want to put off any longer because it's directly relevant to the book that we were talking about
a couple episodes back, the Talking to Strangers one. So I figured we should probably hit that
right now. Yeah. And we can put off the rest to later. So this one is from Why We Cur on the Discord
says, it seems to me like the book Talking to Strangers is trying to say that strangers aren't
possible to read and that even trained professionals get it wrong. But that just seems wrong to me,
given my experience and the people I've seen. It just seems ridiculous to me to suggest that
people are as opaque as the author suggests. I'm pretty sure the book is trying to say that
it's mostly futile to even try to read people. When they talked about the book on the podcast,
they seem to mostly agree with its findings or at least not be surprised by them. To me,
this seems like quite strange claims. I wanted to read that because first of all, noticing confusion
is a huge foundational rational skill and Why We Cur has noticed some confusion and is voicing it.
And also, I wanted to know from Jess, since you're the one who read the book,
was that a correct summary of the book or did we overhype how opaque it says people are?
I think the point of the book is just that we are much worse at reading strangers than we
self-evaluate. It's not to say that intuition doesn't exist, and that some people can't be
good at this. But every chapter of the book cites multiple studies where they have shown
pretty definitive suggestions that...
Oh, I wish I had prepared it better yourself.
I guess the question would be, do you think this book is trying to
ratchet down how confident people are? Or do you think that it is saying,
quote, it's mostly futile to even try to read people?
I think I'm a bit surprised by how negatively a lot of people are skewing
the message of the book to be. I think that this was meant to be sort of cautionary in particular
because it focused on the case of Sandra Bland and began and ended with police violence. It talks
about court cases. Gladwell is trying to point out a legitimate problem with a lot of our systems,
which are that they are systems that were designed with illusion of transparency.
What the book is trying to address are things like the police system, the court system,
and one about consent and rape culture. These are, I think, good things to point out,
whether or not they're making people good or whatever.
I'm wondering whether you occur. I'm curious what they had as evidence on their side because
it sounds like they're saying, from what I've seen in my experiences, this seems false.
And I think that that sounds a lot like having,
I am really struggling to find words.
That sounds like exactly the symptom that this book is addressing,
right? Of course I'm feeling a conflict in it, but that's sort of the point.
I couldn't remember the word anecdote. It's when you will describe, say your friend believes in
astrology and you say, well, scientifically, that makes no sense. The stars are the existent 3D
space. There's no two-dimensional shape that you can draw over them from the Earth's perspective
that makes any sense. Identical twins seem to falsify the concept of astrology given that we
don't all have identical days to identical twins, that sort of stuff. Being a twin is actually
a good case point for a lot of bad arguments. I have a lot of cases where astrology is predicted
correctly. I read the astrology section in the newspaper every day and it predicted a bunch
of things really accurately. I remember even being a little kid, I was reading about the
description of Scorpio and I was just like nailed it, like damn.
There wasn't that famous thing. I'm sorry, go ahead.
No, I was probably going to bring up the same thing as you, the experiment where they will just
use the exact same description of someone that's so vague that it could apply to anybody.
They passed it out to people and they were like, yeah, we've had a professional astrologer come
and analyze each of your birth years and this is a description of you and everybody has to rate
how well they think it describes them and everybody rates it as being very accurate.
The guy who did that study, James Randy did that way back in the day. I want to say in the
70s or 80s, he wore his stage makeup, he looked crazy. I think it was like his whole persona
and he was like, oh yes, I have come and I've got a friend of mine that's really tight astrologer
and he's really good at this and why don't you all rate how this is and I'll come back next
week and pick up your guys assessments or whatever. Maybe you left the room, I can't remember,
but then he wrote what it was on the board and then, all right, if you guys got this one,
raise your hand and then he gets to look and everyone raises their hand and then they'll notice
as everyone else raises their hand and then kind of sheepishly go back down and they're like,
I didn't realize that everyone got the same one. How could it describe this also perfectly?
Yeah, I guess and then the thing about inferring things about strangers is I guess it's like what,
how much can you infer from somebody based off of a fact like that? I guess probably that they're
not a physicist or certainly not an astrophysicist or not even certainly, but almost certainly.
But beyond that, you can't read a lot of their personality. You can't like, oh, well, they're
probably like a shallow person who believes lots of pseudoscience. Maybe that's the one dumb thing
they believe. Maybe when they said they believe in astrology, they use believe in a different
use than you use it in and you failed to, there was an illusion of transparency on their part
because to them, belief is synonymous with, it makes me feel good or I enjoy doing this every day,
right? So I think we've gotten way off from the original question though, like how well do you
think people can read either other people in real life? Because I usually think I can tell if people
are like, positively or negatively reacting to me, but maybe I should not think that at all.
I know for a fact that I can't because I have an anxiety disorder and I've had to do a lot of
cognitive behavioral therapy to get to the point where, for example, every time I go on this podcast,
I'm not being like, Stephen and Edie Ash hate me and think I'm dumb and don't want me to be on
the podcast anyway. And like it's only think that half the time. No, I seriously would think that
about like I negatively skewed everything. You know, you when you have an anxiety disorder or
various kinds of mental illnesses that do this sort of thing, you read into sideways glances.
And then I've had lots of the kinds of interactions with people because I'm interested in this kind
of stuff. And my friends are all psychology nerds where we do have some kind of misunderstanding.
And then we sit there and analyze the misunderstanding forever. And it's very much
I liked the chapter where they were talking about friends, the show friends, I'm trying to remember
what the cognitive bias was. People being mismatched, where people have an idea of what an angry
person looks like, or a jealous person or you know, a grieving person. And almost nobody actually
does the stereotypical things that we think of as representing those. They're very much like
also cultural, also like familial, like my family has a very different way of communicating and
reacting to things than other people who grew up with other family structures. That's been like
an interesting thing to dig into when I'm interacting with other people where for example,
I've had people think that I'm angry, because especially when I get stressed, I default to a
blank facial expression and kind of a monotone voice. And that's me dissociating or me kind of
being in distress and dropping a lot of the stuff that I'm doing on manual a lot of the time,
like injecting expression and tone of voice and facial expression. But neutral reads is angry
to a lot of people. And they showed there's been studies where depressed people were given
a bunch of photos of people with neutral expressions and they read them as hostile or as
sad or they were much more likely to rate the people's expressions as looking something negative.
People who have been abused apparently are much better at seeing anger and those sorts of
aggressive facial features to the point of seeing them when they aren't there sometimes.
Like an echolalia, or I think that's the word. Yeah, I mean,
again, I don't think that the point of the book was to say that.
Which is a survival skill when you've been abused.
Huh?
Oh, sorry, I was saying which is a survival skill when you've been abused.
Oh, yeah.
No, definitely. It's yeah, it's interesting too, because you can get on
really, you can get people who are really going to confuse each other if you have somebody who
is raised in very loving stable family environment and somebody who had the opposite of that trying
to interact about basic things.
Darn delusion of transparency again.
All right, well, I have to go. So we should thank our patron and wrap it up. Yes.
Sounds good to me.
True. Is it my turn to thank the patron? I kind of think it is.
I think so, it's been a while.
Okay.
We don't keep track of who's turn it is.
So it's not that any of us love you less, it's just that we don't keep track.
Yeah. So this week we want to thank Christopher James for supporting the podcast.
He has helped bring all of this to all of you.
For, you know, we do not necessarily have to rely on wondering whether or not Christopher James
likes our podcast because money helps break through that illusion of transparency.
He can directly signal that it's valuable to you.
And this helps us bridge the inferential gap to everyone else as we keep putting out these
podcasts. Is this bad?
It's good. And I think what we can also say is that you know what, because we have people who
financially support the podcast, while we do have a great setup for
recording in a single studio with all of us, we don't have a great setup or rather you guys don't
for mine is perfect because I got this sexy blue Yeti microphone.
But maybe we can use some of our very generous patron dues to get you guys some mics and
improve the quality of the show going forward for the next few months.
That's a good idea.
Yeah.
I don't have a mic that even lent me. I just need to get it like working with my laptop.
And to the people who aren't aware, we don't have a Discord.
And I guess as far as I want to mention on the Patreon note that, you know, I don't know what
the number is today, but it's higher than it was on Friday of people who don't have jobs anymore.
So if you're tight for cash, start cutting Patreon right away.
Our feelings don't be heard. If we don't make the cut, like this isn't...
You've got to make the right cuts more important.
Yeah. If you're noticing this loss of income, that the loss of income that you give to us,
while deans, our feelings don't be heard. If you say, hey, sorry, job stuff, that's, you know,
by all means. I want to make sure that that's perfectly transparent to everybody.
Yes. So thank you everybody for listening, rate and review us on whatever podcast service you
use. We greatly appreciate it. You can chat with us on the Discord, which we are using,
or at least I am reading a lot more of now that I am home all the time. Even though I'm working
from home, it also makes it easier to slack off when I'm not in the office. And yeah, what was the
other thing? Oh yeah, we have a subreddit that you can post on as well. And we appreciate all of you.
We sure do. This is awesome. Okay. And I forgot this wraps up a Rudy Hoffman's episode. If you
guys do have any questions about chronic life insurance, do reach out to Rudy Hoffman at
RudyHoffman.com. I'll link to it in the episode description as well. So and with that, take
everybody. All right. Bye everybody.
