Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Eni Ashbrotsky. I'm Stephen Zuber, and we have
a couple of guests with us today. I'm Shelley. I'm Taryn.
And today we are going to be talking about the recreational side of drugs, since we were
talking about the new tropics last time. After the microphones went off, the discussion
kind of went other places, and we said, hey, we should record this as well, because this
sounds interesting. So I am the kind of person who believed everything they told me in school,
and things have changed a little bit, but I have never done drugs, and I've always been
deathly afraid of them. And I have been hearing recently from a lot of people that maybe drugs
are kind of an interesting thing to try now and then. And you guys are here to convince
me of this, I guess. Well, I actually have a perspective similar
to your own, in that I didn't do any recreational drugs unless you can caffeine. I probably wouldn't.
I think caffeine is recreational. I mean, for some people it is.
It can be useful, but it doesn't make you happy, right?
It's for some people it does. It makes you happy if you need caffeine to function. You
just not happy without it. You get it in you, and you're like, ah, normal.
My husband has, what I believe is a purely placebo effect, whereas as soon as the mountain
dude touches his lips, he's like, oh my gosh, everything is great.
Before his body's had any time to, yeah. But yeah, so I hadn't done any recreational
drugs until last year, and I am in my 30s. Did they destroy your life?
Not yet, working on it. So I still have not done alcohol or cannabis,
which are the most common recreational drugs. So you went straight from like, so I think
you know, when you're talking about like the stuff that told you in school, you're thinking
like dare program, which to those who are unfamiliar, you could probably Google like
reefer madness videos on YouTube, which is like the propaganda films from, I don't know,
the 40s and 50s, 60s.
Well, see, even when I was in middle school, I knew marijuana was basically harmless.
I see.
Everyone knew at that point, just because it's so used so widely by so many people.
But they talk about it like as like, so the dare program was this like drug scare tactic
thing that they have people go around to schools and was always sort of like, whenever they
talked about it, that'd be basically cautioning like, Oh yeah, marijuana.
OK, we can no longer say because people have books and stuff now that, you know, it's
it's going to destroy your life, but it's a gateway drug.
It's going to it'll first you have a marijuana's, then you're going straight to heroin.
And fun fact about dare, it actually increases drug use.
Yes. How would it increase drug use?
Because and this totally makes sense when when I was in the dare program anyway, and
I think they still do this, they tell you don't ever do any of the hard drugs, like
heroin or ecstasy or anything like that.
Because as soon as you do it, it'll be so amazing.
That's all you will ever think about for the rest of your life.
You'll become an instant hardcore junkie addict.
And it's basically not true.
And a lot of people.
OK, so I have recently read a very interesting article from New York Times.
I think it was about a guy who was talking about how he became a heroin addict.
And he said, no one, no one shoots up the first time they do heroin.
That's just you don't do that.
That is hardcore. You don't put needles in you.
What you do is you get like some painkillers that someone got from their doctor.
They got a little extra that brought them to the party.
You grind it up and you feel good.
You have a good time.
And the next morning you wake up and there's no hangover and you're not addicted.
You just go about doing it and you're living your normal life.
And so you're like, oh, there's actually nothing to worry about.
And so then he started taking it more and more and eventually got to the point
where it would be cheaper just for me to buy a smack and shoot it into my veins
than to keep going with these prescription pills.
And that's how you get to the thing.
So if people just were more realistic and be like, hey, kids,
this is a bad idea and here's why, as opposed to like you do it one time
and your life is over and then you do it one time and like, well,
everything I've been told is a lie.
So what you mean, the lies of unintended bad consequences.
Did you ever take any opioids for pain management before you started
experimenting with drugs?
I took, I was given a large, largest quantity of Vicodin after surgery
and I took one and that was it.
Hardcore.
You're just going to write it out or did you, did it not agree with you or?
I mean, I thought it may have helped the pain, but then after I stopped,
you know, I took one and then after that I was like, you know,
I don't really need any more.
So whatever.
I had the same thing.
Most people don't do that with their leftover opioids.
It's interesting because a lot of people, like I've even known some people
well, I know knew one person that developed a problem with it,
but like I took it and I never felt high.
I just felt like the pain went away and then I fell asleep about 10 minutes later.
It made me incredibly sleepy.
And you know, that's fine because that's all I want is to not be feeling pain at the time.
But, but no, apparently with some people who has a much stronger
effect where they actually get happy.
I feel very glad that I didn't have that happy high
because I tend to have this is this is the main reason I'm worried about drugs.
I tend to have a rather addictive personality type.
Like if I get into a game, I will do nothing but play that game for a while.
And I mean, I tend to get that way with anything that I really enjoy.
So if I really like the drug, I would probably have issues with it.
I have an issue with alcohol.
There's different ways you can like stuff, though,
like like psychedelics usually operate on serotonin instead of dopamine.
So even though you like them, you're not as likely to actually
build like reward circuits in your brain that will end up, you know,
reinforcing bad habits with them.
I'm very dopamine driven in general.
So I would probably get addicted to we all we all are.
But I like I hate serotonin.
It just makes me feel like I don't like this kind of happiness.
And why is it why is it taking over my brain with this this weird happiness?
No, the serotonin kind.
Oh, really? Yeah.
Well, from a drug perspective, because I mean, you experience serotonin
and you probably well, like it in an everyday experience.
Maybe, but whenever it's pushed over the natural limits, perhaps, perhaps.
But I'm also I have like a general depression
throughout most of my life.
And so I think I'm lower serotonin in general, probably.
And also the SSRR style drugs don't do that much for me.
Yeah. So what was it that got you to try your first drug?
Well, part of it actually was the rationalist community.
Peer pressure.
I am ashamed of my community now.
So I had heard from various people, like even one time doing psychedelic
or hallucinogenic drug could have permanent positive effects on your life.
Terenes had said the same thing.
And that is one of the things that really worries me.
I do not want my utility function to be fucked with right now.
Maybe maybe, like, if I get to a point in my life where I'm not happy
with who I am, then I would take some be more willing to take those drugs.
But I don't want things to permanently change me.
And Terenes like saying he said he said basically like any any Warhawks
who took some LSD would be like no longer as into going to war with things.
Yeah, I would imagine I'm sure there's outliers and stuff like that.
But generally, I doubt too many jarheads could could could do a lot of LSD
and still feel as good about why it's just you feel less separate,
I think, from from other people, at least in my experience.
And MDMA is probably another big one that would make it generally very hard.
I think those are the two ones whenever we're talking about like recreational drugs,
you should probably stick to a lot of stuff outside of MDMA and LSD.
I don't think has as many therapeutic uses.
Yeah, actually, that was my impression, too, when I was considering what I wanted to do.
Probably, I'm not going to do MDMA, although I have heard definitely
about the therapeutic uses, but psychedelics in particular.
Yeah. Yeah.
So why not MDMA?
Um, it's certainly more dangerous.
Yeah. Yeah.
Is it dangerous or I guess can you expand on dangerous?
Yeah. Well, MDMA is is neurotoxic to a higher degree than than LSD.
Neurotoxic like alcohol is neurotoxic or neurotoxic like neurotoxin is neurotoxic.
You know, I don't know enough about it to relate those two.
But generally, MDMA is less safe than than psychedelics.
Have you found yourself being stupid or the last few years in ways but pleasant ways?
I'm not as focused on just.
Yeah, I'm not as I'm can appreciate
my own experience more and appreciate being present more rather than just living
for the future quite as much.
And that's something that I've thoroughly enjoyed.
Hmm. I don't know if that's a good thing or a bad thing.
I like living for the future.
I think one way of thinking about that, though, is that if your only drive is for
like future stuff, that's where like all of like the the Buddhist talks about
like why people are so miserable all the time.
That's what that's exactly it, right?
Well, I mean, so that that is a big part of of both my misery and my drive in life,
though, it's that part that the mis the drive is like, I want there to be
something of me in the future.
I want to make a difference.
So I'm yeah, working on that.
But then there's also the misery where eventually a few hundred years,
everything dies, nothing matters.
Any contribution I will have made will be have wiped out.
Like who remembers any?
I guess Shakespeare and Homer have lasted.
But even then it's it's eventually it won't matter.
Even if you have like an amazing critically acclaimed book that's bestseller
a hundred years from now, no one's going to remember.
Yeah, I think I was more thinking about just living day to day.
Oh, yeah, no, you're thinking about like instead of like, man, I'm kind of enjoying,
you know, right now I'm, you know, between that's like 10 a.m.
I'm having coffee or whatever, rather than like just living in constant
anticipation of like, oh, man, I can't wait till this or, you know, I'm waiting
for 1230 and then I can do this like just being able to sit and bask and relax
and be happy where you are for that minute.
I think it's more what you're getting.
Yeah, it's it was very hard for me to do nothing before.
But that's very unproductive.
Yeah, yeah, like if I'm doing nothing between the hours of 1030 and noon,
those are an hour and a half that I could have been, you know,
working on a podcast or a book or something.
All of this is just like, man, I should be using drugs a lot.
Like, I know I'm going to join us in the productive side.
I'm currently doing a lot of nothing.
And I'm, you know, I could use a kind of brain reset.
Let's let's just do it.
I'm going to be doing nothing.
I might as well be happy doing nothing.
Unfortunately, drugs do have like a big image issue where you think that,
you know, it's just a dichotomy.
You know, you're either, you know, completely this, oh, man,
it's all just peace and love.
And or you're like completely grinding away in the machine
to make more money for the man or whatever, you know, like.
Or make more difference to the future.
Yeah, totally.
And but you can, I mean, responsible drug use is something that exists.
It's just, I mean, a lot of people who are responsible drug users
probably don't go around their office advertising it quite as much
because there's a stigma against it.
Yeah.
I think that's one of the one of the big reasons for for legalization
for a lot of these things is just to make it so people can talk
about their responsible drug use and kind of break the stigmas of, oh,
you do LSD once and heroin's next, you know, I guess, I guess it's one
of the things I kind of like about alcohol is that no matter how much
you drink the next day, you won't be drunk anymore.
You can go back to how you were.
You may not be productive the next day, depending on how much you drink.
Well, I mean, it changes you over time for sure.
OK, you know, and also some recreational drugs can boost productivity.
Although I'm not sure you could consider micro dosing LSD as fun.
Yeah, I wouldn't call it.
But it does help a lot of people.
I wouldn't call it recreational.
And that at that point, whenever I think of like doing drugs
recreationally, I think of doing them without the purpose of improving
my life outside of the recreational drugs, you know, if you're if you're.
But what if you're trying to improve your like, I guess some people
who are into spirituality or whatever, they they take drugs for that purpose
to improve their spiritual journey or whatever.
Yeah.
So I know that's still recreational to me.
Yeah, I think maybe my definition is off.
But well, I think there's there's two different goals there, right?
One is to have a great time.
Another is to like, you know, be a serious scholar about your own mind or something.
Right. So while they're both probably, I guess, recreationalism,
they're not like prescription use, but I mean, there's and if you're doing
Molly at a party to, you know, roll and have a great time, that's different than
like, you know, I'm going to try this sitting at home, watch, you know,
and relax with the best friend or something.
Those are very different environments and you're probably taking it with a
different goal, but you're still using a an illegal drug recreationally, I guess.
You said you also used to be against drugs very much
until you heard Sam Harris talking about him.
It's a very good, very good podcast.
I still haven't listened to it.
That's OK. There's never heard it either.
It was actually, I think his first actual podcast episode.
There were a couple like lead up ones, but it's second or third.
And he just read the essay that he published.
I read it shortly after it was new.
Some years ago, I can't remember when.
And it took me more off the fence.
So like I hadn't really used, I think I tried marijuana a few times at that
point, but I was pretty much like, well, I'm not going to try anything
that'll practically alter my perception of reality.
So I kind of had like this, like hardcore, like James Randi and Outlook
on drug use and James Randi and like Penn Gillette and people in that community.
A lot of them don't use drugs because they're like, well, and they don't even drink.
Yeah. They're like, well, yeah, I mean, the whole point of being a seriously
scientifically minded person is having a commitment to always perceiving the world
as as unobtruse or as as clearly as possible.
And I'm kind of on board with that myself.
So I am too.
I think what changed my mind was that, like, it's not like if you were to get
drunk once you're submitting to a life of never being able to perceive
reality accurately again, right?
It's like, if you were drunk forever, that would be a pretty serious issue.
But you're taking a break.
You take a break.
I mean, it's just like, I feel like taking that philosophy and I might not
have been giving it the best steel man I could.
But if your whole thing is to, you know, observe reality as as directly as possible.
Well, like then you're never going to waste time, like empathizing with a fictional
character, right?
So like, I mean, as long as you're willing to do or anything, yeah, you're going,
you're going to be taking different levels of seriousness with whenever you want
to, you know, focus on being scientifically minded.
Right. So I wouldn't want to go forth and do science while, you know,
rolling on LSD, but it's the weekend.
And I'm like, well, this is how I'm going to spend my time.
And I'm going to, I guess it's the kind of thing that you can turn off and it's
not a permanent commitment to losing your mind.
But, um, I kind of disagree with the idea that when you're
empathizing with a fictional character or that kind of thing that you're, you're
being deluded and you're not in touch with reality, like you are looking into
your own brain, you're, you're experiencing part of yourself and your imagination.
That's not like false information.
Like fiction is different from lies.
That's true. I might be rolling with that.
I can't argue with it too hard, but maybe like playing video games or I guess
no, because you know, you're playing a video game.
If you suddenly lost the fact that you're playing the video game.
But I'm assuming when you're hallucinating, you know you're hallucinating, right?
Yeah. I mean, you can lose that.
And that's whenever you have things like timelessness and stuff like that,
that experience.
One of the reasons I don't want to do alcohol is I feel like that one in
particular would distort my thinking in a way that I didn't experience on
psychedelics so far.
So it totally distorts your thinking.
But again, it's only for like a temporary time.
The thing is I, I will, I can get as high with really good music and just
dancing and letting the music flow over me as I ever have with alcohol.
And so I consider that or, or certain works of written art, it's not, it's
not near, it's not as strong as music or as consistent as music, but every
now and then it can, I, in my opinion, anyway, it brings me to a mentally
altered state too sometimes.
Yeah.
You can, you can experience probably a lot of what people usually take away from
MDMA and LSD just by living a lifetime of meditation, you know, like, like
and really focusing on altering that state of consciousness and putting
yourself into a different state of consciousness.
Or you could just take LSD and get a lifetime of experience and, you know.
I've heard some scary stories about meditation.
In fact, people meditated so much they had a psychotic break.
Oh, I think that there are people for whom meditation isn't for them.
Like if you, I mean, you have to be the ultimate judge, kind of just like, I
mean, deciding whether or not you could handle drugs.
But, you know, if you feel like opening the doors to your mind a little bit, if
you feel like you're, you know, barely holding on or, you know, if you're
have this sort of anxiety about what might come forward or something.
I mean, I've never found meditation that transformative.
Yeah.
Well, rather like, I mean, I found it a little transformative in my day to day
life, but I've never had, you know, like a, like an enlightened experience or
anything like that, right?
It's probably a bad analogy, but it just is the first thing that came to my mind.
If you're looking at like buying a gun and you get one of like the handbooks
from a store, the first thing it'll say on like page one is like, make sure you
feel like you're a good person to own a gun.
And if you're not great, you made a good decision.
Like to not buy it.
Um, so like, I feel like if you're, it's, it's just like really any other
decision that could change your life, you know, have some idea of what you're
getting into.
And if, you know, make an honest appraisal of other than that, it's good for you.
Right?
Yeah.
That's another reason I'm really worried about hallucinogens.
Like I keep hearing like they are the good type of drug and you should be okay
taking it, but like the reason it's all, it's luck and genetics, you know,
like the reason I am down with alcohol is that it alters your mood without
altering your perception.
And I have a lot of problems with reality, not a lot anymore because I've
managed to work ways around it, but in general, I have some trouble with
reality testing.
And I am terrified that a hallucinogen would just shatter all that.
And I'd be stuck again and the place where I was, or I don't know what's real.
I'm very interested in hearing more about this.
If you, if you're cared to describe it, the reality testing.
Yeah, or like the worst places that you've been in here.
Oh God, I don't want to go too far into, I think, I don't know, it couldn't
have been just my religious background because a lot of people have religious
backgrounds, but I took that shit like seriously and it, it makes a difference
when you know that there is someone who has warm feelings about you, but is
literally watching every single thing you do all the time.
And it was just one of, one of the reasons I've never really had a problem
with mass surveillance or things of that nature.
Cause I'm like, I live for years under constant mass surveillance.
What are you fucking scared of?
Hey, it's in my, my main breakdowns is in trying to figure out if anything is
real and the worst part is when I doubt other people's existence.
Like a lot of it, not a lot of times, but sometimes I'm like, suffering
in third world countries can't really be real.
There can't be something that awful actually in existence.
It must be some sort of like simulated reality thing.
And we're being told about the suffering in those countries so that we have
like goals to work to make the world better or that we can feel better about
our lives, but in no universe could that actually be the thing.
No one could suffer that much.
And then like, if I meet someone who's gone through awful things, I'm like,
is this person real or were they created in the past week or so to intrude on my life?
And I started thinking, is anyone real?
Is it just me?
And what are you guys doing in this room?
Are you here because I am a narcissistic person that wants to have a podcast?
So what did you do?
What were your strategies?
My strategy is not to think about that shit.
To just put in a box.
Except on faith that other people are real and reality does exist and not to
engage any solipsists when they try to talk to me about things.
I'm like, you know what?
Fuck you.
It helps you feel any better.
I feel very real.
Which is something you would say to try to convince me.
I mean, through that lens, there's literally nothing I can say or do.
That is the problem.
Yeah.
Did you ever see the movie, The Thirteenth Floor?
No.
Good.
Don't you like it?
Oh, man, that's a harsh one.
Another follow up personal question, which you made it, you don't want to answer it.
I know, but what about, isn't there some part of your genetic background
that plays into?
Very likely.
I, everyone in my immediate family has mental issues, except maybe my mother.
She might just have issues because she has to deal with the rest of us.
But definitely my dad and all my siblings.
And I don't know about my wider family because they're in the old world.
I don't don't have any contact with them.
I know my grandfather on my dad's side was a alcoholic to the point where he was
kicked out of his home and then died in the gutter a few decades later.
So they did certainly some issues, but I don't know how.
Well, coincidentally, my Facebook memories just showed me an article
I posted exactly a year ago, which is a Slate Star Codex article.
It's about how early psychedelic researchers were really weird.
But it also mentioned a recent study, a 2011 study showing, oh, wait,
that was a different study, but it was just mentioned that most studies
on safety of psychedelics show that it doesn't lead to increased
incidents of psychiatric illness.
Yeah, I think it's not, there's not as much worry about it increasing
the incidence of psychiatric illness, but bringing out or accelerating
the development of psychiatric illnesses that are already present.
And I think that's where people really worry about it.
I guess I would want to check on that evidence because I mean, yeah,
it's it's hard because there's not there's not a whole lot of research
on these things for some reason.
The 2011 study that that I was mixing it up with was one that said that
after one dose, I think it was a high dose of psilocybin
participants in the study generally showed a permanent increase
in the openness domain of their personality, which is very significant
because personality just doesn't change after you're an adult.
And psilocybin, for those who are not familiar, is the active ingredient
in hallucinogenic mushrooms. Yes.
I, by the way, did mushrooms and I did not notice that I got more open.
OK, you're still the cold, closed off person that you always were.
Like I've always wanted to be nice.
Honestly, though, like I really don't want to become more open.
OK, no, that's good.
And neither with acid.
I didn't notice. I don't feel like I got more open.
Do you feel like anything else about you changed in a permanent way?
No.
And I will relate some things that I have heard from others.
One person told me that after trying,
I forget which hallucinogenic was that he tried,
but it was probably the first like serious
mild seriously mind alternate altering drug that he had tried.
And he's like, wow, happiness is chemical.
Like I kind of knew it.
But now I really understand like happiness is chemical.
And I don't feel bad about getting treatment for my depression now because.
Yeah. Yeah, it can.
I mean, a lot of the positive effects,
I think that people get from it are just confronting things
that they haven't confronted before, as far as like psychedelics and MDMA as well.
I don't know why really that ties in.
But well, I think that, like, you know,
he doesn't think that maybe the drugs are bad and kind of confronted.
Yeah. And then also just the sense that you don't have to buy
into the things your depression tells you because it's chemical.
How how do you feel about addiction in in these drugs?
Like what is the risk for for what kind of drugs?
Well, I'm OK.
Are the only ones that you've taken the hallucinogens?
No, I've done.
I mean, MDMA is probably the one that has affected me the most in my life.
But that's also hallucinogen, right?
I think in a way, I've heard people call it hallucinogen, a hallucinogen before.
But I don't know how accurate that is.
All right. What does it do if you can get addicted to MDMA and LSD
and and Silas Oben, Silas Oben.
Silas Oben. Silas Oben.
Silas Oben. Silas Oben.
Those are both acting on serotonin.
And so you don't build as many reward circuits with those.
My experience with alcohol was, again, happiness is chemical.
And so it was like, hey, I have found a thing that when I drink it, I am happy.
It was literally joy in the bottle.
It was the best thing.
And then I didn't stop drinking for three years.
So that was not a good thing.
Yeah, I would have much less of a fear of addiction
for psychedelics than alcohol and stuff like that.
I mean, a lot, a lot, a lot of what you see is really propaganda.
Like there's heroin addicts that will tell you it's harder
to quit smoking than it is to quit heroin.
So it's a lot of what you're saying isn't really an accurate representation
of of the risks of the drugs.
It's it's something used to justify the enforcement of them, I think.
Yeah, another thing you're probably familiar with this,
Enias, is the cultural message that once you're an alcoholic, you're always an alcoholic.
You can't say I used to be an alcoholic.
You have to say, like, I'm recovering alcoholic.
I can and I do say that I used to be an alcoholic.
Yeah, right.
And I have heard and I'm I'm sorry that didn't check on this,
but I've heard that there are a number of studies that show that most people
with alcoholism and maybe I think, including other addictions,
they stop on their own without any kind of treatment or or a program.
Yeah, I don't think it's like a large majority,
but I have heard that more than half of the people who had problem for a while
eventually are just like, I don't want to do this anymore and they stop.
See that pretty quickly with LSD.
That's one of the things that I mean, really, research should be opened up on these things
just because to completely block it off is to say there's no therapeutic
effects and, you know, I mean, the community that does them
is pretty solid that there's therapeutic effects.
So how do you feel about more of the the drugs that are like just party drugs?
Like, I don't know, heroin and cocaine and such.
Before we get to that, I had another quick question.
So we won't use Enias as an example,
but we can use somebody like Enias as an example.
Somebody who kind of struggled with like facing existential crisis
and solipsism, you know, growing up and tearing you use the phrase,
it kind of forces you to face your your whatever you've had,
whatever you've bottled up.
So I'm imagining two different ways that this could go for somebody like that.
They could either end up back in, oh, my God, I'm in the matrix.
Everything's fake, or they could end up having crushed that and be like,
I can't believe that was ever a concern of mine.
Or it could just be a visual happy time.
You know, but but do you think it could go either way?
Or do you think? Yeah. Yeah.
Did you say that you used to have some trouble, too, with reality testing?
Yeah. And it didn't make it worse.
I think it didn't make it worse and it didn't make it better,
but it made me more accepting that that was a part of my life
and to just kind of have, I don't know, accept accept that that was part of my life
and not be really controlled as much by it.
Go cool. Party drugs.
Yeah, yeah.
How do you feel about the ones that are explicitly known as just party drugs,
like cocaine and and and I guess not heroin necessarily, but but,
you know, the morphine.
I definitely wouldn't call her or cocaine cocaine, just a party drug.
No, it's a Wall Street drug.
Yeah, totally. You get it.
It's an office drug. Yeah.
What now?
You know, like that joke about or not joke, I don't know that that quip about
mommy's little helper, like taking their kids riddling.
It's cocaine is like the leveled up version of that.
It's like it's like R rated riddling.
I thought the high from cocaine only lasts for like five minutes.
No, it can last a few hours.
Huh, OK.
But it is. I mean, you can use it at parties and stuff, but I wouldn't.
I mean, going to a rave or whatever, like I wouldn't choose cocaine
as my drug of choice, you know, are they because those in specific
cocaine and heroin are the ones that you see the most in popular media
as being the destroyers of lives?
Oh, heroin's heroin's pretty bad.
OK, so they're heroin.
Heroin's an opiate and it's pretty bad.
Yeah, the real danger comes nowadays because because it's again,
just a completely like black box thing where there's not research heroin
or anything like that.
Whenever people are buying heroin on the streets nowadays,
it's not even heroin anymore, and it's cut with fentanyl.
And so you're getting people that are buying heroin
and they're actually getting an even worse drug for it
just because we don't have, you know, regulated markets and stuff like that for these.
You were.
Oh, I was just going to say, like heroin and meth.
When do you really want to get into?
So there are some limits on the drugs that you're willing to do.
Oh, yeah. Yeah, definitely.
He's giving me this to like, yes, you dumbass.
I mean, it's you can't present it as all drugs are bad or all drugs are good.
You know, you have to understand that, you know, they're just be educated
about what you're doing, don't do stuff that the community at large
doesn't have positive effects out of it.
I mean, if you talk to people who have done LSD and stuff like that,
there will be people who have had a bad experience.
But the majority of them will say it's like one of the most
influential positive experiences of their life or like at least in the top
most influential positive experiences in their life.
I worry about the bad trip, too.
Yeah, I think it's worthwhile for you to know if you would ever consider
doing LSD to know about the possible bad things that could happen.
Do you take into account the warning stories as well as the good things?
Because a bad trip can last for like hours of just terror, right?
Yeah, it could last for hours and that might feel like an eternity.
But that's the whole point of spreading responsible use and stuff.
You know, I mean, it's about the environment that you keep in.
If somebody just hands you LSD and you don't research like what's actually
going to happen and you just kind of throw yourself in a pool
without knowing whether or not you can swim, it's going to be a bad time.
But if you know kind of what influences the trip and stuff like that,
I think you have a higher likelihood of it going well.
So what would you recommend for a good trip?
A good sitter, I would say.
Can you define?
Just somebody who's who's you love and you trust fully, who is going
to be sober with you for that experience.
I would say that would be a big one.
I'll also say that I did hear some warning stories about how you have
to be really careful about your environment so you don't have a bad trip.
And I didn't I didn't find that that really played into my experiences.
That also depends on like dosage and stuff, you know, you take a hefty dose of LSD.
You're saying I should not take LSD and go to a gore concert?
Yeah, probably not.
Not yet.
Maybe someday.
Once you're a little bit more.
Once I'm hardcore into the horror scene.
But then you might as well just do heroin.
So well, shit.
One of my first psychedelic experiences was with someone I was dating
who was was about to leave and it was like the last time that we were
going to be together and it should have been a total bummer to be like,
I'm really sad and I'm taking drugs right now and I was really sad.
But I don't don't feel like that made it a bad trip or anything.
What'd you take?
For eco synthetic psilocybin.
Yeah, those are those are really good too.
We don't know a lot about safety, but I mean, if you're just somebody who
really fears meeting somebody in an alleyway, which you probably, I mean,
if you're buying drugs out of an alleyway.
You're probably doing it wrong.
You're probably doing it wrong.
Yeah.
Taryn's like, find yourself a corrupt pharmacologist.
Yeah.
Are you guys at all worried about normalizing a culture of drug use?
I don't know.
So I agree that drugs should be legal, like every single drug.
I don't make distinctions of the hard drugs.
I think they should all be legal and people can make their choices.
But the whole talking about it and and telling people how okay, you know,
and life affirming or whatever it can be to have LSD, do you worry that
maybe there would be more people that start taking like opiates and
cocaine and things like that?
I think if we started talking about them responsibly, it would
probably be less use, less use.
I would, I would less irresponsible use.
And that's really what's important.
You know, you don't necessarily want there to be less use.
You just want there to be less people who are just like going freaking
nuts with this stuff.
And if, if there was an environment where you could have rational
conversation about the pitfalls and the pros of these things, then I think
the responsible use would definitely increase.
I mean, it's all over Silicon Valley right now, you know, LSD.
And, and that's because they talk about it in a, in a responsible and real manner.
There's some good evidence that our American culture with the drugs that
are legal, particularly, you know, alcohol, the way that our culture talks
about it makes it worse.
And so I think that if people could like just calm down about drugs and don't
talk about them in this overblown way, maybe people would have a healthier
relationship and be more responsible.
Uh, like in the way that people are in France, where they're, they don't expect,
uh, taking alcohol, you know, using a bit of alcohol to make you into some
kind of rage drunk.
We'll see like online communities and stuff like Irrowid where a lot of the
focus is on safety and harm reduction, you know, because they talk about it
openly, it's on the internet.
Nobody's going to bust down their door.
They're not all like, Hey man, you should do heroin because it's so good, you
know, it's, it's much more of a, a responsible discussion.
I also do wonder if maybe there could be some kind of, uh, assistant services
for people doing drugs, even if it is like an abusive situation, drug abuse
situation, like they, people would may be still benefit from having professionals.
They are with them.
Portugal, they focus mainly on just harm, harm reduction and they don't criminalize
it and tell people that, you know, they're the scum of the earth for doing
whatever they're doing.
And then whenever the person, they can talk to the police and say, Hey, you
know, like, I really feel like this is becoming a problem.
Can you guys help me get help?
Have you heard of wet houses?
No.
In an interesting concept, apparently, uh, most, uh, shelters for homeless
people, uh, have very strong rules about no drugs or alcohol of any kind.
And that keeps some people out of homeless shelters and they'd rather just, you
know, freeze on the street and have their alcohol.
Uh, so there was one, I heard about God, I don't remember what podcast it was.
Probably radio lab, but a shelter that's set up and they had all sorts of issues
with government regulations and getting money, but it was like, we will not give
you any alcohol, but you can come here and drink all you want.
And a lot of people loved it.
And that was like alcohol was a very big part of their lives and it's, it's kind
of sad, but on the other hand, it's just someone like, I need alcohol.
This is how I live my life and they live their life and it's not going to be a
very long life in the long run because they are slowly killing themselves.
But I don't know what can you do?
It's, I think it's almost better to allow them to have that sort of a place
than to force them out and, and tell them, you know, you have to either be
miserable or cold.
Yeah.
And, and also you have nowhere to go.
Yeah.
You know, like even if you did want help, it'd be a lot harder.
Right.
At least at the wet house, you can turn to someone or you can have friends.
There's somebody there that you can talk to that'll say, yeah, let's work
on getting you some help.
Are there some, maybe some European countries or something that have more
of these kinds of laws and procedures?
I don't know.
I mean, Portugal is completely decriminalized.
And I think, I think most places that have huge drug problems, like
gargantuan drug problems, they're going to start moving more towards decriminalization
just because like having a war on it and like forcing the market to be a black
market and just the war on drugs just doesn't work.
The drug cartels in Mexico have almost as much power as the government.
More in certain places.
War on drugs.
It just doesn't work.
Once your government loses the monopoly on violence, you got to do something.
I do anticipate that like if June 1st, you know, there was the guy at everyone,
all drugs are legal now, that there would be a huge spike in usage initially.
Oh, yeah.
There's like that taper off after like six months.
It might be more than six months.
I've heard that every culture in the world has about a 100 year period after
they discovered alcohol where like nothing gets done.
There's no.
It's not like LSDB being discovered in the United States.
It's just that now you could get it at the pharmacy rather than having to find a drug dealer.
Yeah.
And so it's not like it's going to impede society that much because it's not like
it's not out there.
It's just hard to find.
The primary reason I haven't used any of these things yet is because I don't have
a safe way to get it.
If I could go to the liquor, if I go to, again, I don't know what you'd call it,
the fancy pharmacy and get, you know, whatever drugs I wanted, like I can go to
the liquor store and get alcohol or go to the dispensary and get marijuana.
I would definitely have used most of these things by now or at least a handful of them.
I guess I'm not, I'm not sure if I'm trying to make a stronger point or not,
other than just anticipating that there'd be a spike.
But also, I guess there's something to be said about being able to trust your
source and having confidence that you're getting what you're thinking you're getting.
There's also like LSD is a journey for sure or any psychedelic is a journey.
It would wear you out if to become addicted to it would wear you out.
There's people that do it and they completely fry their brains with this stuff.
But I mean, I think a lot of people would more skew towards the side that
just uses it responsibly, like once every couple of years, you know,
let's talk briefly about the whole neurotoxicity thing, because I have felt
for a long time like a bad rationalist because I do drink alcohol.
Not, not every day anymore, but sometimes I mean, even though there is
a fair number of rationalists who don't, there's still more that do.
So I suppose it's like a big part of the whole brashless community is really
being into, I guess, for lack of a better term, like intelligence and our brains
and being able to use them and fix things.
And and I feel like stabbing my brain with chemicals is a horrible thing
for me to do.
And and when when when you first said that you didn't drink, I thought it
was because of that reason that that you didn't want to like injure your brain at all.
I mean, partially partially that too.
Yeah, but I don't think like the average alcohol user has long term
like if you have a drink now and then you're probably not going to have
long term injury from it, right?
I probably not because most people drink even the really smart, you know,
even famously smart people do.
But it worries me.
I'm like, what is all of these things through the window of every single
thing that's going to damage me, you know, isn't the right.
It's the I mean, do you ever worry like what if I could be two IQ points
smarter right now if my parents hadn't had to drop me on my head?
I was two or one minus the head dropping, minus being dropped.
I've hit it in my head like somewhere in the order of a hundred times.
And it does keep me up at night, but it does make me bummed.
But I don't feel like you drink, right?
And you don't ever wonder like maybe if I hadn't had the past thousand drinks
over the last 10 years, I'd be at one point smarter.
Yeah, no, that's like I like I said, it kind of took me away from that.
Or where that was for a large portion of my life, you know, what the purpose
was, was to just go faster and faster and get smarter and smarter.
And then the drugs, maybe they did take a few IQ points away, but they
allowed me to kind of appreciate just everyday beauty and stuff like that.
And my life experience has been better, even though maybe I'm not as smart
or something like that, you know, likely would have burned out a lot faster.
Well, I don't maybe I would have not burned out at all.
And I would have just continued to climb a ladder of success or whatever.
But I wouldn't have appreciated just, like I said, the general beauty in existing.
Quite as much if it wasn't for those, I would think maybe I would have
eventually found it, but I think it was a lot quicker road for me.
I just want to mention that, although it seems like the three of you probably
look at intelligence as something very tied to achievement.
I don't so much, maybe partially because I don't feel a strong sense
reward from achievement or productivity in general.
So, but I like intelligence for, I don't know, just for the enjoyment of understanding things.
Yeah, which is very cool, too.
Yeah, you don't you don't find it's a sense of like achievement from doing things.
Not very much.
Um, where do you where do you get that feeling from?
Like in general, in your life, what do you mean?
I mean, I don't feel much of a pleasure of achievement in general.
OK, where do you get like pleasure from then, I guess?
Um, understanding things and experiencing things that I think are
aesthetically pleasing, like primarily, I think that humans are, I mean,
both ugly and beautiful inside.
And I get a lot of enjoyment from delving into minds.
But also, you know, external reality, I just, I don't know, I enjoy, enjoy cool things.
Also, whenever you think about intelligence, a lot of people are related to IQ.
And, you know, there's this whole separate thing, EQ, like that is just being able
to emotionally connect with someone.
I think psychedelics and MDMA certainly contribute to those.
I don't know if I'm so up on the whole like IQ versus EQ thing,
maybe because I'm also low EQ.
Yeah, but you said maybe you'd lose a few IQ points, you know, maybe you'd gain a few EQ.
I'm worried, I want to nip this before we get on a whole other topic of G-Factor,
because that is an entire episode right there.
Yeah, yeah, it is.
We are at 50 minutes, so we should probably start steering towards wrapping up.
Are there things that people wanted to mention that I didn't get to yet?
Kind of.
OK, same.
So, go first.
Stephen, we were kind of having a discussion recently where you were
peer-pressuring me into drinking.
I explicitly said I wasn't peer-pressuring you into drinking.
You know, if you have to say, I'm not peer-pressuring you, but.
So the conversation was, I think, your what I was trying to do is
assuage some of your concerns about alcohol consumption.
Just like Enya, she needs his concerns about LSD consumption assuaged.
So, yes, it was there better.
Did you want just to reiterate roughly what we're talking about?
Or did you want me to answer a specific question?
We can do a summation and then maybe we can do touch on a few things.
Sure, I think what I tried to say was that I was trying to, I guess, I think
many listeners will have had experience with alcohol, so they'll kind of get
where I'm coming from and it is difficult to articulate.
The way I tried to hit it was it was like all the pleasant effects of being
tired with none of like the exhausted effects.
So like you're more relaxed, you're, and this is at, I don't know, moderate
embodiment or moderate consumption level, not slurring your speech level.
Well, I mean, you know, just like with anything, you can go too far.
So I mean, after like two drinks for an average person, maybe you're just,
you're slightly more relaxed, but it's especially like what I tried to say
was after one, I don't think you'd even really notice that you like you could have
happened. Oh, if you've never drank before, you'll notice it after one.
Well, I mean, I guess one what it depends.
But I guess getting at those, I think the beginning effects of alcohol are
so subtle that you might not even think that you, that you took it as substance,
right? You could have, you could have ordered an Irish coffee and not known
that it was Irish coffee, that it was just creamer and you might not notice
that you're that you're at all under the influence of alcohol.
It's just like, oh, I feel kind of pretty relaxed.
That's, you know, so I think the effects are pretty moderate with mild
usage and there's not a lot of like reality distortion or personality changes.
What I tried to describe with me, I think in this might be true or not,
but my general experience with alcohol is people will be like, oh, yeah,
that person's a mean drunk or that person cries when they get drunk.
For me, I think it just amplifies whoever you actually are.
And so the the the barriers and the filters.
Yeah, I bet I talk more when I'm when I'm drinking.
But which, yes, might be a nightmare.
I probably talk too much as everyone mentally cringes.
This is him censoring himself.
But I mean, there's there's one time where I was at a bar downtown
and I stepped over this like fence thing to talk with somebody and went to go
step back over and the bouncer was like, hey, sorry, club rules.
You have to go back around the through the front.
But, you know, I won't make you wait in line.
And he said it like all apologetically, like, you know,
he probably is used to people being giving him a hard time about it.
And I was just I remember this is at a point where I was way too drunk to drive.
But I remember being just over the top understanding.
I was like, oh, no, man, I totally get it.
It's your job.
I'm sure some people are dicks about it.
Don't worry, I'm not going to be an asshole about it, man.
I totally understand.
So I don't think you have to worry about like your underlying personality
changing, I guess, certainly not after like, like I said, the day after assuming
you're not hungover, you're going to be just like you were the the morning before.
And during that time, I think, I mean,
you might be able to just generalize by looking at drunk people, right?
I think the idea that your personality doesn't change is completely bunk, you know?
I mean, there's you could do steroids and you don't get any immediately.
You don't perceive reality different at all.
But over time, your personality certainly changes.
I didn't mean to say that the drugs that drugs never change your personality.
I meant specifically getting drunk one night wouldn't change your personality.
Yeah, not not one night.
It wouldn't change you drastically, but over time.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, just like, yeah, especially if you're doing it too much.
Yeah, especially if you're doing it too much.
Yeah, I certainly hope I wasn't interpreted saying that I didn't think that was the case.
When you talk about being like some more uninhibited and less filtered,
I do feel like for me, like I strongly identify with those parts of my brain,
which are the inhibitions and the filters.
So that would be like a different me.
That's fair. I think.
Can I tell you a secret?
A lot of it is pretending.
And I think I have mentioned this to you already, right?
Yeah, the the the first time I started to fall out of love with alcohol,
was when I woke up the day after a lot of drinking
and was still drunk in the morning and I had to go to work.
And I was like, well, I'm just going to pretend to be sober.
And it worked.
And I noticed after that, if I was having a drink,
I would have to pretend to be drunk to really get as much out of it as I used to.
And if I pretended to be sober, I'm like, I'm a little dizzy.
But I'm not any happier.
You kind of broke the spell when you noticed that.
Yeah, it really broke the spell.
And it was it was really disappointing after that.
It was my first step on the quitting.
Yeah, I think a large part of it is social.
So you can stay just as inhibited if you really want to.
Yeah, I think what exactly it gives you an excuse.
Yes, more than anything else, it's you have social license
when you're drunk to to cry if you're a man or to, you know,
say the things you really want to say and people are like, ah, he's drunk.
It's OK. Sure.
I think the social license more than anything else is the big benefit of alcohol.
Yeah, maybe like social lubricant is the right word and not like social like force.
Like it doesn't make you different.
It just gives you a license to be different.
And part of it that is does come from, you know, everyone, you know,
the socially the social culture of it.
There's a fund. I'm sure we could find it on YouTube, a video of this
this video summary of the study that I saw where basically they they had
a bar that they served all fake drinks and people were like, oh, my God,
I'm so wasted and all that.
Yeah, I don't know if those people had drunk before.
I'd have to check again, because I think if you I mean, you would know whether or not
after some level, whether or not you're actually getting drunk.
But again, after a couple of drinks,
that's what I'm saying is that the effect is so subtle
that you might not even notice that it's happening and or you could
trick yourself into thinking it's happening when it's not.
So when you said that you get the pleasant effects of being tired,
does it vary with what alcohol you're drinking?
I couldn't do to to be clear.
I can't really think of a better way to put it other than that.
Well, because I get that with beer and somewhat with wine, but never with hard
liquors, those tend to like give me more energy.
And maybe it's just because how much sugar is in them.
I think so, like I said, it's it's not even it's not even like being tired.
I think like it's it's the it's like tiredness without the exhaustion without
it's tiredness minus the tiredness. It's the it's just mellowness, right?
It's mellowness. It's it's it's ease.
But you can have that with different amounts of energy, right?
So I don't know if I've noticed the way that I'm trying to communicate it
and failing that I've noticed that changing depending on what I drink.
It may also be because I generally nowadays drink socially
and I pull a lot of energy out of having other people around me.
So maybe it comes from that, too.
Yeah, same. I can see that.
And what you're describing sounds to me like a nice cuddle
and I'd rather just do some cuddling.
Oh, yeah. No, no, do do whatever you want to do.
I think it what I was trying to do was was explain to you that I didn't think it was as
what if you're at a family reunion?
You can't cuddle anyone because it'd be weird.
But I also don't want to be in that mellow space when I'm at a family reunion.
Got to watch your back around those assholes.
I think that just like there's understandable trepidations about,
you know, someone's first time using, you know, using THC or psilocybin.
I feel like some of those concerns are definitely worth concerning yourself with
and others aren't.
I think what I was trying to communicate was I felt like some of the things
that you were worried about weren't worth being concerned about.
But I mean, obviously, like, certainly do whatever you want.
You know, I if if you want to get drunk some time, we totally can, but there's no pressure.
You know, if I I think like, I mean, I certainly was persuaded by, like I mentioned,
I came off the fence on where I sit on drugs after reading an essay several years ago.
But definitely talking to the two of you, put me over and
at the sense of sounding like I couldn't do it myself.
You guys are pushers.
Well, I mean, I think, I mean, there was I'd have to go back and find it.
There was a phrase that you used that I've heard in other contexts of like,
you can kind of just what was it, like shuffle or like reshuffle your your outlook
or something or some there's some some that wasn't it.
There was some better way of putting that.
I'm like, that's not exactly like what I need.
So I I'm I'm kind of sold.
But obviously, like I wouldn't find anybody who wasn't persuaded by that.
They're like, you know what?
I'm happy where I am or I don't want to shake that box or whatever.
Right. So what it forces you to see things from a different perspective.
Yeah. Is that what you were?
Yes, I don't like that, which I'm totally down with.
I mean, I like seeing things from different perspectives.
I'm just I'm not ready yet to be changed.
I don't think I'm not I'm not necessarily convinced that there's a long term
change that is drastic.
I'm sure that that maybe it's a percentage of people.
There are certainly people that there is drastic long term changes,
but I think most people do you think that you're you're underlying disposition
like you're the kind of person who would be easily rattled by something else.
Like, you know, a near lethal car crash would also change them for life or something.
Yeah. So everything that you do, not everything, I guess, but yeah,
everything you do changes your conscious experience.
You know, it changes your state of consciousness, whether it's like viewing
a piece of art that makes you feel sad or like, you know, watching a movie
where you're excited, it's it all changes your conscious experience.
I think drugs are just an extension of of that.
It can force you into a different conscious state.
That's sort of like, I mean, the example that keeps running through my head
when we're talking about, like, because drugs, I think, is way too fuzzy of a word.
If it covers everything from the tea in your morning, your morning,
or the caffeine in your morning tea to sex.
Yeah. Or if it covers from tea to meth, that's way too far.
But like somewhere on that spectrum, probably something like skydiving, right?
And that gives you an adrenaline rush, brain rush.
You probably come down and have a great day afterwards.
Might change your life afterwards.
I would totally consider skydiving a drug.
Yeah.
And I thought I was going to say you consider skydiving for real and I never would.
Falling from heises.
I think that's one of the things that we're programmed to not like for a good reason.
Yeah, we didn't naturally fall from upper atmosphere very much.
Have you not been on roller coasters?
I hate roller coasters. Oh, really?
I don't even I don't even like I'm not a huge fan of not driving when I'm in a car.
I mean, I can totally get by, but like, I don't like flying in a plane for the same reason.
Oh, I like both flying and roller coasters.
I take I take drugs to fly.
I take Xanax to fly, even though like it's interesting.
This is an aside, but my my my brain knows that
like I'm way more likely to die on the way to the airport than I am
while after I get on the plane.
But just I mean, everything with turbulence, you can look at
and you see the wings shaking when you're flying and like, well, we're definitely going to die.
There's nothing I can do, like even if I'm in the car,
like like if the driver starts having a seizure, at least I can reach over
and grab the wheel or pull the e-brake or something.
But in the plane, I'm like, well, I sure hope he's not drunk up there.
Like you just got to time it.
So you jump right before the airplane.
So do you like adrenaline from other sources, like, I don't know, movies?
Yeah, absolutely. All right.
Yeah, I mean, I love specifically the falling.
I guess it might be related to falling.
I think it's also just I mean, that might that might that might actually be
that there's the sweeping sensation in your stomach.
I went on a roller coaster once to make sure I didn't like them,
to confirm my suspicion that I wouldn't.
And I definitely didn't.
Good job doing science.
I went on the Mind Eraser.
Nice. That's a good one.
Yeah, it was it was I'm sure it was great.
But I also don't like the situations, but I don't I'm not scared of them.
I just find going on roller coasters irritating.
Like, why am I here?
This is just physically a little bit uncomfortable and there's wind in my face.
And this is not being productive at all right now.
It's been close to ten years since I tried a roller coaster.
Maybe I could try again.
I've changed a bit in the last ten years.
I feel like my outlook could be more like yours, where it's just like, you know,
especially like if you're being more mindful of it, rather than like letting
yourself get freaked out, which I feel like it might be part of the ability
to handle a good drug experience as well.
Take a lot of drugs in the parking lot, then go for the roller coaster.
Don't do that.
But I think it's being able to check on like what you're feeling and why you're
feeling it. And then, you know, I mean, even like the last time I flew was two
or three years ago, and I remember that was easier than the times I flew as a
teenager, because I was able to actually force myself to not even sit there and
do the numbers, but just know that the numbers were there and like internalize
that on an emotional level.
It didn't completely get rid of the fear, but it helped a bit.
That's sort of unrelated.
But I wonder if there's anything like that with controlling anticipations
on a drug trip.
Is there anything like that?
I'm anticipating that there might be, but I have none.
Yeah, I've had a bad trip before where I was able to.
I kind of got into that timeless state.
I was I was in and out of a timeless state, and it was going pretty badly.
And I was able to say, all right, even though this feels like this is how
I've always been and how I always will be, I can say that, you know, I did
remember that I took drugs and that the likelihood is that this won't be eternity.
You know, cool.
I mean, that's reassuring.
And I would hope to have the presence of mind if I found myself sliding.
But you can go over that limit.
Sure. You know, and when you go over, once you go over, that's when
really bad stuff happens.
A lot of the really bad stuff you hear about, you know, LSD is probably
people that took a little bit too much, I think.
Probably like with every drug, like alcohol, same thing, right?
Yeah. No one had their life ruined because they had a beer at a dinner, right?
But when they stopped at 15, then that's when they're like, oh, yeah,
then they, you know, threw up so much, they went to the hospital.
Yeah, exactly. All that stuff.
So I think you had something they wanted to bring up before we move on.
It was the skydiving thing.
So I managed to shove it in.
Like, well, I do feel like we're still doing phrasing.
There's directing your consciousness and your perceptions of it is the kind
of thing that you can do with or without drugs.
We talked about meditation.
We talked about skydiving.
Yeah. I mean, so it is that's sort of what, to me, just sort of illustrates
the absurdity of making it illegal to do that in certain ways.
I guess they need to very well articulate what their reasons are and they haven't.
Well, it's because, I mean, they did.
Well, Nick Nixon was like, oh, it was to control the countercultures and stuff like that.
You know, I mean, they've admitted their reasons.
They just forgot that they admitted it.
And now they're I would have to agree with their reasons, I guess,
to be to be moved by that argument.
Right. So the reasons wasn't the reason wasn't for public safety.
That's not the reason.
And that's the problem.
He said, what was it?
We cannot illegalize being a hippie.
Yeah, but we can illegalize marijuana.
Yeah. And there's some other, I think people X FBI, people have said things
about like targeting Latino and black communities about other drugs.
Yeah, as well.
So it's if you're suburban, well-paid white mother, you're not going to get
as much scrutiny for your drug use as if you're an inner city black teenager,
you know, and that's just very unfortunately how the drug war is made things.
That reminds me of something I wanted to ask about when we mentioned,
like you said, some people can get addicted to LSD and stuff.
But I imagine they can get addicted.
But there's people that make habits out of it, which will I would imagine
though, that those habits are harder to sustain than other addictions
slash drug habits, because you can't you can't get through a workday
if you're on LSD, where I guess depending on what you do.
But you can if you're, you know, had three drinks at lunch,
you could probably get through the second half of the day.
And most of them are not noticed.
Right. You think people would notice
if you've got three drinks at lunch.
That's what you do. I guess.
Well, so I mean, that maybe that was the best example.
What I was getting at those that like, if say you get home and go home
and get drunk every night, but you can't go home and unless maybe I'm wrong,
take LSD every night and not have it really not carry over to your work life.
No, no, it's it's like I said, it's a journey.
It's something that you take you learn a lot from.
There's a lot to reflect on at the end of it.
It's it's exhausting mentally in a way.
I think it would be very hard for someone to recommend a Reddit post
by someone who's rationalist, adjacent.
I don't know her real name.
I think her handle is like Iella girl.
She has been maybe still as a sex worker.
She does cam work and she was living in a house with other cam stars.
And she did acid every day for four weeks.
Well, if your job isn't I remember reading this.
Yeah. Yeah, I don't.
So if you guys can show it or send it my way sometimes, it sounds interesting.
Yeah, that's what that sounds like the kind of job where you could handle that,
though, or like you're not commuting to and from work.
You're not your co-workers understand if you're not super coherent.
So that might be atypical.
It was really fascinating, though.
When she stopped doing it, God, what was her reason?
Like it was a whole different world that she felt she was in, right?
Yeah, it sounded like it really did have some very permanent effects
in her way of thinking.
Yeah, I had been a while since I read it,
but I would recommend you finding the link and reading it.
We'll put it up on our blog post.
Even one use is going to give you a pretty permanent effect, I think,
in your way of thinking, but it's usually more positive rather than.
As I recall, didn't she say something about how she felt like
like she could just stop living at any time?
And yes. Yeah.
And it just it wouldn't matter because like the entire universe,
I think one of her major difficulties afterwards
after she stopped using it is that now she's now a single small person again.
And she's not like this expansive being that takes up all of the cosmos
and being shunted down into a small little meat suit again
was just very hard to to do if I'm remembering correctly.
Yeah, and it was very like it didn't matter if you died
because the entire rest of the cosmos goes on.
There's just that one little piece of you that happens to wink out
and what's the big deal?
I mean, I think accepting death is something that would help a lot of people.
Nope, go get the hell out.
You know what? No longer welcome here.
And she did talk about how it was extremely stressful,
but she felt like she was opening her eyes to something important.
And she just wanted to to know even as much as it was painful and stressful.
Yeah. Yeah, it was a really good post.
Well, I'm curious. I'll have to look it up.
It's been a number of years.
I may be remembering the details wrong, but it was fascinating.
Did we hammer down?
Did we did we have a sufficient response to like the James Randian
skeptic type who didn't want their perception altered at all?
Did we ever drive home a solid argument against that?
Dude, I don't know if you don't want your perception altered.
Don't do drugs. Oh, no.
But I guess I'm wondering is they might say something like I'm not your Randy
would or not, but someone like that might say if you're using drugs,
you can't be claiming that you're you're perceiving reality appropriately.
Would they go so far as to claim that?
I think I would say that you're you're always doing drugs.
You know, your reality is shaped by your stimulus.
And yeah, like if you exercised or did not that day,
or if you ate a certain meal that day, it all affects your brain chemistry.
The problem with them is they're they're always in the perception
that this specific way of altering consciousness is wrong, is going to is wrong.
Yeah, I don't know.
Better not fall in love because that's a very extreme.
Yeah, fear and love are the two most powerful drugs
that humans can experience.
And what do you do with people who have synesthesia and like see music?
That's they're fucked.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, that that that would be to me,
that feels like a counter example of, look, these people are literally
perceiving things in, quote unquote, incorrectly.
And yet they're managing to live their lives just fine.
Everybody perceives stuff incorrectly constantly.
That's the nature of what we are.
Like if you an easy example is if you put a straw on water,
you know, you see the straw bend, even though it's not bent.
That's just because perceptions aren't there to give us an accurate
representation of reality, they're there to help us survive.
You know, and there's some things that didn't really need to evolve in.
We didn't need to evolve to be able to see things straight underwater.
And we can perhaps reduce our biases, but we'll never completely overcome them.
Yeah, because they're part of being human.
Maybe this using a drug like that will help you to realize that,
that no matter how hard we try to overcome everything,
there always be some little thing that you're missing and that's screwing up
your your perception.
So don't get too arrogant and don't get too sure that you have everything figured out.
I think that's when I really got into heuristics and biases was
whenever I started doing drugs, just because it kind of forced me to see,
whoa, you know, my perceptions can be wrong.
What other perceptions that I'm commonly assuming are correct are are actually
wrong. Is that really fueled that whole journey?
Fascinating.
How I would have thought people would have gotten into into rationality.
Took drugs and became a rationalist.
What my takeaway from today is that I probably will continue doing psychedelics.
I have not been convinced to try alcohol or cannabis.
I do think that it's a good thing to at least consider what you want to do and why.
Yeah, I think to agree with you that there's I don't I think my understanding
and I'll know more later that I'll be able to see more to this personally later
is that I feel like if you're if you go through your entire life without ever
trying any hallucinogen whatsoever, you've probably missed out on something that
definitely would be regrettable to miss out on.
I don't feel like that's the case with alcohol.
Alcohol is just to make talking to people slightly less terrible.
It can make talking to people a lot less terrible.
I mean, before alcohol, I had severe social issues.
It can also make talking to people a lot more terrible, though.
The same time depends on the people.
Yeah, I was very much depends on the dinner thing or I guess a party a couple
weeks ago. And there's this guy who just all of the sensors were off.
And turns out he needs those sensors.
So yeah, it depends.
But yeah, I don't think I'm missing out on anything really important.
I was just trying to make it try to try to dissolve some of any
anxieties or trepidations around it.
Yeah, you're not.
I don't think I'm missing out on anything that with cannabis and alcohol.
No, I almost feel the opposite way.
Like maybe this is because of how much alcohol has affected my life in that period.
But like, I think I think the experience of alcohol is partly interesting
and something to be tried at least once for its own sake, but also just so you
can know what everybody else in the entire world is is done and talking about.
Whereas like hallucinogens, I'm still not sure I ever want to try that.
I like who I am right now more or less.
Not enough to murder me yet, anyway, given another year.
Right on.
Are we OK going on to listener feedback?
Yeah, that sounds fun.
Let's just go.
Do you have anything that you want to jump on?
I'll skim if you've got a list to go right ahead.
Sure.
Leibnit. OK, this is on the lying episode, so very pertinent to having shell here.
Leibnit's integral cax says, I think lying really quickly gets into gray areas
when you get into deceptions that are not explicitly lies.
What if I have to pretend not to be uncomfortable in a social interaction
in order not to lose status, for example, I deceive you about my emotion
and there is no real moral reason for or against it.
Same goes for other social deceptions that are not technically lies.
What if I know that having my chocolate bars lying around would cause people
to ask for a piece and I don't want to give them and I don't want that.
So I put them away in a drawer.
It's definitely deception, but it can't harm anybody.
I don't agree that that's deception in any meaningful way.
No. I mean, if they'd asked to have any chocolate, you said, no, that's deception.
I mean, but not having it out is different.
Like that's I mean, that's like we talked about, we give examples of, you know,
asking about, I guess, I mean, whatever, how much money do you make with the example
we use that kind of sucks, but whatever it is that you don't want to talk about.
There's difference between like carrying a putting a badge on your sleeve
that had like a personal bio like that included your like IQ bank statement,
your all the stuff that people don't like talking about your religion,
your politics or whatever.
And like to not having that card on your on your forehead all the time
doesn't mean that you're lying.
Right. Well, there is a spectrum between like hiding information
and then like a deceptive hiding of information because, you know,
they're going to assume something different.
Right. I think maybe if you're having chocolate bars lying around at the
office or in your house, it's kind of implied that they're there for other people.
It's OK to take and signaling all these kinds of hidden messages,
maybe not so hidden unspoken messages.
They really kind of play into deception, I think, in a gray area.
And the social example that the person used,
I thought that was often very clear deception where you're like
smiling, hugging someone and you deep down, you're like, I hate you.
Isn't that like where a lot of the drama of the typical housewives
of New Jersey or whatever comes from?
It's like, I love you, you backstabbing bitch.
Even if you don't say I love you, like you can act as though you
like someone when you really don't.
Yeah, you could just go up to them and just think, hey, you're a shit person.
You know, hopefully that'll help them change.
No, I don't think that would be the correct way to help somebody not be a crappy person.
What if you don't like your boss, though?
I think your boss falls into one of those those
powered power dynamics that we talked about where you sometimes
you can't be perfectly honest with somebody who has a lot of power over you.
Right. So let's you laugh at your boss's jokes,
even though they suck or something, right?
That's really funny. That's not funny at all.
I feel worse for having heard your joke, but I have to say it was good.
So those, I mean, that's dishonest.
That's that's textbook lying.
But I think that that's kind of one of the situations where you understand it.
Because if you're if you're right,
honest to your boss, unless you get along with them really well,
you don't have a job anymore. A lot of people need jobs.
So, yeah.
So I guess it is still deception,
but a kind that is sometimes unfortunately necessary.
Yeah.
And it's hard to tell when it's more deceptive or less, right?
It's really hard. It is a great area. I agree with that person.
I really don't like my sister very much.
But lately, my mom has made an effort to get the family back together.
And so I am nice when she is around.
Like, hey, it's great to see you here at mom's place.
How fun to be talking with you.
And, yeah, I can relate.
This is reminding me of when I interact with my grandmother before she died
and she had really a lot of dementia.
And they people really avoided telling her a lot of things
or like would just play along with her.
I think there's a special exception to when someone is actually has mental
problems, though, like dementia that is that is very does like being kind
to them and consider it because that is terrible.
Well, that's actually I think what you're that's what they teach in schools
of people who work with this population that, I mean, I'm waiting for FDR
to come on the news. He'd do that, Nancy.
Like, I mean, you don't say he's been dead for 30 years.
Like you don't go to the world because their cage doesn't need rattling.
Even if they're going to forget it in five minutes,
you just don't make things worse. You don't rock the boat.
So you kind of just.
But in that, you're not dialoguing with like rational agents, right?
You're not. I mean, there's not.
I think there's that's not a sense in which, I mean,
that level of dishonesty could be considered a bad thing.
I guess there's a lot to be said to being able to get along with people
socially, even if you don't like them.
And I don't know, where do you draw the line between being one of those
backstabbing new housewives and being someone who is like,
I want my workplace not to be a tense, horrible place.
So I will act OK.
I get along with people I don't like.
And then I just don't I don't invite them out to Saturday night drinks or
something or maybe once every six months, you know, just to keep the work.
But whatever it takes to keep the workplace amicable.
But you don't like you mentioned that I'm not sure what you're talking about.
The New Jersey housewives.
I'm sure it's some TV show.
Yeah, I've heard that like the housewives knew of something or others.
I haven't actually seen any of them, but I've seen like memes and clips.
So but there's a difference, I think, between like inviting them over every week
and like acting like your best friends, but secretly hitting them versus just
like being nice, right?
I have a really it was so weird and uncomfortable at my last job.
There was a co-worker who every now and then
like he'd be hanging out my cube for some reason and like a hot young intern
or something would walk by and after she'd go, he's like, man, I'd tap that
ass and I was like, uh-huh.
And I wasn't sure if like, should I play along to keep things pleasant?
Or should I be like, you, sir, are a bad man?
And I it was the most uncomfortable thing.
I didn't know what to do about that.
And I feel I feel really bad about myself because I basically just didn't say anything.
I let it pass and I feel like maybe I should have said something.
Well, I mean, you got to like weigh the risks to yourself, right?
I think he was a co-worker, not a boss.
He didn't have any.
But I mean, like if work life started getting worse for you
because this guy knew that you thought he was a scumbag, like, I mean,
it all depends like how far he's like, if he's making this person uncomfortable,
that's maybe that's time to step in.
But if he's just saying stupid things to you, no one's
no one's being harmed other than you for having had to hear it.
So it's up to you.
Do you want to escalate?
I probably should have said something just that he wouldn't have done it again
because it happened like two or three times.
Oh, he wouldn't have done it again to you.
Right.
Which would have been fine.
As long as he didn't do it again to, you know, anyone that was the object of that.
Yeah.
OK.
Ooh, this is a fun one.
Sailor Vulcan says, I would like to point out that there is a factual slash
logical error made in this episode.
Atheism is not a religion any more than theism is.
I think we both kind of tried to be clear that we don't think that it's
a religion, but it's a religious alignment.
Is that the term you use?
That is the term we use.
They're the reply right after that was someone said that.
And Sailor Vulcan replied with, yeah, I kind of think that's a bullshit term
they just made up on the spot so that they could dodge things.
Why not make up a term like that?
I think it's a useful term to make up.
And terms have to come from somewhere.
I honestly really personally feel that it is basically a religious viewpoint.
I have an opinion about religions.
And it makes a difference in how I live my life.
And I think it should be protected as much as any other religion is by the government.
But that's only in the context of structural power imbalances, like
or privileged by imbalances, reflecting different belief sets, right?
I mean, you don't think that, like epistemologically, they're
anything like the same stance or even on the same sport.
I kind of do.
Really?
I mean, not in the in the way that atheism makes you believe anything,
but I have a very strong belief in that the material world is all that there is.
And there is no magic or people.
Some people would say that you need an extra term, right?
Beyond atheism to describe that.
And then that thing should be the thing.
Yeah, but I think the generic atheism should work as a decent protector for that.
If like maybe you can use some other term and that's fine, too.
But the strong secularist, maybe?
No, that's not right, because secular just means keeping things separate.
I believe that like humanism as a formal system, maybe include some of these ideas.
I'm not sure I didn't haven't looked that much into humanism.
I do think that the rejection of all supernatural claims,
like the strong rejection, should count as some sort of a religious belief.
And that is what I have.
I strongly believe that all that is bullshit and that people who believe it are deluded.
As far as like legality, that's what you're both in a legality
and in like social consideration.
I know there are like some people who call themselves apotheists
who are like, I don't know, man, and I don't care.
I'm just getting along.
And sure, they don't they don't have any religious belief,
but I feel like my belief is definitely borderline religious.
Nihilism are those people.
Damn you to hell.
I am no nihilist.
You I'm saying those people.
Oh, yeah, I'm an atheist.
I don't believe in that.
I don't believe in anything that's nihilism.
OK, sorry, I take it back.
You are still welcome here.
I think I think I still sort of disagree with where you're coming from,
but I don't know if it's worth beating on too much.
But it's like if Taryn thought that unicorns coats are white
and you thought and Shelley thought that they were off pink.
And I was like, I don't think unicorns exist.
I don't think those are three equal beliefs in any way, right?
No, yours is a much better belief because it's grounded in reality.
But but then to say that, yeah, that's that's a stance.
I guess how does that map on to to like
either having different beliefs about religion or saying,
I don't believe in this religion.
Well, do you not believe in unicorns
because they're mythical magical creatures?
I believe in them because I don't think they exist.
Or excuse me, I don't believe in them because I don't think they exist.
I think that the problem here is that you didn't have a word
for what atheism is and religious alignment,
which is what you guys came up with, fills that void
of explaining the idea without.
Mixing up definitions with other things.
Fair enough.
And as far as like politically relevant,
it's in the same playing field, like.
Your beliefs, yeah, it's still just the same as far as legality.
In terms of political legality, definitely.
Well, that may not matter as much in other countries,
but in the US, where there is a very specific
and strong exemption for religious beliefs,
having that sort of anti-religious belief to be counted
is an important legal thing.
And that I can get more on on board with.
In fact, this is actually a lie told to on a formal piece of paper.
I don't know if it's a lie,
but I should mention this during the lying episode.
When you sign up for cryonics,
one of the documents that they send you, if you want to sign it,
is a religious exemption from autopsy,
because if you're autopsy, you're not you can't be crap reserved.
And I said, yeah, but there's no formal document
that says I have a secular objection to autopsy.
So I signed the one that said
I had a religious objection to autopsy, even though I don't.
But that was only because there was a there wasn't a
a comparable way to get that benefit, right?
So I signed the same thing because, you know, I'm also signed up for cryo.
And I did not feel like I was lying when I signed it.
I was like, this is feels sort of like a religious ish belief.
I mean, yes, it's grounded entirely on science,
but I'm hoping that this technology comes about in the future.
And I've OK, I love that at one point,
Ellie, as I said, you know what, I got sick and tired of explaining to people
what this cryo tag that I keep around my neck is, you know,
in case you die out in the public somewhere and the EMTs come, it says,
please call this number and have them.
Yeah, take care of my body in this specific way.
So I just started telling people that this is part of my religion.
I believe if I'm wearing this when I die, I will get an afterlife.
That's awesome. Yeah.
I was like, fuck, yeah.
No, I do I have once previously
and I wrote this when I was drunk during that drunk period,
but I still kind of stand by it.
I said that I feel like some of the people in the rationalist community,
the leaders almost feel like my priests to me.
They are the people that are doing the good work that I want to see done in the world.
And I am more than happy to help contribute to that.
My inner my I'm cringing a little bit from that language.
But no, no, no, no, that's fine.
I feel like your perspective, though, makes a lot of sense,
especially from where you're coming from, right?
Like, that's the context.
That's like the whole framework that you built your like your childhood model of
reality around. Yeah. And so if you're like, I have strong emotional roots there.
Yeah. So like, I mean, if you're if you're supplanting,
you know, Yahweh with the less wrong
matter, I think, like, as long as you know that they're not the exact same thing.
And it sounds like you're not completely just like, no, I've switched out this
religion for this this blind acceptance of other beliefs.
Right. I feel like that's totally fine.
I do feel like the language would annoy a lot of people,
but I totally get where you're coming from.
I'm sure I just pissed off like 90 percent of our listeners.
I do think that it's dangerous to to venerate someone so much
that you would just accept anything.
I would not at all.
There there have been at least a few situations where I was like,
God, but like if it if it came out that someone high up in the rationalist
community was abusing children or something, I'd be like, yeah, fuck you.
They're all in jail, but also like just on
factual or logical philosophical disagreements,
like, even though I think someone is really smart,
I'm I still am likely to disagree with them about some of those things.
Yeah. So you're in any decent religion, I should hope
you'd be allowed to disagree with their priests all day long.
You can't disagree with your peace.
Get out of fucking religion.
I feel like we're not using the word religion in the same way.
Yeah. And I feel like you're the only one using it.
I'm sorry. I'm completely fine.
I should bow out because I'm doing things wrong.
It's such a vague word.
Science is is a religion.
You know, everything.
Oh, you're cruising and bruising everything.
Everything breaks down to like philosophy on the back end
and somewhere there's a belief, you know, but science is a method
of exploring the world.
It's I would not consider science my religion in any way.
I have very much broader and deeper than just science.
Where science is like a tool.
Where do your Bayesian priors come from?
No one knows where your priors come from.
That's part of the matrix.
Should we go on?
I'm down to keep going.
OK, we'll probably get more mail about this thing
that I was just saying.
Oh, this one is just kind of a fun one.
I'm not sure there's a lot to reply to it,
but GoogleplexBytes says, oh, why is the sky is blue
used as a proxy for absolute truth so much?
Yeah, I always try to avoid that one
because its color and size guys can be different colors.
And gosh, that's a bad one.
We shouldn't shouldn't use guys blue as fairies a lot.
Now, I agree.
But my inner devil's advocate is going to just find a way to argue this.
So I'll I'll I'll defend it in that I think it's popular
because you could imagine in the context of having this argument
like say three people are sitting outside and there the sky is currently blue
and they use that as a claim like, OK, well, you're saying this,
but how can we relate to that to a state like statement like
they all look up and point the sky is blue or grass is green.
Now granted, grass can be different colors.
The sky can be different colors at sunset or there can be clouds.
Grass can be, you know, brown.
It can be yellow. Yeah, whatever color.
It can be painted white like a football field.
Those don't change like what you're what you're getting at.
I think sky is blue is the default.
Like, you know, I think it's like saying this this table is is flat
or this table has four legs like I always like to use number of fingers
because I can see it.
And if you can't see, you can feel my hand, right?
Like if you have things that prevent you from perceiving
what I perceive, there are other methods for you to tell that I have five fingers.
I've heard that the sky being blue is a bit of a social construct, too.
That if you ask children who have never been told that the sky is blue,
like what color is the sky, they kind of look at you kind of confused.
Like, I don't know.
It's not a thing.
It doesn't have a color. Just stuff that's up there. Yeah.
It's not blue.
I mean, the reality is that the sky is absent.
You see that thing out there often.
You see, I'm going to use the thing from now on.
I don't use the blue sky anymore.
I like that. I like that a lot because, like you said,
it's independently verifiable from various ways of interacting with it.
And like if you're colorblind, you can't verify the sky is blue on your own, right?
I mean, yeah, you probably could.
There's probably ways to verify like atmospheric.
Yeah, you'd have to use tools.
But with with my hand, you can pretty almost anyone can feel
my five fingers on some part of their body.
As long as they have a body.
If not, it reached the post post human future.
I love that he ended saying this little rant about the sky with
your very foundation for truth is a lie.
A fiction drilled into your head by society.
How can anyone be honest when they are surrounded by people living in their own
fantasy? That was awesome.
Our perceptions don't give us accurate representations of reality.
That's not what they're there for.
Googleplexbyte also asked, is camouflage a lie?
Hmm. I don't like that.
I mean, by that, yeah.
Right.
I feel like this example of a bad question.
Can you point to an instance of camouflage and tell you if it's lying?
Like is a stick is a stick insect lying about being a stick?
Like I think it's just
are lying about being an insect.
It's pretending to be a stick, right?
So I mean, but it's not doing anything.
It's just being a stick insect.
I kind of feel like there has to be a intent to.
Deceive.
Yeah, but I mean, I guess it does kind of want to deceive predators
into thinking it's a stick.
I think I'll try and find this clip.
If you haven't seen Community, I'd recommend watching it.
Chevy Chase's character plays this sort of like crotchety, insane old man.
And they're having this conversation in the library about how he's like kind of
crazy and paranoid.
And then he busts out from behind this fake.
He had like this cardboard bookshelf that he's sitting next to the bookshelf with.
And he throws it down and he's like, crazy, paranoid.
Impotent. What are you guys saying?
So like he was lying about not being there with that with that bookshelf
because you wanted to spy on them.
But it was just really funny because he confirmed that he was crazy and paranoid
by by being there already with that thing.
I think that I mean, that's that's that was being deceitful.
I don't know if that questions were.
I think it's an example of a poorly phrased question.
Yeah, maybe.
I think we're just trying to at this point, argue like about definitions.
Like maybe lying implies that you have a specific target that you're trying to deceive.
This reminds me of something I wish I had brought up in the lying episode.
So we talked about how I wouldn't want there to become to become impossible to lie.
And I was thinking like there are ways that you could make it impossible for me
to kill you that wouldn't infringe on my autonomy.
Like if you were invulnerable to being killed and that, you know,
that you wouldn't have to do something to me to to create that that state.
That's true. But to make it impossible for me to lie to you,
you would have to know you'd have to at least read my mind
to know if I was lying and then, you know, signal it somehow.
That's fair. Yeah.
I mean, definitely the taking away lying thing would would infringe people's autonomy
because you're taking something away rather than giving something.
Right. It's not like you're giving them the power to tell the truth.
They already have that.
Well, I think it's more almost seems more along the lines of you.
You'd have to invade your personal mental privacy.
Yeah. To to because at this point, we're not talking about like fantasy.
God makes it so no one can lie.
We're like specific technology to make lying impossible.
Yeah. Again, I did say during that, I said that I didn't feel like this idea
was hashed out enough for me to actually want to defend it that much.
But I'm happy to keep talking about it,
but just wanted to put that out there that this is not something that I sincerely believe.
All right. I I I agree.
I still hold that if there was like some kind of magical God,
it makes it so that it's impossible to lie sort of thing that it would be good.
But for there to be a technology that reads mental states, probably way too invasive.
I don't want magical God reading my mental states either.
But I guess maybe that's included in the definition.
Yeah, like he wouldn't be reading your mind.
He would just be like, you try to lie.
And it's like, oh, did you ever see Liar Liar with Jim Carrey?
Yeah. Oh, that was so much fun.
He just couldn't do it. Yeah.
I mean, he didn't try the obvious thing.
Although, so I think I saw this when it was relatively new.
I was a really little kid.
I was like, oh, my God, he could just answer any question.
Like, you might not know.
But then his answer would have to be if he if he didn't know,
say, how far it was from here to here to the moon.
Yeah, the answer. I don't know exactly.
The answer is I don't know and not the correct answer.
Yeah. And when I first saw that, my first thought was like, oh, my God,
he could be like just a fact machine that you were a munchkin at that young.
Well, but it did.
I mean, it defeated itself in five seconds after thinking about it.
But that wasn't my first thoughts that like, oh, my God,
what if he could just abuse this and, you know, like he could go to the casino
and be like, I have a winning hand and he would he could try and like,
you know, mobile that under under his breath.
And if he couldn't say it, then he would know not to bet again.
He just wouldn't. He wouldn't know.
So, yeah, by the way, that is a perfect description
of Steven that your life munchkin only that worked out in real life.
I'll get back to you guys and see if I've successfully rigged life or not.
Yeah, it seems like you're getting there.
It just takes a little bit longer in life
because you can't skip past the boring parts like you can in movies.
That's right.
On that same thing, woodsman if
OK, this this username is WZTVM.
I have no idea how to pronounce that
says I'm a bit confused by Enya's comment
that he considers the natural world to be cute and not deceiving.
I thought you guys have discussed such things before
and I could feel Katrina.
I could see Katrina rolling her eyes right there a bit.
And yeah, I mean, OK, I understand that that is not actually how the natural world works.
But I kind of have a Disney
fide version of the entire outside world where birds are always singing
and never eating each other.
So, so, yeah, I know there's plenty of death and deceiving in the natural world.
I just yeah, it's horrific.
We should get rid of it.
I we should have this discussion on a podcast someday.
Googleplex Bytes also says that regarding lying, improving lying capabilities.
Kaye Anders Erickson, a psychologist and scientific researcher,
has a paper titled The Role of Deliberate Practice
in the Acquisition of Expert Performance.
Suggest that learning requires deliberate practice.
So simply repeating a task in a manner that doesn't challenge you
does not lead to improvement.
For example, I walk all the time.
Even commute to work by foot.
But my ability to walk is only at the level of functional.
And then it was also pointed out later that, yes,
but acting, on the other hand, is basically just lying and people can get better at acting.
So I suppose just lying doesn't make you better with lying.
You have to you have to increase your challenge level to get better.
Yeah, start lying to smarter and smarter people or more and more paranoid people.
I mean, I would I would advise practicing that if and only if you're
planning on getting into, like, international espionage,
like presidency. Yes.
Not anymore. Yeah.
We have lowered that bar.
Salespeople must have some increased skills in lying.
Yes, I would imagine.
Taren nods enthusiastically.
You do work in sales, don't you?
And we're going to trust you again.
And all this time he's been trying to sell us on drugs.
I mean, yeah, right.
It worked.
I think I'm a pretty honest salesman, but.
You would say that.
By my nature, I have to change people's opinions on things, you know.
So I think I do it honestly.
I'm pretty sure I'm an honest salesman.
I can confidently say that.
Well, the benefit is, like, and you know, I've talked about this,
that you're selling stuff that you can get behind personal.
Yeah, I'm selling something that I can be honest about it.
Right. And.
Yes, since since we're almost done, I was hoping Steven,
you would tell us that cute story about lying to your girlfriend.
Or was that what it was?
That's right. Yeah.
I mentioned after on our post episode chat that I had a story
that I forgot to share during the lying episode where I successfully
lied to my to my partner.
She was getting her master's in New York and the difference was
that I had asked her beforehand because not like the day before,
but sometime before I said, hey, would you be all right if I if I deceived
you so that I could surprise you for a trip at some point in the future?
And she said, yes.
And so if she hadn't said that, then I wouldn't have done this.
But since she did, I was like, all right, I got this.
So like the day before I was at work and like I took pictures,
you know, like I guess this was might have been before I was on Snapchat
or before Snapchat was a thing.
But like, you know, hey, it looked boring day at work.
And like the clock is clearly visible in the background, but not like the center.
So like it's not super obvious.
Anyway, so I bought Wi-Fi on the plane so that I could send pictures
like, yeah, I just bored at work, you know, that sort of thing.
And but the reason that I thought it was fun was because I successfully tricked her
and then I showed up at her at her apartment and, you know, she thought
I was halfway through a shift at work, you know, 1,000 miles away.
So it was really funny.
But the trick was, is that it was agreed upon beforehand that I could
that I could trick her about it, right?
And I think that, you know, the only reason that I felt compelled
to ask permission was not because she's such a stickler for the truth,
but because I am, I would have felt really dishonest, even if I knew it was all
in fun to like know that I could lie that well and like misrepresent
reality to her that fluidly.
So I was like, God, we didn't actually talk about like my philosophical
discontents with lying.
And basically it does come down to the idea that, like, if you're lying
to somebody, you're taking upon yourself to say, I know what your model of reality
should be. You shouldn't have the real one.
You should have this fake one.
And I'm going to determine which fake one you should have.
That puts you in a really arrogant position.
I know we talked about this briefly in one of our early episodes,
like maybe number one or number two, where I consider lying to be a hostile act.
You are misrepresenting other the world to other people.
You are damaging their map of reality, and that will have consequences later on.
Their map of reality is less accurate because you have sabotaged it
and they cannot make decisions as well as they would have otherwise.
Yeah, no, I totally agree.
Any other last things we want to jump on or?
GoogleplexBytes also says at the end, the reason loved ones would be better
at lying to you is that you trust them more, which, yeah, that's sad.
You waste a lot less mental effort assessing the truth value of your statement.
But isn't that the whole point of trust?
Yeah. Oh, yeah, that's actually a really good point.
I don't know if we articulated that when we were pointing out that people
that you trust are easier to lie to you, but that's the whole point.
But also they turned more likely to do the kind lies, right?
So like your hair looks great, kind of lie.
Sure. I try not to do that one.
Same. I try not to do that either, because like, you know, if I ask my partner,
hey, how does my hair look?
She could say, you know, yeah, you should do this with it,
because it looks it doesn't look like you want it to look.
I want to know that, right?
I wouldn't ask.
I'm not I guess that that sort of depends on what you're trying to get out of it.
Are you asking because you want to be told the nice thing,
which case you're not really asking the question.
You're asking, tell me I look good, which case you're the liar pretty much.
Yeah. So I've had that sort of situation where
you know, partner would ask me, you know, what would you what would you think
about me cutting my hair shorter?
And I'm like, well, I'm not really that much into short hair,
but I would still love you and it's your body.
So, you know, that that is truth.
And yet kind of assuaging their fears, because when someone is asking
something like that, they're usually asking, are you still going to like me?
Right? Yeah. Yeah.
Right on. Yeah, of course.
I believe that's everything.
All right. Thanks, guys. Cool.
Yeah. Thanks for coming on.
I know we're coming up on the end of our time.
So we're going to roll out.
Thank you to Kyle Moore for our awesome sound job.
I hope you guys noticed that the podcast sounds a lot better.
Thanks to our Patreon supporters.
Check us out on iTunes.
We finally got this came out yesterday.
We finally got our logo working.
You guys will hopefully have noticed that by now.
Woohoo.
It was anyway, it's on the iTunes now.
So now you're no longer looking at that little microphone
with the waves coming out of it.
And what am I leaving out?
If you want to comment on this episode, you can do so at the basin conspiracy dot
com or at the subreddit slash r slash the basin conspiracy.
Cool. Thanks for listening.
All right. Good night.
You're just going to say bye to you. Bye.
Flushing your toilet is the best drug ever.
