Rationality AI to Zombies was arranged differently.
Rationality AI to Zombies was edited in a way that many feel was put together in a more readable
fashion. I do. I'm OG. Damn it. No, I kind of like the original. Yeah. As well, even though it is,
yeah, I think they're both good for different reasons. No, it's true. I liked the spaghetti mess
of the, of my first crawl through, which was fun, because you just, you can get a deep dive and
then you back up six more and you're like, oh, that's where I was. You kind of do the whole
wiki explosion thing. But I don't think I ever did it in a way where I wasn't clicking through a
bunch of links. So going from one to the next will be in a different way to try it. So, yeah.
Yeah, I didn't do it in any kind of order. I kind of liked that, though, because it was
neat when it started coming full circle. And then it felt like, oh, now you've got these
nice round concepts that are starting to form snowball. The first post that you hit that,
like you see it linked to a bunch of things that where you look at it and you're like,
I've already read all those. Yes. Well, when I first started out, we were, I was reading methods
of rationality. And I didn't never heard of less wrong. And it's like, I'll read the sequences
now. What is this? It actually turned me off for a while because there were so many jargony
words and just like references to things that I had no idea what they were, which wasn't even
jargon. It was just things like decision theory. Like, and then when you get into timeless decision
theory, it's like, I think that's absolutely jargon. Yeah. Well, I guess it is. But it's,
my exposure was, I think, the exact use case Yudkowsky was going for. Maybe we should talk
about this on the show. I mean, I'm recording right now. Yeah. All right. Well, we'll figure
it out then. Yeah. My exposure, I think, was exactly what Yudkowsky was going for when he wrote
methods of rationality. Because even in the first post on the sequences, it talks about how there's
no obvious public displays of rationality, like there is for like a martial artist, I don't know,
kicking someone's ass or something. So if I had to guess, well, I don't know, my educated guess is
that one of the many multi purposes of methods of rationality was to be a public display of
rationality by making a fake one of this character who could solve all these problems in a really
smart looking way, right? Oh, neat. And then when it was on fanfiction.net, the top of the book,
maybe the top of the first several chapters said, if you want to know everything Harry knows and
more, go to lesswrong.com. Yeah. And I was like, I do want that. So I went there and read all this
stuff. And then I pushed through all the jargon and got past all that. So should I do the intro
real quick? Yeah, why not? Okay, since I guess we are, we are on this. Hi. Wait, no, how do I
always start this? Welcome to the Bayesian conspiracy. I'm Yeni Ashbrotsky. I'm Steven Zuber.
And I'm Jess Dickie. Hello, Jess. Hi. She did the productivity part one, and we were going to do
productivity part two, but then it turned out we're not doing productivity part two, but we will
do other things instead. Hilariously, I didn't prepare for the productivity tools. Yes. But
that's okay, because we will have you back on later. And we like really appreciate your input,
too. In my defense, I just moved here. Yeah, it's been busy. Yeah, welcome to the Midwest.
Thank you. How are you liking it? I love it. Okay, how are you liking the weather thing?
The weather is super weird. But I kind of love it. Okay, two seasons in a day and all four in a week.
That's a reference to the fact that it was like, there was a snowstorm,
and now it's like light jacket weather and nice and sunny again. Yes. Bit of whiplash.
We're recording on Monday night. Saturday was like, drive with the windows down in a t-shirt.
And then Sunday was, yeah, cold snap. Everything was cold. Lots of snowfall. Snowfall.
Three layers and all that stuff. And then today, I left the house in three layers. And then it's
just, you know, driving with the windows down on the way home from work again. So yeah. The snow is
gone too, which is amazing because from New Jersey, when it snows, it just stays and turns brown.
I've heard of that. And that sounds horrible. It is.
To just have dirty snow around everywhere for the entire season.
It's snow and then they dump like sand onto it to, I guess, lubricate the roads and then
they dump salt onto it. And then it just becomes this horrifying slush that eats through metal.
Oh man. Not good.
No, Colorado is awesome because you will, I'm not sure if I told you this before,
but you will soon notice that whenever we get snow, it's gone from the ground in the course of
three days or so. I feel like I can tolerate snow if that's the case.
Yeah, you get it while it's beautiful. And then when it stops being beautiful, it goes away.
This is how everything in life should be. Agreed.
Yeah, we won't read too much into it. Okay, thank you.
We started talking about the less wrong posts and so we're kind of excited to get
into the sequences here. And I just decided, you know, let's start the recording and we can
keep going from there. Yeah. So in lieu of productivity, I figured we could just do,
we will, I think we can do a small section in future episodes, but for this one, we can just
do the kind of a long dive into, maybe we'll do a bit of, I don't know, meta chat about why we
think this is worth something including or talking about or if there's people who are
listening and have been listening for a while and they haven't checked this stuff out yet,
they should. And I think we'll make a case for that. So this is our big sequences kickoff.
Yay. And I also have an announcement later and then we should also do a little bit of
listener feedbacks too. So I did have at least one feedback. So excellent. Okay. So yeah. So
we were talking about how we first got into the sequences and I believe both Steven and Jess
found it through reading HPMLR. Yeah. That's correct. Excellent. So his evil plan worked.
Yeah. I mean, high five on that. I don't know what to say. Didn't what was the spike in numbers?
Was there or there was some survey on Slate Star Codex for years ago? What was like what?
Fully a third of readers came from less or came from Methods of Rationality? Yeah. Yeah.
Hey, it worked. Yeah. I got I got there because Trula Gailiff plugged it on her podcast years and
years ago. I remember I was delivering pizzas at the time and I made a note when I was driving,
which I shouldn't have done. I think I was on a stoplight, hopefully. I was saying,
check this out and wrote like Methods of Rationality and then got around to it like months
later that I found this little note and yeah. Found it from, I think it was a
Rebecca Watson from the Skeptics Guide had actually recommended it as like, oh, here's a fun like
scientific based Harry Potter fanfic and I started reading it and I thought like some
smart ass college student was writing it and I had heard of Elieze Hikowski separately,
but it was like I was like a good way into the story before I realized that he was the one writing
it and it was weird. But I was really addicted to it. I read all of it and then I caught up and
then I was really sad. I actually started reading less wrong before there was a less wrong.
I don't remember how I got turned on to Robin Hansen's blog, but a lot of my time during the day
at work is, you know, you can't just work eight hours straight all the time. So if you're at a
desk job every now and then you take a break, you go to your favorite blog, someone links something,
and at some point I got linked over to Overcoming Bias, which is Robin Hansen's blog. And at the
time, Eliezer was co-blogging with him there. I think he was still a student of Robbins,
or if not still at the time, you know, he still had good relations with him,
but he had been a student of Robbins over at GMU. A student or worked with him or something.
All I know is that they co-wrote Overcoming Bias or worked on it together. I didn't know that
he was a foremost, was he ever enrolled? Because I don't think that he went to college.
That's a good point. Must have been like protege in some other way. But he,
Overcoming Bias is Robin Hansen's blog. And Eliezer, and actually a few other people
co-blogged with him for a while, but Eliezer started there. And the first, I don't know,
like year or so of Less Wrong Posts were actually posted on OvercomingBias.com,
which is like important context because whenever, in the beginning, he will talk a few times about
Overcoming Biases and what is a bias and all that. And the context of that is he's literally
posting on a blog called OvercomingBias.com. So he's co-hosting with Robin. And even though
the sequence, the very first post is the beginning of his sequences, there's this history where
they have been talking on the blog already for a while, various readers and other co-bloggers.
So he references some conversation that's been going on. And that's because this,
you know, it just sort of started up in the middle of a talk about biases and rationality in general.
That explains why it seems like there's prerequisite reading.
I don't think there... It's the wrong word. Yeah.
Well, it sounds like you're starting in the middle of things, not the beginning of a book.
Yeah. Because, you know, even in the first essay, which maybe many of the links I think
were added after, but going back to find them, and even at the time, I'm assuming it links to
OvercomingBias articles. So it certainly doesn't open the first page in a book.
Right. Yeah.
So we are going to be reading the actual original sequences as they posted,
instead of Rationality AI to Zombies, just because, I don't know, that's how I read it,
and I like it better that way. But Rationality AI to Zombies is probably the way to go for
most people. And there are now two separate podcasts of the Rationality AI to Zombies,
in case people want to follow along with that, we will link to both of them.
And also, I don't think we mentioned explicitly what that is. So Rationality AI to Zombies came
out like two years ago, less. Something like that. And it's a recomposite of the original
sequences. It left some, it cut some stuff out. It more importantly reorganized things into like
six or something chunks that are more sensible than kind of just like the more self-contained.
Yeah. And also kind of stream of consciousness. Exactly. Yeah. Then the stream of consciousness,
that kind of afterwards, you can demark where things happened and that sort of thing. So.
Yeah. I think that's the main reason I like the blog posts, because they are very much a stream
of consciousness. And you get to see both Eliezer's personality and humor. And it feels very much more
like having a conversation with someone or seeing them be them. Whereas the Rationality AI to Zombies
is much more about trying to put forth this Rationality thing and present it to people in
acceptable way, which is good. But also, you know, less what I like, I guess. Yeah. I don't need to
read a persuasive article about why I should be a Rationalist. Right. You're already there.
I was, yeah, I was going to say what you said, that it feels like you're having a conversation
with the writer. The other thing about it too is that if I remember correctly, didn't he write
the bulk of them writing a post a day for two years? Yes. Yeah. So it very much is like a,
I'm already thinking of the next thing while I'm writing this one, not once a week or two or
something where it has a long editing process and that sort of thing. Right. Well, his goal was to
write basically Rationality AI to Zombies. I mean, he didn't have that name for it yet,
but he wanted to write this book and he couldn't sit down and write down all 800 pages in a go.
But he's like the way I'm motivating myself is just to write one post a day every day.
And, you know, getting that little dopamine hit at the end of every day when people see it and
comment on it and talk about it and upvote it and stuff. And it worked out extremely well,
because he got through all, I don't know, 12,000 pages or whatever in pretty quick time.
Yeah. Let's jump into it. That sounds good. Okay. The first post is called The Martial Art of
Rationality. And this is basically talking about what he wants to do, how he wants to create a
art of rationality that will help people think. It's kind of like an introductory post, except
unlike most introductions, which are really boring. And you just want to skip them. This one's
actually interesting. Yeah, I think in addition to being interesting, I feel like this is probably
a decent litmus test for anyone who like wants to try these out. Or if you're sharing them with
somebody, you know, if you're going to try to force the sequences on a friend, I might show them
this one first, A, because it seems like here's what we're going to be covering over the next,
you know, like he said, a hundred posts or a thousand posts or pages, however long you said
it was. But it's also written the same kind of conversational style. It's not like I'm writing
an essay and you can find it if you want. It's very much like a one-sided dialogue. And it has
the familiar, familiar if you've read it before, but the same flavor as the whole rest of the
sequences. Yeah, it sounds like him. It has his voice already. Right. And it's got some of the kind
of jargon. And it just, if you're not interested in what kind of things we're going to talk about
here, then you're like, OK, this isn't for me. But if you are, then you're like, oh, shit. And
there's so much more to go. And then you get to dive into it. So yeah, this has a lot of links now
that I think weren't there originally. Yeah. The apparently they were someone did go through and
link a lot of things that were not linked originally because there's links to the less
wrong wiki here. And there was no less wrong.com at all at the time. So there's there's a bunch
of things linked here that weren't linked originally. So this is more beginner friendly now.
Yeah, a little bit. But also, I mean, one of the nice things about when I first
was reading this was that, you know, the first post didn't have any links at all, you know,
and there's nothing more beginner friendly than just being able to read through a thing without
having to click through, I guess. Oh, I like being able to. I mean, I'm addicted to Wikipedia.
It's an option. Yeah. Right. So if you want to just read it, you can. But if you want to dive into
some of the linkable things, then you can say, OK, what was this talking about?
Right. And then boom, you get an explanation. So yeah, something I wish that they would
incorporate into this is Wikipedia has that feature where you hover over something now and
it gives you like the one paragraph explanation. That would be great to have in the future.
That would be what developers iPhones try to do that with like the newer ones with the push
touch, like the 3D touching. Hey, yeah, it's not the ubiquitous technology, but also
it's kind of annoying. I guess I'm new to having one. But if you don't push hard enough the whole
time, then it thinks you clicked it up into the page. And it doesn't do a preview. It does
a full look. It does like a little page inside the page that shows what you're about to look at.
So that does seem annoying. Yeah. I'm talking about just mousing over something and then
moving the cursor away if you don't want to read it anymore. Yeah. One of the things I really
dislike using the web on the phone because you can't hover over things with the mouse and just
the mouse is such a much better tool than these fat dumb fingers that only have one button.
Well, hopefully Elon Musk will have our neural interface and then we'll just be able to look at
it and blink or something. I don't know. We'll find out. Not even blink, just kind of think.
Yeah. I want to hit that link. That one. One of the first quotes that I'm going to pull out of
this is him explaining that this is what he wants to do is different from like a specialized
education that people get. He compares it to a martial art saying a martial art just trains
your muscles. If you have the human universal complex machinery of a hand with tendons and
muscles in the appropriate places, then you can learn to make a fist. If you have a brain with
cortical and subcortical areas in the appropriate places, you might be able to learn to use it
properly. It's about training brain machinery we all have in common, which I thought was a
really cool way to look at this. It's not, you know, about learning specific facts and stuff.
It's about learning how to use this machinery that we all have. One thing that the sequences
does over and over is emphasize that the brain, yes, while complicated and not 100% fully understood,
is not this opaque, impossible to penetrate black box of mystery, right? There's all these parts.
They're all the same parts in every head of every human on earth, more or less. There's less mystery
there than I think is generally appreciated. Analogous to your fist making skills, you have
all the right brain parts for this to work for you too. Right. And there's a bad way to make a
fist and try to hurt someone with your hand and there's a much more effective way to do it.
Just like there's bad ways to use your brains and there's much more effective ways to use them.
What's the, you know, so if you make a fist wrong and punch a board, you'll break your hand.
Right. What's the, what's the analog for that if you're using your brain?
You start believing crazy things. And I try to like apply everything to one model.
Over that. Yeah. There's a lot of ways.
All right. I just thought I'm thinking of like specifically like the explosive way, but yeah,
maybe that's it is you did the bad way to really bad way to use your brain, this analogous to
breaking your fist is like thinking of really clever justifications for your weird religion or
something. Right. When you're talking about the fact that we do know some things about the brain,
I like that he specifically mentions that we have heuristics and biases programs and
experimental psychology, Bayesian systemization of probability theory, evolutionary psychology,
statistics and social psychology where there is a good deal of work done. So you can start to
think about how you think. Yeah. Well, building on that, there was the like tradition of introspection
is thousands of years old at least, right? Since people have been around and having free time,
they've been thinking about themselves and how they think, but it's in the last couple of centuries,
mostly in the last century that we've got a lot of really good tools to do that in a way that's
effective and well calibrated. And the systematized way of thinking and exploring that is the
scientific method is fairly new as well. Right. Yes. I mean, just the idea that you can ask a
question, test it and ask better questions afterwards is not something that we've been doing
since we've been thinking, right? Yeah. Or since the dawn of thought. Right. Yeah. There's this quote
near the end where it's the inner eye is not sightless, but it sees blurrily with systematic
distortions. We need then to apply the science to our intuitions to use the abstract knowledge to
correct our mental movements and augment our metacognitive skills. Yeah. That's basically
making the point that I clumsily made earlier, which is that we can use all the things that
Jess was mentioning that were in the post that we can do better than just think about our thinking.
We can actually get better at it. And we have the long list of tools. If here's all the things that
we can want to learn all these and learn how to apply them properly, there we go. You can start
thinking better. And he does mention that it's not, it's not something that's just automatically
easy. There's, I mean, there's a reason that he calls it an art. Some of the machinery is optimized
by the machinery means like the human universal machinery of our brains. Some of the machinery
is optimized for evolutionary selection pressures that run directly counter to our declared goals
in using it. Deliberately, we decide that we want to seek only the truth, but our brains have hard
wired support for rationalizing falsehoods. We can try to compensate for what we choose to regard
as flaws in the machinery, but we can't actually rewire the neural circuitry. So you're going to
be fighting against yourself a bit as well to do this. There's some good examples of the brain
being wired to do things that you expressly say and probably believe it's not wired to do. And
Robin Hansen spoke that we talked about the elephant in the brain, where you think you're
being honest or you're joining each charity or something for all the reasons that you think
you're doing it and telling people that you're doing it because it's nice and helpful, but really
there's a large signaling aspect to that too. So the press secretary is the metaphor that Hansen
uses to talk about your conscious self. Yeah, basically your conscious self, the voice that
gives reasons of your behavior to other people and to yourself. It's like, why did I just do that?
And you don't think of this base thing or you might not even, it's not even like you see it
and shirk away from it because it's not nice. It's just the- Yeah, you don't see it at all.
Exactly. That's the whole thing. You just, you don't see it. So it's not until you're called
upon to justify your behavior to yourself or to someone else, they even consult your press
secretary and your press secretary says, oh, you did it because you thought it would be nice.
And, you know, that's good enough. Do you read Slate Sarcotics? Yeah, bit.
Jess? I read all of it. Okay. So you're familiar with when Scott was exploring recently about
this general idea that movement may be the brain wanting to be in a certain position.
Oh, yeah. Yeah, the body like just fulfilling that want. I expect for my hand to be here
and sir, and you expect it hard enough and your body's like, okay, there it is.
That was the predictive processing model. Yeah, yeah. It was interesting. He also recently said,
you know what, I've been kind of confused about this. So I just started trying to think about
a movement as literally just me wanting something and my body fulfilling my desires.
And it is shocking how, how applicable this is. Like he said, I'll think about like when I'm eating,
just like, I want that burrito be in my mouth. And I'm not even paying attention, but all of a
sudden it's in my mouth, then I'm slowing it. And that's, that's kind of awesome how that happens.
And he's like, it's really put in perspective how much I'm just kind of the CEO being like,
I decided to want this to happen. And then all the automatic processes make it happen
without me really being a part of it. And I think that whole rider of the elephant thing
does the same kind of, it is the same kind of thing, right? You're just, you're doing your
thing, you want this to happen, and you aren't really paying attention to the actual deeper
motivations and mechanics that go on. So many sub steps involved in like very basic, like,
well, it's not very basic, but I was going to use the example of driving a car. But
I was driving over to your house and it's, you get on autopilot a lot of the time. I found myself
thinking about what I was going to say on this podcast. And suddenly I realized I'm like, oh,
I just lost 10 minutes. And I wasn't just like, it's not like I've driven here many times. I was
using Google Maps, looking at a map and looking at like, you know, my surroundings trying to figure
out which road was which, but it was all just in the background. And it's crazy. I mean, you're
operating a big piece of machinery at really high speeds too. But you just don't even like,
oh, this is no big deal. It's interesting. Yeah. Cause there's, there's a lot that goes on there.
I was just thinking of the example of like crossing the room to go get something that it's not until
you like observe a toddler learning to walk or like are super drunk that you realize how many
things are involved in getting like your feet under you, keeping your balance and getting,
you know, one foot after the other, lifting your knees, bending your ankles, all that stuff,
all that happens subconsciously, you know, there's, we'd burn a lot of fuel making all
those decisions, making every movement decision, right? But yeah, the driving example is interesting
because I remember thinking about this, like I remember learning to drive. It seemed like there
was so much to do. And now I sit there and there's, I can do it with literally one hand and one knee,
right? Like there's nothing that, I mean, I shouldn't, but I can. And there's so little
involved now, but it's overwhelming at first. It's just kind of funny thing to look back on.
I remember teaching my cousin to drive a few years ago, you know, just telling us like, you
know, it looks like a lot. This is going to be like nothing in, you know, a few months. You're
going to wonder why this seems so overwhelming. There's like three things you're doing here.
You know, stay in the lines. This is, you know, get familiar with how much weight to put on the
pedal. And here's how the, here's how to move the car with the wheel. Yeah. And learn all the
unofficial rules of the road. Yeah. Those come later. Which you also learn by experience.
I remember teaching someone how to ski and having a really hard time verbalizing what to do. I had
to stop and ski myself for a little bit and really pay attention to what I was doing. I'm like,
oh, okay, you kind of lift this foot and shift your weight like this. And then, you know, telling
them to do that. That's so many things. That's why it's hard to teach. I tried to teach a digital
art class for little kids. And I realized really quickly that you have to break everything down
into very, very, very tiny pieces. And I didn't think of that. I kind of immediately thought,
I'll teach them how to do a line art, and then I'll teach them how to put a layer under that
and put color on it. And that'll be really easy. And then I actually tried to trial the class and
realized that even like very, very simple, like use of the tools and like launching the program
was taking the majority of the class. So I guess that's the inferential distances issue.
Yeah. Which is another post that we will come to at some point. Yeah.
I'm just thinking of a similar example. It was like teaching a child to use a computer program,
but I started explaining to my mom over the phone how to drag a file from a computer to a
flash drive. And she lives 70 miles away. And she's like, next time you come by, you can do it.
And I was like, I'm really confident you can get this. Here's Google directions. You know how to
read it, click and read the Google directions. Like you can do this, but there's so much ground
to cover if somebody doesn't know what they're doing, that it's easy to forget all the steps involved.
Do you hear about the genius of Microsoft's early Windows games?
No. Because it's shipped with three games, Minesweeper, Solitaire, and I don't remember what the
other one was. Oh yeah, Solitaire taught like click and drag. Yeah. I never thought that at that
a time, but there was a reason for this. Yeah. No one knew how to really click and drag. No one
had used mice before and Solitaire just like clicked here, drag here. And you know, you learn
this skill really quickly through a game. Minesweeper teaches you how to do precision pointing
with the mouse in those very little tiny squares, you know? I was like, that's really neat.
Yeah, I remember reading something about that. And that was a really cool idea. Because yeah,
I mean, you got to think in the dawn of PCs. I remember in another example of, you know,
love mom, but your tech illiterate, showing how to use her TV that they bought a couple years ago.
And it's a smart TV with a remote that you can click down to apps and stuff. And I had to think
of how I'm going to explain to her, you know, like it has a little hovering halo around whatever
app is selected. And I'm like, okay, so that's where the control is. The direction that you
want it to go in is the direction you press on the map on the controller. But it took me a second
to think of how to phrase that. It's like telling somebody how to play a video game who doesn't
play video games or like who does only uses mouse and keyboard and they're using a controller.
And you're trying to remember without touching the remote, which one moves the camera, which one
moves the legs. Right. And I honestly can't quite remember, even though I play games most days now.
It's almost always the left joystick that moves the character and the right one that moves the
camera. Yeah, that checks out. But in my, you know, in the moment where you're trying to show
somebody, it's easy to forget. Yeah, like hotkeys are terrible. I use so many hotkeys. But when
people go, wow, how did you do that? I have to go over to a keyboard and place my fingers like,
okay, it's these keys. I don't know what they're called. They're these ones.
And we are, we have that a lot with the phrase inferential distances, right? That is something
we just have in our brains, but we haven't gotten to that post yet. That came from a
less wrong sequence post. Hopefully this will help people get on the same page with all these
mental tools. Yeah, just bringing it back. No, I agree. And it's one of those things that I
wonder, I often, I go back and forth and whether or not this should be like requisite reading for
the local group. And part of me thinks it should be because there's a lot of grounds to cover to have,
you know, again, if you have to teach everyone how to use a computer before you can learn to do,
you know, computer or graphic design or, or something, you're wasting, you're not wasting,
but you're spending so much time giving them caught up, right? But you don't have to like
read these whole things, you know, in order, a lot of it just gets picked up through, through
cultural osmosis. Like I'm sure a lot of people in our group, I know several people have never
had these sequences, but they know what inferential distance means. Totally. It's like you can be a
Christian your entire life, have never opened the Bible, but you know all about the Jesus
store, you know, and, and Moses and just you pick up things from, from what you, your people talk about.
I think your mind went there because of your upbringing, not because this is your replacement
Bible, right? No, no, literally because there's a lot of things people know that are supposedly
from this collection of words, but they've never read the words. Oh, sure. Yeah. I'm sorry,
just really quick, I was going to say that's why I'm a big fan of defining
jargon that comes up and I've been trying, we've tried to do throughout the whole show, which is
neck, you know, anytime we drop a new lingo, we, I try to define it so that way they're caught up
without having to go dig it out of the wiki. Yeah. Thanks for doing that, by the way. Yay.
I was going to say that's also a good reason to actually make it required reading because
my experience was that I never actually read the Bible until college, even though I was raised
Christian. And you were shocked at what you found. They read it in church and I like, you know,
it's own out because I was a little kid and I had a children's Bible my mom would read me that had
completely like wrong interpretations of a lot of these stories. And they don't read the whole
thing in church usually. Yeah, they read pieces, some quotes. Yeah. And then they talk about, well,
this relates to this, you know, current event in this really forced way. But when I read the
entire Bible cover to cover, I realized that I was missing a lot of the context. A lot of it was
really terrifying. But that was an enlightening experience because I became an atheist because
of it. Oh, cool. I'm going to say Mark Twain because this is where I heard it. But a lot of
quotes get attributed to people who didn't actually say them because they're more famous.
But I think it was Mark Twain who said that one of the best arguments for atheism is just reading
the Bible. Yep, can confirm. Before we move on to the next post, I did want to say that
when I reread this because I hadn't read this or really most of the sequences since the first
time I'd read them, aside from a few that I really like and reread sometimes. But when I reread this,
I saw that he explicitly referenced the lens that sees its own flaws, which is a post that
is comes up later. I don't even know how much later. But he talks about a flawed lens that can
see the flaws in itself, which, you know, normally you can't with you have a lens. But
as humans, we can have the ability to turn our thinking in on itself to examine it. And I was
like, oh, shit, he called forward to a post that he hasn't written yet and won't write for months.
But just the fact that it's a call forward in there is like he's apparently thought quite a bit
about what he's going to say. It's pretty cool. I noticed that too. I didn't realize that that was
a future post. But now that you mentioned that, that's awesome. Yeah, the lens that can see itself
and like he said, it makes the same. I think that's the whole point of it. Yeah. But it's just
the kind of longer version of this. Yeah. Before you move on, this is, you know, the martial art
of rationality and the structure of the post talks about, well, it directly compares the art
of rationality to like Taekwondo, for example. I really love that. And I think I might be mistaken.
I think there are rationality dojos that either like someone tried to implement or that do exist.
But they weren't around like 12 years ago. I'm sure it was like inspired by this.
Yeah. I think CIFAR is kind of like that. That sounds like a good real world example.
Yeah. But that's like a short intensive training period. It's not like...
Somewhere you could go every week. Yeah. I know that, was it the Ohio group that had a
rationality dojo thing for a while? Yeah. And there's a, Shelley here was trying to get those
going for a little while and I think to two or three and it didn't quite take off.
Yeah. Well, the problem is that someone needs to run it and it's a lot of work and no one
else was really willing to do that work. Yeah. I think that's it. Yeah. It doesn't pay very well
except you get a couple of high fives. Community organizing is really hard. Yeah.
I think we'll hit over and over throughout the whole segment is the analogy to martial arts,
which I really like too, that this first post, like I said, points out that it's hard to have a
public display of awesome rationality skills. The same way that you could see a martial artist,
you know, I remember when I went to like a McDojo as a kid, there was one of the
senseis could do a jump kick and hit a basketball hoop net. So like that's a demonstration of
looking at how good I am at martial arts or whatever somebody wants to do.
Just, I guess the idea that this isn't a thing that you can read about and then have,
like you can gain a piece of knowledge. Right. These are skills that need practice that you
can get better at, that there are degrees of skill, right? And that the more they become
unconscious habits, the better they usually are. Like if you can routinely find yourself, you know,
assigning probabilities to beliefs rather than just I believe this or I don't believe this
and thinking of things as probability distributions of how right about something you think you are,
that makes a big difference if you can do that automatically. I think I once made the point that
in the matrix, as we were talking about just before the microphones went on, when Neo has
the Kung Fu program downloaded into his brain and he says, I know Kung Fu. The reason he's so
amazed isn't because like now he knows how to, you know, make a fist and swing his arm. It's
because now he has these instincts that when someone throws a punch at him, his body just knows
what to do. When he wants to hurt someone, his body just does the thing, you know, that's what
you want when you master a physical martial art like that, that you, you just have this desire
and your body doesn't, you don't have to think about it like, like when you're playing rock band
or something, you know, or any instrument even, you don't want to think I'm hitting G key art,
I'm hitting E, I'm hitting F sharp, you just want to have that desire and your body goes through
with it. And the reason I think that the martial art of rationality is called that is because you
also want to inculcate that sort of almost muscle memory reflex in your brain where you just do it
the right way. I have those and I like noticing when those bells go off in my head. Not for
everything. I wish that obviously they were louder and more salient and all that, but
there are probably other examples like that, you know, like good body mechanics, you know,
if you notice you're slouching or something, you know, you often don't notice until you're
uncomfortable, but if you can train yourself to like check in every few seconds or three minutes
or something, you're like, oh, I'm slouching my shoulders. Let me get more comfortable.
I like that there's tools for that now. Posture, like for example, they have those like posture
braces that you can wear or they have an app or not an app. It was a wearable that would alert you.
I think it vibrated when you were slouching. It would be cool if we could have those for our
brains. I saw one of those like on your lower back or something. I definitely saw something
that would alert you know, alert you about your posture that was like an adhesive that connected
to a computer that would vibrate a patch of muscle or something. That's probably the thing
I'm thinking of. I don't remember what it was called. If I could probably find it, we could link
it, but I'm just a big wearable nerd, but I keep, you know, I really want there to be ones for your
brain. There's tried to be a few of them and other. So, so we should do an episode on wearables.
That sounds fun. Yeah. Or like a technology that can assist with rationality.
Well, and since I got LASIK, I'm not wearing literally anything that helps me do anything.
So, I mean, other than clothes to keep me from shivering. That's right. Do you have your phone
on you? I'm not wearing it though. It's over here. Well, LASIK itself is awesome though. Yeah, that's
true. Now I'm wearing glasses all the time. Let's see. I think, oh, there's another similar to
training physical habits from martial arts or mental habits from rationality. It's sort of an
introspection habit through like mindfulness meditation. If you get enough practice at it,
you kind of just learn to notice the swaying and tone of your thoughts. Before I got more into this,
I could come home, you know, after a day or something and someone could point out,
be like, oh, it looks like you had a rough day. And it's at that minute that I realized I had a
rough day because it was showing on my face, but it wasn't, I wasn't looking at it myself.
And having the tricks to look in to see the introspect in that other direction, not just
on your cognitive processes, but your thinking and feeling, it kind of helps me keep all those
in check. I don't have extreme days anymore because I'm having a rough day. I can look
in and be and notice, well, you're having a rough day. That's why this is being super,
you know, that's why this thing that doesn't usually annoy you is annoying you or something.
And you can stage an intervention. Yeah, totally. And I think it can be pretty effective.
So other, this is tried and true with other disciplines is what I'm saying too. And I'm
trying to, I'm trying to name several in case somebody has tried meditation or, you know,
martial arts or body posture or something. And they're like, Oh, you know, you can't,
I'm trying to draw analogies to as many things as possible.
Yeah, there are some similar practices like cognitive behavioral therapy.
All that being said, before we finally move on to the next post, I don't think that
reading the sequences will make you a rationalist master. I think it'll just lay out the groundwork
much like seeing someone do kung fu and learning the theory behind it will
show you what it is and get you set in the right direction. But you actually have to
do it over and over to practice it. Like this is just reading the sequences is the first step,
I guess. Last example. And this is more specific. Drake has been picking up juggling the last few
months. And juggling is super fucking hard. And you look at it and from it's like watching,
you know, Jackie Chan do do kung fu on TV and it's like, Oh, yeah, I could do that. It's just
moving your arms. And it's, it's, yes, it's just moving your arms, but there's a lot more to it
than that. And, you know, the one like the cartoon example of juggling where you're doing a circle
is like one of the hardest things. There's so much coordination there. It's easier to do the kind
of cross thing. But I'm assuming as Drake, because he knows more about juggling than I do. But
my understanding is that doing the circle is way harder than it looks. And it's way harder
than it looks, but it's, it's, it looks super easy. It's just a couple of hand motions, right?
How hard can it be? But it turns out to be very difficult. So.
Yeah, I think a lot of the art of mastering something is the art of making it look easy.
I know at some circus artists, and they always looked like, you know, they do a flip. They'd
be juggling, they'd be eating fire and they're smiling and they have these like flowing nice
graceful movements. But actually, like, I've done some fire arts and it's really hard not to flinch
or to look at the fire while you're doing it. And I'm the same thing with juggling. I've tried
to pick that up before. And if you can see someone very like naturally, you know, juggling, smiling,
looking at you, not looking at what they're doing, that actually means that they're very skilled at it.
I just had the realization that I think you're right, that master over something is making
it look easy. And I'm trying to think of counter examples. And there really aren't any
that are coming to mind, I'm sure, with five minutes, we could probably think of some. But
it's really good to think about it, that if it looks really easy, it's only because I'm really,
really good at it. And so you look at this and you see how nonchalantly I'm doing this thing,
you think you could pick it up really easily, right? Okay. Part of what makes it really hard
to communicate that something is difficult. Like for example, drawing. Oh my god. Yeah,
I can't draw either. Yeah, well, I have a few illustrator friends now and they say the amount
of time that they hear someone say, look, can't you just draw me the thing? It's really easy,
it'll only take you like 10 minutes. Like first of all, it takes longer than that.
Second of all, it took me eight years of practice to get to the point where I could do this. You
think it's so easy, you go do it. Yeah, as a freelance graphics designer, it's hard to explain
to a client that you should pay me more because I can do this in less time because it took me
longer to learn how to do this in less time. Yeah. I remember hearing about a locksmith guy
who was like, when he would show up and you know, someone's paying him $60, $80 to come in
and unlock their thing, he shows up, he's been doing this for 20 years, does click, click, click,
okay, you're open. And they would be like really kind of peeved. And they're like,
you don't really need $80 for that, do you? He says, nowadays, lots of times if he has,
you know, an extra five minutes, he'll sit there and you're like, just do it. And he's like, oh man,
this is a tough one. And just fuck around for a while before he undoes it. And then they're always
so grateful. I should do that. I don't know how I could do that with graphics design.
I just make it take longer. I'm sorry, I might miss this deadline, man.
Bring my laptop. Bring lots of like useless gadgets, line them all up.
Oh, don't do it in front of someone. Oh my god. No, I don't want to be doing art in front of
someone, then they'd be over your shoulder. Yeah. Oh, can you make it a slightly bluer green? No,
not that much. Oh, no, I don't think I like that one. Go back to the yellow. Wait, let me see them
side by side. The only thing I can think of to do it that wouldn't involve a lot of like just
straight up lying about like how long something took you to do or something would be to just
use tons of jargon and like name drop all the complicated tools and stuff that you can think
of. So they'd be like, oh, can yeah, like I said, kind of get this different color. Well,
you know, according to this, you know, send back, I don't know, like 60 hex codes, you know,
for the colors or something. I have done that. Yeah. And it's like, yes,
I'm going to pick the best one out of those and you can't even you can't even see what those
mean. So that's fun to think about. It's fun to do. Why truth? Yeah, sure. Why truth, Enyosh?
That's actually the question of this post. There are three potential reasons he gave
why seeking why to seek truth, which is a thing that I think we generally do as rationalists.
The first reason was to satisfy curiosity. Lots of times you just want to know the truth because
you're curious, which I'm a big fan of personally. And I didn't, I didn't write down the pros and
cons of that one, unfortunately. But I think one of the obvious cons that he mentioned is that
sometimes you're just not curious. You'll only pursue it so far until it gets tedious or maybe
it gets too hard at some point. And you're like, well, I'm not that curious about the truth here.
And I don't remember if there's something that he brings up in this post or if he brings up at
all or if I thought of, but curiosity to me is like an emotion. It can drive the other emotions,
like it can get you exhilarated or something like that. But that feeling of like, huh,
that has a distinct feeling for me. And it's one that I enjoy. So I think curiosity for its own
sake or truth for its own sake, I think is a valid response to somebody might ask, you know,
why bother? Yeah, it's a valid response. I don't know if it's sufficient, but it's definitely
a good component to a well rounded answer. I like curiosity. Curiosity to me is like,
almost feels like sexuality or a sexual desire, you know, it's just something you want to do
because you haven't innate want for it. And it can get like uncontrollably, you know, high too.
No, I mean, that can be a thing. There's this drive. It's maybe that feeling of like, when you
lose your car keys. And it's almost like curiosity. But it's like that turn, it's like that tuned up,
there's maybe a little more agitation built into it. But the longer you're looking for them,
the more intense the feeling, right? And you're like, and then I guess, yeah, I sometimes think
of curiosity as an itch as well. It's just like, something you really got to just, and then when
it stops, then it's like, ah, that felt great. I fucking love having Google in my pocket all
the time now, because I can't even kind of put a number on how many times a day, I'll like,
Oh, what's that bird? Hey, I'll Google it. No, I know what that bird is. And nobody in our past
has ever been able to do that. It's crazy. And he has a rodent essay at one point about the,
I think it was 12 virtues of rationality. Yeah. And I think curiosity was the first one, right?
Curiosity is the first one. Yeah. We should maybe have done the 12 virtues, maybe we'll pull them
up for this episode too. Yeah, he says first, first, it was curiosity in the essay. Okay. Also,
we were saying about emotions, what he actually says was, some people I suspect may object that
curiosity is an emotion, and therefore not rational. But he labels an emotion is not rational
if it rests on mistaken beliefs rather than on irrational epistemic conduct.
Hey, I like trying to explain that difference to somebody I used to know, that if you tell them,
if you say you shouldn't be feeling that way, that sounds like you're challenging their feelings.
When in fact, it's not so much, I'm not challenging your feelings, I'm challenging the
beliefs that your feelings are based on. When you realize those beliefs are false,
your feelings should go away. But with somebody who doesn't speak that language,
it just comes off as super annoying. That's a common problem with people that are systemizers
versus empathizers, where for example, they feel like you're invalidating their feelings, and it's
like, I'm not trying to tell you that you're not having that feeling. I've gotten better at it.
I'm working on that right now. I've mostly run into people who say things like, well,
you're a rationalist, so you think no one should have emotions, right? And to continue the quote
word that you were writing, he says, if the iron approaches your face, and you believe it is hot,
and it is cool, the way opposes your fear. If the iron approaches your face, and you believe it is
cool, and it is hot, the way opposes your calm. And Spock's emotional state is always set to calm,
even when it's wildly inappropriate. The emotions, when they actually reflect reality,
are rational things. Like if the iron approaching your face is hot, you do want to panic. That is
the rational thing to feel at that point. I like that he specifically wrote that, this has the
advantage of letting us regard calm as an emotional state rather than a privileged default. And as
a person who has chronic anxiety, I can agree with that. That is a privileged state. And it would
be bad if we were just calm all the time. Anxiety does have a place. There's a lot of things to
not be calm about. Like ex threats. Yeah, existential threats, which are the threats that
could wipe out humanity. Right. All of our dooms. So I want to dive into that a little bit, because
I think calm, how would Spock, shouting and waving his arms on the board, the enterprise help anything?
Well, it might not aboard the enterprise, but there are times where it's a really bad idea to do
something. And he does not act like it's a bad idea. Well, also Spock is like no realistic person
acts the way Spock does. Spock was able to still prioritize something as being highly important,
and but like maintain calm. But the way humans work is that we experience anxiety and stress in
response to predators chasing you, or social conflicts that are coming up. So you can't really
just divorce the emotion from the response, because we don't work that way. It would be lovely if we
did. No, totally. And to be clear, I haven't seen a single episode of Star Trek. So I'm probably
missing something. But well, I doubt I doubt if Spock was being chased by some space line, he would
stand there calmly, he would calmly run away. Right. I the original series was not a very good
series. I thought there was one or two good episodes, but I haven't seen all that many of them either,
because I just didn't like it. And Spock was a lot of fun, because he was so inhuman and weird,
I think that was this whole point. Yeah. And I think I mentioned Julia Gallup earlier, I think
she coined the phrase straw Vulcan, which is what people think of when they think rationalists,
if they're not familiar. I think that's gotten, well, I think my circles gotten more rationalist
in the last several years. But I feel like that's less of a trope now than it used to be. But maybe
it's still the same. I might just be the bubble that you're in. It's probably definitely the bubble
now that I think about it. And Spock was totally a straw Vulcan in that show. There was, I don't
remember what episode it was, but like, some natives were really upset, and they were throwing
spears at this shuttle that they were in. He's like, it is entirely illogical for them to be
throwing spears at us. And McCoy's like, you're fucking idiot, Spock. And yeah, Spock was being
a fucking idiot at that point. So I guess I'm assuming by illogical, I'm guessing that the
spears couldn't penetrate their shields or something. I think that's what it was. I don't
remember. So he's making a completely pointless observation, which is, yeah, so let's throw
out his bad use of the word illogical and just he could say they're wasting their time. And that's
true. But it's kind of, again, he's wasting his time saying that. But he doesn't understand why
they're doing it, which is a failure on his part. Yeah, totally. They're mad. And that is their
motivation, you know? Yeah, exactly. Well, they had a good reason to be mad. They didn't have a
good reason to throw spears because they actually wanted to hurt them, I'm guessing, right? I believe
so. Yeah. What they should have done is, I don't know, found some big rocks to push off a cliff
onto the ship or something. But he was implying that since it is impossible for them to hurt the
ship, they shouldn't be even feeling anger right now. It is an illogical emotion. Okay, yeah,
that's done. Yeah. Okay, I'm sold. I think he was totally a straw Vulcan. Which made it fun. I'm not
defending him. I realize that he's literally the straw man on purpose. But the the idea that
but it's interesting how many people I mean, he was he was a fun character. But there's also a
lot of people that look up to him. And I don't know, I've read a few of their accounts. And it's
usually people who are like really emotionally hurt at some point and didn't want to be anymore.
And so like, saw that sort of thing as a sort of armor and vulnerability, you know, you can't
hurt me if I don't care. Yeah. And so, you know, there was, there was that aspect to it too, where
this was important to people for other reasons than just making fun of things. And I'm assuming
some strength. I'm assuming also pulled a bunch of like smart ass, not just smart ass, but also
smart stuff out, right? Oh, he was always the one that was my guy, I bring their way out of
shit. Right. So it's like wanting to be more like Dr. House because he's a super genius by
taking Vicodin, right? Or by abusing. So it's like, you're not going to get any more like house
by by abusing drugs just because that's a thing he does, right? So you're emulating the wrong
part of it. Yeah. Okay. And there is some advantage to not getting too worked up, because sometimes
you can, you know, lose control of yourself and you shouldn't. Yeah. All right, we're still on to
why truth. Yes, we got two more, we've got at least two more good answers. Another one was to
accomplish a specific goal. Because if you're seeking truth to accomplish that goal, you get
feedback on what modes of thinking work and which don't. What sets humanity firmly on the
path of science was noticing that certain modes of thinking uncovered beliefs and that led us
manipulate the world. Like it's sometimes really important whether doing this thing will make the
plane fly or plummet out of the sky. Yeah, that actually ties back into a sentence from the first
essay that I forgot to capture, which was, it wasn't by having the biggest muscles that human
draws to prominence on earth, which is a sentiment that Harry flex and methods of rationality.
And he suspects that much of that point is lost on wizards because they can just wave their little
wands and make magic happen. He's like, no, look, our real superpower is brains. Even if you guys
just want to stop working, we still got those. Having accurate beliefs around the world as a
requisite to accomplish goals is, I think, really underappreciated. And I don't think I run into
a lot of people who full out say, nope, having an accurate map is, or they wouldn't use these words,
but expressing the sentiment that having an accurate map is pointless, because they can't
believe that that's true, right? Even in the sense of literally having an accurate map to get to work,
right? Like if they're going, if they probably take a similar route to work every day, or at
least they know that work is over there and they live here, so they need to go in that wayish
direction. They're not going to just try taking all right turns to see if they get there one day,
because they know that that's not how things work, right? So I know I'm belaboring this point,
but I once argued to somebody who didn't, who when I was in my teenage phase of arguing people
out of their religion for fun, had fallen back on fine, but I don't care about logic. And I was
like, yes, you do, and I'm going to prove it. Yeah. The whole like, well, what is truth? Well,
if you walk off a cliff, then it's true that you're going to plummet to your death, and that's
why you're not going to do it. And you're going to plummet at roughly 9.8 meters per second per
second without without one of the baller squirrel suits that people on the internet jump off of
cliffs with. Those look fun. Those like flying squirrel suits. Oh, those things. Yeah, those
are cool. But you know, the downside to pursuing truth to accomplish a specific goal is that once
that goal is accomplished, you don't need to pursue the truth anymore. You're like, well,
I got my plane. Now I'm going to go back to, you know, burning the fat of the lamb to my god.
I used to worry about that. But I think that the more you learn about the universe, the more
complex it becomes like this hydra where you cut the heads off. I think that we're not going to run
out of problems anytime soon. So I don't worry about that anymore. But if all you care about is
what if your specific goal is to make other people believe in your God, then there are
ways of doing that that you can research into that, but you aren't actually finding out the
truth of the world. Yeah, so this is the dark side of epistemic rationality, right? Well,
this is the dark side of applied rationality where you're trying to solve goals. Epistemic
rationality. That's the second time today I flipped those. I'm an instrumental rationality.
Is that called dark arts? I think dark arts are something more specific. Yeah. But I was just
saying that you can use the tools in a way that's actually harmful. And I can't think of a good
martial arts metaphor for that. I think just martial arts in general, like you could just hurt
somebody. Yeah, you could hurt somebody without meaning to or you could hurt yourself. But then
it's really clear that you're doing it wrong if you come out of a sparring match and, you know,
with broken bones or something, right? Well, I mean, like if you're a trained Taekwondo artist
and you just go into a bar fight in order to hurt people. Yeah. If you're part of a Cobra Kai,
shouldn't be doing that. But I think the downside is that you could learn martial arts with the
expressed goal of beating up all your high school bullies and, you know, with all the vengeance
in your heart and still get good at martial arts, right? There's no actual blocker there,
but that doesn't quite work for this because this is more encompassing, right? Maybe you can get
good enough martial arts to kick ass, but you can't become a true martial artist or something. Is
that a way to get around it? You can learn just enough martial arts that you can get in a bar brawl
and satisfy your drive for violence, but then you're not, you know, attaining enlightenment or
getting the like positive benefits of martial arts. And you're definitely like
causing externalities on the rest of the world. I think at this point, we're talking the differences
between, you know, learning something and what we do with the thing that we are learning.
Yeah. You know, you can always use technology for good or evil. Yeah, just like any tool.
Yeah. I think the con of the reason to learn through this to find a specific goal is because,
you know, similar to curiosity, once that goal is achieved, you don't necessarily have to keep
searching for truth. That's why the first virtue is curiosity. Yeah. And the third reason that he
gives, and this one is my personal favorite is morality because this is like the reason I
seek truth and I guess was taught to seek truth since, since I was a child is that it is a moral
imperative like the Jehovah's Witnesses literally call their religion the truth with a capital T.
Um, but morality is you seek, you believe that to seek the truth is noble and important and
worthwhile includes the belief that truth seeking is pragmatically important to society and therefore
is incumbent as a duty upon all. This, in my opinion, has the most pros for it because
you continue to seek truth as an end to itself, regardless of, you know, whether you're curious
or I mean, curiosity is definitely a better motivator because then it's intrinsic. But
you continue to seek truth. Even if you aren't all that curious about something, you continue to
care about things being true. Even if you aren't specifically looking for truth, you think it's
important even if you don't have any specific goal that you're trying to accomplish with that truth.
So I really like it. And this is the one that I push when people ask, you know, like, well,
how are you going to get people to stop believing in religion? I'm like, just give someone a love of
truth so deep that they really, really want to know the truth. And they're eventually going to
find out on their own that this religion thing is bullshit, because they're going to run across
the scientific method and asking questions like why do you believe what you believe and they're
going to get to the answer by themselves. But the con side, speaking to this, is that it's too
easy to acquire, as learned moral duties, modes of thinking that are dreadful missteps in the dance.
To make rationality into a moral duty is to give it all the degrees of freedom of an arbitrary
tribal custom. People arrive at the wrong answers and then indignantly protest that they acted with
propriety rather than learning from their mistakes. They feel like they are accomplishing their moral
duty by going through the steps of rationality. And if you then say, I think you came to a
wrong conclusion, and this is why they can be all indignant that like, no, I did my moral duty,
how dare you try to say that I'm a bad person? Yeah, not an accident. And it's, there's a lot
to read into the use of the word virtue of curiosity, or rather the first virtue of rationality is
curiosity, because like living a virtuous life in the like Greek sense wasn't just about like
doing the right and wrong thing. It kind of stemmed from being a virtuous person. But a virtuous
person would do the right and wrong thing, whether or not anyone was watching or whether or not they
knew they could get away with it, because it's just how it was, it made you a good person too.
And so part of part of you being a good person was that you just happened, you know, you did good
things else to the outside too. Maybe, you know, you could even read maybe more into the word
morality here, because this seems like I said more of the Greek sense of like morality rather
than what we mean just by making right and wrong choices, or rather morally right and wrong choices.
I don't think any of these three work as a standalone justification on their own,
put together their good legs for this whole case for truth to stand on, right? I suppose one,
maybe satisfied curiosity is the fun aspect, that like there's this really good rush from
actually figuring something out, you know, like finding your car keys after an hour of looking
times whatever factor, when you solve a problem and you really get it, and it's, and you know it's
true because you can prove it, that feels really good. And so I mean, there's a fun aspect to it
too. No one's going to say in the moment that they know exactly what it's like to be a deluded
person or to be a person who deludes themselves with fake truths, you know, to get by or something,
right? You know, you talk to like a religious fundamentalist, they're not going to say, oh,
yeah, it's great. It's a little double thing. Right. But I think if you are in the middle of
that sort of thing, I don't know what I don't know if I've had a big enough transformation to come back
from like the feeling of that rightness that you're doing it the right way. If that's tainted,
at the time where it's only tainted in hindsight, when you look back and realize like, oh, no,
I was totally deluding myself to, you know, try and persuade others.
Well, this is where he brought up the Spock example specifically was in the morality section,
where people think that because they were, you know, all calm and rational and gave, you know,
four significant digits in their estimate, that therefore they are doing rationality right and
they get indignant if you point out that that's not actual truth seeking, that's just performing it.
But when they come out afterwards, so maybe I could ask you from your, when you were a proselytizing
Jehovah's Witness, did I imagine at the time you felt like you're doing the right thing,
or was there always this like nagging, like kind of dirty feeling that you there was always a dirty
feeling? Okay. I believe that it was important and that sharing the truth was the most important
thing to do. But I don't know, it always felt dirty because I'm guessing you never really any
heart believed it then. No, I did for quite a while. Is it possible you felt like you weren't
examining the alternatives? No, I mean, when I talked about it with my friends, that was one thing.
That was then that was I was really helping them and saving their lives and all that.
But going up to someone like just out on the street and trying to tell them about Jesus,
it felt like being a pusher, you know, okay, I meant more, I guess, in the sense of like
having like, you know, this this web of beliefs that you later realized was all false.
In the lived moment of having those, if that felt dirty at the time or not, and I guess,
I have the beliefs, I to, you know, justify them in a circle and do all the mental gymnastics
you have to do that. Did the mental gymnastics make you sore? Or did they feel good? Well,
because you don't notice the mental gymnastics on the surface, right? It's not until you start
really diving deep into it, which I mean, I couldn't do until I was at least 12, 12 or 13,
is when I started noticing the flaws. When you're younger than that, you just like accept it,
you're like, Oh, this is this is the truth. And, and you have this deep desire to know what is true.
But your parents tell you people in authority tell you and it's not until you just you don't
see the mental gymnastics. It's once you see them that you're bothered by them. So I wonder,
I guess I'm kind of thinking because of like, you know, someone like Ken Ham who can get on stage
and say the earth is 10,000 years old. How does he love to be able to see into his head?
I wonder if I'd love it if I'd go insane, like, because I could imagine that he knows he's full
of shit, and that he's all up there just, you know, all the signal virtue that he wants. No,
no, he's he's he's a true believer. So but, but what does that feel like in the face of, of,
I guess, maybe there's this awesome, I know I'm really getting sidetracked now, but
because I'm examining a specific person, but well, I mean, it's just like any other conspiracy
theorist where they convince themselves that something's true, that there's like a child
pedophilia ring in the basement of the Pizza Hut, you know, the guy really believed that was the case.
Yeah, but like in the case, and I keep picking on religion, because it's the easiest biggest
target change maybe to social justice. Yeah, I guess, because I can speak to having a really
strong beliefs about social justice that eventually seeds of doubt crept in, and it got
strong enough to the point where I did actually have to look up things. Nice. Can I can I set that
up in the way that I was going to do with the religious one, which was, and if this isn't a
good set up, just ignore it. This is another controversial thing that we can hate on.
No, it'll be fun. There's, you have to do the kind of mental tricks like not knowing
the structure of a logical thought, you know, you can have a belief that justifies,
belief A, that's justified belief B, which is justified by belief C, which also justifies
belief A, you've got this circle, and the rest of us know that's not how you can't,
you can't support this web on a circle of nothing, right? I will say that even as a child,
I was really, really bothered by the fact that God hated gay people, because I, I was just,
I know this sounds like a hippie thing to say, but I was really down with love. I was like,
everyone should love each other. And what is wrong if like two guys love each other? You know,
I just could not get it, but your parents believe in this and you depend on them to give you food
and shelter. And all your friends depend on this, your entire social network is people who believe
this. And if you don't also believe it, then you might die, you know, from neglect and exposure.
So there was, and all that's behind the veil of your press secretary, you know, as a kid,
realizing all that stuff. Well, no, no, I actually did, it bothered me as a kid, but I,
no, no, that you might be homeless if you disagree with your parents. Oh, that no, I didn't think
of it explicitly, no. But I felt the inability to reconcile a loving God with a God who hates
gays. But you know, I just didn't think about that. I was like, some part of me was like,
this is very important not to think about. And I didn't for as much as possible.
That's rough. Yeah. And you know, it was as it became more mainstream and you saw more gay people,
it was more and more in my face like, Hey, God really hates these people. And it was harder to
bury that when you actually saw gay people and knew them. But what is your social justice thing?
I was pretty aligned with the social justice movement. And I felt like I had read so much about
it. That I like, it seems so obvious to me that yeah, you should like support marginalized people,
feminism is good, fighting racism is good, etc. You start to kind of just like absorb all of the
things that people believe in social justice. And I remember points where there were people in
the office that I was working in that would kind of, you know, I would argue with anybody about
any of this stuff when it came up. And we kind of had a pretty good natured debates about it.
But I started to as the social justice got more and more like radical leftist, have a hard time
defending some things. Like I think the best example is when it started being okay to write
hashtag kill all men and make jokes about like, you know, male tears, talking about how all men
are terrible. And I was on the other side trying to justify to my like a bunch of my co workers
who are men who are asking, Well, this seems terrible. What's the deal with that? And I would
have to kind of go like read and see what other people had written and go, Okay, well, it's because
they're not actually talking about all men. And I heard myself like saying these justifications
and like the back of my brain, I was like, I don't think I, I don't think I believe that. And this
actually makes me feel dirty to say these things. But it was really hard to push through why and to
sit there and actually look at the beliefs because I didn't want to, I guess it's tribalism, I guess
I didn't want to like, you know, you don't want to do my tribe. But um, that's all like in hindsight.
But you definitely have a feeling that you can articulate. Did you lose a bunch of friends when
you Oh, yeah. Yeah, I think I like, I like, I appreciate you sharing that because that feeling
like you said of not really knowing how to justify what you just said, because you all you know is
what you've been told you believe on some subjects. And then you have to go off and find it and then
rehearse that argument and feel hollow saying it. I think that that sounds like a very familiar
sensation. I'm trying to think of when that happens to me. And I'm sure I could think of
something but nothing's coming to mind. I never been wrong before. No, it's just that that's
sort of what I was thinking about when I was trying to think of the unvirtuous truth seeker,
right? I'm trying to bring it back to the essay. But I, I think, man, I had something more to say
there. Shoot, I hate this. It's Monday. Yeah, kind of tall. It was a good Monday, though. It's
productive at work for like the first time in a couple weeks, which was nice. Congratulations.
Hey, actually, I finished something that I was going to take like 25 hours to do because that's
how long I estimated that it would take. But rather than do it the hard way, I was like, you know
what? What's the easy way to do this? And I just emailed or I messaged somebody who I know works on
the code base that we were interacting with, like trying to figure this out on our side. And
rather than me have to figure this out over the next two, three days, he was like, oh, yeah,
we changed that endpoint, hit it like this instead. I'm like, cool. It took me 30 minutes.
Asking for advice is an amazing life hack. It is. And it's one of the things that I think is
been like, it's just not just advice, because this wasn't like me consulting a senior on how to
fix this problem. It was me going straight to the source of somebody who was working on the
changes that we were trying to like update our stuff to work with their stuff. And like, wait,
just tell me what you guys did here and that I could figure this out. When I talk about it,
it's in tomorrow morning. I'm not going to just say, I'm done. I cheated. I'm going to explain
the virtue of how I cheated and why I want to do that all the time. So if you get the opportunity
to, right? Yeah, it'd be like, if it really mattered, like what an author meant when they
used a sentence or something, and you could sit, we could sit and argue about it for an hour,
or you could shoot them a text and they'd be like, I meant this. It's like, boom, done. All right,
cool. There's also the matter of comparative value of time. Like I realized in this case,
it was absolutely worth the time. But every now and then I, my boss is like,
way a bit more busy than she should be, to be honest. She is at work 12 hours a day, just about
every day. And I know sometimes there's a problem I could go to her and she could probably help me
figure it out in about five minutes. And for me, it would take a good half hour to 45 minutes to
puzzle this thing out. But on the other hand, if I'm in the slow part of the month, I'm not doing
anything in that half hour to 45 minutes anyway. And if I can save for that five minutes, it's
probably worth it. Yeah. And this is, I mean, this would be especially the case for things like
artificial intelligences, you know, maybe if they're working on something really super important,
you don't want to take one minute of their time, if it takes you a month to figure out something,
because their time is just that valuable that you're better off spending that month.
But they're not human. So they could do multiple things at once.
We're assuming that they're up at the limit of their technological capabilities or something.
Well, for this argument. Well, let's further destroy your argument and point out that the
machine is running on machine speed, we're running on meat speed.
Right. That's why I said a minute. And for that, let's take a month.
So, well, yeah, for them, well, I guess what problem could it probably take us a month to
solve that would, I guess, that's not the right scaling to use here, right? It's a million to
one, not 30 to one. What if you delay the solving of death by one minute? I mean,
that's at least a few lives lost. What problem could you possibly come to a
superintelligence with that would take you that you could solve in a month by yourself,
but that would take it a full minute to solve? I don't know. Yeah. Right. There.
Oh, thanks for pulling my hypothetical out of the water with another hypothetical.
It's good to be conscious of that, though. I've been doing job interviews and they keep asking
the question of how do you handle collaboration or explain how you worked with a team before.
And I always like to point out that I try to be really aware of the time of my boss and my
supervisors. I think it's cool. Collaboration is great, but yeah, you do have to be really
strategic about how you use it because you don't want to be doing what you just mentioned,
taking more of the time of someone who has a lot on their plate already to benefit you if you
do have the time to work on it. I get annoyed with it happening the other way, too, though.
I think one of the reasons my boss works so much is because she spends way too much time on things
that don't matter. Long story short, a payment that went through the bank was four cents less
than what we had on our system. And so I was just like, hey, I'm just going to write this off.
Is that cool? She's like, no, research it, find out what happened, make sure it gets
transferred correctly. I'm like, it's four fucking cents. I'll give you the four cents.
Don't waste my time. My time is worth more than the half hour to an hour I would spend
fixing this four cent issue. Okay, maybe make more than eight cents an hour. Yes, I was really
annoyed that she wanted me to work on a four cent problem. But to still man her case, it might be
that, look, we need to know how this happened because next time it might not be four cents,
might be $400. Then we'd look into it. I know how it happens. Someone mistyped the key on the bank
sign. Someone saw the number put 0.00 at the end instead of 0.04. That's fair. And I do need to
point out because I think the other thing about being the employee who asks lots of questions
to superiors is that you're the annoying squeaky wheel that can't handle anything yourself. So
you need to be seen to be able to tackle things yourself and figure it out, even if it takes
you three times as long as it would if you ask somebody else. So my general strategy, except
in interviewing a little bit too, was basically so that they ask, how do you handle a problem
that you've never seen before if you work on a team with seniors? And I'm like, well, it depends
on how much progress I feel like I've made in 15 minutes or 20 minutes or something. If I haven't
made one step in 20 minutes, I'll shoot someone a message and be like, where do I get started?
And they'll respond to the link and then there I go. And then at least another 20 minutes or
something. But I can sit and burn a whole day and I've seen coworkers do this and drives me insane.
The approach problem is in the wrong way. And they could, and then they've, at the end of the
day, they've got to throw all that work away and backtrack or start from scratch. So I was like,
no, no, if you just asked somebody 20 minutes into your day, rather than after three days of
damage, right, then you could have saved us all this time. Right. And that saves the company,
you know, three days of wages for you too. Right. So I try to find a midline between those two
things. I guess that's where you have to develop the instinct of when it's worth asking. Yeah.
I just tend to always do it because I have this, uh, well, I have social anxiety. So I was coming
from a place of having never asked questions. So, uh, just updating more towards ask questions.
When you get stuck has helped me a lot. I still think I ask fewer questions than probably the
average employee. I've been trying to make a conscious effort to ask more questions too and to
be more eagerly ready to admit that I don't know something. It still feels awkward, but the more
I push through it, the easier it's getting. You know, even it's like, Hey, have you heard of this,
you know, book or this TV show or whatever, rather than me kind of him and ha I'm like,
Oh, I don't know, maybe because that leaves you some face of like being out of the loop. I'll say,
never heard of it. Tell me about it. And maybe it's, it's easier to get started with examples
like that. And when someone asks you during an interview, this happened at the last one I was
at, they were like, Hey, so how much to this do you know? I'm like, not that much, but I'm happy
to pick it up if I need to. And they're like, well, there's none of that here. You don't need it.
We're just checking. But, but if I had said, Oh, you know, I'm okay. Then it would have wasted
my time and there's by me pretending that I, that I do something, right? So sometimes it pays off
in a really funny way. Telling the truth is good. Maybe as a trick, they sometimes ask about systems
that don't actually exist. I saw one of those programming here programming Huber subreddit,
someone was like, how much do you know about the illuminate JavaScript library or something? And
the person she's like, I've never heard of it. They're like, good, we just made it up. You passed
the test. I had that in an interview recently. Really? It was not that not the illuminate,
but they actually just made up. They're like, how much do you know about this? Like, okay,
it was, I think it was you were asked to teach a class on and then they said something like
squid do or like it was some ridiculous goofy word. And then there's like, you don't know
very much about this. How would you handle that? And I explained how I would handle it. And then
after the question, I was like, if I can ask, is that a real thing? And they all laughed and they
said, no, we made it up for the interview. That's perfect. I'm curious, were you already like into
the rationalist scene when or or knew about it when you like started dropping out of the social
justice activism thing? Yes, but um, I don't know. Actually, yeah, rationality did have a lot to do
with it. I was going to say it didn't. I wasn't really that deep into the rationality community
when I started dropping out of social justice, but I started the drop very slowly. And then I got
back into rationality, and then I was able to articulate the problems that I had been having.
And oh, that's why, you know, that bothered me because I didn't look it up. I was just like
saying what other people had said, and I didn't go to the root of the problem. I didn't look up
any of the statistics or the scientific studies that have been done, which is what I should have
done. That's why that bothered me. So that was awesome. Kind of awesome. It was kind of hard.
Right. Having like killing sacred beliefs hurts physically, but it was the right thing to do.
How long ago was that? Four years. Around three to five years. It's been a process and it's,
you know, it's still a work in process. The second virtue is your relinquishment.
And it can be painful, depending on the belief it is, right?
I think it usually is painful because it just, something hurts about losing beliefs that you
had. It can be freeing too. Yeah, certainly beliefs that you care about anyway. I didn't
mean to interrupt, but like if someone corrects me about the population of Japan, I wouldn't feel
any like, other than the embarrassment having been wrong, then it's like, okay, whatever. But
and then I'm like, oh, good, now I know the right number. Some are easier practice cases,
but they don't really, I don't think they even practice cases. They don't translate really
well to an emotional loss. The loss of, you know, the emotional attachment to a belief like,
well, like losing your religion, because you'd lose your social circle, that like link to your
childhood, that like belief that you're not going to die. You're just going to go to heaven,
be in paradise forever. That all sucks. Yeah, a lot goes out the window. But then knowing you're not
going to go to hell is kind of cool too, maybe. Was that ever something you worried about?
No, the joves and misses don't have a hell. Oh smart. That you just die. Good call. But I mean,
I was scared of death from the very beginning. So wait, if you just die, what's the point?
You're dead. The same reason we don't like dying. No, no, no. But what's the point of being a jove
as a witness and proselytizing? Oh, if you're good, then you get to live forever in a flawless
paradise. Oh, if you're bad, you just die. Yeah. Okay, gotcha, gotcha. Okay, I was going to say,
like, if there's not a payoff even for the good one, then how do you, how do you market this?
Well, I mean, you could market it as have a good life now, which is kind of like what we do, right?
That's fair. Okay, yes. You can go to, you can go door to door and say, look, you know, like,
like selling your multi-level marketing scheme, if you really believe it, then, you know,
you're thinking of helping people. Yeah, okay. But they didn't actually have infinite reward.
So yeah. Having your consciousness erased sounds worse than hell to me.
I can, I can imagine states of being that are worse than being dead because, you know,
I was in one for a couple of years and, and I would rather not exist than, than to be in a hell.
Yeah. Yeah. If, if, if you imagine it's not just your like sensory input being attacked in hell,
but like also everything about your cognition, your emotions, everything about you being fucked
with, right? Like there was that Simpsons joke, I think it was Bart saying, you know, wouldn't you
just get used to the pain? Like, you know, easing into a hot bath. And it's like, sure, if you got
to keep your meat suit and everything worked like it does up here, right? But if you got really
creative, then things just could hurt way more than you, they could ever possibly hurt on earth.
And it freaks you out way more than it should because they're also screwing with that meter.
So yeah, things can get really messed up. You read about some of the medieval tortures that they,
they did. And, you know, there's a reason they called it going a medieval on someone's ass and
pulp fiction. I would much rather be dead than to go through some of those tortures.
I thought you were just talking about depression. Oh, I was literally talking about depression.
Not to get too personal, but I had a brush with suicide because it would have been better to be
dead than be in that continued pain. But that past and I got better and things are much better now.
But I would rather be dead than to be in that sort of permanent depression for all eternity, too.
I've never felt that I have had depression. I've never had suicidal depression. I've never felt
suicidal tendencies. And I've had to like talk friends down who had suicidal tendencies. I didn't
know what to tell them because I couldn't empathize with the feeling. Luckily, there's hotlines to
call. I was in a situation where I had to talk a friend down, I was able to consult somebody,
they sent me the number for a hotline and I talked to them and they gave me some advice.
Then the rest of the night worked out. So yeah, if you're ever in a situation,
Google Suicide Hotline and you'll find your local numbers. Should that ever happen?
Hopefully never. I actually also don't know what to tell people who are suicidal.
You call those numbers and you find out. Yeah. No, I'm serious. You delegate.
Well, why not? They're at least trained, right? If my toilet broke, I could sit there and try to
fix it or I could call somebody and they could say, do this and that would fix it, right? So
if it works for a broken toilet, it works for a person. That's all I'm saying.
That's just how physics works. Take a plunger the person's face and they'll be better.
I'm pretty sure that's in the sequences too. A lot of things are in the sequences.
Plunge your friends. That's what it should have been titled.
Should we move on to what's a bias again? That sounds good.
All right. The last one is what's a bias again? I will go ahead and read the first
quote that I pulled out of it. We want to get to the truth and we find various obstacles
getting in the way of our goal. These obstacles are not wholly dissimilar to each other.
For example, there are obstacles that have to do with not having enough computing power available
or information being expensive. It so happens that a large group of obstacles seem to have
a certain character in common to cluster in a region of obstacle to truth space.
And this cluster has been labeled biases. This one was also alluded to in the first
essay of the lens being reliably distorted. I've talked about biases a lot and I think we have
too. But I guess I wanted to say that this is more foreshadowing. There's a lot more in that
first post that covers kind of explicitly some things, but it also just hints that
here's a lot of the stuff we're going to be covering. This one sentence here,
we're going to talk about that for 80,000 words. I don't know how long these are. I think my numbers
are way off. He says, we seem to label as biases those obstacles to truth which are produced
not by the cost of information nor by limited computing power, but by the shape of our own
mental machinery. For example, the machinery to win arguments in adaptive political contexts.
Believing what others believe to get along socially. Our brains are doing something wrong
and after a lot of experimentation and or heavy thinking, someone identifies the problem in a
fashion that system two can comprehend. Then we call it a bias. And by the way, system two is
differentiating. System one is like your instinctive, intuitive.
Lizard brain.
Yeah, lizard brain. And system two is like the more slow, contemplative,
I can think about things instead of acting on instinct.
And your lizard brain can also do basic math and stuff. But it's also very easy to trick your
lizard brain with carefully worded math problems. But like two plus two, you don't have to sit there
and do the mental math. You kind of just know it. If I ask, but you can do...
The classic one is a baseball bat and a baseball together cost a dollar 10. If the baseball bat
costs $1 more than the baseball, how much does the baseball cost?
Right. So people, their immediate answer is a dime, because that's the difference.
But the real answer is what, a 15 cents?
Five cents.
Yeah. See?
Because since the bat is a dollar more, that the bat would be a dollar and five,
and that makes a dollar 10 all together.
I couldn't do mental math while making eye contact. That's why I never look at people when I talk to them.
Because you're always doing math while you're talking.
Even if we can do no better for knowing, it is still a failure that arises in an identifiable
fashion from a particular kind of a cognitive machinery.
Not from having too little machinery, but from the shape of the machinery itself.
Biasis are distinguished from errors that arise from damage to an individual human brain,
or from absorbed cultural mores. Biasis arrive from the machinery that is humanly universal.
That's another case where they mention later on that it's not just like necessarily a moral duty
to reduce biases in the world, because biases are bad and evil. It was more that you are trying to
instrumentally accomplish a goal, or because you're curious, you want to know what the truth is,
and these are things that you find in your way, so then you deal with them at that point.
But again, not all biases are evil. Loser brain uses heuristics.
Heuristics can be really good.
Often the obvious stereotypical thing that your brain jumps to is the correct thing.
Right. Well, heuristics are distinct from biases, right?
So heuristics are more about your brain not having enough computational power or something, right?
So heuristic is the shortcut, and the bias is the crack in the lens.
I like that he was more making the point that this isn't about IQ and intelligence.
This isn't about individual processing power that you have. It's about a problem in the machinery
that is universal to all humans, thus making it sort of like an art that everyone can use to get
better at thinking in general, as opposed to something that is there to train like your IQ
or something, you know? It uses a lot of highfalutin language and stuff, but I think that,
right, it's trying to assuage the concern that, oh, I'm not smart enough for this,
or oh, this is only for those esoteric IQ 160 people. Often high IQ people, or like,
I think they're, you know, James Randi-Fulling scientists and doctors, for example,
show that the smarter you are, often like the easier you are to fool.
Yeah, you can definitely become what he cautions against later as a sophisticated arguer.
I can't be wrong for all of these really good reasons. If you're not familiar with Randi's
screwing with scientists, last I heard there was, he was writing a book on that was going to cover
like all of it comprehensively, maybe a new thing that he was doing. I know that he put
a couple of students in labs back with like in the 80s when they were doing like serious
magic research in government-funded labs across the country. I think that was the 70s.
70s, yeah. Well, Uri Geller was popular in the 80s, wasn't he? And maybe it was the 70s too.
It might have just been like a period of 20 years. Yeah, whatever it was. There were charlatans
who would go out there and they could do four shitty tricks and they'd be sitting, they'd,
you know, get paid to go to a lab and do it under scientific scrutiny. Yeah, they claimed it was
ESP or telepathy or like remote viewing. Right. So it's not like magic. It was like tricks. They
didn't think it was magic tricks. It was, but it was that like the government was trying to see
whether or not you could read someone's mind. No, totally. But like Uri could do like a spoon
bending thing that they would. Tribulate telekinesis. They would want to see. Yeah. So
Randy had a couple of students go in. They were going to go do magic just like Uri Geller was
doing. And if at any point they were asked, are you faking this? They were just saying, yes,
James, Randy sent me. And they were never asked over the many months that they were there doing
these studies. Okay. So even like the basic question of like, you fucking with me? Never came up.
Because I guess maybe they didn't encourage them that they're able to be fooled. Yeah,
they were very smart, but they were naive. Like they never thought that someone would
intentionally try to mislead them for, you know, financial gain or for notoriety. Right.
Which is a stupid oversight. And I'd like to think our scientists are smarter now.
It's not even a smartness thing. It's more of a like trust thing. Like a lot of people in
the rationality community tend to be very high openness. I would hope our scientists are more
jaded now. I think they are. I think the skeptic community has helped with that.
Kind of. Yeah, definitely. There was that recent bunch of papers that like hoax papers
that. Yeah, I got some popular retweets. That's a different kind of phenomena though. That wasn't
someone going in and tricking somebody to their face. That was more just like no one actually
checking to see if this story checked out. Right. So I'm thinking of the like the symbolic penis
or what was that one that was a couple years ago? I think it was the same group of people,
but they did another round of papers. Yeah, recently. The only one I can't remember what
this was, but it was some they wanted to make a case that look at these these journals that
they'll pose they'll publish anything that looks like it's, you know, pro-social justice warrior
stuff and the medical the metaphysical penis and they had some if you haven't if you're not
familiar with this little scandal. Well, the thing is, is that people would retweet about oh,
yeah, they were all fooled. But it turned out that this was published in like a pay to publish
journal. It was turned down from a ton of real journals. Okay. And that didn't come out in the
initial wave of this release. And so this was sort of like a second level deception,
and it was more on the people consuming it rather than the people doing the tests.
There was a more recent one. I don't remember the details.
That's the one I'm thinking of it. So gold squared. That one also had its issues, though it was like
claiming that it did a certain thing. Ozzie had a really good reputation on their blog about
why they think that most of it was bullshit, although I think they agreed that the last one
was a crappy paper and shouldn't have been published. Can link to that too. I think that
was a really good article. Please do because I think I heard about this in passing, but I'm
right about it. So that'll be fun. We're off topic. Okay. I did also notice in this in this post
that there was a call forward both to politics is the mind killer and universal fire. That's just
fucking awesome. I think we talked about politics is the mind killer before, which is exactly what
it sounds like. People go funny in the head when talking politics. So save those conversations for
higher level. I was going to say like, you know, rationalist on rationalist discussions. You're
going to have one of these arguments or use like distant hyperbole examples or just like historical
examples or something like that. Blues in the greens. Yeah. Or 17th century France is a lot
easier to talk about in a political heated situation than today. So what was universal fire?
Was that everything? That was the one with flagistan. Okay. So we'll have to save the mystery
flagistan or flow just and I'm not sure how you say it for another day. Oh, right. Yeah. I'm not
sure either. I think I've heard of both ways. It's one of those things I think there's probably
a word for it that will probably mispronounce if we only have read it where you say something
different if you've only read it before and then someone says it in real life and you're like,
Oh, that's how you say that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Epitome, for example. I thought it was pronounced
epitome up until a few years ago. I know someone who thought demonstrably was pronounced demon
demonstrably. I like that. Yeah. It's like, why, why are demons involved in this?
This word? I pulled out this quote because I really love it. If you're a scientist just
beginning to investigate fire, it might be a lot wiser to point to a campfire and say,
fire is that RNG bright hot stove over there. Rather than saying I define fire as an alchemical
transmutation of substances, which releases flagistan. Yeah. I also had a good interview for
a tech question to ask like, what's a computer? Yeah. And you know, you could say, well, it's
like a turn complete system or you could just pull out your phone like this thing. Yeah. This is a
computer efficiency of kind of explaining pointing up or pointing down. At that point though, you're
also guessing at what your interviewer wants to hear. Are they someone who wants, you know,
a quick dirty practical answer? Are they someone who wants to know the theory behind
computation? That's why you research the company that you're interviewing at.
Right. Yeah. You look at the Glassdoor reviews. But if I was asking that question to an interviewee,
I would want to see how they'd react to an odd side ball question. Okay. And you know,
I'd probably learn something because they're probably smarter than I am. They have some great
answers. But if they had, do that thing where they're like, that's not a real question. And then
then come back from that. That's the reason I ask a question like that. The fact that it's about
computers is only because it would be a computer company, right? So. Yeah. All right. We've been
going for a while. We should move on. Okay. I also want to say that we probably will probably,
we definitely will not be spending this much time on things going forward. This was just like
our big, Hey, we're doing this. We're having a squee little kickoff talking in depth. But
in the future, they're going to be much quicker because we can't, we, this would turn into just
the less wrong sequences podcast. Yeah, we'll do, we'll do bullet points for the future ones,
maybe big highlights, fun tie-ins, that sort of thing. But certainly. And notes. Preparations.
Yes. And probably, probably just two per episode. Yeah, that sounds good. Probably a better length.
Cool. So before we get to listener feedback, I have an announcement as well. Tell us. Okay.
My announcement is that, um, it's probably been mentioned before on this podcast a few times
that I was writing a novel for a while. And actually, it's been over a year and a half,
I guess, since I finished the first draft. And there's been a lot more work done on it
since that point. But I have finally decided that I am going to do the, the thing that seems to be
all the rage and rational circles now where we publish our fiction serially online. So starting
November 11th, I will be publishing the first chapter of my novel, What Lies Dreaming, at
whatliesdreaming.com. And then I'll be putting them out one chapter every week for 44 weeks until
it's done. So are you going to be releasing chapters that you've already written? Or are you
going to have to do like significant editing to them before you post them? The whole thing is done.
In theory, I could just post the whole thing up right now. I'm probably going to give it one last
look and change some last details at the last moment, because that's how writers are. You're
always tweaking right up until the last second. But yeah, the whole thing is done. And in theory,
I don't have to change anything at all. And you can cut this if you want. But I think it would be
valuable to plug the Patreon component to this. Oh, okay. At the beginning, because then people
can know about it. Maybe even set the Patreon up in advance if you're already plugging it here,
right? Yeah. So you can set the Patreon up beforehand. So I've actually already set the
Patreon up. There we go. Yeah, the Patreon is patreon.com slash eniashbrotsky. Or you can go
to whatliesdreaming.com. And it will also have a link over the Patreon, of course. But yeah,
depending on the level of Patreon support, you can get next week's chapter a week early. You can
get author's notes, you can get deleted content, because there's a lot of stuff that I went and
cut through in my various revisions. I'm gonna have to pay for that one. That's
nice. I was gonna do I was gonna pay anyway, but I got to see the stuff that hit. I think I like
the stuff I don't buy DVDs anymore, because it's not the early 2000s. But I do go to YouTube when
movies come out and look at the deleted the deleted scenes or movies that I like. I love the process.
I love being able to see what the person's like thought process was when they're creating something.
Yeah, that'll be both from the notes and in the cut stuff. But just just so you guys know,
it was cut for a reason. Some of it was actually bad. Yeah, but that's good.
Again, it's fun. Yeah, obviously, if it was great and you wanted it, people who it left it in,
but it's fun to see why what was left out and then why on that sort of thing. Yeah,
what the branching path is in the timeline, the way it could have gone. Or also I'm a writer too,
so I like to see like, what should I cut from my work? All right, well, then hopefully you guys
will enjoy that. And then just like watching deleted scenes for movies, you're gonna wonder,
why didn't they put that one in? I think sometimes the answer might be because
it's too long that way and that could go. I doubt that's much of a constraint with a
with a book that no one told you to cut that yet, right? It absolutely was a constraint.
Really? I cut a lot of things. Well, in my opinion, it sort of starts slow and builds and it gets to
a really great place. But as I was reading through it the second and third time, I was like,
I got to cut more from the front. The front is just a little too long before things get going.
And so I cut in quite a bit from the front, actually. And I still think it takes a little
longer than I would like it to get to the really juicy stuff. But I guess it's less
of a constraint once you're publishing weekly, because I was originally thinking of publishing
in a novel, right? If you're publishing weekly, it doesn't matter as much. People are just going
to read one chapter a week. But yeah, you can make it as long as you want. Yeah.
Wild Boe. Exactly. But I still didn't want to make it too long. I do also have a thing at certain
levels. Once the ebook comes out, because I am going to just put it out as an ebook for anyone
to buy in one novel shot if they want. At certain level, you get the ebook for free. At
certain other level, you get a physical book for free shipped to you. At a higher level,
you can get up to two books both signed and personalized if you'd like. Oh, and there is
one thing. The book I divided it up, it takes place over the course of eight days. So I divided
it up into sections for each day. At one of the higher tier levels, when we start a new day,
you get all the chapters for that day immediately, as opposed to having to wait one per week. So
cool. I'm really curious to read this because I didn't yet, even though you sent me a copy
before you went to Burning Man. Just so everyone knows, there's always a worry if you take a long
travel out into the desert that you're going to get in a car accident or something. It's like,
Steven, in case I die, I want you to put this out on the internet because I spent so much time on it.
Someone should see it if I die. Yeah, the first time you went to Burning Man, I think you didn't
know what to expect and all you need to be in the desert for a week. It was the middle of the
night before you left. I woke up the day that you'd left and there's an email that said,
if I die, please make sure this gets out. Yes. That's great. It's like, here's what to do with
my money. Here's my last will. It's like, here, just publish this book. Yeah. Did you make any
arrangements for your assets or anything? Or was it just your book? No, no, fuck my assets. I don't
care. The book is the thing that I really poured my life into. That's awesome. So as quickly as a
brief recap, the little summary that I have here, famine racks, second century Rome, food riots
rage in the streets and the emperor struggles to hold onto power in the midst of a burgeoning coup.
He recalls the German legion to Rome to restore order. Unbeknownst to him, a hidden evil slips
into the city along with the returning legion. A civil war boils over and black magics run unchecked
and ancient horror stirs from its dreams, finely roused after eons of slumber. Sounds dope. Spooky.
Yeah. I'm excited. Why is it going on November 11th? I don't know. I just, I needed to set a date
to start and I was like, okay, this gives me about a month and a half to get ready. So cool. Yeah.
Well, I'm excited. Yeah. Me too. And everyone else should be. I'm, I, I look forward to it.
If it has the similar vibe to the rest of writing, I can tell I'm going to enjoy it already. So thank
you. Yeah. That nice grimdark aesthetic. Yeah, definitely. Oh, oh, oh, oh, and I decided this
just a few days ago. Everyone who is a Patreon supporter of the basin conspiracy is going to get
the first three chapters a week early just so they can get a free sample taste. Awesome. Nice
to have rewards for this show too. So. All right. That, that is what I got. I'm excited about this.
I hope you guys end up liking it. I'm excited too. It should be fun. How long, or I know that
when we had Max on, he asked us not to say how long Crystal Society was because when I was talking
with him about it before, I think right when he published it, but before we did the episode,
he was like, yeah, it's about as long as the fourth Harry Potter book. And I was like, wait,
it's like 734 pages. Okay. And he was like, I don't know if it's exactly that, but it was a
similar word count because for some stupid reason, I had not only remember the fourth and fifth book
links, but I used to have all them in my head somewhere for some stupid reason. Okay. And yet
I can't off the top of my head tell you my dad's birthday. So like my priorities are totally in
order. Yeah. But how long is your book? 120,000 words. How long is that compared to other books?
Because I don't know. I think that's average. Yeah, most books are, well, most books used to be
around 100,000. They've been creeping longer lately. So about 120,000 is getting close to about
average now. Yeah, it's a little bit on the longer side of average. But yeah, basically average.
I love that people have the, you know, taste for larger novels again.
Is that like two to 300 pages? Or is that four to five? I have no idea. Because I know page size
depends on page size and text size and all that. Well, generally in a published novel, it's 250
words per page. So someone in the 400 pages range. Okay, cool. Because I read all of the Willow
Time series most of it twice. And that was like 11,000 words. Wait, no, 11,000. Hold on. There
was 11,000 something 11,000 pages. Oh, okay. Okay. Yeah, that sounds closer to right. Because there
were like 800, 900 pages each in the 15 books. So I think I can handle this. Yes, definitely. And I
did read worm. So then you can handle it. Yeah, awesome. Great. That's awesome. I'm excited.
Cool. All right, should we go on to listener feedback? Okay. I had a real quick one. Well,
we'll see how long I'll whatever you guys tell me how long this should take. Someone commented on
episode 36, a link to permanent mental effects from LSD. Oh, yeah. And I read that. And I was
thinking, Oh, that's interesting. And then luckily, it opens up with saying, these are the permanent
changes I've noticed after doing a fuck ton of LSD and the link to saying that that was about
250 micrograms once a week for a year about average. So luckily, that's a lot more than anyone I know
for the most part. So when I was thinking when I was reading through this, I didn't have to be
super worried that I was going to be hit by these because I had taken well under a fuck ton. So
but I wanted to go through the what? Well, I guess there's 11, but I'll go through really fast
and say just yes or no and then we can dive in. So number one, worst memory. I don't think so,
really. I think my memory is similar than it as it was. It's hard to say. I have a hard time saying
because I've always had a shitty memory similar. So I have no idea about I can't remember how bad
my memory used to be, but doesn't I don't feel like it's any worse. I haven't done LSD. So if you
want to do a like pre post op. Yeah, we could do like the what is it the optimized mind. I can't
remember the name of things. Maybe my memory is bad right now. So this wouldn't be a good time to test
that, but you could test before and after. Cool. Yeah, that sounds fun. Number two, gaps in thought.
This is more just kind of saying that they're thinking kind of feels spacey,
like their thoughts aren't really tied together. I don't feel that way. I can see
how that happens. But I think maybe what if I had to guess they're more just aware that their
thoughts are doing that all the time. I actually think that I am a little more spacey than I used
to be. Like I used to have a lot more anxiety in general in life. And this having a little bit
of space between my thoughts has made me feel like a little bit dumber, but also just a lot more
mindful and a lot more enjoying of life too. In general, I don't have this constant like
racing going on in my head, you know. Yeah, I think it sounds amazing. That sort of ties into
number three, feeling less like I'm the one thinking of my thoughts. Well, that's not exactly it.
Number five, permanent increased well being in a way that's hard to put my finger on.
I could sort of attest to that, but it's really hard for me to say because this happens with every
big shift in my personality. It always comes with something that could be a plausible explanation
and other big life changes. So I can't pin it down. So like my life's gotten a lot better,
I'm a much heavier person. I tried LSD the month before I got my first real grown up job and had
like income and a savings account and health insurance. So like my life's a lot better objectively.
And it happened right after this happened. So it's hard to see if the causal arrow is really
the temporal arrow is causal or not. But I have a similar problem. Like when I first started
working out, I also had just gotten surgery and I got a Lasik not too long after that.
And I started up the podcast and I just made so many life changes all at once. It was hard to say
what led to what, you know, I was having a fantastic relationship for the first time ever.
And so I would sometimes say, yeah, I, when I, when I did this one thing, it led to all these
other changes, but who knows what exactly had caused it, you know, and recently I've also had
major life changes had a major divorce, you know, I went through a year where instead of working
for the man, I was writing a novel and there's a lot of things that change in my life then too.
At about the first time I tried LSD, so hard to get to point it to any one thing. I do slightly
blame LSD for like, because I finished my novel before I took any, right? Because I was like,
I don't want to change who I am while I'm still working on this. Now I am that sort of angst
and self-hatred and having anxiety in life really drove my writing a lot. And I'm going to get back
into writing again soon, but it has been God like nine months since I've written anything.
And I'm like, God damn it. I took LSD and I stopped writing. Why am I so happy with life? This sucks.
Well, maybe you need to write about different subjects.
Well, and I think you're selling yourself short, you still maintain a blog, you do this and another
podcast and you do write, you're just not publishing stuff lately, right? Well, no, I haven't really
been writing fiction at all in the past nine months. Weren't you at the coffee shop yesterday
writing stuff? I've just started again. Okay, so like literally just in the past couple weeks.
Well, I mean, you did just finish a book too. So like before the stretch, I guess I'm,
and there was the whole getting a new job and, you know, renovating this place and
there was a lot of stuff. Oh, that takes so much time. Yeah. Yeah, a lot of, you know,
there were a lot of other time pressures on me. Yeah, we're operating a bus stop by candlelight
was probably a, you know, big time, time sucks. So even me just setting up my new apartment,
like I didn't have to renovate anything, but there was no furniture and it was just a nightmare
before I had any kind of like living room area. There's we just got a couch two days ago. There
was no couch. We were sitting on the floor. There's no desks. Oh, it's a nightmare if you don't have
your workspace set up. It's one of those things you take for granted until you don't have it. So
yeah, that could definitely like just throw you into disarray. Yeah, so you got plenty of excuses.
Yeah, but I'm just saying if anxiety is one of the things that pushes you along in life,
taking away that anxiety might be a bad thing. I wonder if it's on net a bad thing. I don't know,
because I'm, I've noticed a personality shift. And I remember thinking, I don't want, I think
I said the words, I don't want to roll the dice of the personalities. I'm mostly happy with who I
am. I'm happier now. And I again, I can't be sure which way it came from. But, you know, if it was
related, which it very well could be, this is not an uncommonly reported experience. That's why
we're seeing a lot of checks on the same list. It's, I don't know, if you're more laid back and happy,
at least as long as it's not the obvious cost of like, intelligence or something,
something else that you really value. Productivity. Productivity, yeah. And I don't know, maybe it
did affect the intelligence a little bit. It's hard to say. You don't seem any dumber.
Okay, well, let's go. And I guess I should say you don't seem any less smart.
But because I mean, so that's the thing is, you know, if somebody took a blow to the head and
suddenly they can't remember how to get home from work anymore, but they're way happy, like they've
lost something and everyone can see that, right? I don't know. Because last night when we were
talking with the guy, I brought up the whole thing about... Hey, wait, what is this? We were invited
out to dinner with someone who was in town who was a fan of the podcast and he was like,
Hey, I'm in town. Can I buy you dinner and just chat with you for a few hours? And we're like,
Sure, that'd be awesome. So we did that. He mentioned one of the things that he appreciates is,
he knows there's some error in all his beliefs. And I asked, aren't you a little bit worried that
maybe because of that, you can be swayed from beliefs that are important because people can
exploit the fact that you hold that there's some error in your beliefs. And actually, I think it's
a really good thing to always know there's some level of error in your beliefs. He was like,
Like what? So I brought up that some people kind of are racist and will use things like the crime
stats for the black population are much worse. And that proves that black people are less civilized.
And he was like, Well, no, but that's because the system penalizes being black more. And I was
like, Yeah, I totally agree. And I never pushed that because in part because, you know, I didn't
want to be like, giving the impression that I'm one of those alt right assholes. But after we were
driving away, I was like, I should have pushed him. So you don't believe that there's error in
your thinking about whether or not the system is the problem. But on the other hand, I don't want
to push him on that either because I also agree that the problem is with the laws and how they
are enforced in large part. So you bring that up because you're worried that if you were,
if I had been more mentally on top of things, I would have made that connection then because it
didn't occur to me to point that out that there are some beliefs where you're like, I'm not willing
to entertain error. Like, so what is your error interval that it's actually the system and not
something inherent? Sure. I think God, I'm so fucking uncomfortable even saying those words.
But I think everyone knows that you're using this as an educational example. If they don't,
they're not listening closely enough. But I think I don't know what it's like being inside your head,
obviously. But unless that's the kind of thing that you would ordinarily have not missed or
something and this is happening a lot, then it doesn't sound like usual loss. The fact that
you're uncomfortable talking about it now and you're not meeting a stranger and you're not in
public, where you could very easily be overheard making very compelling arguments for racism or
something, all of those things were in some level aware in your head and you might be
missing it, right? I know I would have definitely pushed him on it in my late teens and early 20s,
but that was when I was much more confrontational. Nowadays, I'm more like, I want people to think
good things about me and not think that, oh, maybe I'm a racist or something. Back then, I was like,
fuck yeah, I'm an atheist, eat me. I still believe that way, but I'm no longer arguing about religion
because that's gotten boring, I guess. It might just be that you're less confrontational now.
I think that's probably, that could be it. I mean, obviously, like I said, you know yourself
best, but from the outside, I'm not noticing a difference. I want to tear through the rest of
this list real quick because we have some other feedback. No, no, no, you're totally fine. I just
didn't want to go on too long. Well, I didn't mind going on. I just figured it's more the overall
length of the episode that I know you're editing that I want to keep short. Number four was access
to an intense altered mental state that this person can make usually last around five to 10
minutes triggering this generally long term cures any stress, anxiety, or insecurities I've been
struggling through recently with different levels of intensity required to trigger that mental state.
And I think what they're describing is just like kind of a mindfulness introspection. They've
they mentioned kind of spacey thinking earlier and feeling more than a mindfulness, but feeling
like I'm not the one thinking my thoughts. I think that kind of when you when you take a
mindfulness perspective and watch your thoughts form, that's from like an inherently relaxing
place. You can even be focusing on like physical pain or on like a, you know, extremely anxious
like heart race. And you just when you sit back and you say, Oh, yeah, my heart's racing. I'm
noticing that my heart's racing. That's a pretty neutral thought when you're back there having
that it's less. Yeah, but they said triggering an intense, what was it? Intense altered mental
state. That doesn't sound like the mindfulness sort of thing. That sounds more like being able to
all of a sudden flip into. They'd have to describe it more because I suppose that can mean a lot of
things. Also, not feeling like I'm the person thinking my thoughts that could be kind of a
mindfulness state of mind, or it could be disassociation, which is terrible. Yeah. Yeah.
That's true. And it looks like at the end of the last one where access to altered state of mind,
I've written more extensively about this here and they link to it. So
because I was going to say, I wish I could talk to this person and get some clarification.
I haven't read that that link yet. So maybe there's answers to all of our questions there.
Number six, shifts in belief about myself, the way I work, the things I'm curious about,
epistemics, philosophy, and ethics. These shifts are pretty severe and appear to be permanent. I
like these beliefs a lot better. That's fortunate. Yeah, which is interesting. I don't know if I had
any radical shifts other than like being more laid back and happy, but that might just come from like
the slack of having a better whatever income or life situation in general. It's hard to say.
Alternative mental reactions to alcohol. Getting drunk now feels slightly less psychedelic experience.
It's interesting. Yeah. But again, you got to keep in mind, this person took a fuck done, which is
yeah. So my internal experience and feelings of thought process are now way more nonverbal,
whereas pre-acid, they used to be full of words. I don't know if I've noticed that at all.
I think maybe that's part of what bothers me. Maybe that is what I feel when I say like,
I've been more spacey. It's definitely a little bit less verbal than I used to be.
And I mean, I know a lot of people who hate that verbal thing and I would sometimes get really
irritated at too. It's just like this chain of thought that just keeps going and going and
going. It's like a train and you can't slow down. You can't stop thinking, you know?
But on the other hand, that's also really useful if you're trying to make words as a living.
So I kind of missed that a little bit. But on the other hand, dude, having that squirrel in your
head just sucks. Do you just look at that? Racing thoughts, yeah.
I mean, that squirrel might not be gone too. It might just be. I mean, it still shows up.
It comes back to my desire to just have an interface where I can kind of turn something
on or off as needed. If only there was a way to LSD and then to un-LSD and just flip that switch
when you need it. Yeah. And this is probably a good time to remind that these experiences all
sound mostly positive for this person, where we had mostly positive experiences now comes.
That's not the case for everybody. Not everyone likes it. This isn't an endorsement to try it.
Use your best judgment. Do all your own homework. Let's see. This one's kind of long, but I'll just
read the bullet points. I'm spending more time on this than I meant to. Number nine, the mental
process I take to explain my own behaviors to myself have shifted drastically. They talk about
their shift in their mental movements around their sense of agency. I'm going to just move
past it. That's long, but it's interesting. Something to look at. I laugh way easier,
or way easier laughter. And that's number 11. I skipped around. Number 10, existential masochism.
Oh, I can actually sort of relate to this. This is a really bad way. I wouldn't have put it this way.
The sense of pleasure and pain in a mental state, in a mental sense, have been seriously
turned together. It's not that pain is any less painful or that pleasure is any less pleasurable,
probably the opposite actually. It's that they more often coexist and they tend to coexist
at greater extremes. I don't know if I'd put it that way, but for myself, I've noticed that I'm
able to, in an odd way, enjoy experiences that I don't want to repeat or I don't enjoy. Eating
food I don't like. Rather than just having this yuck reaction, eating mindfully is actually
a really interesting thing to try and do, to try and maintain a mindfulness sense of all the
sensations and stuff that are going on when you're eating. Everything from the feeling of it in your
mouth to how hard it is to chew and all that stuff, and the taste and all that. What did I just eat
in the last couple of weeks that made me think of this? Oh, it was a green olive. I went out to
this super swanky speakeasy. Rachel took me for my birthday. It was awesome. You know what?
I haven't tried a green olive in a few years. I'll try them. I regret doing this, but I was
able to backseat, experience it. I don't want to eat another one, but it wasn't an unpleasant
experience. Olive's the weirdest thing. They're only good at burning man. I've always hated olives.
I had some at Burning Man because I was hungry, and they were there, and they were really fucking
good. Hungers against home. Hungers against home, too, right? But there was something about also the
fact that they were chilled, made a big difference. But then I came home, and I bought me a can of
olives, and I was like, this is shit. What the hell happened? But it's also just been better olives.
That's crazy. I like black olives. I don't like green olives. I like all olives. They were black
olives in both cases, but I've always disliked black olives. It was just like I said, that little
minor thing of like, okay, yeah, this sucks, but I mean, I'm appreciating how it sucks.
I can comment that, too, from a mindfulness perspective, having had panic disorder,
where I read a lot of things about how to deal with panic disorder, and there was
the suggestion that you try to really tap into curiosity. You can reframe anxiety as excitement.
It doesn't always work, but I have had that work before. Or you can reframe the panic attack by
like thinking about, well, let me try to think through the process of every reaction that I'm
having right now. Okay, my heart is racing. Let me think about how that feels. Okay, my muscles
have tensed up really tight. That's interesting. If you just, you think of each step and you're
like, wow, my body's amazing that it's doing this. It's doing this because if a predator came by,
it's forcing me to hold really still. So the predator doesn't see me. That's fascinating.
And you can talk yourself through it that way. It's not necessarily turning it into enjoyment,
but it's more redirecting the negative thoughts into ones that are at least neutral.
I like that. Or helpful. I have an off air anecdote that's similar to that, but not,
it's adjacent to that that I want to talk about. We can do it an hour later. It doesn't matter if
you want to cut this out. Sure. I guess the real short version, I don't know if it has to be off
air or not, but when Rachel and I were buying, well, we went and picked out all the components that
we wanted and then got her an engagement ring, which she's, this has to not go out. Well, actually,
this will be out after. Yeah, this will be out in a week and three days. So does she listen to the
podcast? No. Oh, okay, then. But still, you know, the fewer people. But so she's getting the ring on
Sunday, which doesn't know that. So this will come out after Sunday. So that's fine. But we noticed
that after we went and kind of like, we, you know, long story short, we found the one, all the parts,
they ordered it in like a bands and stones and whatever. And we both kind of like went out to
lunch afterwards. And we're kind of like anxious. And we're like, we're not like nervous. And I'm
like, no, it just feels like nervousness. This is just excitement. But it's the sensations are
like the exact same there. You know, and so it in the moment where you're worried that you might
be nervous, it's easy to imagine that nervousness is what's going on there. But we talked about it.
And we were like, you know, described how we're feeling. And so it was that it was that sense
of being aware of how you're feeling and being able to analyze it on that level. It was just
similar. But it wasn't, it wasn't so much redirecting or realigning how you're looking at it. But it
was just recognizing that two sensations can be tied to very different emotions that some people
dislike or like, right? People like being excited, but they hate being nervous.
It's a lot of the same like neural pathways and a lot of the same physical sensations,
which is interesting. Like a racing heartbeat can be excitement, or serotonin and dopamine can
cause serotonin can cause you to be aggressive or can cause you to be happy.
Didn't realize it could cause you to be aggressive.
I think so, unless I'm thinking of different neurotransmitters.
No, it's very well me. I don't know shit about serotonin.
All I know is that elephants have oxytocin releases when they see humans,
which we have oxytocin releases when we see puppies. And so it means that elephants think
that we're cute. And that that's a really cute thought for me to have. And if they think it's
cute, then I think it's cute that they think we're cute, then we get this awesome feedback
cycle and we're just rolling around. So your oxytocin is releasing right now when you think
about elephants thinking humans are cute. That's right. All right. Was that all of them?
Yes. But like I said, last takeaway that drugs are hazardous. Everyone should be educated
to the extent that they're comfortable with. And if you do decide to ever try anything,
try to get it from somebody you trust, do it in a safe and comfortable setting with
people that you're relaxed around. In that same vein, Scott Alexander pointed out that
some people have permanent reactions to hallucinogens. He said, I think it was like one,
one to 2% of people who take them have some sort of permanent hallucination effect afterwards.
Which is like, seems like a lot. That seems like a lot. I feel like I'd have heard about that in
my homework, but I'll take his word for it. I think he was confused by it too. We personally
know someone who has permanent hallucinations. Well, we don't know if they had that before they
had lots of drugs. I can't remember if they said that it caused it. I think it started with it.
He took an amount of acid that is ungodly large and if it was possible to have a lethal overdose
of acid, he would have lethally overdosed. Your mileage will almost certainly bury.
Be careful with drugs, kids. Drugs are bad. To be clear, I think I've done a total of
400 micrograms in the last year and a half. You did 400 micrograms at a time period greater than
the statute of limitations for being prosecuted for that. I'm the kind of person who would lie
about taking drugs for the social esteem that it gives me. If you're the NSA listening to this,
that's what's happening here. That took a lot longer than I meant for it to. I thought it was
interesting because this is something that I look back on once in a while and think about because
my personality is a little different, my life is different, all that stuff.
And you're like, how much of that was LSD and how much was it other things?
I was expecting very little of it was, but I think it's likely that some of it could have been.
So that's why I wanted to bring that up. What episode was that in response to?
I think 36. Let me double check the email. Yep. 36, the other kind of drugs because I think the one
we had before that, Neutropics. Yeah. Episode 35 was Neutropics. I have one listener feedback.
Actually, I have two listener feedbacks, but the other, the second one is really long. So I'm
going to wait for that one until next week. I have a really short listener feedback from Simula
Crumpet, which says, Eneosh, your point about natural speed limit seems odd to me as people
construct roads. Often the government has it happens. And before I continue reading the rest of
the comment, yes, people construct roads, but the concept of a natural speed limit is like,
I actually know a civil engineer who I think is retired now. I'm not sure. I'll have to ask her
again. But roads are recognized to have a quote unquote natural speed limit, which is the limit
that drivers want to drive on a road based on how it's constructed. Roads that are wider,
that have large shoulders that are straight, that aren't on an incline all tend to lend themselves
to being driven on faster multiple lanes helps. If there's like a something solid in the median,
that you can not drive over that also helps. So all these things are things that give roads a
certain natural speed limit that feels the right speed to drive on a road on that this is a very
well known thing in civil engineering. And that is why I get really annoyed when there's a road
that it is very obvious everyone would be driving 40 to 45 on this. And the speed limit is set to
something like 30 so that the cops can just sit there and write tickets. I'm like, fuck you,
don't do that. There's a natural speed limit. And honestly, there used to not be defined speed
limits on roads, you know, people would just drive on what was the safe limit and cops would
sometimes patrol roads. And if someone was driving obviously too fast and recklessly,
they would pull them over because the cop knows what the space safe speed limit on road is too.
And this also changes with technology as cars get better and safer. And, you know,
can hug the road better can break better people take that into account. And so the natural speed
limit goes up. But that also leads to things like cops saying, Oh, I pulled you over because you
were driving at too fast of a speed, in my opinion, when it's someone they don't like,
right, is a racial minority, or does someone specifically they know, but it was used as a
tool for oppression. And now now having numbers, they can't say they were driving too fast,
they're driving 26 and 25, unless they're going to take it everybody that same way, right? Right.
So I mean, that kind of limited that. But then the cops just found other reasons to pull over
black people. Totally. Yeah. So the natural speed limit is also something that they're
trying to teach self driving cars. It's been one of the frustration points, because they started
out trying to teach self driving cars what the actual rules of the road said and then found out
that like, psychologically, nobody drives like that. The textbook rules of the road. That's
actually really interesting. I hadn't thought about that. But that's obviously got to be the case,
right? If you're going 75 in the interstate, and everyone else is doing 85, you're going to be a
dangerous risk. So that that's obviously true. But it didn't occur to me what legal hoops you'd
have to jump through to say, look, we're gonna have the car speed, but only when everyone else is
speeding. I guess, I guess it all has to come down to the numbers and say, look, my cars don't
crash. That was what Elon said a couple of times during the podcast he did with Joe Rogan,
where Rogan had asked if he'd seen that video of the guy falling like asleep, you know,
snoring at the wheel in traffic. And he was like, I've seen it. The cars don't let you do that
anymore. We put out an update. Now, if you don't just the wheel for a while, it slows down,
honks at you and pulls you over the side of the road. So wow. But I wish I could afford a Tesla.
But then he had said, Hey, you know what? At the very least, he didn't crash. Our cars don't
crash. Other cars crash. Ours don't crash. He has this way of kind of punctuating his little points
like that over and over. So it's awesome. Yeah. Continuing the comment, it seems like the winding
side road and the speed limit actually constrain your behavior in similar ways. And no, the winding
side road constrains it, you know, much more naturally where the speed limit is an artificial
limiter is my my counter to this. Anyways, similar crumpet asks if hypothetically, the
government removed all speed limits, but reconstructed the road. So driving speeds
didn't change. Would you prefer this? Yes, they have done that. Oh, God, yes. They've experimented
with the how happy they've taken away like stop signs, street lights and speed limits. And people
do naturally drive safer than they would otherwise. Well, oftentimes, even in really complicated
intersections, because people autopilot, but when they're forced to pay attention and look
around, see if there's pedestrians or actually communicate with other drivers, then they are
able to drive more safely, getting less accidents. I think that would actually probably slow down
the natural flow of traffic quite a bit, because one of the things that green lights and red lights
let us do is streamline that you don't have to pay as much attention and you can go faster
through these intersections. But but yes, I do think that if you want a road to be a 35 mile per
hour road, you engineer it to be a 35 mile per hour road. That's why suburbs, people who live
in the suburbs, or at least when I was a kid, I asked the suburbs, why the fuck are these streets
so windy? They go nowhere. Like what what is the purpose of this? The purpose is literally to make
people slow down and to not use the streets as shortcuts, because you just you don't do that
on those sorts of streets. That's exactly how I get to work. I take exclusively back roads,
other than this like quarter mile stretch. But I can't go 40 on those. I do go like 30. So yeah,
yeah, that that I mean, in your case, it's faster because the main roads are so clogged up that
going 30 on back roads is better than being on the main road. And I'm not the I'm not the only
person the way I discovered the the the rest of this back route was I saw it in my rear view mirror
like because I just moved to I don't know in May. And I was taking this new way I was trying to find
the you know, save a minute on my short commute to the train stop. And I saw three or four cars
in my rear view mirror turned on this side street that I'd only barely seen before. And I'm like,
they can't all be just live down there at eight in the morning, where are they all going? So I
went that way the next day and it led to where I usually looped back around to get to. Nice. But
yeah, I guess speed bumps are like another way to get around that, which is like, yeah, the road
straight, you could totally pedal the metal this and get up to 80 before you've got a turn. But
we're gonna put in these speed bumps to stop you lest you destroy your car. Yeah. So although I've
heard and I don't know if I've never verified this that speed bumps cost more lives than they save.
That sounds like something that's too easy to say. But I think the idea that emergency vehicles
can't barrel down the street towards your house is the is the argument that I heard. But this sounds
super made up now that sounds too simplistic. Yeah, it seems like that wouldn't that wouldn't
come into play very often. How often are emergency vehicles coming down your specific side street
to save you? And how do you measure how many lives they've saved? Was it saving lives because
it was like making the emergency vehicles arrive more slowly? I think that's what was costing lives.
And then the saving life aspect was like people are speeding less and hitting fewer people. Now
that I say that out loud, I'm actually glad I did because that sounds like a totally I'm guessing
that's a very wrong sound bite that I heard once and committed to memory and now I can throw out as
obvious garbage. So if anyone has any real numbers and that I'm curious, but all right, we should
wrap this up because it is over two hours and I'm gonna have a lot of editing to do. This is
Yunish interjecting after the fact we forgot to mention in the episode what the next two sequences
posts are. In two weeks, we will discuss the proper use of humility and the modesty argument.
Links to both posts will be included with this episode. You can get them, as always,
at our website, TheBaseinConspiracy.com. Before we go, I would like to thank our Patreon supporter.
We want to thank all our Patreon supporters actually. In the last over the last two episodes,
we have gotten like just a flood of support recently. And I mean, it's little amounts, but
just seeing all these people like wanting to support us and being like, Hey, we like your
thing has really made me feel happy over the past few weeks, because there was a long stretch of
period where we just didn't get new people. And now we just got what I call a flood. I think it was
like three from each episode of the past two episodes. That felt like a lot to me, you know,
and it just made me feel much happier. Yeah, I get the notifications on my phone and I see them
and it brightens my day. And it does mean, I don't know how to, I say this every time and I feel
awkward saying, because it's like, thanks for the money. And it is, but at the same time, it
it says something and it makes me feel odd in a way that you'll have to carefully edit that
people care about this enough to throw some money at it. So yeah, like I said, one of these days,
we'll put this towards, I think I would definitely benefit from a mic that I could walk around using.
I know that they make some nice Bluetooth ones that, you know, have a mic that attaches because
I don't sit still very well, as you might have noticed over the last couple of years.
I think much better when I'm on my feet. Yeah, so I when I'm on the phone, I pace all the time.
Maybe we should get both of you guys like some microphones. Yeah, get some of those pacing ones.
I've got one that work that I use that works really well. I haven't recorded on it. So I don't
know if it comes out really well, but it works great for phone calls at work. I might just
bring home and use that once in a while. The thing is, it doesn't come with a case and it's
$300 and I don't want to break it, but I'll find some careful way to get this thing home.
As a cheaper option, we could get those ridiculous bouncy balls.
Bouncy balls? The ones that you sit in, they're supposedly orthopedic. You're shaking your head,
Steven. I just wanted, I need to be up moving my feet, but I can't move my body in a bouncy ball.
That's true. And those are 15 bucks. So I had one of those ones. What did I do with it? I don't know.
My former coworkers never going to listen to this, but we all got bouncy balls at one point,
like kind of just to be like sarcastic, but he like fell off the bouncy ball and injured himself
and put a hole in the wall. So there you go. And then I've read a bunch of things about how
they're not actually like orthopedic. And I don't know. There's a lot of injuries related to them.
Holy shit. There's only one person at my office who uses them on the floor of about 100 people.
And I don't know them that well. So I won't point out like, Hey, this is a stupid idea.
But if they were on my team, I'd point that out. So I also want to point out that in the last episode,
we talked about Petrov Day. And we had a listener who wanted to remain anonymous,
send in a cool little picture that they made. Yeah. And it's on the episode description now.
Cool. So if you look at the description for last episode, it's, it shows up there. I also made
the picture for this week or this month's meetup on Facebook, but we can post on this episode too.
Yeah, let's do that. Yeah. But definitely check it out. It's fun.
Uh, so the, the Patreon supporter we want to specifically think this week is Lyric Lee.
Lyric Lee. Big shout out, big fan. Yeah. You're awesome person. Thanks, Lyric.
The person we know personally. Yeah. So this is more, more endearing sentiment to them because
I haven't known who they are. So high five. You rock. All right. And also thank you, Jess, for
coming in and being on mic with us today. I know this is, you know, a lot of time out of your day
and not exactly the easiest thing to do. So no, it's super fun. And I think it's important.
Like I have terrible stage fright slash social anxiety and I'm trying to push myself into doing
more things that will give me exposure therapy. This has been really like fun the two times that
I'm doing it and I'd like to be on again. Awesome. Thanks. Yeah, totally. And if this,
if the externality of you trying to better yourself as you accidentally making the show
awesome, then hey, we'll take it. Cool. All right. Thanks, everybody. And we'll see you in a couple
weeks. Boom. Bye. Bye.
