Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Manny Ashbrotsky. I'm Stephen Zuber.
With us today, we have Audrey McDowell. She is a teacher and she is on the podcast because
today we are going to talk about schooling and why it is terrible and nobody should ever
go to school.
We've got to work on your intros.
Yeah, I know.
I'm just trying to say something that'll get our host right away be like, hey, no, let's
talk about this because you're wrong about everything.
Well, I'm expecting that though.
Okay. So would you like to tell us a little bit about your background in teaching?
Sure. So it all didn't advance until I have a cold right now that I might be coughing.
I have been a teacher at a public charter school for two years now. Before that, I went to
St. Lawrence University and got my degree in English Literature and Teaching. While
there, I spent God knows how many contact hours in various classrooms from elementary
to middle to high school in the three different schools in New York and one school, a private
school actually in London, where I spent four weeks.
And so I have a decent background in working with kids of all ages and both teaching, test
prep, actually running tests with kids, project-based learning, Common Core, kind of the basics
there.
Excellent. So you have the new Common Core skills too, right? Because that was not in
school when I was around. Stephen, did you get any of the Common Core stuff?
I'm not 100% sure what Common Core was called back then or if that's what it was. What's
Common Core? Can you lay that down for me?
So Common Core is essentially a set of standards. There are some, I know that the big beep with
Common Core, a lot of people put on the internet is like, oh, they're teaching math this new
weird way. I don't know much about that. I teach English language arts and social studies.
And for me, and I use a mix of both the Common Core, which is the kind of the national standard
and then the Colorado State Standards. And the set of standards essentially say in sixth
grade, you learn X, Y, and Z in writing, in reading, in fiction and nonfiction. For example,
in social studies, sixth graders, they have a focus on like ancient civilizations and Western
civilizations. Seventh grade is Eastern SIB. And eighth grade is US history. And I know that
because I teach at my charter school, sixth, seventh, and eighth grade in a mixed classroom.
Okay. Well, the reason that we are having this podcast is because the podcast is specifically
aimed at the Bayesian rationalist community. And for, I don't know, almost as long as it's been
around, the community in general has kind of been looking sort of side eye at the whole schooling
system. I believe one of Robin Hansen's many refrains is that what is it? Schooling isn't
about education. And it has recently been coming up again, making the rounds. So we figured we
would talk about it this time. Do I basically got that right, Steven?
Yeah, I think the other reasons it's in the news is that SV wrote a post on it recently, I think
inspired by the chapter in Robin Hansen's new book, The Elephant and the Brain on Education. And
that was also related to Brian Kaplan's new book, The Case Against Education. And I'm sorry,
Audrey, I missed it. What age group did you teach?
Sixth, seventh, and eighth graders. So that's middle school.
Awesome. I just wanted to check if I get that count later.
Should we, I guess, lay down first with the common Bayesian, or not Bayesian, sorry,
the common rationalist opinion is about, or at least what the discussion has been recently,
about education. And then Audrey can, you know, tell us what she thinks from an inside view from
the education scene. Yeah, that's fine. I also want to disclose that I'm a big fan of teachers in
general. My answer teacher, and I don't think anyone's down on teachers or the enterprise,
I think it's the, like, quote, industry, unquote. And I think the main argument is basically that
schools aren't really what they're, their real purpose isn't actually tied to what they say they
do, or what they say they're for, that it's not so much about like educating people and training
them for jobs in the, like, the most palatable sense. I think it's, like, the cases, the arguments
against there are like, kids, or students, rather, don't learn a lot that's actually applicable to,
like, real life, or whatever job they're looking to do, even like in college. The stuff that's taught,
or rather, they're not taught things that apply to that. The stuff that they're taught
is often, like, quickly forgotten and not retained. And, oh, there was a third part,
I had this all organized. I got a little, little shuffled there before we got on the call. So,
sorry about that. Anya, she take over. Okay, I would like to also say that I do like the enterprise
of teaching. I really liked all my teachers. I really liked most of my teachers when I was going
to school. And I, I enjoy teaching, like I have three younger siblings. And, you know, I remember
teaching them about, like, the basic physics of how a seatbelt will save your life one day,
which was really fun by strapping an egg into a roller skate and rolling it into a wall.
That, so I kind of wanted to be a teacher up until the point where I didn't want to go to
college anymore. And I couldn't get a teaching job without a degree or some sort of, you know,
formal training in that. So defaulted to accounting. But the major problems with
education as they're set forth is that a lot of schooling does not seem to be about
really teaching people. And I think this was most aptly demonstrated, demonstrated recently when
Washington DC announced that they were going to have to start flunking a third of their kids
every year. Or was it more than a third of their kids? It was basically it was drastically increased
in number of kids they have to flunk, simply because they are now going to start enforcing
some of the standards that they have. And the standards are basically along the lines of if
a kid is 15 minutes late for a period, he counts as gone for the whole day. And if a kid has more
than 20% absences in a school year, then he has to be flunked. And a lot of kids in high school
there take their younger siblings to their schools first and show up late to their first period.
And so they are automatically flunked in a lot of classes. And this led to various observations
along the lines of, you know, the kids aren't really being brought there to learn in so much as
they are being corralled as a place to be kept during the day, and to be taught things like
conformity and submission, which is what employers mainly want. And on top of all that,
I think one of my major complaints about school is that I believe it's lots of times actively
psychologically harmful to people. It is socially it is almost a prison like environment, the way
the kids are set up. And I think it's in large part due to the fact that their their main criteria
is, are you there or not? The test is, you know, do you accept this as a makeshift prison for eight
hours a day? And that seems to be the most important things as long as you show up, you get kicked out
the door. And like Steven was saying, a lot of the things that kids are taught, they don't return
or retain, and they aren't really applicable. I remember seeing a statistic along the lines of
during the three months of summer vacation, kids lose like half of what they learned during the
year. And that also led to speculation like, is this because they are being taught things they
aren't ready for? Or is it a matter of, because kids are kids are just being taught to the test
to guess the teacher's password in the parlance of the rationalist community. And over the summer,
they forget the teacher's password. Is it due to fraud because their grades are being inflated at
the end of the year, so they can get moved on. And then they're kind of deflated at the beginning
of the year, so that it'll look like they've progressed more throughout the course of a year.
There's there's a lot of questions, but a lot of what the speculation comes down to is that,
look, this thing really isn't all that handy. And unless you're teaching kids to conform,
and it just seems like that is my experience too. Like I learned a lot of things in high school,
but those were all things that I really wanted to learn. And the things that I was forced to learn,
I have forgotten, even the things that I wanted to learn, I basically never used in my life,
I just really enjoyed learning them. And I would have, I would have learned them anyway,
if I had access to some sort of teachers. But the fact that everyone else in school was forced
to be there and resented being there, made it a really uncomfortable environment. And I don't
think children should be forced to be in such settings if they have better things to do with
their time. I'm sorry for that long rant there. So a lot of the things that you guys are bringing
up are quite valid and come more from the administration and the governmental standpoint,
than from the education standpoint. And this is not just speaking as a, because I basically
have a teacher's dream job. I can teach however I want. I have very small classroom size. I get to
plan a spring trip to take the kids on. In fact, we're leaving on Sunday to Kansas City.
That being said, I have visited and worked in plenty of other schools where the focus has
been shifting. And that's the good news is that educators are pushing back. Educators,
we go to school and we want to teach the content because we love it. I'm an English teacher because
I love literature. But we also want to teach applicable skills. And that's what I've been
focusing on. In fact, my last professional development class was about, they call it the
foresees, which is creative thinking, collaboration, communication, and critical thinking,
creativity, critical thinking, collaboration, communication. And that's being implemented
in classrooms across the country. And in terms of getting students, because those are the more
marketable skills, those are the skills that will actually help you become a lifelong learner.
That's the goal of most teachers, most people who are in the education business to educate,
is to help kids become lifelong learners. And that's why you have fond memories of your teachers.
And lastly, administration is also sort of making that move. I visited a public school
district in Westminster last year, which has shifted to the same style of learning that my
school uses, which is proficiency based, rather than your graded ABCD or on a 4.0 scale. You're
getting on proficiency. You show proficiency through doing the work, showing that you've mastered
a topic. And by mastering it, if that's not just spurting back the content, that's using the skills,
you have to be able to research, you have to be able to compile information, you have to be
able to write or speak about it. So that that's the good news is that a lot of places are trending
towards moving towards those skills. You say, well, kids forget it. Yeah, kids forget content.
We do too. Everyone does. Our brains don't have the space for all of it. I was a wonderful math
student. I've gone to Calc 2 by the end of high school. I can't remember how to do algebra now
because I've not used it in six years. But the more we use those skills, the more they happen.
And the summer slide happens, even if you're not teaching to the test. My co-teacher and I,
there's only two middle school teachers. He teaches math and science. I teach ELA and social
studies. We see the summer slide happen every year with almost every kid because most of them,
when they go off to summer, they don't do any academics. Their parents don't have them read
every night. They don't practice math. So these skills I have to often reteach. Here's how you
write an essay to kids who've done it with me for two years. And they're just like, oh, yeah,
I remember this now. Doesn't that mean though that writing an essay really isn't an important skill?
Well, the point of writing an essay, it's not about here's how, you know, you have to write about
the Lord of the Flies or whatnot. It's how do you take the information in your head and put it on
paper, which is a skill. You as, you know, you're on Facebook, you wanted to get this podcast together,
took you a skill, notice that here's the information I have to get across. Here's the order I'm going
to put it in. And here's how I'm going to make my sentences flow and cohesive. That's what you
were trying to teach with the essay writing or with the world reports is that in many modern
jobs, you have to do some sort of writing, some sort of oral report or presentation,
customer service, you have to be able to talk to people. That's part of the collaboration,
group work. So a lot of things assignments that we do, it's not you have to write an essay because
essays are important. You have to write an essay because the skills you're building to write it
are important. I've seen a lot of distinction being made on really all the posts I've been
reading lately between schooling and education, where the argument is that schooling is, you know,
at most, or is more of a signaling game where you're showing off rather than being taught very
much, like I can afford to sit in school and focus on just one thing for this eight hours,
I'll make a great employee. And whereas education is more about learning things and that the argument
being made is that schooling is not required for education due to, I mean, lots of kids who want to
learn things will simply learn things. The best way to learn reading for most kids is to play,
well, not anymore now that there's voice acting, but it was to play video games that required
reading because then all of a sudden they were really motivated to learn how to read. I have
learned almost everything that I have wanted to do by myself with the, you know, I think right
about sixth grade was the point where schools stopped being like really useful. Everything
before that like basic literacy and numeracy was really important and laid a good foundation,
but everything after was just fun stuff that I enjoyed learning. And I'm appreciative for that,
I really enjoyed it. But I don't think I think that anyone who wants to learn something will be
self motivated to educate themselves. And that's the best way to learn and forcing them to go to
school can like beat the joy of learning out of them. I work with middle schoolers every day of my
life pretty much. Even kids who are self motivated still have to learn how to learn. I work with
some amazingly self motivated intelligent driven eighth graders. And they still have to do the
steps in order to learn how to learn. You may have had a knack for it or an innate talent. I did
too. I was a very easy learner. Things came to me very, very easily. But a lot of these kids have
to work. They have to, they have to put the effort in in order to gain those skills. And they are
skills. And then they have to practice them over and over and over. You know, you say, well,
writing essays, what's the point of that? When I went to college in my first year, we were all
required to take a class that was basically writing essays one on one, because every class
required essay writing, even in the sciences and the STEM. And there's a lot of kids who did not,
who really struggled with that because in their schooling, I will say that they didn't practice
it much. They, they really did not learn that skill. I did. And so I had the advantage. And so
the repetition and then growing the depth is what is important. And the depth of the learning will
lead to the lifelong learning. You're lucky, not as good as that lucky. And some kids take a while
to become motivated. Some of them are really intelligent, but they just they're not motivated
until something clicks. And that happens because their brains are still developing.
The prefrontal cortex, the very front of their brain is the last thing to develop.
In fact, it's really not done developing until you're about 25 years old. And so the stuff that,
you know, we make a decision, oh, it's, we decide, I'm going to sit down and put the time into this.
They don't have that sort of decision making that they are very impulsive. That's, that's why kids,
we look at them and say, why are you making this dumb decision? They don't think through
so they don't think through the consequences. And so the same thing applies to education.
We think, well, it's obvious. If you want to learn, you just sit down and learn. But to them,
they don't put the pieces together. They don't realize, if I don't sit down and do, you know,
learn how to learn now, then I'm going to struggle later. They don't put the pieces together.
And so they need help to get there. Some of them do it faster than others.
I think I wanted to add a couple of things to that, that, yeah, just, just adding on that point
that I think a lot of kids can be like motivated to learn on their own and, you know, pick up
what they're interested in. But I think like the example that you had of, you know, being good at
writing essays from school and then having to do it in college. So school trained you well for school
in that particular regard. But like, you know, and then I guess in your professional life,
you're also probably writing essays or something because you're close to that system. But so like
the other thing that people in their rationality circles say that school is for is like domesticating
humans in the sense that our ancestors wouldn't have been good at. And we can, we can look at that
by like seeing what happens when people moved factories to other countries that didn't have
the same sort of education system. Getting somebody to sit down and do something that they
don't really want to do for eight hours a day doesn't come naturally to us. People rebel at that.
So getting good at that in school and picking up the skills to like do a job, even if it's not
what you're particularly driven to do, it's something that school does. And I don't think
that that's a negative thing, at least for people who want jobs and don't have the luxury of like
finding their dream job, right? Because then, you know, if your work feels like work and you have to,
you know, clock in and do stuff like everybody else, having a 15 year or so period or however
long kids are in school, 12, I guess K through 12, and then some college or whatever, having practice
going by a schedule, you know, like I've had lots of jobs and almost all of them make me come in at
a certain time, I could take a break for a certain amount of time at lunch or, you know, between or
in the middle of the day or something. If the workplace is the first time you're exposed to
sort of an environment, people would freak out. And in fact, do I think that Hansen talks about
some of those cases, and I bet they're in Kaplan's book, which I haven't read. But like I said, I think
that there's one, you can put a nasty spin on that and say, see, it's just about, you know,
corralling people and breaking them. But I don't think that that's, that's not what I'm trying to
say. I think it's just an important facet of the system, but one that people don't really talk about.
I just want to backpedal for a second. I think in the introduction, you know, I should use the
phrase, guessing the teacher's password. I was wondering if you wanted to explain what that was
and if we could get audience feedback on that. Oh, sure. It's a, well, it kind of is what it
sounds like where the students don't necessarily know the reason behind what's happening. They just
know what the student wants to hear. I think Feynman gave an example of this when he was,
oh God, it was such a complicated example now that I can't recall exactly what it was. It was
something about the light coming in from outside and bouncing off a lake. And he was asking the
students in his class if they could use this as a way of determining the polarization of the light.
And they all looked at him blankly and he said something about the, you know, light moving
through an index of refraction. And they like immediately jumped up and like recited word
for word exactly what, what, you know, all the physics terms applicable. And then he was like,
well, water is an index of refraction, you can use this knowledge to figure out which way the
light is polarized. And I'm, I'm murdering this example because I don't remember the details.
But they, they never put those two together. And this was new information to them. So a lot of
school seems to be like figuring out what your teacher wants to hear and then giving that to the
teacher. And that is since it's not that valuable of a skill when you are not interacting with the
teacher, it tends to fade. And I actually, I, I was a bit of a teacher's pet as a kid. So I loved
guessing the teacher's password. I would write like the most exquisite essays and get awesome
grades on them. But I, when I am not dealing with a teacher as I haven't in two decades now,
I don't use that skill. I don't, you know, you don't really use essay writing in the business
world at all. You want to get your point across quickly and with as little fuss as possible.
I don't know. There's, I mean, I'm not saying it's a useless skill, but I think
a lot of people say they want education. And I think there's better ways to get it than the
school system we have right now. Have you, are you familiar with the unschooling movement at all?
Not really. I'm sure if you define it, I will recognize people in my community who are moving
towards that. Oh, yeah. You live in a cool little hippie commune up there. Yeah.
Odd reason Crestone, which is like one of the most hippie places here in Colorado. It's kind of
neat. Unschooling is when you pull your kids out of school and basically just let them do whatever.
Like you don't even do homeschooling really. I mean, you say you do homeschooling,
but the kids run around and play and educate themselves. I'm sorry. Go ahead.
We call those feral kids. Okay. We have them. We have them here.
Do you find that they tend to learn the things that they're interested in?
No, absolutely not. When those kids come into the to the charter school, they have very few
skills that they can use in order to learn. They've learned that they can get away with
things that they want. They've learned that they don't have to hold to any sort of schedule.
They learned that they don't have to really respect. It's actually really difficult with
those children sometimes. And that's not in the, well, we're the authority and you have to sit
down. We all are here to learn. And because we're all here to learn, you kind of had to sit down
and shut up for a little bit so I can help you begin to learn with everyone else. So those kids
really do struggle when they come into school. I've had two where kids went and quote unquote
homeschooled for a year or two and they're always behind academically, always. Now the
those who are inclined to learn and want to learn and were stifled learning,
they catch up really quickly. I have a couple of students in my classroom who came in pretty
far behind. They're motivated and so they caught up because they wanted to and they're even ahead
in some areas and it's awesome to see. But they were definitely handicapped when they first
gone to the school. Now that's also they all homeschooling is inferior and bad.
But the homeschooling that these kids had was. And then kind of to backtrack to Stephen's point
a little bit about the learning how to keep a schedule and whatnot. In my school, it's actually
kind of difficult for a lot of the kids, especially because in previous years, we were a very, very
loosey goosey school, whatever goes your heart tells you that you have to, you know, you just
can't do it today. So you're going to sit in the corner and blah. And so my co-teacher and I had to
work really hard to instill a schedule because most jobs, most things have a schedule. If you
say, even if you're a stay at home mom, your kid has a schedule, you have to keep up with the
feedings, get the grocery, get the cleaning, all that stuff. It's there's things that we had to
keep up with in our world. And there's another plan is going to make and it's slipping off here.
You mentioned, you mentioned the kids that love to learn that even if they were raised
feral when they come in, they catch up pretty quickly. Like in my opinion, the ideal kind of
school would be one where teachers are available and they teach, but attendance isn't mandatory.
Like what do you do with the kids who are forced to be there and don't want to be there? Because in
my experience, that was what made school really crappy was those students. Yeah. And it depends
on the severity of that students dislike. And here's what I say about kids who don't like school.
Oftentimes they don't like school because of the back strength of the teacher or they are,
oftentimes they're not challenged enough. And that is a failing both in administration and
on certain educators, because I will not, they're their teachers out there who come in, they get
the paycheck, they don't want to, they don't want to interact with the kids. They don't want to be
part of that. And that's a problem. I think a big part of fixing education is getting good educators
in that that's a big help. That being said, even with inspired, really engaged educators,
there's going to be kids who do not want to be there. So in my classroom, I have some kids who
are not quite the most motivated, they don't really want to work, but they're there. They do
put effort in. A big part of their schooling or their education is the social aspect, is the
aspects of, oh, pops into my head on the subject. And a couple of big things that are coming into
the education world now, things like grit and failing forward, which are life skills. Grit is,
I have to go in and I have to do this job, even if I don't like it, I have to get a paycheck, blah,
that's the kind of survival, do what you have to do and keep moving on, even if you feel defeated.
And then the failing forward is a similar concept. So those kids who may be not so academically prone
or so interested in the academics, they're still learning some of these other skills. My school
calls them core values. They're still learning the core values. So even though they may not be
very good at discussing the crucible, they can at least learn other things that they can then
take into further education, whatever path education lies. Now, there are children who
unfortunately need a lot of outside help before school is the right place for them. I have a
student in my classroom who has certain behavior disorders. And even with teachers who really
weren't there, we give them our all. The student is unwilling to learn, uncompromising. They blow
up the classroom. In fact, the student is no longer in my classroom. He sits out with his computer
and does computer work because otherwise he completely disturbs everything in the room.
And that sucks. It's something that I didn't think I would encounter this early in my teaching
career. This is the sort of thing where we have to help the student as a whole child before we
can ever get him into academics. And there's students like that across the country, students with
home lives that are completely distracted and they can't focus on things. Students who are on the
streets, students with a myriad of situations that we can't control for in the schools. And so no,
they're not going to be into education. And that's valid. And that's some societal things that have
to be fixed along with the education. But with the majority of kids who, even if they're not
quite into the whole school thing, they'll be engaged in certain parts of the day, they'll be
engaged with certain lessons or in things. It always kind of brings this smile when I have kind
of the students who aren't really into ELA, but they get into a conversation all of a sudden or
they really get into some simulation or other. And most good teachers are going to expand their
repertoire. They can expand the types of lessons that they're teaching and the content and the
skills that we're building to try to hit all the kids at least a little bit. The kids who want to
be there and into everything, you're going to hit them all the time. The kids who aren't, you're
maybe only going to reach them sometimes, but at least you're going to give them something to kind
of cling on to, to want to continue in education. I don't know if you can answer this in a public
way, since we are going to be recorded and put out on the internet and you are a teacher.
So if you can't, that's all right and we'll move on. But I'm wondering, I guess from both of you,
what do we do about the fact that some people just shouldn't be in school? Because I'm okay
with them not going to school, but that also means they get left behind by society. And
you can't really, I guess you could get a job even without a high school degree if our society
was structured a little bit better. I mean, a kid should be able to go and get an apprenticeship
with a carpenter or a plumber or an electrician at 14, because at 14, you're old enough to learn
those things and go into the working world, but we don't let them and I think that's pretty fucked up.
How many 14-year-olds have you interacted with lately, Nyash?
Lately? Not many, but I remember I was working with my dad when I was 14.
I think you're painting a rosy picture of 14-year-olds.
Again, remember the brain thing I was talking about? Yeah.
If 14-year-olds are capable of learning that stuff, but they are not capable of the
responsibility of holding that position. Now, apprenticeships, I agree with. In fact,
my school has mentorships where students learn various skills from various mentors around
the community. Some of them are more valuable than others, but I teach 14-year-olds. That's
the talent of eighth grade is 14-year-olds. They're not ready to enter the working world.
Now, can, well, go on. And are they ready to take some jobs? You know, working with family,
because I do have kids who work in their parents' restaurants, who work manual jobs. In fact, last
summer, I hired one of my 14-year-olds to watch the house, like the kind of kid jobs that a lot
of us are familiar with. They do that and they're building that stuff up. A full-on apprenticeship
or the working world, I don't think so. I think that their education would have to extend a little
bit longer in a very structured, very scaffolded environment. We have to give them ways to fail
without heavy consequences. That's a big benefit of school, is that for most kids,
they can fail, they can funk a little bit, and there's not going to be serious real-world consequences.
If we kick them out of the working world, then all of a sudden they're part of their parents
paying for the bills. They're part of all these responsibilities that should not be put on them.
They are not developed enough yet. They may look old enough. They may sometimes even
emotionally act old enough, but they are not. I agree with you on that matter, but I don't
think people are really fully grown up until they're in their early to mid-30s anyway,
and people before the industrial age started taking on adult responsibilities and supporting
themselves and their families at ages like 14. I think it's illegal for a reason because it's
just not right. Kids should have a childhood. Why would we put them in the working world at 14
if they're going to be working until they're 60 anyway? Let them have another five or six years
of freedom before we make them be a part of that drudgery. They're going to be 40 years.
See, I don't consider being forced to go to school as a gift that we're giving to anyone.
I would imagine a lot of kids around that age would much rather tool around with a car or something
than be forced to come in and be basically in a prison environment where they are forced to sit
and just endure hours that they don't want to be there. They're not getting anything out of them.
They can't socialize with anyone. I mean, it's no wonder they're miserable in school,
and they make other people miserable too. I would also be miserable.
I think just taking a step back is like there's a difference between
like a 14-year-old bagging my groceries and one repairing the engine of my car. I'll trust
a 14-year-old or whatever, a 15 or however old they want to be to help me out at a grocery store,
but not to fix my car. He's not going to be fixing your car by himself. It's under a apprenticeship
program where he's there with another guy and not making very much. He's still basically living
at home with his parents. He's being paid in the skills that he's learning as he's working.
Sure. Then I think there's an alternative there that a lot of people take, which is
people don't finish school or they finish high school. I mean, getting a high school degree
doesn't really open any doors for anybody anymore anyway, but you can do like trade
schools after. I got a useless degree in psychology and never did anything with it,
then went and got into a coding boot camp and now do that for a living.
Many of our generations offer automotive courses and stuff to get a trade degree kind of thing
or that sort of thing. I guess I was just wanting to just not get too bogged down in
a specific example and just point out that there are other avenues to go down that sort
of alleviate some of these concerns maybe. I think that's mainly what I'm coming down on,
is that I think education is a great thing, but I think schooling is not necessarily the same
thing as education and schooling is not necessarily right for everyone. I think our society is kind
of fucked up in the way that it forces everyone to go to school. Like you said too, you asked,
what do we do with kids who shouldn't be in school? How you define that is going to be tough,
but maybe somebody who just couldn't go to school. I was almost in that camp. I was in
trouble a lot, especially in elementary and junior high. I got bored and I would just go for Allen
drive and do whatever it was and I would make a mess and make a ruckus and stuff. I don't know
how many lines I'd have to cross where someone kicked me out of school, but that wouldn't suck.
Leaving aside the problem of how you define that line, there's also the problem that it's not like
a line where the kids on this side aren't good for school, the kids on this side are,
because let me rephrase that. Maybe the kids who are good for school are in a box and there's all
different kinds of places to be outside that box. If you're not good for one kind of school,
you might be good for another kind, but you can't set up institutions for every kind of
non-typical learner or something. Right. Well, yeah, there's many ways to get an education.
A lot of our generation's greatest programmers dropped out of high school.
One of the things I'm worried about is that in the modern society, the way it's set up,
if you don't have a certain amount of both education and on top of that, just raw intellect,
if you don't meet a certain minimum level, you're basically unemployable and it's creeping up every
year. In a hundred years from now, even unless you're in the top 10% intellectually, it may be
that 90% of the human population simply cannot be economically employed in any useful field.
And what do we do then? Now I feel like we're getting to our field. That doesn't really relate to
the education system. Okay, that's true. Sorry. That's just like we're all flocks in 50 years.
And that's probably true no matter what. That's not relating to whether or not it makes sense to
make high school kids read Shakespeare or something, right? Right. Or whatever other thing.
So Girona, I'm enjoying where you're going when I feel like we're getting to our field and I don't
want to leave the vaudry. What do you think? Is this something you want to talk about?
I mean, we can look at many different models of the future and where we could go,
but if we look at the trend, education, more and more people are getting an education.
Now that's not to say that there are people left behind. When I was in college, I read a book about
a woman and her child, her whole family, and they're a white family living near the Appalachians.
They're illiterate. And the book was about the author trying to teach mother and son how to read.
It's absolutely heartbreaking because the mother, they're trying to learn how to read because she
realized how little she had and how few opportunities she had by not having this.
And then they got in fights with her husband because he was illiterate and proud of it almost.
And it was like a societal thing with their family. And here's the thing, I'm an educator.
My goal is to give as much, impart as much education as I can to as many as I can. And
that's the trend with education. We're trying educators, not just across the country, but
internationally. And the administrations are starting to hop on it too. They're trying to
alleviate these problems of it's a prison. We're not actually teaching them. They're not taking
this into it. It's just basically keeping count of the young citizens in our country.
And there are people out there absolutely who really aren't going to do well in education.
They're not going to do well in high school. They're not going to go to college. They may even
drop out of high school. If you ask the Audrey, look at your class, can you point out any of your
students that really are going to benefit much of education? I say, yep, that one there. He's
not motivated. They're content doing something that doesn't require an education for their life.
And that's fine. But to say, well, some people are bored. Some of them are acting out. Some of
them aren't getting anything out of it. So let's scrap the whole thing. It's absolutely ridiculous.
Graduation rates are rising. People go into college. The numbers are rising.
The trend is positive. I was just looking before we hopped on here some essays that people wrote
about education and how it looks in 2030. And they're looking at statistics and the trends and
what education means and how we're trying to implement it. And people are really a lot of
teachers and a lot of schools are trying to make the move from what you call schooling
to education. It is highly valued. And making that move will inevitably leave some people behind.
That's what happens in a society. Not everyone's going to be on the same wavelength. But education,
the more we can provide the more different things. I say with apprenticeships, let's keep them in
school, let's have them do academics in the mornings, send them off to the apprenticeship
in the afternoon. Maybe they have two different ones every week so they can get a feel for the
different fields out there, the different trades. I'm all for access to higher education,
be it trade school, online, college, whatever we do. The more education someone has,
the more opportunities that open up in front of them. That's just the reality of the society
we live in today. I was also looking at statistics in terms of education versus annual salary or
income. And it's true. The higher education, the more likely the higher income. And that's not
all the way across the board. I'm a teacher in rural Colorado. I make very little money.
And I have a bachelor's degree. That didn't hold true in terms of the trend. But I had
opportunities. I didn't have to pursue teaching. I could have done so much else with the education
I have. A lot of people I talked to who have either, they've graduated high school and they've
gone into college, but they didn't put a degree or they didn't get to go to college.
They lament that they wanted a higher education. Again, that's not speaking for every human being.
There are those who aren't going to want it. Whether I don't, I still think 14 is too young
because I work with 14 year olds. I know them. I see how they act. I have them. I have some 14
year old eighth graders who think they're ready for high school and they go up and they all strut
about like, I'm in high school. Like, no, you're not. And the way you act, it's very, very clear.
My boyfriend teaches tech to the high schoolers and actually he teaches tech to K-12, but it's
a K-12 school. And seeing the eighth graders next to the high schoolers, it's a clear difference in
maturity and ability to sit still and focus on a task that they're interested in.
Because they love it. They love technology. They love science. They don't have the same
capacity as the 10th grade or 11th grader to sit and work on a plane for an hour and a half and
fiddle around with all the things. They're excited by the idea of it, but they don't do the work.
And that's just the degree of maturity. I have a question for you. I recall that middle school was
the worst of all the schooling years by far. And you just said that the eighth graders like are
unable to sit and focus, whereas the 10th graders don't have a problem with it.
Unless this is something that was somehow, I don't want to say beaten into them, but
taught to them in two years of schooling, do you think this is something that they learned
in two years? Or do you think more of a biological thing where they just grew up and matured to that
point in between eight and 10th grade where they could now do this? It's a mix. It's a mix.
So part of it is that the 10th grade just has the capacity to focus more.
Our middle score is we give them 10 minute breaks between each of the morning classes.
We have three morning classes. We have a 10 minute break between each of those.
They have recess still. We make sure to give them PE because they are. They have high energy.
They're emotionally, socially, still maturing, absolutely. They have the capacity to sit still.
If you walk into my classroom, and this is just between my classroom and my co-teachers,
you walk into my classroom during study hall. Everyone is silent. They're working quietly.
They're studious for an hour. They're working. They're walking to the other teacher's classroom,
and things are bouncing off the walls. It's science. It's not just my personality versus
my co-teachers and the way we run our classrooms. Now, that's not to say they're always silent
all the time. We do lots of different activities in my classroom, but the kids, that space is a
quiet space because I'm a quiet person, usually. I didn't purposely carve it out to be that way.
It just became that. I played some nice soundtracks while the kids were working,
and maybe lots of reading, and lots of note-taking. That's just the thing that I did.
Those same two eighth graders can sit in my classroom for an hour and work studiously.
Part of it is when they go upstairs, it's like physically changing places in the building,
changes the way they act. Part of that, I think, is just the excitement. They want to be in high
school, which is awesome, because they want to be there. They're bouncing. They get back in
their bouncy stage. I don't think that's two years of sit still and do nothing, because honestly,
the high schoolers are out doing. We see them running around more often than our kids are
in that building. I think it's just a case of personalities and spaces. Space actually has
a big thing. That's actually part of my professional development, is looking at
remastering classroom spaces. You have a space for conversation. You have a space for discussion.
You have a space for group work. You have a space for quiet time. Not all of us are
blessed with huge classrooms in order to make those spaces, but the spaces moving from one
place to another, even within one classroom, can actually help get your brains in certain modes.
I think probably it's just their brain mode. They're eighth graders. They're still not
as developed as a 16-year-old. Do you think the eighth graders would do better to
have some other form of schooling then, until they get to the point where it's easier for their
biology with their brain structure to sit down and do the more studious kind of work that comes
more naturally to a 16-year-old? No. I just said that they can do it very, very well.
When I say that they're emotionally, socially, what not less mature, their brains less developed,
that's just in the general, the way they act and the way they behave. Now,
I'm a middle school teacher. I hated middle school. I was unchallenged. I skipped eighth grade. I
wanted to get out of there. I hated middle school. When I went to become a teacher, I was like,
no, I'm not going to teach middle school. I hated it. I wanted to teach high school. Then they
placed me in middle school classroom, and I loved it because here's the thing with middle
schoolers is they still have the energy and the excitement elementary kids have, but they also
started to develop their own ability to think independently and think critically. They're at
that sweet spot between elementary and high school where, yes, they can sit down and study,
but they can also, you can really get them excited about something.
People say, you can't teach the crucible to middle schoolers. You can't teach Lord of the
Flies. Those are high school texts. I taught both of those to my middle schoolers because I know that
they're mentally capable of it. Did they need my help to understand a lot of it? Oh, absolutely.
Were they fired up? Oh, yeah. The kids were out there during Lord of the Flies going,
sucks to your a**mar and quoting from the book. Almost like, can we just leave us for a day
when Lord of the Flies is up? And we're like, no, because we're really responsible for you.
Well, the kids, they, and that's not to say high schoolers don't have that, but high
schoolers, especially in this day and age with the internet, they have a degree of cynicism
that the middle schoolers don't have yet. So the middle schools are the sweet spot where,
if we ask them to sit down and be quiet and focused for an hour and really put good work in,
they will. And man, they produce such good work. I should send you some of their short stories with
their names redacted sometime because they are absolutely incredible. I wish I'd recorded,
we did a model UN about climate change a couple of weeks ago. They were into it. They did the
research and they really put forth time and effort so they could talk with the other nations and make
deals. And then of course, they got really excited about it. And then they were like, no, you
betrayed us, Russia. You're low for this resolution. And they, they, they can be students, but they
can also be excited about it. And that's a, actually a fight that the high school teacher,
who is just as inspired and energetic as I am, she's really struggling with the high schoolers
because part of their being so quiet is they're also kind of surly. And they are very resentful
of the school environment. And she's trying to do everything she can to bring them back into it
and have the fun, engaging learning. And it's, it takes time. It takes lots of good teachers,
lots of years in a row for kids to get there. But I absolutely think if we have that, if we have
the ducks in a row, if we have the good teaching practices, which the teacher password, that's
bad teaching practice. And none of the teachers I work with do that because it's bad practice.
When I say the summer slide, that's not me and my co-teacher standing up in the front of the
room going, tell us what you remember. We have a, it's not really standardized tests, but we have
what's called the NWA map testing. And it could take it three times a year, once in the fall,
the winter and the spring. And it studies their growth and it looks at where their holes are and
where we can fill those in. It's pretty stress-free. You know, the kids sit down and they do it and
they're fine. It's not a stressful test. It's data for us to see where they're going. And that's how
we can see the summer slide. And then we don't teach that to that test. I have no idea what's on it.
I teach what I teach. And usually because I teach skills, I teach the kids how to,
how to research, how to read, how to analyze, how to understand what they're reading.
Because that's the important part of ELA. It's not, you have to read Shakespeare and understand it.
It's you have to read and understand what they're saying to you. Look at the bias. Look at the,
you know, look at the author's tactics. Are they using fallacies? Are they using these sort of
literary language in order to try to persuade you? Because especially with the internet nowadays,
with so many people spouting so much stuff to read, they have to learn how to sit through the
bullshit. I have, I have two questions for you, if you wouldn't mind. Then I have three.
And then you have three. Okay. Do you want to do yours first or?
Well, first one's more of a correction.
Audrey, I just realized I think I called you to autumn at least twice. All I see on Skype is AV.
And when I move my mouse, I see Enya Sparadski and then AU on the top. And the only other I need
AU I know is an autumn. So sorry if I called you the wrong name. I apologize for that.
And if I do it again, don't hesitate to call me out on it.
The question was going to just be, I think just out of high note, I imagine that anybody,
I guess rather many people in the US who are listening to this are going to hear your style
of teaching and be crazy jealous. Because I think that the way that, unless, I mean, I just
realized I graduated 10 years ago, which makes me feel super old. But unless things have changed
a lot in the last decade, I think the way that you're doing it is highly atypical, super desirable
and awesome. But I think it's rare. Would you agree with that? So the way I'm teaching, and that's
the big reason I'm teaching at the school I am, is because I have ultimate freedom. Every teacher
that I work with or have talked to, they want to teach this way. They want this. Now, I teach
to standards. You know, you can ask me what standards are you doing? And I can point out what
ones we're doing. And fortunately, a lot of districts are turning away from the common core.
What's the word? Script, which I actually, I have taught that before. I've taught
common core both with the script and then going off script, if you will. And a lot of districts
allowing teachers to teach the content, but their own way. So it's been kind of a weird decade in
that we're trying to figure out how to have standards and how to have standardized education
while not stifling the educators. And I think, again, I'm an optimist, but I think positive
trends. Teachers are being given some more leeway now as we go on. But almost every teacher that
wants to be in that built in those buildings, they want to teach the way I teach.
Okay, yeah, that's that's sort of the answer I expected. But I'm happy to hear that it's it
seems like it's getting more and more common. Because I mean, a lot of the
my memory of childhood, it's pretty fuzzy. But I mean, I remember just a lot of like covering
the same material in history class for like five years, you know, just start, you know,
basically, we do like a few weeks on, you know, pre American history, then the rest was just like
whatever, revolutionary war throughout World War One. And we just do that every year with
different teachers. It was weird. And I think I went to what's considered a good high school.
And my high school history teacher, I guess, didn't totally break that trend. He was awesome.
But did you observe? Yeah, I guess I did you observe the same sort of thing in the public
schools where you were observing or teacher assisting Ting or wherever you were doing,
or were those more less ideal? So it depends on the school I was in. And a couple of the schools
in upstate New York, it was more that teachers had the freedom in the school I student taught in,
they actually kind of used me as a guinea pig, because they would just get in the scripts for
Common Core. So I taught one class by the script and the other class, where I took the script,
and I cut it up, and I repasted it and did what I wanted with it. And I basically reported back
to my cooperating teacher and said, Here's what I did and how I did it. And here's how effective
it was. And she took that back to the administration. I think that they're not on script. They were
kind of in that gray area if they weren't sure how to implement the Common Core yet.
In the schools I visited in Westminster, they absolutely were trying because they were trying
to get the proficiency based learning. So they and they're much, much bigger school and school
district. There are limits. Now, part of the reason I can do what I do is because I have
12 kids in my two classes. And so it's a lot easier to do it with a fair number of kids.
That being said, there are plenty of teachers in plenty of districts and the ones I visited
kind of hold true where they're doing their best to get that sort of engagement and that sort of
comprehensive education to as much as they can. So is it harder in bigger districts? Absolutely.
Is it possible? Yeah. I had another quick question. You mentioned earlier that
a lot of like more and more kids are seeking higher education. They want to go to college.
What's your impression of why that is? Well, a big part of it is they need it.
In the time and unfortunate circumstances, a lot of jobs nowadays, you need a college degree
to get your foot in the door. And I sort of hate that. I hate how a lot of the millennials and
younger generation are sort of being forced into such horrible loans just to get a job.
I'm a huge advocate for trade schools and associate's degrees and community colleges and
other things to get a higher education if one is inclined to do so. And so part of its necessity
and part of it is kids want to. I have middle schoolers talking to me about they're applying
to these special high schools because they're planning on going to these certain colleges or
applying around to colleges. And they're excited. They want to do it. And of course,
you know, I probably have a very high degree of highly motivated kids
percentage wise in my classroom. But they want to get the most education they can. And I think
that that's sort of a trend across the country is a lot of kids see, A, I need this in order to
get the sort of job I want and B, I kind of want this. It's education is such a valuable tool.
That's really what it is. It's a tool in order to get what we need and what we want.
Yeah, I loved being at school, especially like university. I mean, I think I just I have like
this this thing that lights up in me. And it's like the whatever my
the cultural descendant of like Plato's Academy, just like this, when people are coming to acquire
knowledge, and I just have this big romantic idea about it. But I think, like, on the other side
of the client, my inner Robin Hansen would probably say that, you know, kids, kids want to go to
college, like you'd said, many of them, because they know that they need different jobs, because
they need to signal to their employers, their potential future employers that look, I'm the
kind of person who can go to college. And so like, yes, I got an A in biology, I realized this is
an accounting position, but I got an A plus in biology. And like their accountant, their their
person, the HR people at the accounting position that they want to work for, they don't care that
they know biology, but they care that this is the kind of person who can get an A in biology,
especially like a hard, you know, a tough side or tough subject. Because hey, this kind of person,
this tells us, you know, not that they learned anything there that's useful to us, but it shows
us that they can buckle down, learn hard material and excel at that. I think the
I'm sorry, go ahead. Okay. Well, I was just going to say that,
in part of it, yes, they can sit down and get that A, but a lot of colleges too are turning
towards, I mentioned the four C's earlier. And that's a big thing employers are looking for is
can, you know, can our this candidate collaborate? How is their critical thinking? Can are they
problem solvers? How, how would they communicate? And that's a big benefit, at least at my college,
and I know there's other colleges out there that have a focus on teaching these skills
through the means of the content. And so I'm hoping that that's the trend that goes
both in secondary and higher education is the workplace skills that they're really looking
for. I think that's the big reason a college degree holds so much weight is because it shows,
A, this person can buckle down and get the work done when they need to, and B, more than likely
this person has had to collaborate with peers, more than likely they've had to do some sort of
leadership in either a TA or other position, and so on and so forth. And that's the attraction
of a degree. And it can go beyond that too, like certain colleges with certain fields,
like my college was a leader in education. And so if I wanted to stay in New York state and
be a teacher there, I would have had an advantage because my college was well known out of reputation
for spitting out good teachers who were not just good at their job, but motivated, they were
knowledgeable, they had all the different trainings they need. So I think that's also part of it.
It's not just the, you got an A in biology, good job. It's everything that comes with that,
that I think is attractive to employers. For sure. I didn't mean to push past the other,
I guess, like to say that it signals the one thing that I said, doesn't mean that it doesn't
also signal a bunch of other stuff. You're right. If it's a more collaborative subject, like the
lab component maybe to a lecture course or something, typically you're doing that with other
people. And if you can't work with people, you won't get an A in that lab component, right?
So yeah, that's valuable to employers too. I think what I was trying to get at with my
Hansonian lens was that depending on the student and depending on the subject and all that, but I
think he might say that many of them much of the time are less concerned about learning anything
in college. They're more concerned about like how will this look to my prospective employers
with the entire signaling package this will give. Oh yeah, absolutely. I mean, when I was,
that's the entire reason I worked at that school in London. I had to study abroad there for four
months and we got to choose a four-week internship and we saw it to interview and like be chosen back.
It wasn't like a here you go thing. But I was like, hmm, I want to go into teaching. I'd love to do
an internship that's a bit more fun and breezy because it's the end of my time in London. But no,
I have to do this at the school because that's going to look great on a resume. And that's why
people do internships. That's why people do work studies and whatnot is it's all for that resume.
I was just going to say we are passing the one hour mark, so we're going to have to start wrapping
it up pretty soon. I did. Well, okay, two sort of questions. The first one I noticed when you
talked about the high schoolers that you said that they were kind of a surly and sort of
dissatisfied with school. Do you know what caused them to become that way?
I wouldn't say it was dissatisfied and surly with school. It was more with the life. And
I think a big part of that is especially as kids are going into high school,
they have more access, they have more access towards the points of view. That's very, you know,
the echo chamber is a real thing because these kids who are the cynical surly ones,
they're like that with everything, not just with school. And in part of that, I'm putting up on
the internet, part of that is also home life, part of that is their life circumstances situations.
Again, in my small town, the feral kids phenomenon is real. High schoolers who are kind of homeless,
or their parents just kind of leave them to themselves for eight months is real.
So, high schoolers who are going to analyze the world around them, analyze their home situations,
and the questioning that began in middle school really becomes a deeper questioning. It becomes
resentment sometimes. It can become all sorts of things. And that's because as they're growing up
and as they're trying to become who they are or trying to figure out who they are,
it goes so much further beyond just the school. And that's probably when I say the brain development,
the emotional development, depending on certain factors in childhood that can hinder that,
depending on if the child is using substances, that will absolutely hinder that. In fact,
the high school, my high school is not much as mine, but I know high schools sometimes have
problems with kids smoking weed. As much as I'm an advocate for legalizing, it's just like alcohol,
if you start it too young and use it too frequently, it can definitely have an impact on your
development in a very much still growing body. So, yeah, it's a mix of factors. Some of it might
definitely be something that was filed by a child.
Okay. So, I got now, I guess, sort of a personal question for both of you. I personally
felt lucky to have survived high school. And I know that part of that was just the immense
depression I was going through at the time. But did either of you have a similar sort of experience?
Do you want to go first? You're on me too.
I don't mind either way. I guess my quick version is that, I mean, I think, yeah,
high school for me was when life started finally getting good. I mean, you know,
kid life was fun too, but the first time I found instructors that were, like,
if not, you know, PhD experts, although some of them were, they were very knowledgeable
with what they were teaching. They weren't the ones who were like, oh, yeah, I'm teaching
you Spanish and junior high, and I'm two semesters ahead of you at CSU when I take it out at night.
Or something like that, right? So, I had really good educators that, like,
being the super annoying student I was, I'd ask tons of questions, not to, like,
try and stump the teacher or be a dick, because I was really curious. And in elementary and junior
high, I had some good junior high teachers, but especially in elementary school, I would just
get told to sit down and shut up. And they, I think they felt like they're, you know, like,
some smart ass kid is trying to make them look like a fool or something. But in high school,
I, every teacher I had knew a ton, and it was awesome. I mean, at least all the ones I remember,
there are some that sucks, but all of my favorite classes, Ecology, Biology, Chemistry, History,
they were all just really gung-ho about their subjects, and they wanted us to be gung-ho about
it. So. My teachers were all good. It was more the social and psychological situation for me.
Oh, yeah. Socially, my life was terrible until five years ago, so I can't, I can't really compare
there. I think psychologically, I did okay, but I don't think that has anything to do with school.
But yeah, Audrey, what's your, what's your thought?
So I, I, education was my solace in high school. I definitely turned to my teachers
as a source of not just education, but of social comfort. I really struggled in high school socially.
I had, quote unquote, friends, but they weren't very, they weren't very good friends. I definitely,
like a lot of high schoolers out there, I struggled with depression. That turned into some
anxiety stuff going into college and blossomed into more during college. But
you know, there's lots of things going on. So I don't know, high school, I don't look back in it
with any sort of fondness. I love the things I learned. I love the things I did. I was in theater,
and we put on some amazing productions that came with the consequence of
uh, severe anxiety about the productions because our director was a,
I didn't know the correct term for her. She was a control freak perfectionist who basically lived
through the students in our production. So there's, there's just high pressure and violence.
Can I add one thing is I want to point out that I, I had a few friends in high school and a couple
of them listened to the show. So I don't want to dismiss the idea that I, I didn't have friends.
I made them great long-term life, lifelong friends there. And the other thing relating to the last
thing you said, am I alone in suspecting that that trope is super common among like junior high
and high school music and band and theater teachers? I found those are the ones that took
their job the most seriously. I took, I took choir through junior high and my teachers there
seemed to think that they were teaching, you know, the, the New York choir, I was going to say
New York orchestra, but, um, you know, they're like, they were preparing for the Olympics. Like
they thought this was the most serious thing. And I mean, I get like taking your job seriously,
but they seemed way invested. Like, you know, getting mad purple in the face and slamming
their fist on a piano and saying, damn it, Zuber. Um, so anyway, is that a, yeah,
anyone else agree with that trope?
I, I never.
That wasn't the choir teachers. I had very chill choir teachers. I could not survive
both the choir and the theater with such divas.
I didn't have the confidence for theater. That sounds like a lot of fun.
Yeah. Oh, it was, it was a ton of fun and looking back, I'm very happy with it,
but during it, it was super stressful not to mention almost all the theater kids were
all involved in sports and like AP or IB and academics. And there's just a high pressure
environment. And I don't think I even have a single high school friend still on Facebook.
I don't know the last time I spoke to any of them. Um, so for me, educationally wonderful,
everything else pretty shit. Yeah. I, I mean, I had a similar thing. I really enjoyed the
education parts of things. I loved learning stuff, but, uh, I mean, I do still have some
friends from high school, my petro life partner, Drake, you know, I knew from high school and
a lot, a lot of, there are some good relationships that came from that, but overwhelmingly high
school was a horrific experience. Uh, when I wasn't actually learning things and from almost
everyone I've talked to, they all say basically almost all of them say basically the same thing
that I feel lucky to have survived. And I mean, most people do survive it obviously,
but I think it's a really telling thing that everyone feels that way. And I personally believe
it is in large part because schools are structured very much in this prison like way where everyone
has to be there even when they're bored and they don't want to be there. And there's no way to
distinguish yourself in any objective way. So it all comes down to social games to signaling
and to having to tear down other people in order to build up your own social capital. And it's,
I mean, I hate drawing the analogy back to prisons, but it is kind of like a prison environment where
you form these clicks and it's all just about dominating other people. And I think that this
is a horrible thing that we subject almost the entirety of our population to during their formative
years. It's, I love the education aspects, but school has got some serious social issues that
I don't think we should put kids through. I think for me, one of the weirdest things was like
the monitored bathroom breaks. And I totally get like why that has to be a thing because otherwise,
you know, if there was no limit on when you could leave the room, unless you had mature kids,
like in high school, they started cutting back on that. But like in junior high, they're really
cracking down because kids would just take off and leave the room and come back 20 minutes later,
but it's a 50 minute class and they missed, you know, a typical fraction of it. But like,
you know, you've got three bathroom breaks that you can use in my class for the semester.
And, you know, so, you know, the analogy to prison, I'm not sure what bathroom breaks are
like in prison, but you can probably pee more or less when you want if you're not otherwise
occupied. But, you know, things like that, I think just kind of give this air of no autonomy.
You know, you don't have the freedom to relieve yourself without permission.
And with that, if you do it too many times in a semester, you incur penalties for participation
credits or something, right? That part was super weird. I mean, I agree that some of the structural
things can change. But I think a big thing is that the social aspects, a lot of that's out of the
control of the adults or the situation. And part of that is kids learning how to interact with each
other, how to make this a thing. And that's just what's going to happen even if you have the most
perfect environment, very low stress, you know, full autonomy, yada, yada, yada, there's going to be
conflict, there's going to be drama, there's going to be hurt feelings, because kids are still
figuring that out. The kids have very little empathy skills. The empathy is part of that
brain development that's coming along. They're very me centered. They're very, you know, a lot of
them aren't very observant. They don't, I mean, and part of my job as middle school teacher with
my middle schoolers is helping with the drama. Now, I don't step in all the time. A big thing
that I feel is that kids kind of have to learn how to interact with each other themselves.
Because we don't have someone looking over our shoulders in our adult lives to say,
now you have to go and apologize because you did x, y, z. But when it explodes in something big,
then we can step in and sit down with them and say, okay, here's what went wrong. You didn't
notice it, but they were feeling this and teaching them how to communicate. I think that's something
that could be implemented in more schools for sure. But there's going to be drama. I mean, again,
I teach 22 kids. I have five eighth grade girls. There's drama. There's no clicks in my school.
There's no, I don't have enough kids to have clicks. There's not a big like sports atmosphere.
There's not a competition atmosphere because we don't really post grades. And it's not like,
you know, all these kids got A's so they get to go out early or whatnot. We don't have any of that.
But the drama still happens because their personalities conflict. They're learning who
they are. They're learning how to be with each other. Friendships, people grow and change. And
kids who are best friends in elementary have always been finding their personalities are
clashing. They don't know how to deal with that. That's going to happen in the teenage years because
of all the development and all the growth that's happening. So I think the educational system as
a whole and parents as well, the adults in the community and the kids lives can do a better
job at both holding their hands and kind of letting them go to learn how to deal with it
themselves. It's a delicate balance. And there's times when my co-teacher look at me and go,
oh gosh, do we need to interfere with this one? Or can we let them deal with it themselves? And
will it go poorly if we do one or the other? It's very, it's a hard dynamic. But the social
aspects, it's more complex than just shoving them all in a building and they hate it.
There's so much going on there.
That makes sense.
We are at a little over a minute, an hour and 15. Is there any final things that any of you
wanted to say? Thank you for bringing me on. Thanks for listening to. I'm clearly very passionate
about this. I'm kind of holding back, but it's very interesting to hear what you guys have to say.
And I hope we see some improvements. I totally like having passionate guests on. It makes for
a more interesting show. Yeah, absolutely. And thanks for coming on. I hope this didn't feel too
adversarial. I'm not sure what sort of briefing Enoch gave you as to what the stance would be
over here. But I think it's one of those weird things where you can be pro the people in the
system and anti the system. It sounds super cliche, but whatever. I'm one of those people
that feel like teachers should be paid four times, five times more. The idea that the people whose
job it is to hone and sculpt young minds to bring forward the next generation of workers
and voters and thinkers are being paid a bit better than food with surface wages and often
have to buy their own supplies to give their students the best experience. That's something
insane. So I think I guess that's one to make it clear that we at least I don't want to speak
very much, but we support the endeavor. I think it's just the implementation doesn't really at
least I sort of feel doesn't really match up with the expressed motivation. But it's awesome to hear
that there are programs like yours and that that sort of movement is getting more traction.
Because I feel like all the floor is better in that environment. I'm not the kind of kid that
could be cut loose and learn my own thing because I would have stayed at home and played video games
all day. But I needed some structure. I needed some corralling. But I didn't need the short
leash that I had for my first 10 years in school. So anyway, that's my long way of saying thanks.
And this was a lot of fun. Yeah, I totally agree. And you know, I well, okay, I don't totally agree.
But I do agree that if I were to have kids, I would like for you to you or someone like you
to be their teacher. Because, you know, that sounds like the sort of way to go forward if I were to
ever put them in any sort of real school. Because again, it's the system that I have issues with.
And God, did you see that thing about they're trying to pass a lot of make it illegal for
Colorado teachers to strike? Yeah, that's that. Yeah, that is I mean, I understand that once
someone is a teacher, they've invested years of their life into this and it's their passion. But
so you can't just quit. But I would I would strongly want to quit. And I don't see how
they're going to have any teachers in the future. I mean, telling someone you can't not work is
that's basically slavery, right? Who wants to sign up for a job where you are enslaved?
Yeah. Sure. I mean, I agree. I overall, I love the concept of education, and I love the trends
going forward. And I agree, there's problems in administration in the system. There's problems
in my own administration that have made me look at my job and go, What have I gotten myself into?
But I don't know, I'm hopeful overall. I think we're going to iron out the kinks, maybe not
by the time our kids, if any of us have kids or grown up, but hopefully in the next 50 years.
Oh, God, that's depressing. How many millions of children have to be sacrificed?
That sounds super reassuring. I mean, granted, it'll suck for the next, you know,
while but if things are on their way up the whole time. I mean, the other message could be that
things are going to get worse until everybody is just miserable. So if people in the industry are
confident that things are getting better, that makes me happy. That's true. Getting better is
definitely better than getting worse. And let me say that 50 year timeline is not a
in my mind, that's more every school's implementing all these things. They have great
educators across the board. Like that's that's what I'm thinking in that timeline. It's going to
take a long time to get all that stuff in place. But I'm hoping that that stuff will be put in
place very throughout and tested and changed and growing and evolving. And I think it will
because it is so it sounds like charter schools are much better options for kids than public
schools at this point. Would you agree with that depends on the charter school? And keep in mind,
mine is a public charter school. We are under the district umbrella. And so we do have some
limitations. But part of our charter, it also gives us some freedoms. I would say, you know,
if there's any parents listening in and they say, well, charter schools automatically better, you
have to look at the schools themselves, look at the kids are coming out of it, look at the educators
in it, look at what their their statements are with the programs that they're running and the
things that they're offering. It's really going to depend district by district and school by school.
Would you support like the the the what is it the voucher thing that they've been talking about
lately where if someone doesn't want to take their kids to public schools, they can get a voucher to
help offset the cost of a private or a charter school? I mean, yes and no. Well, on the surface,
it sounds kind of nice. At the same time, the current administration is putting when you put
all the money towards the public the private schools. And that's absolutely abhorrent and cannot
happen. Because the majority of kids are in public schools. And even if parents want them to go to
a nicer school, there's limitations on transportation is limitations on being able to pay for stuff.
For example, in my own district, the the public school just down the road, they have a bus that
can take kids to and from they have a breakfast and a lunch program. And parents often choose that
because they they they have to work and they can't deal with those things for their kids.
Whereas at the charter school kids have to bring their own lunches, they have to have breakfast
beforehand and parents must provide transportation. So it's it's not as easy as well if they want a
better school and the voucher is going to help them. There's lots of factors to put in there.
And I don't want money diverted away from public schools when they're already so struggling to
have funding to get what the kids need. I understand what you're saying. But I think if the public
schools are doing so poorly, it would I would rather like even very low low scale private
schools show up ones that only charge you know them 2000 a year and aren't frills or anything,
but simply provide an alternative that you know you can put your kid here for for a year instead
for that $2,000. So at least there'd be an option. Again, there's lots of things going to that and
big reason public schools suck right now is because there's no funding in order to help get better.
A lot of these programs I'm talking about those take money. It takes money to bring in people
to train the teachers. It takes money to get the curriculum going. It takes money to get the programs
online going. And if they don't have that money, they're stuck. And so it unfortunately does come
down no matter how inspired the education the teachers and the administration are. If they
don't have the money to do what they want to do, it's just not going to happen.
I will say one thing that I think is a really useful service of public schools is that it
inculcates a shared culture among everyone in the nation, which I think is a valuable service.
And I think there's a lot to be said for for, you know, some cultures help help societies
more than others. And I think that is why there were so many schools about what can and can't be
taught in schools. And the push for school desegregation was all to impose the sorts of
culture that we want on literally everyone in our society. So we all have that shared common
bedrock. And I think that's why schools are often such a, you know, battleground for activists,
because it does determine what the culture of the next generation is going to be, at least to some
extent. Yeah, I agree. And I'd also want to remind us that this compulsory round, you know,
all around education is fairly new in terms of human history. It's only been, you know,
a century or two that we've had this sort of thing. So, you know, we talk about the pros
and cons and whatnot, but we have a much more educated society now than we've ever had before.
And just like society and technology have grown and changed and usually gotten better,
I think that's just going to be the way that this happens here. It's still kind of a baby, really.
Previous generations and societies haven't had to figure out how to educate without
falling into all of these pitfalls, you know? I do think basic numeracy and literacy are just so
amazingly valuable and important for everyone in society that, you know, everyone should be required
to go to school at least through fifth grade to learn those things. And after that, I mean,
I heard just today that 16% of adults can't read above a fourth grade level anyway. So,
I mean, it seems like that's all you really need. It's a function and anything above that would,
I would be more okay with it being voluntary, either, you know, find your own way in life or
keep going to school and keep expanding yourself. My only thought would be if we take that path,
it's going to, everything comes out of money. It's going to divert funding because we have fewer
kids in the schools and the ones who are there and want this opportunity are going to get fewer
opportunities. The opportunity is going to close if we take them away. You know, I would be okay
with continuing to pay the same amount of schooling taxes that I have now, even when schools are
voluntary and attendance drops by half. I'd be happy for everyone to suddenly have double the
funding per student. That would be great. Unfortunately, like states like Colorado,
where citizens vote on whether or not to fund schools, they often vote not to. So,
even if those like you are for it, a lot of people aren't. And so, it's just such a
hard line to balance. Yeah, but their taxes wouldn't go up at this point. It would just
be that the number of students needed to be serviced by each tax dollar would go down, although
they would vote to give less for further local schools. Yeah, it's weird that people don't want
to fund their schools in their community. I think, well, all my kids are already out of school,
what do I care? It's like, well, you want educated neighbors, right? But this sounds like it's kind
of, maybe beyond the scope of education. Right. Okay, well, thank you for joining us.
Yeah, thanks for having me. Cool. Yeah, thanks. Before you go, is there anything you want to
plug or anything at all that we can put on the website for you? Any cool, whatever links to,
I don't know, anything? I said that really eloquently.
You could have used some more education, Steven.
I mean, I don't really plug stuff on a public servant.
I thought I'd ask, if anything comes up, you're welcome to send it our way.
I mean, if you guys find any charities or anything for like any
movements to fund schools and for education, that'd be great.
Alrighty then. We'll try and find something. Awesome. Thanks. And I'm going to log off so I can go
hang with the child. Cool. Have a good time. All right. Bye. Bye. Thanks again so much. Have a good one.
And now on to listener feedback, the listener feedback portion of the show.
I'm going to say first that I don't really have any listener feedback to read. I have one from
way long ago, which I will touch on. But I have been extremely busy. I was...
Well, the audience, I'm assuming, noticed that I was gone for one of the episodes recently because
I just could not fit it in with everything that I was doing. But I bought a new place,
which I had to do major renovations on before I could move in. And then the building that it's
in caught fire. And it didn't actually damage my unit at all. But it put me way behind schedule.
And then I had to go to Los Angeles for a week long workshop and award ceremony since I managed to
win one of the Writers of the Future awards for this year. And that was... Yeah, you did.
Yeah, that was a fucking amazing experience. I wrote up a whole big blog post about that.
But basically, I just had absolutely no time at all. And I haven't had time to go back and look at
the comments or listen to feedback for the last two episodes. So I apologize. I'm only going to
have one really old one. That's totally fine. I think I will... I had a couple of good ones in here,
but one of them will take a while to cover. And I want to give it my best. And I'm actually kind
of burnt out. It's like 9.30 and I'm old. So like 5.30 this morning, which is super dumb.
So yeah, I will save those. I did have a... I don't know what we're going to call it, our
whatever this week and rationality thing that we're wanting to plug.
So I'll have one of those. But yeah, I'm ready when you guys are. Or rather, when you are.
Okay, go ahead.
Oh, I mean, if you wanted to do the... Well, let's do the feedback thing. And then, yeah.
Okay. The one feedback that I had from way back was from episode 50, Approaching Rationality with
Kyle Moore. Eddie says, Inyash made the claim that the CDC has killed four more people than it has
saved, which I found to be an outrageously unqualified claim, especially coming from you guys,
especially on this podcast. And I wanted to say, holy shit, if I said CDC, I am extremely sorry.
And I want to walk that back as far as possible because I love the CDC. They have all my hearts.
They managed to fucking cure polio and smallpox and, oh my god, JD Oni's amazing blog post,
500 million, but not one more, which is just... It's fantastic. It is a classic in rationalism.
The CDC does great work and I love them. So if I said CDC, I apologize. What I meant to say was FDA.
And I do think the FDA is on net negative. I think they do good things with food safety,
which is nice. But the amount of delays and rejections of beneficial drugs and just the sheer
amount of money that has been poured into getting a few drugs to market and stops any other drugs
that are less profitable than that being even researched is just a damn disgrace. And I think
that they should not be nearly, not even to one-tenth of the level, as restrictive on drugs as they are.
It's like we should have a food administration and a drug administration.
Yes. And then we should murder the drug administration.
Yeah. My Air Libertarian agrees with you. And my Air like... I don't know. I imagine that's
something very eloquent at this late. Part of me thinks that that could go badly.
You want some... Well, in some of my moods, I want some control on what hits the shelves.
But to have... What is it? Something like 10 or 15 years between... We think this works to work
and hit the shelves at Walgreens? Yeah. That's sort of a huge drag.
After waiting for five goddamn years for vasogel, I just finally went and got a vasectomy because I
realized it is not going to happen in my in my reproductively productive lifetime.
Vasogel, was that some sort of male contraceptive?
Yeah. Yeah. It was basically like the male equivalent of the IED where they put some things
in your vest efferents and it prevents the sperm from going through. And it's reversible. And they
just... Ouch. Yeah. Yeah. I just never got around to you, to approving it.
Huh. That's interesting. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I could see that that'd be... I guess,
man, I'm not feeling it. I hear what you're saying and that sounds good.
I think I used all my brain juice. I was trying to... With our guests, I didn't know how much
preamble you gave her on where we were coming from. And then I think I noticed pretty quickly that
like her tone said, like, I feel ambushed. And I'm like, oh, shit.
I was trying to... Well, I did tell her that I'm rather against schooling the way it is and that
there would be a lot of, you know, I dislike it and let's start a fight. So I think she was
ready for the pushback she was about to get. Yeah. Yeah. I'm sure I should have asked about that.
We kind of started a few minutes late. Yeah. No. I think it was fun. I agree with you on most
everything that you were saying, except I felt like we got bogged down a couple of times. It was
fun because we really disagree. So I had a... What were we going to call it? Our whatever rationally
interesting thing every two weeks? We don't want to completely rip off Julia Gayliff's
rationally speaking pick. Okay. I can't call it the Beijing conspiracy pick. That sounds too
copyright infringement-y. Can we call it the Beijing conspiracy choice? What's really close to pick?
All right. The conspirators will come up with something by the time this episode...
Well, I think it's going to be funny. Yeah. In two weeks, we'll have something decent.
So this was a... There was a fun case in the, I don't know, the history of the rationality movement
where Eleazar Kowski was responding to the charge that like... Basically,
the Neil DeGrasse Tyson charge, which he has changed his mind on after listening to Eleazar
Kowski on St. Mary's podcast, that yeah, he was at some sort of panel. He grabbed a microphone
and he was talking about how, hey, I heard this podcast and changed my mind. So that's kind of cool
because his position was the fairly standard thing that it's easy enough to keep your AI
boxed. And by that, it means like, don't plug it into the internet and like, just talk to it. And
if it seems evil, you just, you shoot it with a shotgun or you unplug it. Yeah. Or like you said,
if it goes evil, you just throw a glass of water on it. Yes. So that used to be Tyson's stance and
that's a not uncommon thing to encounter. And Steve Kowski said, all right, cool. You know what?
Why don't you play the role of the AI researcher? I'll play the role of the AI,
give me two hours to convince you to let me out of the box because you've got to give one to prove
the point that if you're encountering something that's smarter than you who wants to be let out,
humans aren't immune from like unwillingly being persuaded, right? Brain hacking. So
the charge was accepted. And under the under the terms that I think that the winner would get 10
bucks or something, and they couldn't talk about what happened. And it turned out that
you've got $10. That's all everyone knows. And so the moderator of whatever forum this was,
because this was the early days of the internet said, Hey, I'm calling bullshit. Let's do this.
Kowski did it again. And one again in this time 20 bucks. And so
there are speculations of balance about how he manages to do this. The only hint he would say
was that there were no tricks. I just did it the hard way. All of the ways that I could think
of to do it were like tricks. You're like, I'll give you $20 after this. If you give me $10 now
and say, and you know, let people think I won or really cheat and like kidnap their children and
say, look, you gave your kids back if you'd let me win this conversation or something, right?
Or do it on the case of like, think about what this will do for like AI safety research if people
think that if people think that that, you know, this is a threatening problem and I win this or
something. So anyway, I found the case online. I was talking to coworkers about this and I was
googling AI box to send them something. And now I'm finding the link on what looks like lesser
wrong, but it is less wrong. It looks way different than it used to. Whatever it is, the link will
be on the website. Yeah, less wrong. Actually, lesser wrong has been moved over fully to less
wrong recently. So now what was less wrong is a port of lesser wrong.
Well, I guess I like the name more, but I'm gonna have to get used to the new format because
googling now looks different. So that's cool to know. Yeah, well, I mean, less wrong as it was
was basically just an archive. And now it is an archive plus all this other new interesting
discussion that is happening again. It's alive. Yay. So anyway, this this post is called how to
how to win the AI box experiment sometimes. And basically, this guy and his friend did this. And
the the person playing the AI got out. And they published their their dialogue in a pretty ugly
reading format. But I read through the whole thing because it was really interesting. Yeah. And
he talks about like the setup, the response afterwards, and like how he felt when the whole
thing was going on and after. And there are some constraints that some people think it doesn't
doesn't quite pass. But rather than it's not representative, but whatever, I think it is
considered a win. I mean, he let the AI out of the box at the end. Yeah, but they were like,
they set up like a specific role playing thing that someone challenged that this isn't exactly
indicative of like how it would go. It's a long fun post. And I strongly suggest that before you
read through the text exchange of how they have how he did this, to spend, you know, the good
rationalist five minutes by a clock at least, thinking of how you would do this. I threw out
some ideas earlier, but there are other ways. And this guy went around that I would never have
tried. I thought it was really interesting. And so I had to share this, I found this a few months
ago or a couple months ago. And that's actually why I wanted to bring up like the, oh, that and
we did the episode on keeping up with the rationalists. But anyway, this is a lot of fun. Strong
recommend to check this out. And the AI box experiment was, to me, one of the like fun
intro topics, especially if AI comes up, which it often does no daily wise with our coworkers.
I'm being funny. Yeah, you don't talk about AI like every other week at your work.
Actually, I don't because I'm an accountant, but since you're a programmer, I thought maybe you
did. No, I was, that's why I realized you didn't laugh. Yeah. Yeah. I was like, that's kind of cool.
I wish I worked in a, you know, programmer's office place. So what do they call places where
programmers are crowds like the stables? Is that it? Yeah, that sounds right. So there's a,
actually, they sent out a course that only everybody in the company at stake or at least
every dev. I think it's everybody in the company. It's a 50 minute course on AI and machine learning.
And this was like the company all hands webcast thing. I call it the five minute hate because
it makes me think of 984. But they, they're like, oh, yeah, we're gonna take this because this is
like this whole new up and coming thing. I'm like, oh, fuck off. And it was a 15 minute course. And
I kind of joked. And I was like, oh, yeah, shit, call you a lot musk. This is easy enough to learn
in an hour. We're all going to die. But anyway, so you mentioned that our people talking about it.
The answer is weirdly yes, but not in anything that has anything to do with any of our jobs
whatsoever. So okay, so boring, we can cut that. No, no, no, how about for just me and our Patreon
subscribers? Oh, ho, you give us a spoiler and tell us how, how, how it happened? Or is that,
is that without ruin everything? We can have, we can have it out there. And then I guess our
Patreon supporters could go in and find it if they want to spoiler. But I still encourage them to,
to go through and read this. But basically what he did was okay, this next one, this next part is
only for our Patreon subscribers. Haha, we now have inclusive content. For the rest of you,
just go and read it because that's what Stephen recommends doing anyway. He says it's much more
fun to read through it yourself. Okay, I also say that for our Patreon supporters. But if you
guys want a quick spoiler. And at the end, the guy is just like, I'm letting out of the box.
Holy shit. The, the, the person playing the AI when he was talking about it. He said that he
just sat there, he was sweating. Like this whole thing, he got really into it. And that he was
there sweating and shaking. And he's like, I thought he was fucking with me, or he was going to be
like, haha, or something. But it blew my fucking mind. I like reading this is kind of a trip. It
was fun. So, so really, it's important to actually read it through and get like all the emotion in
it. It's like, like a good story. Someone can summarize the story to you. And it doesn't count
at all. You know, you actually have to watch Star Wars in order to get Star Wars, you know?
Yeah, or Infinity War, I've now seen three times this outstanding.
Oh, holy shit. Okay.
But, oh, that's nothing for me. But, you know, it was, I saw it a couple times last week and then
once today. So, I guess, I guess Star Wars is a better example. It's more like, it's more like
the matrix. No one can be told what the matrix is. You have to see it for yourself.
That's actually, that's not bad. Yes, I mean, that's fair. I did say to them like 90 minutes,
unless they're really fast reading or at skimming. Reading the post is, the post itself is pretty
long. And then the text exchange is fairly long as well. So, yeah, well, I mean, it was a two hour
text exchange. If you just wanted the, well, it's surprising, you know, they'd spend a minute or two
between things. So, it was only a few hundred lines long. Oh, okay. That's not bad at all.
Specifically, it was in lines because I had to open it in like a non-center text editor to
be able to format it so I could read it. Okay. That might have been a Mac problem or something,
or however I downloaded it, but whatever it was. Anyway, so, yeah, if you want to save some time,
that's how it worked out. But it was a lot of fun, stronger command, and that's that.
Cool. Thank you. That was awesome. Yeah, you bet. Okay. Oh, and to our audience, thanks for listening.
Bye. Thanks, guys. Oh, wait, hold on. We've got two more things. Oh, yes, we do. We have to thank
people. We've got to thank, we've got to thank our sound engineer for bringing this sweet, sweet
audible chocolate to your ears, Kyle Moore. And Enios, do you want to thank our Patreon supporter
this week? Sure. I can totally do that. This week, we would like to thank Nick Lowry. Have we
thanked Nick Lowry before? And you're asking the wrong person. My name sounds familiar. You know
what? Maybe you got to think twice. This week, we'd like to thank our Patreon supporter, Nick
Lowry, for helping make this possible. Bring this to you guys. Yeah. Thanks, Nick.
Thanks, Nick. You rock. Yeah. All right. And with that, we can call it an episode.
Cool. I have a good one. All right, thanks. You too, man. Bye-bye.
