Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy.
I'm Inyash Brotsky.
I'm Steven Zuber.
And today we have with us, is it Sergei?
Serge, forget it.
Serge, OK.
Welcome to the podcast.
He is on the line with us from Moscow, right?
Yeah, that's right.
I'm here at the moment.
Excellent.
Thank you for joining us at this with the Weird Times
Ogan Convergence.
And you wanted to talk to us about biohacking.
And I normally, when we have a guest on,
I know something about the topic.
And I know absolutely nothing about biohacking.
So you're going to have to hold our hands a bit through this.
Unless, like, Steven, you have become
super knowledgeable in the past weeks.
Let's pretend I have it for the sake of the audience.
OK.
All right.
Cool.
Well, actually, I've listened to your podcast on no tropics.
So you have to know something about it.
So you know words like midaffinals.
So that already makes you more qualified than a lot of people
about biohacking.
Oh, great.
Cool.
So I guess the main idea of biohacking
is that we, as humans, are obviously
systems of biochemical reactions.
And everything that we do depends on what's going on
inside our body.
So whether we have energy during the day,
whether we're in a good mood, whether we're
able to solve a complex problem, whether we're
able to have good productive relationships with other people,
it really all depends on the state of our body and mind,
on our hormones, on our neurotransmitters, et cetera,
et cetera.
And biohacking, I think the core idea
is that we should use what science has discovered
about our bodies to figure out how
to make them work better for whatever objectives
that we have.
So I'm an entrepreneur.
I've built a couple big companies before.
I started my last company.
It's called Ostrovok.
It's the largest online travel company in Russia.
And I was working as a CEO, working pretty hardcore hours
and really, really stressful job.
And I just started doing various experiments
on what I can do related to my health and well-being that
would also make me more productive and effective
and competitive as a CEO.
And it kind of started from some obvious things,
like, hey, sleep more.
And just sleeping more starts having a lot of downstream
interesting effects.
Like, I found that I would procrastinate much less.
And I would have fewer anger management issues,
because as a CEO, it's not the best thing
when you flip the fuck out at the developer that's
screwed up right in front of the office
in the middle of everything.
So essentially, I just started with simple things like that.
And then gradually started adding more things.
First, things like vitamins, things
like understanding a little bit about my genetics.
For example, I have a genetic mutation
that reduces the quality of vitamin B12 metabolism.
And I need to take a lot of vitamin B12
in order to compensate for that.
And that's kind of had effects on my subjective well-being
and also an objective biomarkers tested in my blood.
And then I just kept adding more and more and more to that,
just because it seems like if you have an engineering mindset,
you want to optimize the system that everything else is
based on, that all other things you do in life are based on.
And that is our body and our mind.
And so I started doing things like taking
Adderall and Medafinil, doing things like sleep trackers
to figure out exactly what my optimal sleep times are.
And then I started really going into pretty deep stuff.
So by now, I have a medical team led by Dr. Peter Atia.
He was pretty famous in the whole bio packing and health
optimization community guide, who's
focused a lot on things like ketosis, which is, I guess,
like a dietary intervention that's helpful and things
like heart disease prevention.
And so by now, I do pretty sophisticated things.
Like I manage my hormones quite extensively.
So I tune my thyroid hormones constantly,
kind of like trying to push it into an area where I'm not
overdoing it, but at the same time, I have more energy,
better mood, et cetera.
I tune my testosterone cycle in a fairly smart way.
So essentially, the testosterone cycle
is a long cycle of biochemical interactions, which
start with your pituitary gland that produces some hormones that
are precursors to testosterone.
Then they get converted into testosterone.
Then that partially gets converted into estrogen.
And estrogen is received at the pituitary
to kind of close the cycle and tell the pituitary
to produce less precursors to testosterone.
So that's how the feedback loop works.
And I had kind of low precursors, but average testosterone.
So I essentially took some stuff that
blocks estrogen receptors at the pituitary,
and thus increases signaling to produce more testosterone.
But instead of some guys in the gym
who jack up on testosterone and cause issues,
I'm actually just signaling better into that pathway.
So anyway, that was too deep into one
of the particular examples.
But I think if I give an overview,
then biohacking really is about managing your health
in a very proactive way and with specific objectives.
So the main things that I would categorize it into is sleep
and optimizing that, nutrition and optimizing that,
exercise and optimizing that.
And then the more sophisticated things
are optimizing mental health and doing lots of tests
to understand how your body works
and where you have potential defects because of genetics
or some other reason.
And then medicines and supplements and drugs
to essentially tune your body to where you want.
So that's the overview, super high level of what I do.
And I've written some very popular articles about this
just on the side.
I don't have any commercial interest in biohacking.
I work in tech in things like e-commerce
and artificial intelligence.
But basically, this is something that's a very effective tool
for me to enhance my competitiveness as an entrepreneur
and to help me get things that I want more off.
So things like energy and good mood and cognitive ability
and presumably longevity as well.
So yeah, that's an overview.
So that's awesome.
Yeah.
Can I jump in there real quick, Yash?
Yeah, go for it.
Two things.
One, Sergey, I'd love for you to send us the,
sorry, I'm going to start over.
I think my audio is coming in too hot.
No, it's good.
There we go.
I mean, on my recorder, I can see it flaring there.
So I was going to say, that's a really cool overview.
Thanks for going through all that.
I guess, sorry, I got a little turned around there.
I had a couple of quick questions.
One was, you said you found out that you
had a hereditary predisposition to poorly metabolizing
B vitamins.
Did you find that out through something like 23andMe?
Or how did you come across that?
Yeah, it was just 23andMe plus an interpretation service
called Prometheus.
Since 23andMe no longer provides interpretation
of your genes because the FDA kind of cracked down.
But there are services that will take an API from 23andMe
or like a data dump and decode it.
So Prometheus is one I really like.
It connects to an open source kind of like a Wikipedia
for genetic mutations, SNPpedia.
And it just analyzes all of your stuff
and tells you, hey, these are the things that
might have the biggest impact on you negatively or positively.
So that was one component.
And the other component is I started
doing a large number of blood biochemistry tests.
And I noticed that I had significant elevation
of a protein called homocysteine, which
is a protein that's associated with a lot of negative health
outcomes.
And it's particularly elevated in vitamin B12 issues.
And I had the mutation called MTHFR,
which is a thing that tends to interfere with B12 metabolism.
So I just started taking huge doses of B12.
And I immediately noticed a large drop in that protein
biomarker in homocysteine.
And I also noticed a subjective improvement in well-being
in things like sleep quality and most of all,
emotional and mood control.
And that's not entirely surprising
because B12 actually has downstream effects
on neurotransmitters and in production of things
like dopamine and serotonin.
And that's where that could have a potential impact.
And that was one of the first things where I said, whoa,
holy shit, this kind of thing can
have a significant impact on my life.
Let me dig more.
I want a lot more of that.
So yeah, that's when I started digging in.
Interesting.
That's really cool.
How do you, at least you were taking the blood tests recently,
how do you get these blood tests done?
Well, I guess you have a team of doctors.
But assuming that one didn't have a team of doctors,
can I just go into a clinic somewhere
and ask them to draw my blood and send it somewhere?
Or how does that work?
So in the US, it's kind of complicated
because the medical system is pretty screwed up.
I think everyone knows.
So it's a little bit harder, but there
are a number of services that provide online blood testing.
I think the one called Life Extension is pretty good,
despite the kind of weird and over-selling name.
But you essentially go and buy those online.
You pick out the list of tests that you'd like to do.
They send you the kits.
Or I think maybe you have a local phlebotomist
who can just draw your blood into the tubes
and send it off to a lab.
And that's how it gets done.
So in the US, it's a little more complicated.
Most labs will not do stuff without a doctor's prescription
and also will be super expensive.
Because the way it usually works in the US
is the doctor prescribes one test for some specific disease.
And of course, the insurance company
wants to bill $600 for that one test,
even though the marginal cost of doing it is $0.50.
So essentially, you have to just look out for specialists.
But there are companies that already cater to biohackers.
Or people who are just interested in preventative health.
The bigger challenge is interpreting the data.
So some of it is easy to interpret, but a lot of it is not.
And there's not very many doctors out there
who are kind of taking this proactive approach towards help
management.
How much of a, well, you said the B-12 one was a major help.
That was the first major intervention that you did?
I wouldn't call it a major intervention,
but it was a noticeable benefit.
So one thing that I guess the body is a very complicated system
and there's a great deal we don't know about it.
And one wouldn't expect to have,
given that it's a system that was designed by evolution,
you wouldn't expect it to have a lot of easy hacks
that are so noticeable that you immediately feel better.
But I've done a number of interventions
that were noticeable for my well-being.
So one is B-12.
Another one is Adderall Slush and Daffodil.
So these are definitely not placebo.
So I started out, actually, the first thing
I've ever tried that had just like a psychoactive clearly
effect on me is when I tried Adderall in college.
And after I had to write lots of business school essays,
like 15, and then I realized 12 or 14 hours later
that they were all done and I still wanted to work.
And I went home and ironed my socks
and sorted them by color.
So yeah, that was the point when I was like, whoa,
this little thing had such a significant impact
on my ability to work.
And after that, I just took Adderall for a while,
realized that it had some negative side effects
that I found kind of annoying.
The biggest two were that it kind of made me anxious.
And it also, it made it very easy to work on anything,
but perhaps not necessarily on something
that's worth working on.
So sometimes I would go off on a tangent
and write some email extremely well
when the email didn't fucking matter at all.
And I would spend an hour and a half writing
this amazing email.
So I switched from Adderall to Medafinal,
which is a very nice meds that there's
a good medical research base that
suggests that it has no material side effects
and that it has an impact on human cognitive abilities.
So essentially one of the very, very few interventions
that appear to boost executive function
in healthy humans that are not sleep deprived.
So I think that I take it every day.
Oh, wow.
I've heard that taking it every day
can be harmful, start to add up to bad effects.
You don't find anything negative?
I don't.
I think it's hard to.
So I've actually, I've taken Adderall and Medafinal
for about eight years.
So like seven years of Adderall every day.
And then I managed to, so I was starting
to find those kind of, especially the anxiety effects.
They were unpleasant.
And so I decided to just ditch it and switch to Medafinal.
And I don't think I see any issues.
Medafinal in general is a very gentle med,
unless I guess you take lots and lots and lots of it.
But I don't think I've seen any credible, credible evidence
that it was harmful or that it could be harmful if you take
it all the time.
I imagine it probably becomes a little bit less effective
if you take it all the time.
But I don't think, like I find myself very productive,
even though I take it every day.
So whatever it is, it's not broken.
That's what I've heard too, is that it wears,
that a lot of people have tapering off effects
where they get reduced benefit from taking it every day.
I'll take it on occasion.
And I think the last, most recent time was, but Thursday.
And yeah, it's a really profound effect.
But it's not like jittery, like you mentioned, like Adderall.
It's just stuff.
Exactly.
So I found that it's an effect that's
kind of like your head is just more clear, constantly.
And it doesn't cause anxiety.
And it's just like it's a reasonably nice effect.
But by the way, one thing that's important to mention
is one of the biggest challenges in all of this personalized
medicine and biohacking areas is that different people react
very differently to many compounds and to many meds.
Partially for genetic reasons.
So it turns out that our liver, which obviously metabolizes
medicines, is one of the most heterogeneous areas
of the human genome.
And there's a good reason for that,
because you would want to, if a tribe of humans
found new berries or mushrooms and ate them,
you don't want all of them to die.
You want it to be a very, very diversified kind of part
of the genome.
But the consequence of that is that different people metabolize
meds in very, very different ways.
So my favorite example is codeine,
which is a tranquilizer, essentially a painkiller,
rather, that gets metabolized into morphine by the liver.
And so some people have the gene that
have many copies of the gene that metabolizes codeine
into morphine.
And so they take some codeine that a doctor prescribed them,
and they get really fucking high, really high.
And for, like, 10 minutes.
And they call the doctor and say, doctor, that was awesome.
Can I have more?
It's only worked for, like, a little bit.
And the doctor writes in his notes,
potential drug addicts don't give any more morphine
derivatives.
And then someone else might have no copies of the gene.
And so the codeine just goes into the bloodstream
as an inert molecule that doesn't do anything.
And the guy calls the doctor and says, doc, doc,
this thing is not working.
Can you give me more?
And the doctor makes that same note.
How the guy's a drug addict.
And this is just one illustration of how primitive
modern medicine is, and also how heterogeneous we are as humans,
and how hard it is to build scalable solutions out
of personalized medicine.
So we've covered the neotropics once before.
And I think we've many times said the great values
of getting good sleep and exercise.
So I wanted to go a little deeper into the other things
then.
I think right now, the biggest thing that would stop me
is just not knowing how to get started on all of this.
Like, what would you recommend for someone
who wants to get something like this initiated?
You took that question right off my listing, Yash, way to go.
Yeah, I wrote a couple of big articles around this.
So I'll just send you the links to my blog.
And you can read those.
They're like 30, 45 minutes just to read the articles.
And it includes all my tests and all that stuff.
So you can read that just to get a sense of the details.
But I would definitely start with sleep.
So sleep is one that has a very significant impact.
And there's a number of things
that most people do wrong with sleep.
So the biggest ones are, first of all,
shifting sleep time from day to day.
So the reason that you don't want to do this is because,
so sleep is driven by two specific cycles in our brains.
One is the sleep pressure cycle,
which is that when you wake up,
a protein called adenosine starts accumulating in your brain.
And that's actually the protein that gets inactivated
by coffee, which is why coffee staves off sleep.
So the more adenosine appears in the brain,
the more desire to sleep there is.
And at some point you fall asleep.
And that's when adenosine gets cleared out of the brain.
And at the same time, there's another cycle,
which is the circadian rhythm,
which is melatonin and essentially exposure to sunlight,
et cetera.
And if those two cycles go out of whack,
where let's say today you go to sleep at nine
and tomorrow you go to sleep at one
and the next day you go to sleep at 10,
then those two cycles are misaligned.
And some of your sleep stages,
especially the early sleep stages,
which is when a lot of deep slow wave sleep happens.
So some of them will just perform in a suboptimal way.
And the important thing to realize
is that sleep is actually not passing out.
Sleep is a very, very active state
when a lot of bodily and body and brain systems
get repaired, cleaned, rejuvenated, et cetera, et cetera.
And there's a bunch of stages that the body,
that a sleep goes through.
And all of them are important.
And essentially if you're shifting your sleep time,
it's almost like you're living
in a permanent state of jet lag
and you're disrupting some of those stages quite severely.
So you're not disrupting your sleep by 10%.
It's more that you're taking a particular stage of it
and degrading it by, I don't know, 70% or 80%.
And that has a lot of negative effects,
both short-term and actually long-term as well.
So this is one thing,
it's just sleeping at the same time every day.
So I try to not shift my sleep
by more than 20 minutes a day.
It's really hard, it's really hard,
especially with travel.
But when I managed to get this done
for several weeks in a row,
I just know that I feel much better,
my mind is sharper, et cetera.
The next big thing is to sleep enough.
So it's really important to get something
at least seven and a half hours of real actual sleep.
And what that means since sleep efficiency
for young healthy people tends to be around 92%.
So you spend 92% of sleep
if you're doing a good job out of sleep,
maybe 85 or 80 if you're doing a bad job out of sleep.
So essentially, if you're spending seven and a half hours
in bed, you're actually sleeping
for probably like six and a half hours.
And again, there's some sleep stages
that happen towards the end of the night.
They're essentially like a particular sub-stage
of REM sleep.
And if you sleep for six hours
instead of seven and a half or eight hours,
then you significantly degrade those stages
and the functions that these stages have.
So I think those two are by far the biggest things
to do with improving sleep.
There's a bunch of other more minor things.
So I try to wear orange kind of blue light
blocking glasses several hours before sleep.
I don't drink caffeine for at least eight hours
before sleep.
So this is another thing by the way connected to genetics.
So about half of us are slow caffeine metabolizers
and half are fast.
The fast metabolizers metabolize caffeine
with a half life of about five hours,
which means that if you drink caffeine five hours
before sleep, then you still have half of it
in your brain binding adenosine at the time you go to sleep
and that's potentially disruptive.
And if you're a slow metabolizer,
I think your half life for caffeine is like nine hours.
And basically you shouldn't really be drinking coffee at all
because you're going to disrupt your sleep
unless you drink it at like eight in the morning.
So that's an interesting thing.
I used to drink coffee up until 6 p.m.
and think, oh, three hours is enough,
but actually caffeine half life is pretty long.
I've lately started drinking coffee again a cup a day
and it is kind of ruined my last week.
So I'm going to completely cut that crap out again.
Yeah, you should check out
whether you're a fast or slow metabolizer.
And did you do those tests?
No, so this is 23andMe is the first step?
Yeah, that's the cheapest step.
So do 23andMe, they'll send you the data
and then you connect it to the service
I mentioned earlier, Prometheus, pay them like five bucks
and then they'll give you a report
and that report you can easily parse.
So it's like a searchable archive with a nice UX
that you're going to be able to see,
hey, like search for sleep
or for whatever else you're interested in
and see all the genes you have
that are associated with that particular phenotype.
Interesting, you just also, sorry to go on a tangent.
You said UX, that's the first time I heard that.
Is that user experience?
Yeah, yeah, user experience.
Interesting, okay.
Sorry, this is like a thing
if you've been building websites or mobile apps.
No, I always heard UI before, but not UX.
These two are slightly different.
The UI-
The interface is how it looks,
the user experience is how it feels to use it, right?
Yeah.
Okay, all right, sorry,
I didn't mean to get off on a tangent there.
Oh, no, you're good.
I was going to mention too,
I've been taking the last week or so,
extended to release caffeine pills
because I don't drink coffee,
but I'll tend to take a caffeine pill in the morning.
And for whatever it's worth,
I got these on Amazon for like 15 bucks for 100 of them.
And they're so far, but I don't know a week or two in,
they're doing pretty well for me.
I find that I'm not tapering off around like 11 or noon
like I would if I took a regular caffeine pill
first thing in the morning.
And it metabolizes to be about 100 milligrams caffeine.
Interesting, I've never tried those.
I mean, yeah, I'd give them a shot
if you use caffeine to supplement your alertness.
I mean, I imagine if you're taking medaffinil every day,
you probably don't use caffeine on the daily,
but maybe you do.
I do because I already know,
so medaffinil and caffeine do combine,
so you got to be cautious with this
because you might get over stimulated
and that's going to be unpleasant.
But I've been taking this for so long
that I kind of know how much coffee I can drink
and I know the symptoms if I'm drinking too much.
Plus, I just really like the taste of caffeine
and it's kind of my morning psychological trigger
for starting to work.
So I kind of have a very, very, very standardized day
when I will get to a coffee shop around like 7 or 8 a.m.
and work there for six or seven hours every day.
And it's kind of like my morning routine
which really triggers me into working well
and kind of being in the flow all the time.
I love that your morning routine
starts with working for six hours.
Well, I really like that because it's...
So if I wake up and quickly get to doing a bunch of deep work
where I can focus without anyone distracting me
at an office or something like that,
then by 1 or 2 p.m., I feel like I've done
an enormous amount of productive work
and the entire day is still ahead of me.
So it's a pleasant sensation because then later on
in the day, I can just relax without the feeling of guilt
that I have to be doing something.
Plus, the sense of flow is so enjoyable.
It's one of the nicest, I think, things in life
is when you get super, super deeply engaged into something.
Yeah.
So, okay.
I like that a lot.
Yeah, that's awesome.
Can we go to the testosterone cycle then?
How did you start testing for that?
So I gradually just read a bunch of
just online materials and books
and that kind of thing on health.
Just over time by myself.
I've been doing this for about five years, I think,
five, six years.
And I started just reading.
There's a very nice book by Ray Kurzweil called
Transcend, The Nine Steps to Living Well Forever.
And it's a very good overview of a lot of the basics
in terms of kind of personalized healthcare.
And so I just looked at all the tests
that people are commonly doing in labs
for various disorders or for various diseases, et cetera.
And I just decided, hey, I'm gonna do all of this.
I've done tests, I've done like hundreds of tests at once
where I would go into a lab
and give them like 35 vials of blood.
And they would send me like a huge amount of data
that I would have an assistant enter
into an Excel spreadsheet.
And then I would go and just like research and geek out
and try to figure out what those numbers,
what they actually mean.
And I just saw, so with testosterone specifically,
I mean, obviously it's quite a famous molecule
because, hey, you're supposed to get better muscles
and you're supposed to have better sex
and you're supposed to basically feel better,
be in a better mood, be more energetic, more confident.
That all sounds fucking great.
So definitely served me up for more of that.
And I tested my levels over years
and kind of saw that it was like average-ish
and I'm not one of those people that's content
to have an average result, that's something.
Plus, I don't know about you guys,
but I grew up on role-playing games a lot.
And for me, this whole thing is like,
okay, you just got plus one to testosterone.
This is a primary step that gives you
plus 10 minutes per day of energy, that kind of thing.
So essentially, I was just kind of asking myself,
okay, can I do something about this?
And with testosterone specifically,
for a long time, I wouldn't really touch it
with any direct intervention.
So it's affected by a lot of kind of things like exercise
in the right way and sleeping the right way.
But before I started doing like hormone treatments,
I only really dared do those
once I got proper doctors advising me
because the hormone systems are fairly complicated.
And so specifically for testosterone,
you can have biochemical bottlenecks
in quite a large number of different parts
of the testosterone cycle.
So it could be that your problem
is that too much testosterone gets converted into estrogen
or that not enough testosterone is released
into free testosterone,
which is the biochemically active part
because you have too much of the protein
that finds free testosterone, that kind of thing.
And if you do something wrong there,
then it's quite easy to screw yourself up.
So specifically with hormones,
I think it's really important to be very sure
that what you're doing is the right thing,
consult with an endocrinologist, et cetera.
So it's just like kind of a tricky,
potentially dangerous thing.
But I have seen very nice effects.
So the testosterone bit was definitely very noticeable.
So it was a noticeable boost to energy.
It was a noticeable boost to basically mood
and it was a noticeable boost
to just like being horny all the time.
So, and I had like a very...
So the way we tuned that particular bottleneck that I have,
I had a very good reaction to it.
So my free testosterone rose by about
80% over two months and has stayed there ever since
for the last, I guess, like year and a half.
But that I've been tracking that
since we started doing this intervention.
So it's quite a significant change.
So it sounds like this is one of the ones
that is not very easy to hack by yourself.
You need medical professionals for this.
Yes, and I think, so hormones in general,
a lot of people appear to have screwed up hormones
for whatever reason.
It could be bad sleep practices.
It could be some toxic crap that we breathe
when we live in cities.
It could be stress related,
but hormones, I think like from what I've seen
of other people's results,
just about everyone has some kind of hormonal issue
and hormones are a very actionable thing
that can mostly be tuned.
But it's also something that, yeah, you're exactly right.
It's something that takes professional help
to really interpret in the right way.
Because if you start searching about that stuff online,
you're gonna have these crazy biochemical diagrams
of this thing conversing to that thing.
And it's just very hard to understand
unless you've been doing this for a while.
So what are the easier things that we can do at home
with kits that we order?
Sure, so I think, well, the first thing
I think that's really important to figure out
is what you want.
So what your specific objectives are.
Some people are very big on longevity.
Other people are very big on things like mood and energy.
I mostly, my primary concern is really to do with performance.
Because I think the longevity part of things,
I think other people will solve for me
by the time my natural health span and lifespan is up.
So given the way the trends are going.
But so I think the most important thing
is to just start with the why you are doing this.
And if your goal is, let's say, energy
and mood, then definitely sleep.
Definitely, so exercising in the right way.
And really the right kinds of exercise.
The best kinds of exercise for downstream hormonal
and metabolic impacts are, first of all, hip hinge exercises.
So things like deadlifts and squats and leg presses.
And the reason those are very effective
is because you're exercising by far
the largest muscles of the body.
So your leg muscles and your glutes,
they're really, really large
and they're relatively far from your heart.
So you're essentially really getting much more bang for the buck
from one squat than you do from one bicep curl.
So if you are doing a lot of things like hip hinge exercise,
kind of reducing your fat percentage,
upping your muscle percentage,
then that's helpful because your body is just,
I don't think I'm the best person
to really describe all of the effects,
but you do get more energetic.
You do get more hormone production from those things.
Another thing I would look into
is called high-intensity interval training.
So the main idea is that instead of running on the treadmill
for an hour at the same pace,
you do really, really aggressive kind of speed ups
and slow downs.
So where you will warm up for five minutes,
race all out for 20 seconds,
rest up for a minute and a half,
race up for 20 seconds again,
and do that like eight times in a row.
And what that does is it stimulates your cardiovascular system
to improve because you're kind of pushing it to the limit.
And it also stimulates more mitochondria
to appear in your cells
because you're also pushing the cells to the limit.
And those things appear to be having an impact
on energy kind of down the line.
So in terms of, if you want to specifically talk about meds
and things like that,
then I mean, Medafinal definitely gives energy
as I think you've, as you've obviously experienced.
Yeah, so I think you really have to think about
what exactly you want
and kind of take a systematic approach
and gradually look for opportunities
to get some kind of results.
And then when you get a quick win of some kind,
then you will find additional motivation to keep exploring,
to keep exploring this.
So yeah.
How hard is it to find these wins with things like 23andMe
and Prometheus?
It's not trivial.
It's not trivial.
So I think it's much harder than to find quick wins
with just things like sleeping well and eating right
and exercising right and meditating
and getting psychotherapy or whatever.
So digging into biochemistry is harder
just because a lot of people have fairly unique situations
and there's a lot of data out there that you can get.
But it's really hard to interpret that data
without just like spending a lot of time researching
about it yourself and talking to people who are knowledgeable
and just really digging.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, that's where the hacking part comes in, right?
You gotta sit down and actually really do the work.
Yes, exactly.
And I think that it's totally worth it
because it is a thing that affects everything else.
So I think in general, moving into the future,
people who really heavily invest into this kind of thing
will be able to use it to develop additional wealth,
not just financial, but also intellectual
because I have this additional energy,
I can spend time taking cool courses on Coursera
and learning about biochemistry or about nanotechnology
or something else.
And that's an asset that I built
and that asset I think in the future
is going to help develop more financial returns,
more intellectual returns, et cetera,
that can be reinvested into more biohacking.
And that's where the whole thing with divergence
in human capabilities is going to happen.
I think it's already is happening,
especially as more and more technology is going to appear
more and more data, more ability to interpret the data,
et cetera.
So it seems like I almost feel like this is a necessity
if you want to be working in a highly competitive area
or if you want to achieve something really, really major
that a lot of other people want to achieve,
it's really, you've got to understand how your body works
and figure out how to tune it
or you're running the risk of basically becoming obsolete
because other people will do it
and the returns in society are going to consolidate
to those people and you don't want to be
off of that bandwagon.
If you were to say get these tests done
and run a 23andMe and go through an interpreter,
do you think like one weekend of sitting down
for 12 hours a day for two days in a row would be enough
or is this like a multiple weekends long sort of project?
Good question.
I really like how you asked that.
I think that in one, I think in two days
of intensive focus, you will understand a lot.
So the first day, you're just gonna read
a whole bunch of stuff and it'll all feel very confusing
and overwhelming and then, you know,
you could sleep on that for several days
and then come back to it again.
And so I think it's more of a one weekend,
we'll get something interesting.
There's specifically in terms of 23andMe,
there's not that many genes that are very well known
in terms of their effect.
So the one that I have a mutation in
is a fairly well known one.
There's other ones, there's some that are specifically
like introduce significant cancer risks
or something like that.
There's one particular gene that introduces
or reduces Alzheimer's risk, that's quite important,
but not that many genes are well mapped out.
If you, I think that's what's more actionable
is if you take, if you do lots of blood tests.
So, and really test out your lipid profile.
So kind of how much heart disease risk you have,
your hormone profile.
So, you know, you might not want to do something
without a professional, but at least you'll know
that there's something potentially interesting.
Your glucose metabolism profile.
By the way, all of this is also listed in my article.
So you'll be able to see kind of all the tests
that I've done and you can just copy that.
Oh, perfect.
Yeah, yeah, totally.
And that's the, that you can definitely get value
out of in a weekend because you're gonna find
that for example, you might have some lipid screw up.
And, you know, that means that you should be more cautious
about things like heart disease risk over time
or you're gonna find out that you have
really shitty vitamin D, which most people have
in the northern hemisphere anyway.
Well, I guess not in the latitude that you guys
and I live at.
Yeah.
So, yeah, things like that.
You're definitely going to find actionable,
useful stuff in a weekend off digging into the data.
And to get that data, like you said,
find a Google like a phlebotomist,
get a bunch of blood draws and then take them to a lab.
Will the lab do it without a doctor's prescription?
So there are some people who will do it.
So if you Google these guys called Life Extension Foundation,
they're a website that sells fairly high quality supplements
and they also sell blood tests.
So for example, I'm just gonna Google this real quick.
So let's say I'm assisting Life Extension.
Anyway, I can't quite find it,
but if you just go on their website
and check out the different tests that,
oh yeah, there we go.
So you go to lifeextension.com, blood tests,
and then you can see, for example,
let's see, B12 status panel.
And for 50 bucks, they will test several things
related to your vitamin B12 metabolism
or for, let's say, for 70 bucks,
they will test your free testosterone
and total testosterone.
So it's still, it's not cheap,
but it's much cheaper than lab testing.
And you can just buy that online.
I'm not sure exactly how the blood draw stuff works,
but there's phlebotomists.
I don't know, in San Francisco,
I had a phlebotomist who would come and draw my blood
for like 30 bucks or whatever tests I wanted.
And they would just come to my apartment
and do it in the morning.
So it's other countries, it's much easier.
So in Russia, I get, I think like 150 different biomarkers
tested for a total of, I think like by now 400 bucks.
450 bucks.
So in the US, it's gonna be more expensive,
but you can definitely get a lot of this stuff done.
Excellent.
I personally take NAD plus every day supplements.
Do you, have you looked into those at all?
Do you know anything about it?
I take NAD plus.
So I think with supplements,
my philosophy is basically as follows.
I actually, I take a shit load of supplements.
I take, I think 60 or 70 pills a day.
Holy shit.
Really drawing that inspiration from Ray Kurzweil.
Yeah.
That's not including the prescription drugs.
So prescription drugs, I think I take about 12 or 13.
But with supplements, I mean, my philosophy is pretty simple.
So the most important thing is to make sure
that the supplement cannot be harmful.
And certain supplements like iron supplements
or calcium supplements, it is possible for them
to be harmful, although they could also be
situationally useful depending on what you have,
what you have going.
But most supplements are definitely not harmful
because, you know, taking, I don't know, green tea extract
or, you know, vitamin D12 or omega three fish oil,
you know, those things are mostly food,
just concentrated food and you're making sure
that you get plenty, plenty of them.
And I imagine that probably half of the stuff I take
is completely useless, but I don't know exactly
which half it is and some of them are plausible.
It's plausible that they are useful
and none of them are likely to be harmful.
As long as, you know, you buy them
from very highly reputable high quality suppliers
and you're careful and, you know, you make sure
that you're not taking something
that is actually going to be bad for you.
So I kind of take the philosophy of like,
hey, you know, I'll collect the potential upside
plus I get placebo value.
I think placebos are fucking awesome.
So because you have no downside, you just have upside
and you just have to believe in it.
So yeah, that's like a fairly well-reproduced effect
in medicine, although some people challenge its existence,
but, you know, it's just so with supplements,
I think most of them, I don't know how useful they are,
but I still take them because they could be useful.
Okay.
Do you got anything, Stephen?
So my goals basically are to feel more alert
and more cognitively engaged throughout the day.
So I've been the last several months,
I've been going to the gym a few hours a week,
working on better sleep,
but that's really what I wanted to ask you about.
So I historically am always a terrible sleeper.
I've got a nice bed, comfortable pillow.
I keep doing it at a good temperature.
I do all the, what I feel like the external things
I can do, but I sleep poorly every, basically every night.
There's a few nights a year where I wake up
and feel like, oh man, I feel great.
Most of the time I go to bed tired and wake up tired.
So like, do you have any, have you discovered anything
for people who try to have good sleep hygiene
but sleep poorly nonetheless?
So there's, I think several things I would look into.
One is, first of all, just make sure that you measure it.
So by like, I really like Aura, O-U-R-A.
It's a ring type device that tracks your sleep
by essentially flashing light through the thin part
of the skin under the finger and figuring out stuff to do
with blood pressure, sorry, not blood pressure,
heart rate, heart rate variability, et cetera.
So that's just a useful tool to really figure out
what is going on, whether you're waking up a bunch
of times at night and you don't remember
or you're not getting enough of a particular sleep stage
or something else, that's the first thing.
Another thing I would consider is going to a sleep lab.
So a sleep lab is basically where you go and sleep
in the hospital and they will hook you up
to a bunch of equipment like those caps on your head
and oxygen sensors and stuff like that.
And sometimes people find that they have a sleep disorder,
for example, sleep apnea, which is a condition
where people, essentially people's oxygen supply
gets a little bit disrupted at night
and it makes them wake up, like have a tiny awakening
and then fall back asleep without noticing,
but it's disrupting the sleep stages.
So I would test for that.
And then after that, I would kind of keep track
with the ordering and experiment.
So try not eating after like 3 p.m.
Try meditating before bed
or just like doing something really, really relaxing.
I mean, definitely don't drink coffee or alcohol
because those two are really disruptive to sleep.
And I guess just keep reading about the issue
because sleep is like a super, super complex human behavior
and we don't know that much about it.
There's a great book you should read called Why We Sleep.
It's by the guy who's the head of the Berkeley sleep lab.
Awesome book, like really easy to read
and tells a lot about what we've learned about sleep
and what kind of experiments are going on
in sleep research right now, et cetera.
And I just learned a lot from it.
So I think those are some things tried different temperatures.
So I found that I need to be cold in order to sleep well.
So I need to be at 18 degrees Celsius.
I don't remember what that is in Fahrenheit,
but it's basically fairly chilly.
How long has it been since you have slept like on your own?
I know a lot of people who are in relationships
will actually get separate beds
because just your partner moving
can sometimes make things harder on you.
Yeah, that's a good point.
So I've been, I've had a partner sleep in my bed
for, we share a bed rather for like the last seven years.
This has been going on longer than that.
And I wake up, I'm aware of the wakeups
that I have in the middle of the night.
I'm basically aware of, well, I guess I can't say
every toss and turn, cause I don't know the ones
I'm not aware of, but I'm aware of several per night.
I just get up, you know, change orientation,
roll over, go back to sleep or something.
But I'm aware of a lot of those.
I think I'm just a light sleeper.
Yeah, that sounds awful.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, I'm used to it, but yeah, it does kind of suck.
I'm tired a lot.
So I'll check out the aura and that's pretty cool.
I think, I think just experiments.
I mean, some people find really weird things
will help them sleep.
So for example, I sometimes find that
if I take a really cold ice shower,
it actually knocks me out after I get under the covers.
So it's just like experiment and try to find out
what the drivers of quality sleep are for you.
Okay, cool.
We are coming up on our hour.
Steven, did you have other things?
Yeah, I was actually just curious in general.
How did you find out about the podcast?
This is our first international conversation here.
I'm into the whole rationalist community.
I'm one of the people that really want to live forever
and merge with the machines in some way.
And essentially, I find a lot of the discussions
in the rationalist community to be interesting.
So I'll read Star Slate Codex, et cetera.
Although I think Scott Alexander doesn't like me
because he thinks that I'm too aggressive
in my articles that I write
and that I give transhumanists a bad name.
So I think I just found you guys through some part of that
and I listened to a number of podcasts and liked them.
And then I saw that Rob McIntyre,
who I know through Y Combinator,
has had a couple of podcasts with you guys.
And I'm like, oh, I love the rationalist community.
I want to go talk to these guys.
Awesome, awesome.
Well, yeah, I'm glad you got in touch.
This has been really cool.
No, that's really interesting.
And now I'm glad you reached out.
This has been really fun to learn about.
And I mean, I think if Scott Alexander
said anything bad about you,
I think that's how you know you've made it, right?
If somebody as big as Scott has given you a hard time.
Yeah, but, uh-huh, go ahead.
Okay, I do have one final sort of question,
which is tangentially related.
So I like all this, you know, life being awesome
and being productive and all this,
but I also go out generally once a week
where I am up really late
and it throws off my sleep schedule
and I drink alcohol and that fucks everything up.
And is this just something that is not possible to do
or I have to accept that I'm going to have, you know,
a lower productivity in my life if I do this every week?
Cause I really enjoy it.
I think it's important to just, you know,
decide what kind of trade-offs you want to make where
because I mean, anytime you change your sleep schedule
significantly, it's going to have some negative effects.
So I'll do this from time to time as well.
And I, you know, we haven't talked about it,
but I'm really big on using things like MDMA and LSD
for biohacking purposes as well.
MDMA is a great drug for helping kind of social intelligence
and helping, I guess, especially for someone introverted
to help develop social skills and extroversion
and that kind of thing.
But, you know, every time I take something like that,
that is part of, you know, a night long thing
and that knocks out my sleep schedule
for the next several days.
So I think it's just most of the time,
like I don't like alcohol because I think it's just like,
there's better ways to get high.
It is one of the shittiest drugs, yeah.
And it is really bad for you.
And I feel bad after I drink alcohol.
And so I just completely gave that up.
But I mean, you know, there's always trade-offs in life.
So I guess like you got to just like say, okay,
this is what I want and this is why I prefer
to keep this particular thing.
Plus, you know, for me, like I cannot fully kick sugar
because I'm quite addicted to it.
I sometimes managed to go without sugar at all
for like a month, but then I'll have a stressful event
of some kind and I'll start eating some cookies
and then, you know, it just goes downhill from there.
So, you know, I don't think it's possible
to just like be perfect with respect
to all of these things or to be like super religious about it.
It's important to just say, hey, like here are the impacts
this is having and I want to make better choices.
Generally, some choices will still be bad,
but that's just, you know, part of the human condition.
Yeah, awesome.
Well, I think I have covered most things I wanted
and we're running low on time.
Did you have any last things, Stephen?
I have one last question not at all related
to the previous topics.
I was, you know, we don't get someone from Oskow
on the line so far ever.
And I can't help but ask, is there any sentiment, you know,
to the average citizen over there?
Or rather, what is the sentiment regarding President Donald
Trump in the US or is that come up over there?
I'm curious to sort of what the feeling is on the ground.
I think I'm not the right person to ask because I'm, you know,
I live part of the time in the US and part of the time here
and part of the time in Europe.
And I kind of grew up in the UK and the US.
So I get the sense that people here, I don't even know, actually.
So I think people, when he won, a lot of people
were quite happy with that.
But yeah, I have no idea.
And I try to, one of the big things
that I try to do as part of my work related to mental health
is I just try to really not get exposed to that stuff at all.
That's fair.
Yeah.
I mean, it's just news and social media and all of that stuff.
I think that they kind of suck time and attention.
And I think, you know, they actually kind of reduce
intelligence because if we think about intelligence
as an applied ability to, you know, focus and get stuff done.
So I've really deliberately, so I have, like,
all the news, like The New York Times or Wall Street Journal,
et cetera, I have a band on all my devices.
So I can't actually even go and see it.
And I've been trying to kind of get off of that because I cannot do
anything about Donald Trump or about Kim Jong-un or about Putin.
So it's outside of my circle of influence.
So I mean, I kind of shouldn't care, especially since the media really
makes quite a negative narrative out of the whole thing.
And I feel like if I listen to that a lot, then it'll make me more stressed
and it'll make me a more negative person.
So I take the idea of, like, filtering my own information space quite seriously
because it's almost like, hey, if you listen to Donald Trump,
then some of your neurons become orange.
You know?
Yeah, I think that's a very good answer.
Every now and then I have a news blackout just for, like, a week.
And I noticed that nothing, like, the news you get is not actionable, you know?
If someone in Washington is doing something, what the hell are you going to do?
Yeah, exactly. Exactly.
And if there is some news that's actionable because it's really related
to, you know, your work or your business, someone's going to tell you about it.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah. So I guess, like, in conclusion, I just, like,
would encourage the listeners to really explore the whole area around personalized
health and preventative medicine because, you know, the things that people die from
nowadays are not singular events like diseases of, you know, like flu or something like that.
But it's mostly lifelong metabolic diseases.
So these are lifelong processes that you can act to reduce or prevent to some extent.
Plus, you know, the body is really the thing that everything else is based on.
And there's a very great deal of depth to dig into here.
So we talked a little about sleep and sports and stuff like that.
But I also find that everything to do with mental health, so things like meditation
and psychotherapy, et cetera, are super important for just your well-being and for
your ability to get the things that you care about done on a daily basis.
So I would just really encourage digging into this and learning because it's a very important
system and it's worth it to invest into it.
Fantastic.
Yeah, I think that's awesome.
Awesome.
And I'll send you the links to the articles that I write about this stuff.
And, you know, if you have any comments or questions or someday we'll have another conversation
I would love that because, you know, like I said, I love the rationalist community.
It's one of the communities full of really, really smart people who think about things
in novel and interesting ways.
Awesome.
Well, you take the next word out of my mouth.
That's going to ask for those links.
So perfect.
OK.
I think it's a lot of fun.
Thank you so much for coming on.
Thank you, guys.
Have a nice day.
Thanks.
You too.
Should we get into listener feedback and things?
Let's do it.
All right.
There's a joke.
I'm assuming a joke comment on the subreddit for the last episode, the 98% likelihood that
this episode is about Pataculous.
It says 60 to 98% is a very wide range, but it's episode 60.
Yes.
Yes, it is.
Oh, that's even better then.
Yeah, I mean, episode 60, 98% chance.
I listened to that episode and it was really interesting.
Cool.
Yeah, totally agree.
That was awesome.
Did you sign up for Pataculous yet?
Not yet.
I should.
I signed up and I had some.
I'm in accounting, so the end of my month is always a bit light.
So I signed up at work and just answered a bunch of questions while I was there.
That's awesome.
OK.
I'll do that.
I've got time.
I hope you have a red pick for this week because I did not read through the ones that
I have, and so I am not prepared to present them.
If you don't, that's OK.
We'll just get skip it this week, not rat pick a rat chat subject.
Rat chat.
Do you ever watch the flinally?
No.
I think that was before your time.
It was a brief empty V show with sock puppets, which I thought was really fun, but they
had rock facts and the intro to that section was one of the for one of the for Rockfax
Rockfax Rockfax.
We should do something like that.
That sounds funny and like borrow a drummer and just have them bang out this thing.
We go one of the for one of the for a rat chat, rat chat, rat chat.
I could take it.
As long as you do the noise, I'm not very high energy.
OK.
And from emails has a question.
If we would like to change the world for the better, it seems quite reasonable to have
more rationalists in it.
And I agree.
That's kind of why I did the HPMOR audio book.
It's why I do this.
I'm hoping that some people will get sucked into it through this sort of thing.
They continue and seemingly a no, it seems as if a lot of children do get influenced
by their parents on who they become as a person, myself included.
For the good, by the way, thanks mom and dad.
Also keeping in mind from the Malthusian trap, shouldn't rationalists do their part in
bettering the society as a whole by introducing to it more people trained in the art of rationality
from a young age, people who will be more altruistic, open minded, better scientists
and researchers and so on?
Seems to me a very reasonable thing to do and a big influence on deciding if you should
have children.
If you do not have any other reasons why you would not want to.
A young mind is much easier to change and adapt or even think up new ideas.
Another part would be trying to convert, I'm making this sound like a cult aren't I, as
many people as possible, but that's a more difficult task.
And see, I'm all about the converting, although not necessarily using that particular word.
I mean, that's like I said, that's the reason I do this sort of thing to, well, that and
it's fun, but to try to, to try to get it out there more.
And I think HPM are in particular has been really successful in doing that, which again,
is all aliases are so fucking awesome.
I just made a podcast of it.
But I think one of the reasons the rationale that is important, and I know I've said this
before is because as we continue to increase lifespan and eventually get indefinite lifespans,
then we can no longer count on killing all the old people who don't disagree with us
through old age.
And we actually have to learn how to best incorporate new evidence and change our minds
as opposed to letting the opposition die off.
And so I think the rationality is vital as we head into the future.
But I also, I realized that having children is one of the easiest and most effective
ways to spread an ideology, and which is one of the reasons why religions that focus on
that are successful and I also banning contraception is a good memetic move for things that are
hard to teach adult or convince adults.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There's a magic man that watches you masturbate.
Only sounds reasonable if you've been brought up to believe that, but I think first of all,
it feels like cheating to me because the young minds are so vulnerable.
It's not like you're going in there and convincing someone with good rationalist arguments.
You're just hacking into their brain from when they're young, and it's an important
fight.
Isn't cheating, you know, a legit move, right?
It's called technique.
That's right.
So yes, in an important fight, you just want to win and you don't care if there's cheating,
and I think if we have to rely on outbreeding the opposition, we'll lose anyway.
That's fair, but maybe we need to keep a critical mass.
Yeah.
Yeah, that too.
I mean the shakers managed to abstinence themselves out of existence, which is too bad because
they seemed pretty groovy Quakers, shakers shakers were like the Quakers except not
allowed to have sex.
Okay, just probably one of the reasons they shook so much that might be it.
I don't know, but I
I understand the the reasonableness of that particular argument.
I just hate the conclusion and I am not going to have kids myself.
I don't know.
How do you feel about the situation as someone who has considered procreating?
I considered and disregarded the idea years ago.
Oh, you did?
Yeah, I don't know.
I thought you were still a little bit on the fence about it.
Not even a little.
No, I've never really wanted kids.
Okay.
Did I not come across that way during our kids episode?
I think I mentioned being briefly like attracted to the idea, but not, I mean, at the end
of the day, I couldn't handle three years of poor sleep and constantly having human
shit under my fingernails and, you know, the constant anxiety of like, is this thing going
to die and it'll be my fault?
But like, I think, you know, all right, let me articulate this.
Anecdotally, Julia Galev mentioned that her parents, the way that they raised her and
her brother played a big influence on how they turned out.
And it was largely just being like treating them like people.
And if they said, you know, look, is this fair?
Why are we doing this?
They would say, you know what?
I thought about it and I think you're right.
Like, if you get that once every few months from your parents, I think that does a big
thing that like, hey, good reasoning can actually play a big role in my life.
I know my evangelical streak comes from being raised as a Jehovah's Witness.
Yeah.
I think if your goal is to like just get into people's heads when they're malleable, I had
very like informative instructors in school, you know, especially when they're like old
enough, I guess, to take philosophy classes, you know, at that point, you get a lot of
people who are already like super gridlocked into whatever they believe.
But I think you expose young adults to like what a real argument looks like and what
it's like to encounter a position that you disagree with.
I remember a lot of good exercises be like, you know, who believes evolution should be
taught in schools or who believes it shouldn't.
And people would raise their hands either way and they would say, OK, cool.
The people who raised their hands saying it should be taught in schools.
You guys come together with an argument about why it shouldn't.
And then vice versa for the other group.
And just the idea of like trying to put forward a compelling position for an argument
you disagree with is good practice.
And I think, you know, everything I'm getting at is if your goal is to maximize the
number of new rationalists through indoctrination, you might do really good teaching.
You only have so many kids, you know, a dozen is probably at the super high end.
But, you know, more likely two or three.
So, granted, they could go on to have their own.
But who has that many generations to keep track of?
So, well, I mean, that's that's where the long term thinking comes in.
Like the Catholic Church is just great about this thing because they don't care
about what happens in the next few years or the next few decades even.
I mean, they do to an extent.
But what they're really looking at is what happens generations down the line.
Yeah, I think they've done really fucking well for themselves.
Yeah, they're like they when when they force people to convert, right?
It's there's this old saying, I don't remember who said it and it's nice and
pithy, but the whole a man convinced against his will is of the same opinion still.
And the Catholic Church responses, that's fine.
We don't give a fuck if you actually believe or not.
As long as you raise your kids this way and your kids raise their kids this way,
your grandkids are going to believe.
So fuck you, we win.
Yeah, I think rationality doesn't have the same stick that we can hit people with
though.
So like the other thing is that I strongly suspect that many of us don't
see a 10 generation down the line thing timeline that we can plan for, right?
You know, so if the world's going to be radically different in a century,
we don't have, you know, a dozen generations to work through.
I also have this into not really an intuition.
It seems that a lot of who people are is based on their genes that that is in.
I that sounds stupid to say now that I've said it out loud because yeah,
duh, of course, but I just mean to the point where it doesn't matter all that
much how you're raised.
I mean, it matters to an extent, but your genes tend to matter more.
And so I think, God, like when my dad told me that he was secretly an atheist
the whole time, I was like, you motherfucker.
And then like a month later, I was like, huh, that kind of bred true.
Like even though they raised me strictly in this super fundamentalist religion,
my dad wasn't atheist.
My mom's kind of like, you know, whatever.
And so despite the conditioning of being in this religion, I broke atheist anyway,
as did both my brothers.
It seems the genes kind of overwhelmed the education part of that.
Or it could be that they weren't thorough enough in their indoctrination.
That's possible.
You don't want to live through it.
I mean, did they seem like they were being super sincere all the time or did they
just like go through the motions?
I'm not sure if I would be able to tell the difference, but it certainly seemed
like they were sincere.
Like I was legit shocked when my dad came out as an atheist, secret atheist.
That's yeah.
That's super surprising.
I wonder what value they thought they were giving you by raising you that way.
Oh, you know, community and all the, all the standard, aren't there less
ostracizing communities like the Unitarian church or something?
Well, and all the general religious propaganda that you need religion to
teach your kids morals and all that other stuff that people didn't know any
better until fairly recently, you know.
Until 20 years ago.
Yeah, that I wonder if so, you know, there that goes to his point, though,
like if you want more rationalist in the world, you need people who are
rationalists propagating their genes, because if you try to teach someone
who's innately not that way, it won't stick.
I don't know.
I suspect that religiosity is more nurture than nature, but I mean, you have
a good anecdote that that is counter evidence.
So yeah, but I mean, on the other hand, I still have that evangelical fervor
that was that was brought to me by my religion.
It's just it has been usurped into the into evangelizing for atheism and
rationalism, depending on what period of my life I was in, you know,
like when I was in my teens and twenties, I was a huge crusader for atheism.
Yeah, I went through that phase too.
And then I realized that it was a lot of the same arguments and it wasn't
it lost its fun pretty quickly.
But I was bouncing back from a very mild religious upbringing.
So I was bouncing back from a very serious one.
I can imagine being way in it, way further in it for longer.
Oh, shit.
I had something that's going to say about, uh, well, I had something.
Let's just pretend I said something really smart there.
Cool, Stephen, that was amazing.
Thank you.
You have changed my mind.
I will have all the children now.
Perfect.
Now it wasn't about, it wasn't about procreating.
I can't remember what it was, but it was, uh, you know, oh, I don't know what I was
going to say, you, you guys also, you and your brothers became, you know,
atheists in the last 20, 30 years, uh, like the last generation or so.
But atheism as a whole has been going way up during that time too.
Right.
So that seems to be more counter evidence that it was genetically based.
It's true.
Yeah.
Cause really non religiousities on the, been on the upswing for decades anyway.
Um, and you know, I think even just 20, 30 years ago was some thought, some sub
5% or something and now it's up to almost 20%.
Yeah.
Um,
that is, that is faster than, than breeding atheists could account for.
It's just, I think propagation of ideas.
Yeah.
Um, and that's, you know, the more, I see things like rationality and, and, you
know, critical thinking and open minded discussion of ideas being more popular
going forward, cause that just seems to be more required to have a life in the
first world.
Yeah.
Um, you're interacting with people that, you know, didn't grow up in your bubble
every day.
Um, so whether, you know, it's at work or a lot of people, you know, there's a
correlation between non religiosity and liberalism and higher education.
Cause you know, you go away from home.
Typically you're not surrounded by the same safety nets or bubble walls or
whatever that you were raised in.
I've heard them referred to as lightning rods.
You could hit struck by the, the lightning of new knowledge and realization, but
then you have this community to ground you where all that gets channeled
through you and you renew your faith.
And so if you are taken away from that, you don't have that lightning rod
anymore and when the lightning hits you, it blows the roof off your mind.
Man, I can dig it.
Yeah, that might be it, but anyway, I predict this will go on the way up, but
whether or not it's happening fast enough to save the world, I don't know.
So, uh, probably mention this at some point, but Jesus didn't have any
children and yet his influence is huge.
So not necessarily, you don't necessarily have to have children to impact the future.
That's true.
Just be a great cult leader.
Yeah.
Oh, shit, Yudkowsky.
Oh, no, no, no.
Scott Alexander is the one true Caliph, sir.
I don't know.
He, he's less of a like upfront public figure.
Yes.
And I think less charismatic, that's what I was going to use a little bit.
I mean, well, no, that's a good word for it.
That's what I was thinking of, but he, it's not, I think he's less breaking.
He's not doing a lot of like new ground, new breaking new ground.
He's digging awesome trenches in this new ground that's been broken.
And he's, and he's kicking tons of ass there, but, um, I don't know.
Going more for depth rather than breadth.
Maybe he also covers more topics than, than the sequences or something.
But I wonder if he'd be half as successful without less wrong, having been a precursor.
Yeah.
Right.
So I suspect not.
Well, and as early training, you know, that too, he was one of the first
rationalists on the boards there.
Yeah, that's true as your vein.
Yeah.
I mean, get on, get online and, you know, I think my advice would be if you're
trying to increase rationalists, get online and proselytize through whatever
medium you want, um, grab a microphone like we do, uh, talk to, you know, if
you're, want to make your life out of it, you know, run, um, you know, some sort
of an education thing, whether it's like a, I don't know, work at CIFAR or
something, right?
Yeah.
Um, I think, you know what?
I think a lot of it comes down to comparative advantage for some people
having kids is one of the best things they could do in part because they're
good at it and they enjoy it.
Whereas for people like us, we would not be good at it and we would not enjoy it.
And our, our skills are probably better put to other uses.
Yeah.
That's probably about right.
That said, you know, if you're going to have kids, I steal every incentive to
make them, you know, young little rationalists.
I think it would be awesome, um, you know, I don't know how they'd go through
public school, not being, you know, or being raised to not capitulate to stupid
authority arguments or, you know, if they can't get along with their peers or
something, because their peers are all regular kids, but, um, there's got to be
some way to make that work.
Are you worried that we are drawing, that we have already drawn our bottom line?
Do you remember that post?
Yeah.
Okay.
But what, what line are you thinking that we've drawn?
Well, that we've, we already decided that we don't want kids and we don't want
to accept that raising kids is the best way to go forward with this.
And so now we're making all the arguments that we can find against it, but we
already decided where we want to be and we're trying to get there as opposed to
looking at things the way they actually are.
Now that you pointed it out, I still don't feel that way, given that I don't
want to have kids, what else can I do is I'm raising the question and I'm not
thinking, all right, now that I'm starting, you know, picture picking my life
from scratch, how do I want to do it to maximize this?
But I still also think that if, you know, you're teaching 60 kids a day, you
know, at a college or something and you get through to two of them a semester,
that's still more kids than you could ever have over a few years.
So if that's bottom line thinking, it's not jumping out of me.
All right.
Well, there you have our non-answer.
Thank you for the email though.
It sparked some interesting conversation.
Yeah.
I mean, I, I'm not, if someone's looking for like instructions on what to do, I'm
not even prepared to touch that.
I'm prepared to give, give my thoughts on things, but you can't ask me what you
want, what, what to do with your life, do whatever you feel like doing and then
kick ass at it.
That's my advice.
Yeah.
At this point, Stephen and me went on a 20 minute digression about the Marvel
cinematic universe.
If you would like to hear that, it's up on our Patreon for subscribers.
All right.
Next question.
Okay.
Ah, yes.
Uh, James on our website, the basin conspiracy.com posted in the comments on
the getting schooled episode, I feel like it was overlooked that the reason
charter schools exist is to privatize schools to divert, is to privatize schools
to divert money from poor minorities and unions specifically.
The more the system is dicked around, the worse it is, and the more they can cut
slash pocket the money from it.
This starved the beast strategy is a well known tactic for conservative pro
business political operators.
So yeah, the claim is charter schools exist specifically to pull money away from
poor and minority groups.
Um, I am not an economist or a school scientist.
I have no idea if that's true.
I could see other compelling arguments being made that like, um, I happen to
live in like an area without great schools and all my kids to go to a great
school and I can provide for that.
So like, that's why I wanted to exist.
Not just to fuck minorities and poor kids, but, um, I can see that it also
does that, but I don't know if that's like the purpose.
I think I kind of want to disagree with him to the point where I think the
opposite is true.
Like if you live, the reason people move to really fancy pricing neighborhoods
is at least 80% of the reason that I've ever heard is because they want their
kids to go to good schools because in America, at least schools are funded by
property taxes.
So you go to the most expensive area you possibly can afford to live in and then
your kids go to the schools there and they get a good education and that that
is kind of what helps fuck the poor schools.
Right?
Is because they live in poor areas with poor property taxes.
And I think if there was a charter school rule where every person can get $2,000
to send their kids somewhere else, if they wanted to, the rich people in the
rich areas would just keep sending their schools kids to the public school because
it's just as good.
I mean, I've seen some really fucking nice public schools out there in the rich
areas, whereas the people in the poor neighborhoods are the ones with the
schools that are crumbling, that have horrible discipline issues within the
classrooms where people are just making noise and fucking around with the teacher.
And those are the ones that would most benefit from going to some place that
isn't falling apart.
Yeah, I can see that too.
I clearly don't have a very strong opinion on this.
Okay.
I just, it's like, I see his point in a way because the way that these things are
supposed to work is that all of society gets together and then provides free
schools for everyone.
And in theory, once you start taking that money away and giving it to people who
want to go to different schools, it's the rich people that want to put their
kids in private schools, so they're just getting extra money and they're taking
it away from the pot of people.
But when it comes down to in the real world, the poor area of schools are the
worst ones and they're the ones where you most want to pull your kids out and
put them somewhere else.
I, my only thought on this really is, I remember the first time that I learned
that school funding comes from the, like the surrounding neighborhood.
I was so flabbergasted by that.
I didn't believe it until I was able to verify that with somebody else.
That blew my fucking mind.
That makes no sense.
Even, I think I learned this in like junior high or high school, you know, as a
young, you know, young high school or something, but it was, I was like a kid
and I was like, there's no way that's fucking true.
You tell it because all that would do is keep the poor areas poor and enhance
the rich neighborhoods.
Yep.
There's no way that it's that blatantly unequal.
And it turns out it was.
And so my only thought on this really is like, that's some horseshit.
It should be, uh, not funded from your surrounding neighborhood.
Yeah.
I can see how it got that way.
I can see kind of the reasoning for it, but I can't, for the life of me, get
why, uh, maybe the poor schools in the country get some support from the
government or something, but it's clearly not enough.
You know, teachers having to buy.
Supplies for their kids to use or like not everyone having access to a computer.
You know, uh, when I was in elementary school, I think that was when we first,
like my first time using a computer was one of the green text on black
background, old school computers.
I think clearly not cutting edge for the day, but they were like, they
taught us on them because they're like, Hey, you know what?
This is computer things really taking off.
We should kitchen out a type and shit.
Um, the idea that, you know, there are kids now who don't have access to
like learn the skills that are going to get them like real jobs.
It blows my fucking mind because their schools are funded by the poor neighborhoods.
Yeah.
I, I'm expressing, I'm running a loop because that still boggles my mind.
How anyone can look at this and be like, that makes sense.
This is good.
Let's not change this.
So yeah, I don't know what to say.
And I just, I disagree with the, with the concept also that if the cost of sending
a kid to a public school is $2,000 a year, which is what I think I heard for
vouchers around here.
Um, and you pull the charter school.
No, no, public school because that's at least in Colorado, the, the proposed
initiative and I don't remember where it went because I don't have kids and I
didn't track it, but the proposed initiative was it costs the state $2,000 a
year to put the kid through public school.
And so if you pull your kid out of public school and take me to private
school, we'll give you that $2,000 and you know, it seems to me that at that
point, you aren't actually costing the system.
Anything you sure this, the, the school gets $2,000 less for your kid.
But on the other hand, it doesn't have to teach when your kid, so it's saving
those $2,000.
So it's a breakeven proposition, right?
And I know that's not like literally true.
Like a school that was completely empty would still have the costs of paying
its teachers and, and keeping the building maintained.
So it's not perfectly scalable.
But if, if the estimate is $2,000 a kid, then giving that to the parents
who are pulling their kids out should be a net zero thing.
Yeah.
But what can anyone afford a private school for two grand a year?
Well, not, not the private schools as they exist now because they're for
rich people, right?
But if there was a thing where you could get 2000 a year for training kids,
then possibly in the poorest neighborhood, someone might be able to set up something.
I know that there are like some communities of homeschoolers that do, you
know, or it's like people are basically like teacher certified and stuff.
And they kind of do like a small neighborhood thing.
I think largely this is done in like a religious context where, you know, let's
not show them the books that have evolution and stuff in it.
But there, I'm sure not religious approaches to doing this.
And that sounds like the kind of thing that, you know, could cost under two
grand a kid per year.
Yeah, that's interesting.
It'd be hard because I was thinking two grand a kid that's, if you get 20 kids,
it's one classroom, that's only 40,000 a year.
I don't think that's enough to run a classroom and pay a teacher salary.
Oh yeah, you'll need volunteer teachers or something.
Maybe, and probably, you know, rented space.
I guess it's not big.
The group is, right?
If somebody just has like a really big, uh, well, no, I don't know.
I was going to say like half a dozen people could hang out in a room, but
that's not really enough.
Is it?
No, no, I don't know.
Yeah, I don't have a very informative opinion on this.
I'm trying to do that Robin Hansen thing where, well, not just Robin Hansen, but
he brought it to mind, um, on his episode with Sam Harris, where.
He per the chapter in the elephant in the brain on conversation, not saying
something when there's a topic that's up, makes you look poor in front of your,
your peers, right?
Cause you know, you're, you're showing that you don't have a tool for this
particular conversation.
And then, you know, that signals to them, oh, they might not have tools for
other things that could care about later.
So that's why everyone's so eager to talk all the time because they could
show off what they're talking, they could show off that they're useful for
other things that might actually matter.
But to fight that impulse, I feel like it's important to say, I really have no
idea what I really have no idea.
So rather than make up one on the spot, I'm going to just say that sounds possible.
But I, I'm going to sit this one out.
So if nothing else, I don't think the intention is to starve a public institution.
I think it is to provide people with other options and maybe as a result that
might, that might end up happening, but on the other hand, it also wouldn't happen
if the public institution was even halfway doing its job, right?
Maybe.
Maybe, okay.
All right.
All right.
I'm ready to, that is all I have for feedback for this week.
Sounds good.
Matt, you wrote another great question that I haven't forgotten about.
We're going to get to it, but I want to give it more time.
So it's my opinion from what I've seen of Jordan Peterson, this public figure in
Canada, who apparently feel some of the same niche that Sam Harris fills, you
know, not afraid to say things that are challenging to the left and, you know,
no, not, not a fan of like the liberal craziness that's shutting down, you know,
public speakers on campuses and whatever.
It's like, he's, he's filling that role, I think, a bit.
And it's my impression that the guy's a fucking crank and that he says a lot of
it's like whack-a-doo shit that makes, that is unsolvable and that couldn't exist
in a sound mind.
So like, I'll hear things like, oh yeah, you know, liberal feminists aren't
against Islam because deep down they're really seeking dominant male or domineering
males in their lives.
He said that?
Yes.
Holy shit.
I sent, I sent David a sound bite.
I don't know what the full context was.
It was him on some podcast or something.
So rather than a rat chat, what I want to ask is like, what people's thoughts are
on Jordan Peterson.
Oh, no.
No, no, no, no, no, not in a mean way.
No, no, not even in a mean way.
I just mean you are inviting a firestorm.
My impression after talking with David is that I was eventually moved to the
position that it might be like outsiders hearing about Sam Harris and they hear
some crazy things and they're like, oh, this guy must be fucking nuts.
Okay.
But once you hear the guy in context, you know, I think Harris holds very few
stupid ideas.
Can I tell you what I think of him?
Yeah, Peterson.
Yeah.
Okay.
So Sam Harris, I don't think it's a fair comparison because you can listen
to Sam Harris talk on one topic for an hour and you're like, oh, okay.
That, I mean, maybe I disagree with his particular opinion, but he is a thoughtful
person who has put some effort into thinking about this and he seems pretty sane.
You know, I have sat down and listened to Peterson for more than an hour, like
multiple hours, two, three hours probably at this point and I've given up because
the first thing I saw from him was fucking awesome.
It was a TV interview where this reporter was just trying to gotcha him, right?
And she, she was pushing buttons instead of having a map.
So she pushed this button and expected a gotcha in return.
And instead he was like, no, this, I'm not playing your game.
Here's why you, what you're saying is bullshit.
And she kept trying to get back there and get him into this gotcha position.
And he just wouldn't do it.
He's like, no, you're not going to get me to say the stupid thing.
Here's why.
And it was, it was beautiful.
It was a great example of the maps versus buttons sort of thing where he didn't
have buttons to press to spit out an answer and I thought it was great.
But that being said, I think his map is semi incoherent because I think that's
my impression as well.
Yeah.
I've seen him talk for an hour and every now and then he has something really
like interesting and cool to say, but for the most part, his thoughts don't seem
to relate to each other even that well or the rest of the world.
And it's just like it is, it is discombobulated brain stew that's all coming
out and you can like pick out the gems of, oh, that's really cool, but it doesn't
seem to cohere into anything legible.
So in my opinion, I think, I mean, from what I, he shows up a lot on the
Sam Harris subreddit where they talk about like the newest episodes and stuff
and between episodes, they'll throw out random bullshit.
That's, you know, throwing shade at Peterson or some other stuff and
my first exposure to him was on his first episode on Harris's podcast where
within the first 20 minutes, Peterson threw out some definition of truth that was
like basically what's called pragmatism.
It's true if it's useful.
And he insisted that he's being more Darwinian than Harris because his actually,
counted on like as useful if it was encouraged survival.
And I've never heard of a person that uses the phrase more Darwinian than you who
wasn't really just funded by the list.
And then I listened to him for the next 90 minutes, refused to come down on like
objective truth being an actual thing.
And I was like, this guy must be some religious nut job.
Who is this guy?
And Google him when he is.
And Peterson's a religious nut job?
Yes.
Well, he's like a new age apologist.
So the reason that he wants this crazy bastardized version of the word truth out
there is that he can say Christianity is true and it's true that it's raining outside.
I did not realize he was religious.
The best I can tell.
So whether or not, I mean, he also didn't AMA a couple of days ago and that's why
he was back on Harris' subreddit.
You know, the top question was like, maybe I'll just find it so I don't sound
disingenuous.
Give me just one second here.
Like a lot of his answers to me end up feeling like a word salad.
Like you didn't say anything.
I think that that's the one thing that I really dislike about his presentation as well.
So like, you know, Harris can put across an at least coherent idea in a few minutes.
And it's entirely plausible that there are ideas out there that are too complex to get
across in less than eight hours.
But I mean, that sounds a lot like I'm suspicious of that because that sounds like,
you know, hey, put up this huge upfront investment.
I mean, you can explain the benefits of something as complex as rationality in just a few minutes.
A few sentences gets across the general point, right?
If you need more than a few hours to explain your position, I wonder if it's too convoluted.
So anyway, the top, the top question on the AMA was, Dr. Peterson,
you've claimed that the atrocities of Nazi Germany came out of a loss of belief in God.
However, only about 1.5% of Germans in 1939 claims to lack religious belief,
and many of the anti-Semitic beliefs propagated by the Nazis were inspired by those
Christian figures like Martin Luther.
How can you explain the populist spread of Nazism in Germany as a result of atheism,
when historical facts do not suggest such a conclusion?
I remember that that was the top voted answer when I looked and he hadn't answered it yet,
but it looks like he answered it about an hour and a half in.
And he says, he says, Nazism and atheism was an atheist doctrine.
So was Marxism.
Well, I mean, Marxism was, but Nazism certainly wasn't.
So I kind of agree.
But to him, I think he has to say it is because anything's quote,
not religious if you're not doing good.
So by that definition, good Christian Nazis are not religious, but good atheists are religious.
So again, when you can say truth is whatever is quote useful,
then truth is whatever you want and nothing matters and there's no facts.
And so he's just allowed to be the arbiter that says they weren't religious,
despite them wearing in God with us on their belt buckles and Hitler's famous
what God, God stand or he had he opened.
He had this big thing that he would say during his speeches, some God related quote.
Okay, it's not coming to me.
But like, so despite all that, and despite, you know, the the church is,
you know, commemorating Hitler's birthday and stuff.
You can sell that wasn't religion.
No, no, that couldn't have been because they were doing the wrong thing.
No, no, real religion is people doing the right thing.
So, you know, you know, when you when you give money to the poor, you're being religious.
I mean, that's assuming I give money to the poor though.
But I'm grabbing an atheist.
So I don't know.
I don't know if we have to keep all this in there if it's a really good
conversation starter.
But the reason they brought it up is because I think David's super intelligent
and he convinced me that I'm missing something.
Right.
So that's the weird thing that there is a fair number of really intelligent people
in the rationalist community who seem to be really taken by this guy.
And I don't get what I'm missing.
First thing I need to do is finish reading Scott Alexander's review of
Peterson's book, 12 something or other.
Even Scott Alexander seemed kind of smitten by him.
And I was like, this is so weird.
Yeah, at least Alexander, I think has the he's like the
was it that Aristotle quote that is the mark of an intelligent person that they
can entertain an idea without believing it.
Yes.
Yes.
So I think he did me of that.
He really is.
I mean, he even talks in the beginning of that that essay is somebody insane
shit that Peterson said and he's like, well, running past all that this book
actually has some cool stuff in it.
But he's like the one person I know that they can do that.
Right.
I remember near the end of the lesser on community,
someone made a post just a whole bunch of rationalist commenters walk into a
coffee shop, right?
And what what they do with that exactly?
I don't know.
It was it was they walk into the coffee shop and there's someone there saying
that this coffee was made with the blood of some children somewhere.
And so Grun goes and thinks, how can I do this and sets up a very elaborate
self-blinded test as how he can test which coffee is it that has the
children's blood and which one isn't?
And it was just typically perfect Grun, right?
And Scott Alex.
And it was just, you know, kind of a caricature of each of the big commenters
on the boards.
And Scott Alexander's was, Yavain thinks about this for a while, makes a long
impassioned post about why it's a good thing to drink coffee made with the
blood of children and ends it with, I'm doing all this to strongman this
position as strong as good as I can before I come back tomorrow and just
rip it into tiny pieces because it deserves to be ripped apart and he leaves
the coffee shop and everyone's like, let's drink the blood of children.
This is awesome.
You meant steel man, not straw man, right?
I mean, did I say straw man?
Yeah, I meant steel man like he's really steel manning it so it goes down
forever, but the lesson everyone takes from it is drinking the blood of
children is great.
That's awesome.
I think that's that's a good I think Alexander is one of those people who
can argue very convincingly for just about anything.
Well, because I mean, he does, he's great.
No, I think I like it.
So yeah, I just brought that up because that's what was on my mind today.
So it wasn't exactly something I can point out with a link, but I'm wondering if
like, Pearson says nutty as I think he is, or if I'm totally missing something.
And if there is, there's something that you can point me to that's way less
than eight hours of my time, right?
If there's a 30, I mean, you know, every insane thing that Harris says,
I can point you to something that you can read in 10 minutes,
and that gives you his full position on it.
It's, I don't know, is it, you know, I sure of any ideas that take more than
several hours to like convey?
Like, it's one thing to like fully understand it to the point where,
you know, you can build it from scratch, you know, a la Feynman, but you know,
my counterpoint to David when he mentioned that was like, I could explain the
like history of the universe in 15 minutes, right?
Like granted, you can build the universe from scratch from that explanation,
but you could get the overview.
I don't know, there's, I mean,
Eleazar said once that he had to write the sequences in order to,
in order to convince people that AI is an actual problem,
because there was just so much inferential distance between where the world was,
that he had to explain, you know, reams and reams of stuff,
and he managed to do it in a entertaining way that made you want to keep reading it,
you know, and he did his job.
I don't know, he, maybe he could have said it in less, but
the sequences were kind of a masterpiece of crossing
that inferential divide and giving people all the information they need.
I don't know if it could have been done in less,
but I think the case for artificial intelligence safety could be made in less.
Yeah.
Getting people to believe it is different.
Right.
Right.
So just getting people to know what the fuck you're talking about
shouldn't take that long.
I mean, I think you could come across that in an hour.
No.
Well, I mean, I've been able to summarize the AI thing in a few sentences before.
Yeah, yeah, same.
I mean, at parties, whether or not they believe the conclusion is different,
but at least I can lay out my argument in just a few minutes.
And I'm suspicious of somebody that says,
my position is too complex to do that.
It will take me eight hours to explain to you what my position is.
And at the end, I hope you took good notes because,
you know, you don't have to listen to the whole thing again.
So, I mean, I've heard both the positions for why, you know, it's,
it might be important to research racial differences and for why we shouldn't do that,
or at the very least never talk about it in public with people who aren't already trained
in this sort of, in this field.
And I think they're both good points.
And I don't know which way I come down on it personally,
but they were both explained to me in the matter of minutes, you know.
And that's a fairly touchy subject, right?
Yeah, I don't really know where to go there.
So, I'm trying to be as generous as possible because,
you know, I keep calling out David,
but he was the guy I was talking to when he's been on the show,
so I think he's okay with it.
He had said,
I don't think you're engaging the principle of charity here.
And I said, you know what?
I tried.
Well, no, no, but I wasn't.
I think I stopped and I was like, you know what?
You're totally right.
I heard some insane shit.
I don't know how anybody that is worth listening to could say these things,
but I'm totally willing to grant that there's things.
I mean, I've seen memes of Harris saying
that we should nuke the Middle East, right?
So, like what she doesn't say, you know.
Well, I went into Peterson's charitable because
I had heard a few good things about him already.
And the first thing I saw of him was this awesome interview
where he just showed calm and respect
and basic like rationalist judo on this TV reporter person.
So, I was like, this guy's awesome.
And that's why I went on to keep giving him second chances
and watch a couple hours of his stuff.
And before I finally gave up with like this guy's incoherent.
So, I think maybe the way my best preferred outcome here would be
if anyone is like, oh yeah, Peterson's awesome.
Check out this 30 minutes or less video or this short essay or something.
But I don't want to read a 600-page book or watch an eight-hour lecture.
Right.
Just because, I mean, that's it.
Maybe it sounds lazy, but it's, I don't think, I think that's fair.
I can't spend eight hours engaging everything that I think is dumb.
Just let me rephrase that.
Or no, that's, that's roughly what I'm trying to say.
I can't spend that much time on everything that I'm trying to consider
because there's too many ideas.
I can't spend that much time on everything, right?
So, yeah, if anyone has like a cool short thing to send me, I'd love to see it.
But I'm trying to see what's going on here which way the dust will settle.
So, I think I'll put my card in the table.
Cool.
Otherwise, let us thank a person.
And thank Kyle, our sound engineer for, as always, making the sound awesome.
So, seriously, yeah, Kyle, you fucking rock.
Yeah.
Oh, oh, oh, oh, we got to think of the people that did our music.
Oh, yes.
Thank you.
I made a note to you, Josh, that we forgot to do with the last couple episodes.
So, big shout out to our, we've got different composers for the intro and the outro.
I'm assuming you have them down.
So, David did some of the music for Methods of Rationality, right?
Yes.
David did the fight scene with Sprout.
And he, he did one other piece, which is not coming to me now.
I'm really sorry, David.
But he's done, he's done some, at least two pieces for the Methods of Rationality podcast.
I'm trying to think of other original scores.
I know you credited them all during the show.
Anyway, yeah, let us know which one it was, and you'll get a shout out there.
Thank you to David Greer for composing our intro music.
And to the Samariki Project for composing our outro music.
The, whatever that rock and roll one was supposed to be like a three episode placeholder,
and it ended up lasting like two years.
So, I'm loving this.
I've listened to the episodes that have this coming on there, and it's
more relaxing and chill.
I think it totally hits more of the vibe I'm going for.
So, excellent.
Yeah, love it.
And Kyler Sand Engineer, another shout out.
And to our Patreon supporter for this episode.
This episode's Patreon supporter is,
thank you to Andrew Morosco for being our Patreon supporter for this week.
Well, I mean, he's our Patreon supporter every week,
but he's the one we specifically thank this week.
Yes, thank you.
This episode, rather.
Yeah, this episode, yeah.
It's a whole thing.
We're all, you know, time's confusing.
Yes.
Anyway, thanks Andrew.
It makes a big difference for us.
And thanks to everyone who helped spread the word,
tell their friends, leave into iTunes reviews, anything like that.
Yeah, no, yeah.
It makes a big difference.
Thanks a lot, guys.
It helps a lot.
Okay.
I think that's everything.
I think that's everything.
All right.
Have a good night, everyone.
We'll be back in two weeks.
Yeah, yeah.
