Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, and I'm Gray,
Gray, welcome, what are you doing here in Denver?
I've been on a vacation visiting some friends, a friend of mine was back from Iraq for the first time in a couple of years, so it was good to get out.
And since my airport at each end of the trip was Denver, it was a really good opportunity to drop in.
Yeah, thank you for dropping in, this has been really cool, it's really neat meeting people from the rational community that I only know online, you know?
Yeah, and I don't get to do that very often, where are you from? I know it's on the east coast, right?
Midwest, I live in Minneapolis, St. Paul in Minnesota.
Okay, I thought Minnesota was on the east coast, I don't know where our states are.
We're on like the western tip of Lake Superior, the northern end of the state is.
Okay.
Iowa's to the south and North Dakota's to the west, if that helps.
It does, it does a little bit. I guess it's not on the coast, but I still think of it as the east.
I mean Lake Superior is bigger than some things people thought were oceans, so you could argue that it's on the north coast.
There we go, cool.
The United States had a north coast, that's it.
All right.
Well, welcome, how do you like it here in Denver?
Big fan, everybody is astonishingly polite, the driving people in cars are polite to pedestrians, everyone's got an animal that they're nice to and everyone expects people to be nice to animals.
Do you not get that in Minnesota?
No, Minnesota's got all of that, but what I've noticed, how is it that most transplants put it?
I grew up in a whole bunch of other countries, and to the extent that I grew up in the US, I was in Virginia.
Minnesota has a lot going for it, the problem is that people from Minnesota always have enough friends already.
Okay.
And so as someone who moves there, either all of your friends are going to be transplants or you just don't have a lot of them.
Okay.
Denver seems a lot more, there seems to be, I guess, more churn, you'd call it here.
Oh yeah.
So we've had huge, I don't know, can you call it a population explosion?
You can call it whatever you want.
Okay.
Influx of people.
I don't know if it's an explosion, I don't know what makes an explosion an explosion,
but we've had a lot of people coming here over the past six years or so, just every year, huge growth.
So yeah, there's a lot of new people here still meeting everyone else.
So cool.
I am glad to hear that you'd like it here.
We're always trying to get more people to move to Denver, create our own little Berkeley in here someday.
Speaking of Berkeley, that's where Jess is this week and next week.
Hear that it's a great time out there.
Apparently.
Except for the swatting.
Yeah.
Which I need to hear more about.
I want to hear more details about that too because Jess mentioned it to me and they did not know what was going on.
But just that it had happened.
And I hope that the reason is something amusing, but it sounded like people might be a little bit nervous.
It's always funny when the SWAT team shows up.
Yeah, you know, that's a great time.
I feel like that should be the end too.
It's all fun and games until.
Right.
Yeah, until the SWAT team shows up.
There was a flashbang in your baby's crib.
Sorry.
It shouldn't have gone there.
I mean, I don't know about baby's cribs, but I mean.
I mean, it's happened at least once.
I mean, just yet.
I don't want to say it's par for the course, but if someone told me that it had happened in a raid that was definitely botched in other ways, my prior would lean significantly in the direction of it having happened.
I mean, the police are way too militarized as it is, but also anyone who intentionally swat someone.
That's got to be some kind of serious assault charge nowadays.
You're basically unleashing a rabbed Rottweiler on your neighbor when you do that.
I know that at least some swatting cases do produce some very pointed visits from the FBI.
There's a YouTuber, I think Wings of Redemption was what he was called, and he accused someone else of swatting him.
He was swatted and accused a particular person of it, and that led to a great deal of flame war and an FBI visit to the person accused, even who the FBI determined hadn't done it, but they did take it very seriously.
You think the FBI would just be able to see who made the phone call?
But I guess I'm not.
They definitely have the technical capability to determine it by that means, but I'm not sure that they want...
That might actually not be admissible evidence, and I don't think they want to take the chance of the non-admissibility of that evidence becoming a precedent that they're required to abide by.
That's a good point.
Well, at this point, it's all speculation anyway. We should wait till Jess is back and get the actual details.
No, no, let's just keep speculating.
So what are we talking about today?
What are we talking about today? Wait, no, we're not talking about things yet. I want to know some more about Gray.
Is Gray okay?
Yes.
Okay, just wasn't sure if you only want to go on GSV on the podcast or anything, but no, how did you get into this whole rationalist thing?
As we often ask rationalists when they come.
Let's see. I think five or six years ago, I found rational wiki reading about some medical silliness or other,
and I read their article on Eliezer, which contained a lot of scathing criticism from...
And the tone of what I'd read on rational wiki to that point was generally pretty clinical, if sometimes snarky,
but some of the treatment of Yadkowski was so hostile that I felt myself intellectually obligated to read some of what he'd written
to see if the criticism actually worked, and then I found that it didn't.
That's a hell of a backfire.
That's awesome. Yeah, because that's actually my only exposure to rational wiki as I first went over there after I heard about it at Google's name.
I was like, oh, this is some place for cranks. It's like conservapedia or something, but apparently it's legit-ish.
It depends on what the topic is.
Yeah, which is a drag. That shouldn't be how it works for rational anything, but yeah.
So you got reading from there and kind of fell into it at that point?
Yeah, I started the sequences. I've been trying to start the sequences from scratch for five years, and every time I just try to binge the whole thing,
I get distracted before. Yeah, so I need to just set a proper reading schedule like you're doing with the podcast,
go through three or two, three, maybe four sequence posts daily for a while, intermixed with other entertainment,
because if you try to binge it, I actually calculated this once.
Going off of the word count, telling someone to read the sequences is about like telling someone to just go read Worm or to read one and three quarters King James Bibles.
Holy crap. Yeah. That's almost two Bibles.
Yeah. Rationality from AI to Zombies is curated and somewhat shorter than that, but it's still a large time commitment to just ask someone to do.
I believe Rationality AI to Zombies is still too big to be bound into a single copy. It would have to be in more than one volume.
That sounds about right. I've got the PDF copy on my phone, and I think it's eleven hundred, eight and a half by eleven pages in PDF form.
Yeah.
So that's at the very least, that's at the very upper limit of what you can bind in paperback.
Maybe, yeah, yeah. Maybe if like you got a textbook publisher, because they got some good, good binding tech.
Or like some really, the mother of all spiral binders.
Yeah.
Neat.
Discord or subreddit?
Discord.
Okay. Have you ever been on the subreddit?
I've read the subreddit. I've read it as something I've wanted for years to be more active in, because I have enough of a spectrum of interests that people tell me, oh, you should, you should read it about this sort of thing.
And it would just be a rabbit hole for people to go into on other subjects.
But it's not that I don't like the discursive atmosphere of Reddit.
It just feels like too large a commitment in a way that Discord doesn't.
I have a hard time giving a legible description of why, but it may be that Reddit feels too much like social media.
Discord offers most of the benefits of social media, and I don't, but it doesn't feel like I'm using social media, so it's actually replaced almost all of my Facebook use since I found a couple of servers I like.
Cool. What are the other servers you're on?
Slate Sarcotex Discord, another rationalist Discord called ACA and a Comfy Neighborhood.
A couple of specialist servers for games that I like.
That covers most of it.
Cool.
I find that even online interactions with other people involved in rationality are significantly lower effort by default than interacting with the baseline human.
The normies, as we call them.
That's, yeah.
I like the term baseline human.
That is less pejorative and more sounds like, you know, something Spock would say.
We could use Sline from Neil Stevenson's Anathem.
No, we could not.
That would make a sound really bad.
It actually, no, that's, that's gotta, when you say the word out loud, it definitely sounds like a word that's supremely insulting.
It's, yeah.
No, let's not use that baseline human is okay.
Sline is pretentious.
Yes, yes.
It's almost, it's, I think that's even worse than Brights.
Like, I mean, because Brights was a self description, but God, that was just so pretentious, you know.
And then, and then Slime is like the opposite side of that.
Sline.
You said Slime with an M.
Oh, Sline.
Sline.
Sounds like the Slime though, so, yeah.
That's probably why it comes off sounding so insulting.
Yeah.
Maybe if you, if you used it, like, if you directly used it as a loan word in another language, maybe it would sound better.
Yeah.
But in English, it has that quality of conveying an insult even when you don't know what it means.
I think a lot of words like that, like the mouth feel is important.
Like, Slime, it just feels yucky.
Like, I've heard the term ASPY for Asperger, which sounds, you know, alright, some people refer to themselves as that.
Then I've heard the term Spurg used as an insult.
And that's just like, you feel the difference in your mouth between those two words, right?
Like, one of them is like, oh, yeah, okay, kind of nice fun.
The other one's like, eugh.
Those, the sibilant consonants definitely make a difference.
I'm reminded of a conversation near the end of Saka Barone Cohen's The Dictator, where he's using Yiddish words in casual conversation with
another person who's definitely not Jewish.
And he says, well, you know, I have to hand it to Yiddish speakers.
Those words like schmuck, they really sound like what they're supposed to mean.
You don't need to know what a schmuck is to be insulted when you're called one.
Right.
Yeah.
So welcome.
How have you, how have you liked the discord?
Just curious.
It's, it's great.
We have a couple of subject matter experts who are entertaining to interact with.
I play at an RPG now with other people from the discord.
Oh, excellent.
Yeah.
With, with Wes and David Spearman and the other David Youssef also, we Thursdays usually.
Cool.
And we're, we put that in the servers voice channel so people can listen to it.
Yeah.
Are you able to keep up with all the stuff?
Because God, it's really hard to keep up with some of those channels.
I don't find like the, the basing conspiracy discord in particular I find pretty easy to
keep up with.
It's not like the slate star codex discord has a user base that's at least an order of
magnitude larger and trying to follow everything that's going on.
Well, most of the channels are pretty low content anyway, but even if you try to keep
track of just the effort posting, you're still trying to drink from a fire hose and it's
not that apart from the distinctly different discursive environment, I'd have a hard time
giving a legible description of why, but I like the conspiracy discords environment
more than most of what I do online.
So it gets a lot of my time.
Cool.
Before we dive into the, the main topic, I was also wondering like, do you have a lot
of friends, family that rationalist?
Have you tried breaching the subject with anyone?
I've, let's see, I've tried bringing it up with immediate family.
My parents, for one reason or another, are not receptive and my brother, he works a very
demanding, weirdly scheduled occupation that makes it hard for him to just schedule time
to read something.
So it's been, I feel like I could get him interested if I found the right hook, but I don't have
a hook that's able to get him to devote some of his very limited free time to it.
I think there was a deliberate effort to make a hook called Harry Potter and the Methods
of Rationality.
See, he doesn't even, he doesn't like anything about the canon Harry Potter.
Well, then he might like, I mean, if he likes literally nothing about it, then he might still
not like it.
But if he, if it just because the characters were boring or whatever, then.
Yeah.
Rationalist Harry is pretty different.
Yeah.
That's a valid point.
I will suggest it to him and see if I, if I can get him through chapter 10, that anybody
who's willing to reach, who I can get willing to read chapter one has been and through to
at least chapter five, where Eleazar himself says it kind of hit its stride has continued
to 10 and everyone who hits 10 goes to the end.
I've, I've tried, I don't know.
I've, I've dropped some hints to my parents.
It's not like they don't know that I have these two podcasts.
Well, I guess down to one now, but it's a pretty big thing in my life.
And so it's not like my parents and siblings don't know about it.
They just aren't terribly interested.
And, you know, I don't want to push anything on anyone if they're not into it because that's
the best way to turn someone off to something.
It's just, yeah, get a crammed down your throat and you're like, fuck you.
Maybe I would have liked this pizza if I got to eat it myself.
But then you get Scott Alexander's most recent short story, the one about the meditation cult.
Yeah.
That was fun.
Yeah.
I don't want to be enlightened and you can't make me.
Yep.
I didn't read that post.
So it's fun.
It's, yeah, it's called samsara and.
Oh, I keep hearing about it.
It's on.
I've got to open on my phone.
I haven't read it.
Pretty much all of Scott Alexander's short stories are fun.
He like, he knows how to write humor.
Yeah.
Which is really hard to do.
And, you know, it's entertaining, I guess, because it's humor.
The only fictions of his that I know that I could think of off the top of my head were
unsung and whatever one where the person's having a trip and trying to like universal
love or something.
Said the cactus person.
I haven't read that one, but I know about it.
That one's really short.
I keep meaning to.
But they're both funny.
I think you probably heard the study of anglophysics because that was.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's right.
Okay.
I like that one too.
Yeah, you're right.
Everything you write is funny.
Yeah.
Scott's fiction has gotten really polished over the years and I enjoy.
All of it that I can think of.
But I have a weird feeling about it.
It's sort of an anti-psychedelic experience.
The archetypal description I've heard of a psychedelic experience is that there's this
overpowering insight that you can't put into words.
And I have the opposite experience.
I guess not the opposite, not to say that there isn't, that there's no insight.
The problem is that I have the inverse experience.
I have a bunch of words and I feel like there's an insight, but I can't for the life of me
map it onto a thought.
Okay.
I think that's good though.
That's insidious and it gets into your brain.
I keep thinking that in some way if you have all these words that you kind of feel are
pointing at something, but you can't figure out what it is, that somehow in the back
of your head it's going to alter the thinking a little bit.
Scott's a sneaky one.
Yeah, but occasionally it's not always ideal.
Sometimes you end up with things like unsong, which Scott himself says, this is not didactic
in any way, but it's deliberately written about a subject that is so entwined with centuries
of enthusiastic pareidolia that you're intended to feel that there's an insight there even
when you know that there are specific reasons to think there's not.
Yeah.
I love that in the comments of his chapters as you putting them out, a constant refrain
was this is not a coincidence because nothing is a coincidence.
Anytime anything was a coincidence in one of his stories.
That was immediately quoted or in any of his chapters.
I did have a blast reading on song in part for that.
I should give it a reread just to see how many extra cabalistic entanglements I can
pick up on another pass because I missed a whole bunch of important stuff I know on
my first read.
I feel really sad that he's saying he's going to like edit it and cut down some things that
are unnecessary.
Apparently, I think I heard him say that he's going to take out all the references to
that drug because it really didn't do anything.
I'm like, no, don't do that.
I don't care.
This whole story was an awesome meandering experience.
It was the journey, you know?
Yeah.
And while drug was a part of that.
It's a great piece of Americana.
I actually, I was there like.
Yeah.
Leave it in.
Leave everything untouched.
Don't become George Lucas.
That's going to be the refrain.
Don't colorize unsong.
Yeah.
Don't Aaron shot first.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You've never actually done in psychedelics?
No.
Okay.
Yeah.
I'm just going off of the archetypal description there.
My personal experience only once have I had any sort of insight and it wasn't like a
grand insight of to everything.
It was just like, oh yeah.
Yeah.
I guess this is true and I should probably pursue this, but that's the closest I've ever
had and even then it wasn't really that big a deal.
Have you had anything?
I think with LSD, there's the sense of profanity to everything where it depends.
Like I've had, I've had experiences where I forgot that I took a drug and like you kind
of lose your history and you're just there having raw experience.
But then you come back from that after a few seconds or millions of years.
It's hard to say.
So like there's this sense like, oh, this, like it just feels profoundly, but it's not
attached to anything.
The closest I've had to an insight would be like, I had this long like level of like
recursion back and forth in my head of like my mental model, someone else's mental model
of my mental model of what I'm trying to explain.
And I realized, if anything could be realized in that sort of mindset, it was like, oh,
okay, there's really no way to get someone to like to know that you've explained something
accurately to somebody.
But that's not, you know, an original insight.
It was just one that was somewhere clarified.
MDMA gives you sort of the insight that, I mean, it can in the right, it's hard to not
be in the right mind space on that one because it's not really psychedelic, but it like,
it makes it so that you're not really capable at least while on it.
And you can carry this feeling forward of feeling like jealous of people where, you
know, if a coworker is more successful, you just feel happy for them rather than feeling
spiteful about it.
If that's an insight, I guess.
Maybe if you had like a thought that seemed important while you were having one of those
super profound moments, I might seem like a big insight.
That might have been the thing about trying to explain stuff to people.
Alrighty, in that case, let's get on to the thing that you are doing, which is the podcast
legal.
No, it's it's about.
Okay.
You are podcasting the book legal systems very different from our own, which was written
by David Friedman, Peter Leeson and David Skarrak.
So David Friedman is actually a writer of this book, too.
Yes.
Interesting.
Okay.
Didn't he co-write The Elephant in the Brain?
I don't know.
I will double check that.
Yeah, that doesn't sound like Friedman, but he's got a variety of weird interests.
I don't know anyone else with a PhD who plays World of Warcraft, so.
Oh.
All right.
I know he did at the last time I read the Wikipedia bio about him, and he does SCA in
his either 70s or 80s.
Damn.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's that's pretty hardcore for someone in his 80s.
You're doing this with permission from them?
Yes.
I reached out.
I didn't.
I had never, I heard of Friedman like 10, 11 years ago when I was in an edgy teenage
phase of reading everything about Austrian economics.
I probably would have come out of that one a little bit better if I'd gotten more Friedman
and less Mises Institute sort of people.
But I knew about the machinery of freedom.
I didn't buy it at the time, and by the time I had complete discretion over what books
I bought, I was no longer in the Austrian phase.
But the name Friedman kind of cemented itself in my memory.
And then I found through the SSC podcast, Scott's review of legal systems very different
from ours, and that primed a whole bunch of old associations to Friedman.
I read it on the strength of the recommendation.
I actually got the chance to thank Scott in person for that at a meetup about two months
ago.
Sweet.
And I enjoyed the book so much that I wanted to be able to point friends to it.
And it's not a huge book, but it's not something that you tell people to just read in an afternoon.
So I thought I'd have an audio format.
I know a lot of people who have jobs at a desk like me that give them some time to listen
to things.
So it's easier to say work this into your podcast rotation or listen to this audio book, then
go read this.
And I found when I searched, there was no audio book.
So I emailed.
You decided to fix that.
I emailed Friedman and I said, hey, would you have strong objections to this being released
as a podcast?
And the only condition that they insisted on was that everyone be credited by chapter.
There are only two chapters in the book that aren't written by Friedman, but for that's
why almost all of the episodes begin with chapter whatever by David Friedman.
It's just to hold to that commitment.
Okay, neat.
The name of the podcast is like, it was not intuitive to me.
What was it again?
The podcast very different from ours.
Okay.
Right.
Yes.
It's as close as I could get to the title while still being readily adaptable to future
projects.
Kind of like HPMOR podcast became the methods of rationality podcast.
Yeah.
Okay.
You were thinking ahead.
Yes.
I wish I had done that.
Because I mean, I don't mind that it's HPMORpodcast.com, but forever it's going to be.
Well, it's fine because now the thing that's being done there is we want more.
So again, HPMOR focused kind of circled back.
Yeah.
Actually, I want to say that as long as we're on the subject as far as the origin of the
podcast.
I don't know exactly where the tipping point occurred, but it was partly you and partly
Jeremiah of both the Slate Star Codex podcast and We Are Not Saved, which I'll plug later,
that somewhere just sort of pushed a podcast from being, oh, this is too much of, like
this is a thing that other people do to, okay, this is something that I could sit down and
like actually produce.
Yeah.
Add anyone with a microphone can do.
So two things.
One, Kevin Simler was the co-author of Elephant in the Brain.
I don't know why I thought it was David Friedman.
That name rings a bell.
And I know I've, I'll have to figure out where I'm associating that from.
And also, where can people find a podcast not like are very different from our own because
it's still not on the iTunes store where I can find it for my podcast app.
I get home from Denver tonight and that will be literally the next thing I do podcast related
even before I edit the episode that's coming out next week.
Currently it's only on Google Play podcasts and apparently hard to find even there.
So you can, if you want to look for it until I get the pod, the, put it into all the pod
catchers or to the podcast, like listening services, by the time this comes out, it'll
be, it should be up by the time this is, by the time everybody hears this as the podcast
very different from ours.
If you still can't find it, I am on SoundCloud as GSV bemusement park.
Cool.
Cool.
Perfect.
So why did you want to make a podcast out of this particular book?
The thing about it that's really refreshing, but and also leads to some of my small issues
with the book, which we'll get to is it's a pretty good legal overview that's not written
by a legal scholar.
It's written by an economist.
So not by a historian either, although he's done some legal scholarship obviously and
some history, but his focus is on, I guess, the meat of the matter when you're developing
a legal system, which is it's supposed to constrain conflicts and he looks at the incentives
that these different legal systems create to constrain conflict and how they might be
modulated by illegible ancient social factors or and to what extent, like a restriction
that appears to be religious is actually enforced by convention.
He talks about all these things in a way that's really refreshing compared to discussion
of legal systems by people in other disciplines, at least some of what I've read.
In particular, I would compare because they actually both appear in both books.
Murray Rothbard, another one of the Mises Institute anarcho capitalist economists, brings
up both the Icelandic and Irish systems, which appear in legal systems very different
from ours.
In his book, The Ethics of Liberty, the problem I realized very quickly on reading Friedman's
chapters is that Rothbard stripped out any analysis of why these things worked and just
sort of drooled over the fact that there was a seemingly functioning stateless legal system
so that he could make an argument that legal systems didn't depend on states.
And empirically, they don't, which is the point of the book.
One of the ways in which a legal system can be very different from ours is that either
prosecution or enforcement is not done by the state.
But the economic analysis of what's going on in the legal system is why these things
are interesting and why they might have things we could learn from.
And Rothbard didn't provide that, and Friedman does.
Okay.
So going real quick to the economic thing is the spark to thing in my head.
I've only heard the first episode of your podcast so far, I'm sorry, I'm having my
list now.
But the Chinese system, it seemed like one of the major goals of their legal system was
to not have people use their legal system because it was expensive and they didn't have
very many judges and people tended to like anything that went to the legal system kind
of fucked both parties.
And I kind of get the feeling we have the same thing in America that anytime you go
to the legal system, it's going to be runously expensive even if you're in the right.
And is this a common thing among legal systems?
It's not common, in fact, in feud systems in particular, in the Romani legal systems
and the Icelandic law as it's described, and Irish law to some extent, and definitely
Somali law, which I think the main feud systems the book covers.
There may be one other that's eluding me right now.
In a feud system, the thing that's backing the enforcement of law is the private application
of force or the threat thereof.
The risk of escalating that is why the word feud has such unpleasant associations to our
ears as moderns.
So what the quote court end quote process in a feud legal system often functions to
do is to get a bunch of people who aren't themselves party to the feud to publicly commit
to a particular resolution of the feud so that there are major consequences above and
beyond the risk that you take in the feud itself to continue to engage in the feud after
an agreement, after an arbitration has been issued.
To some extent, they even do this in the Amish system.
The Amish don't have a lot of crimes more serious than using a telephone, but for really
serious ones, they enforce all the congregations at some level and enforce some form of shunning.
One of the things that can be led that leads to shunning actually covered in both systems
in my second episode, the Romani and the Amish, is that refusing to accept a community settlement
of a dispute will lead to that punishment of ostracism.
If you don't accept the community's judgment, you're out of the community.
That sounds fair.
It's a really potent threat in the tightly knit communities that rely on this sort of
communal decision making.
The Romani have various quasi-religious beliefs about non-Romani that make it supremely undesirable
to be exiled from Romani society, and the Amish are pretty deliberately from birth not
trained to function in broader American society, so it's going to be difficult even if it
goes well.
Doesn't that make a lot of incentives for people to chase popularity then?
Because if you're popular, people are more likely going to side with you in a dispute.
It just kind of seems like a nightmare for any sort of more introverted nerd type people
to be in that kind of system.
There's some risk to that, and different feud systems dealt with it in different ways.
The Icelandic system, which gets a lot of discussion in anarcho-capitalist circles generally
and in this book in particular, dealt with it by making your claim, your ability to initiate
a court proceeding for a particular claimed crime a transferable property.
If you accuse someone of stealing your stereo or your TV, you could take them to court yourself,
and there's some agreed on schedule of damages, or you could sell it to someone else who was
better able to actually carry out the court proceeding.
This doesn't give you the status that would come from successfully chasing down and knocking
payment out of someone who committed a tort against you, but it's still prosocial in the
sense that someone is profiting from the resolution of this dispute.
The person who did the wrong thing is being punished, and that's a good, and it does lead
to status on the part of the person who does the successful prosecution.
There's an incentive structure under this transferable tort system to pursue compensation
for offenses, even if you're not yourself the offended party.
Do you first have to prove that you were offended in that way?
No, that's done a trial.
What you sell, as I understand it, is the right to make that claim in court.
There's a really good example of how this could be used in modern law that I will bring
up later when we get to that, but feud systems have a lot of ways of encouraging that commitment
and of making it desirable to go after offenders like that.
Just a couple high-level questions, because most of this is going right over my head,
so I need to start from a higher place.
Romani, are you saying Romani or Roman style?
It's spelled R-O-M-A-N-I.
They're not connected to the Romans or to Romania, and in their language the emphasis
is on the first syllable.
What modern systems are of that style?
They're like what people normally refer to as gypsies in casual conversation, right?
Yes.
I thought that was Roma, not Romani, I wasn't sure.
I do not understand any of the languages or cultures involved well enough to explain
the difference.
I know just R-O-M is a plural used sometimes, Roma is used sometimes seemingly interchangeably
singular and plural.
It may vary widely depending on the particular Romani offshoot that you're dealing with.
They generally speak the language of the society they live in with a lot of Romani loan words
mixed in, and they aren't a huge fan of having their languages or other aspects of their
culture studied for the most part.
I'm actually going to read Ann Sutherland's book on Vlokrom, the Romanian gypsy population
in the US in the next couple of weeks because it sounds hugely interesting, but I don't
understand the different Romani cultures well enough to explain why there are so many very
close but distinct words for them.
Got you.
Perfect.
I saw about 10 or 15 years ago a movie with Brad Pitt where he played an Irish Roma or
Romani person.
It was an interesting movie.
I think his part was sort of a side plot, but in the end you got sort of a feeling for
how justice is done with these people and it was like, okay, I guess for the most part
they don't get too involved, but when shit goes down they really fucking take it seriously.
At least in that movie.
There are three Romani groups covered in the book.
The Irish splinter are a fourth one that come to mind that the book doesn't discuss.
They may either be very similar to the Roman achal, the British Romani, or just not numerous
enough to have been widely studied.
I think the most interesting thing about the movie was that they had absolutely no faith
or trust in the legal system of the country they were living in, and so they were basically
an entirely separate legal system, and they knew they were breaking the laws of the land
when they enforced their legal system, but they just didn't give a fuck because this
was how it went down in their culture.
The three groups have different approaches to that.
All of them are consistently mistrustful of Gaza.
That's everyone who's not Romani authority, and they go as a civilization to astonishing
lengths to avoid having it consistently enforced against them, but they have different approaches
to the ground level relations they have with those governments.
The Kala, the Finnish Romani, are a very strictly nuclear society.
They're organized at the household level and nowhere below or above that.
They have a feud system that in practice mostly takes the form of when a feud breaks out.
Every member of each kin group on either side of the feud will avoid every member of the
other, presumably until some settlement is negotiated or just forever.
I just looked it up.
The movie is called Snatch, right on.
The Kala are interesting because they don't have the sexual taboos of the other Romani
groups.
They have a much stronger sexuality taboo, which consists of denying the existence of
human sexuality entirely.
Oh, I heard about this probably in Scott's review.
Yeah.
So they don't acknowledge the, as far as I can tell from the description Friedman gives
and I'm going to read Grunfurs' account to make sure that I've understood this correctly.
They don't actually recognize any individual's parentage by any particular individual.
Like women just sometimes get pregnant and no one knows why.
No, it's much more off the wall than that.
So if a couple wants to procreate, they are expected to leave the household that they
live in and then go someplace far enough that the woman's kin cannot find and retrieve
the woman who's fled.
They're supposed to stay there until, not just through the pregnancy, not just until
birth, but until the child has been weaned so that it's no longer visibly connected
with an individual mother and then the woman's kin will smuggle the mother and child separately
back into the household and the man will be expected to show public penitence for violating
the norms of his community and undergo some potentially expensive and painful purification
rituals.
That sounds bizarre to me.
Very different from our own system.
And after that, the child is expected to treat every woman of its mother's generation as
equally co-parent.
Neat.
It sounds easier from the kid's point of view.
Like if that's just what you're told, no one tells you who your mom is, then it's all
right, cool, you're all my mom.
Sounds like an adaptation for people with a high female mortality rate at any rate,
so that you aren't left motherless.
It definitely solves that.
They're taking, it takes a village all the way up to 11.
What's particularly cool about it and thankfully quick to describe is that they actually follow
through to a considerable extent on the logical implications of their denial of sexuality.
Other Romani groups have taboos associated with menstruation like a lot of cultures do.
The Kala don't because if you had taboos associated with menstruation, you'd have to
admit that menstruation was the thing that existed.
And they don't because if it doesn't exist, you can't possibly enforce rules about it.
The Vlachrom are the largest of the groups.
These are the Romanian-descended ones who have undergone a large diaspora since the
abolition of serfdom in Romania.
And they're the group that I think Freedmen pays the most attention to.
They're interesting because instead of completely avoiding gaja authority, they use it as a
weapon amongst themselves.
The Vlachrom, when they have a large-scale dispute, the sort of thing that you actually
would feud over, they eventually settle it in a communal court, which is supposed to
have as judges or jury representatives of as many Romani families from as many Romani
kinship groups as you can possibly get together at once, depending on the severity of the crime.
And they can issue a final settlement with a sentence up to an including exile from the
Romani community and additionally exiling anyone who refuses to accept that settlement.
But they don't conduct their, like the procedure that leads up to a Chris, that's the Romani
court proceeding, consists of a feud in which the participants try to manipulate their contacts
in the non-Romani world to impose costs on each other.
One of Sutherland's informants mentions he was accused by his son's father-in-law, basically
that they set up a deliberately non, they put the girl in this new marriage up to deliberately
not consummating it so that they could then accuse the father of the recent groom of trying
to go after her instead.
And this is a really serious offense in Romani culture for a man to make advances against
his son's wife.
So he tells, he knows that the girl has picked someone's pocket before and can prove it.
And he knows other issues, apparently other legal issues that the father might have.
And his way of prosecuting this feud, before it goes to the Romani court is to convince
the police or to just get the police to arrest them both and cost them a lot of trouble and
money.
In other situations, you might say talk to the, the leader of a Romani community might
talk to the truant officer or the welfare officer in order to delay qualification for
benefits, get extra visits to where the parents have to contend with a righteously indignant
truant officer.
They, yeah, their, their feud prosecution leading up to the court takes the form of
manipulating non-Romani to annoy each other or otherwise inconvenience them.
So it sounds kind of like what rich people do when they're suing not rich people in the
United States, where it's just like, I'm going to make life hard for you.
You know, like, oh, who's a good example?
Someone comes to mind.
Donald Trump, for example.
He had that guy write that book about him that he thought was going to be all glowing
and nice.
And the guy published that, because then he get, then Donald gave him access to all of
his records and like, oh yeah, by all means, gloat about me.
And he published that his net worth was something like 150 to $250 million, and so Donald Trump
sued him for $5 billion, which would have made him worth $5.2 billion afterwards.
And this was expensive.
Trump ended up, what was it?
What do you call it when you like cancel a lawsuit?
Drop.
Yeah.
He'd dropped the suit after a while, but slap suits.
Let's see.
Strategic lawsuit against public participation.
Yes.
Thank you.
There was a good episode of John Oliver's show on that just a couple weeks ago, which
we should put in the show notes.
If you want to be, it's funny.
I love that show, John Oliver's thing.
If you want to laugh and feel indignant about something in all the same time in 20 minutes,
it's great.
And he can do things.
I know this isn't really related, but on whatever random topic and it's like, oh, I should
really be pissed about that.
Like trailer parks, for example, or mobile home parks, like the shadiness involved in
owning the land and what they do to raise prices and how they basically ring out the
people who live there is nuts.
And it's not the kind of thing that you would even be aware of.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The slap suit one was fun.
The only other thing I can think of, because I don't know a lot about, I'm more just learning
that's why I'm being so quiet.
But there was, there's a blog I've been reading called ProSafe Folk that is kind of like when
Scott Alexander does like an analysis of like, here's some medical thing or whatever.
And he's like, oh yeah, you know, all that confusing mumbo jumbo, like here's what's
actually going on from a medical point perspective.
This is that, but with legal stuff.
And so like, I think one of the first couple of posts was on that cake shop in the Colorado
area who refused to sell to gay people.
And then they challenged, then like they countersued saying your religion's garbage and it's making
you act like this.
And he's like, hey, you guys can't sue me on my religious garbage.
You have to do it for some other reason.
And so it, it takes like an objective, like, you know, forget where you stand on the fairness
and morality of this, but like what, what legally is going on here.
It's kind of fun.
So we should put a link to that too.
I just took a note down.
I actually have them already to send over.
So perfect teamwork.
Yeah, the slap example you bring up is a good one.
Several of the chapters do focus on systems that recognize the risk of what we moderns
call vexatious litigation and have different means of dealing with it in the imperial Chinese
system, self-consciously lawful evil, though it is, though it was, if you made a false
accusation of some crime or other, you would receive the penalty that would have been imposed
on the defendant if found guilty.
I think that's a really good thing to have in general.
They, they took it in a weird direction, though, is the risk of that is obvious, especially
if you go after a high status person who might just be able to ride their status to an acquittal.
That's a big problem.
So you might avoid that risk by making the accusation anonymously.
And the Qing dynasty, at least, dealt with this problem of anonymous accusations in a very
straightforward way for a magistrate to read an anonymous accusation in court was a criminal
offense, and for the person who submitted it, it was a capital offense.
They had a lot of capital offenses, although one of the things the chapter focuses on is
how many things they insisted on making death sentences for and then walking them back to
something slightly more reasonable.
Yeah, I, that was the chapter that I listened to.
I found it was really interesting that they seemed more concerned with like a karmic balance
to the universe than justice necessarily.
I think the example that you read out into that you read in the podcast was if a group
of people like committed a crime and one of them was sentenced to death for it, but then
someone else in the group managed to die before he was executed, then that execution was commuted
because, you know, a death has been dealt for this crime by the universe.
Yeah, there's been a life for a life.
Well, that sounds really hard to manipulate to your benefit, right?
Just kill your co-conspirator.
Yeah, so there were a lot of death sentences the imperial system issued that would end up
being commuted either to a couple of years at hard labor or an unpleasant beating with a
weighted piece of bamboo.
Yeah, that was, that was really interesting.
I'm wondering, so all of these are very interesting and I look forward to hearing about all of them.
Is there additional benefit besides the fun of hearing something interesting about different
legal systems?
So Friedman mentions, Friedman will frequently contrast the way a given legal system does a
particular thing against the way that we do it now.
And he'll mention in particular when something comes up that just seems absolutely bizarre
when it's done a particular way.
The book gave me a serious case of cultural relativism for about a week and a half
when the first time I read it, I mostly got over that.
In particular, I think Friedman may be giving Sharia a bit too much credit in his chapter on it.
But there's more to than just the specific institutions in that knowing that there are
other ways to do things leaves you a lot better equipped to optimize.
And there is an entire chapter at the end of the book dedicated to specific things that
Friedman thinks we might be able to learn from in the in the current legal system from these
ancient ones.
So that obviously is the question.
Are there things you think that weird legal systems use that we would be
well advised to incorporate into ours?
I think that the biggest one and the one that Enrico Capital is spring up most often,
I think is the transferable tort model that the Icelandic system used.
Do we not have that?
I know you can sell debt to other people to collect it.
You can't sell the right to initiate a court proceeding.
There is one exception, which Scott actually brought up in his review of the book as the
best example of a way that you could improve on the existing system this way.
So in the status quo, if you work for an evil big box retailer, which no point in naming,
that just cuts an hour off of everyone's time sheet every paycheck for a year
and they employ a million people.
If you're paying biweekly, by the end of the year, they've stolen 26 million man
hours of labor, which at the current US minimum wage is somewhere in the neighborhood of $180
million, but it's spread across a million people and no one is going to take the
evil big box retailer to court for $180.
And there are a lot of issues in our current just in modern society like this,
which is why we have class actions.
The class action exists because we don't want a situation where committing sufficiently
small crimes against a sufficiently large number of people will let you get away with a large pay
day and no risk of punishment. And so in our class action system, some enterprising lawyer who
learns of the existence of this large scale low intensity wrong will go into a court and get
himself appointed as attorney for the class. And the judge just says, all right, you are allowed
to represent everyone who had their money stolen by this retailer in the form of wage theft during
this period. And because you want to transfer other sorts of rights than that, right?
What the class action does effectively is transfer the tort.
That's actually one of the bad parts of the existing system.
So you'd like it if like individual people could transfer a tort from one to another.
Right. So to use the class action example to make it a little bit clearer what's
happening at scale, in the status quo, the lawyer would go out and get appointed
attorney for the class and he'd go to the evil big box retailer and say,
I have the right to sue you for compensation for 26 million hours of stolen wages.
I'm also in charge of negotiating the settlement. So I want half a million dollars and give everyone
else a $25 coupon to TGI Fridays. And this isn't this isn't expressly illegal. I suppose a judge
could in theory object to the settlement. I don't know how often it happens. But there is a serious
principal agent problem because the lawyer the class action attorney can get his payday
regardless of how good a deal he gets for the victims of the large scale wrong.
In the Icelandic system, you would have to get from individual victims the right to pick up their
compensation. So if you found out there were a million people subject to this problem, you might
as the as someone who wished to litigate the case with the big box retailer,
send out a bunch of mailers that say, Hey, we understand that you worked for this
evil big box retailer and over the year of 2019, and had 26 hours of wages approximately stolen
from you. This is something you should be compensated for. But we totally understand
that you're not going to go to court for half a paycheck. So instead, we'll give you 90% of
that value if you send us back this mailer that says we're authorized to collect the money from
the retailer. And then once you've assembled a big pile of we have you have the right to collect
this money from the retailer, you go to the evil big box with a big stack of forms, say these are
the 792,000 people who've authorized me to collect 26 stolen hours of pay from you. The in this case,
unlike the present system, the victims have necessarily accepted the settlement they're
eventually getting 90% of the value of the stolen money. And the attorney is getting his payday.
But you an attorney wouldn't go after a class action in this system without a without a strong
belief in the probability of success, or the the the fraction of eventual compensation offered to
the people you were buying the claim from would have to be much lower. So I think it's an opportunity
to make to get some spurious litigation out of the market and make this market for justice more
efficient. It's the single biggest thing I would take away from the book. Okay, is there anything
more esoteric and weird that you would like to have incorporated? The Athenian system seems to
have been crafted by a team of bunny ears lawyers, Czech TV tropes folks. Can you quickly tell us
what a bunny ears lawyer is? Someone who's more than a little bit unhinged, but his antics are
tolerated because he's demands he's absurdly good at his particular task. Okay. In the case of the
Athenian system, there's a bunch of stuff that's outright amusing to hear, but actually sounds
like it would work as a way of addressing real legal issues. For example, the, so if you had
something stolen from you in the Athenian legal system, you could bring a case to against the
person you thought stole it. And in the course of that case, you could search their house and
try to recover your property. Now, in the modern legal system, if law enforcement just comes barging
in, we might be without a warrant, we might be concerned that they were planting drugs in order
to be able to arrest you. The Athenians were concerned that you might bring your own property
into a house in order to plant it, provide have unimpeachable evidence recovering it in the search
that this person had stolen it and then be able to collect the value of the property, the property
itself and compensatory damages. The Athenians dealt with this problem in a shockingly and
amusingly straightforward way. You can search the house of someone you were accusing at theft,
but you have to strip naked at the front door so that you can't be, you can't have anything
palmed or up your sleeve or otherwise concealed that you'd be able to plant.
That's pretty awesome. I mean, well, I guess I got to think of the ramifications of that
before I wholeheartedly agree. So the downside is that some naked dude could just come knock on
my door and walk in and say, I'm here. They had an actual court system. This would occur as part
of a prosecution that you were bringing. But presumably, it would still be a surprise to have
them at your door. Otherwise, if you knew they were coming, you could hide the stolen goods
or the allegedly stolen goods. That is not clear from my reading on the subject.
A lot of what's known about the Athenian legal system actually comes from
the detailed accounts of speeches at court that are given in Greek theater,
which assume that the reader is familiar with procedure. So it describes the procedure
as if you'd be familiar with it. And you can sort of feel out the edges of their legal system from
that. Just like no one knows how ancient people saluted. Right. Now, I don't know exactly how,
I don't know where in the Athenian court proceeding for theft, the strip naked in search
would fall, but... They were pretty big on nudity. You had to do the Olympics in the nude too,
so that you were visibly of the sex that you claimed you were. Didn't have guys dressing up
as girls to win the woman's 10,000 meter or whatever. There was a great South Park episode
on that that just came out, but great if you could tolerate South Park humor. But I still
have to think that if my accuser, who I didn't know, was out there until they called and said,
hey, detectives and I all be by sometime or sometime tomorrow between three and six p.m.
I think what happens is you probably like have someone knock on your door,
pull you into court, and then you have to defend yourself, and then they can do the search after.
I guess having not trafficked and stolen goods, I'm not really sure how this would work,
but I'm just thinking that if I had a heads up, I would move them out of my house. Right.
It might not be that many places you can move things in ancient Greece.
Yeah, that's a possibility. And also, if you're aware of that risk, you could hire a couple of
people to watch the house, and that would just be part of the compensation that the thief eventually
owed if you caught them. There is another really, Friedman calls Athenian law the work of a mad
economist. And the best example is one that he ends the chapter with. Can we put in like a skip
ahead to spoiler? Oh, yeah. Right now, if you want to not get the spoiled for you, skip ahead by
three minutes. That too should be plenty. Okay. Okay. So the Athenians had, in addition to regular
taxes, a system for producing public goods that they called the liturgy. And the liturgy consisted
of city officials coming around to some group of the ex richest people in Athens every other year,
and saying something like, Hey, guess who's sponsoring the Olympic team that we're sending
to Sparta this year, or look at that shiny new tri-rame down at the docks, gets who gets to pay
the salaries of the crew this year and be captain. This was, I think it's actually a pretty cool way
of progressivizing the tax burden and guaranteeing public good production, despite the vagaries of
a legislature. But the way that you got out of it when the city officials showed up, they would
tell you that you were paying for whatever, and you could pay it on the spot, you could
show that you had already been consulted this year about performing a liturgy or had done one last
year, or you could refer to the city's attention, someone richer than you, who had not done a liturgy
last year and was not doing one this year. Now, this presents a problem because you can't really
tell in a society where there are no, in a society with no property tax records,
no real estate listings, nothing, it can be really hard to tell if you're richer than me.
And the Athenian solution to this, and the reason that we're spoiling this,
is the way that you did it. The way that you prove someone is richer than you
is to offer to exchange on the spot all of your property for all of their property.
If they accept, then you've either made an expensive mistake if they're actually poorer than
you, which is an incentive not to do this recklessly, or if they're richer than you,
then you've just gotten a bunch of free money and can now pay for the liturgy that you were
previously unwilling to. Cool. Either that or they refuse, thus signalling that they are in
fact richer. In which case, they are immediately, they are required to pay for whatever the city
was going to ask you to do. Cool. That was, I feel like if you wanted to switch stuff with me,
I guess if it included accounts, then maybe I'd be okay with it. But if it was just all the stuff,
like I like my stuff, that's why it's my stuff. I'm pretty sure it would include all your holdings,
like the mines that you have off in Dacia or wherever.
Real property at least. Even real property, if you're talking about the 300 richest people
in Athens, which was a pretty unequally distributed society, you're probably dealing with people who
do have remote holdings, but these will either be known or difficult to conceal.
Dude, the inequality and wealth in the ancient world was crazy. At the height of the Roman
Emperor's power, he controlled literally more than half of all wealth in the Roman Empire.
And like a fifth of the entire world. Yeah. But one person with literally half the wealth,
that's, I mean, in the US, we make like 14 trillion a year GDP. That would be like if
one person made seven and a half trillion every single year. That's fucking nuts. Jeff Bezos
says I'm not there yet, but growth mindset. Yeah, that was the number I was trying to
think of was, all right, how close are we to that distribution is different now because there's
more people working and there's more money involved altogether. It's radically more equal than the
past was. Although I have seen an estimate that the genie coefficient, the standard
econometric of inequality is actually higher in the US now than at some important period in
Roman history. So yeah, there's that to consider. It was one of the fun things when reading up about
the ancients that, yeah, the liturgy thing that you were talking about. And oftentimes it wasn't
even like a thing that was required and imposed by the state. It was just the rich people were
expected to, as part of the society's worshiping of the gods, I guess, is to throw big feasts and to
basically spend a lot of money on the public. And that would, that was part of like, you know,
you got respect and you got prestige as a person by doing this, but you also
used a lot of your wealth to help pay for food or for clothes for people that were really poor.
And I mean, it's kind of a shitty system because it also only makes sure that
public projects that are visible get funded. Like aqueducts might if your name was attached to them,
but something less visible than that didn't get that much funding. But still, it was,
I thought it was neat that like the richer you were, the more you were expected to contribute
back to society as part of their religion even. Yeah, yeah, exactly. How far through the book
are you right now? I've got, I think, seven episodes out of a planned 12 up right now.
The eighth one I'm hoping to finish this week with voices provided by one of the discorders.
And that'll hopefully go up today's the 17th. Yeah, that'll hopefully go up on the 24th.
I've been trying to stick to a two week production. I tried initially to stick with
a one week production schedule. I this became untenable. And then it occurred to me that
I was doing an episode twice the length of a typical HPM or podcast episode at twice the
frequency. And I understood with that sense of scale why this might not be sustainable.
Yeah, why you're feeling overwhelmed. So I walked the schedule back to two weeks.
I had some trouble meeting that although one of the discorders actually
the hobo demon, the one who's appearing in this upcoming episode edited the last one
together for me to help keep it from getting too far off schedule. Thank you for that hobo demon.
Which one, which legal system is this one going to be? The one that's coming up
this week is going to be Plains Indian law. The Comanche Kiowa and Cheyenne and a general overview
of feud law systems, of which the Plains Indians are one example, the Romani, the Icelanders,
the Somalis all have their own takes on that system. And Islamic and Jewish law both show signs
of having been developed from systems like that, where private force and individual
vindication of your rights is the way that things are done. Before we wrap this up, before we started
the episode, you were telling me something about how what great lengths was gone through in Jewish
law to make it look like their God was enforcing the law when he really wasn't?
That's not exactly. So there's a whole chapter on the issues with religious legal systems. And
one of them is he actually kind of lumps US constitutional law in this category.
So we have in theory in Jewish Islamic and US constitutional law a single unchangeable
source of authority. The Constitution is not written on stone tablets, but it's treated as if
it were. And this is a really serious problem when the society changes to a sufficient degree
from the one in which the law code was written down to make some institutions suboptimal or
when you need to add prohibitions that God didn't think to include.
And so in Jewish law in particular, the first solution to this problem that they hit on
is very, very broad interpretation. The rabbis over the centuries developed some very elaborate
rules by which to construe the meaning of the Torah. On the basis of some other doctrines,
the oral Torah is the main one, to defend interpretations of the Torah that you could
not plausibly derive from the actual language of the text, because there is an oral Torah,
which includes correct interpretations of the Torah by which you can modify this sort of thing.
They also over time established some communal like the
for the 2000 years after the destruction of the almost 2000 years after the destruction of the
temple until Israel was established. The global Jewish community was a bunch of
separated populations living under non-Jewish authority, usually allowed to enforce their own
law. And the religious legal system was not ideal for everything. So the secular Jewish
community authorities developed the authority to promulgate new rules themselves. I think the
sort of consensus they settled on was that the secular authorities could forbid what the Torah
permitted, but not forbid what it required or permit what it forbade. So the only thing that
struck me as confusing there was that the United States Constitution, at least in idealistically
and historically, isn't treated like stone tablets because it's the rules for changing
it are expressed in it. I actually absolutely understand what he's saying. The way we treat
it as a society is very much like a holy document. People treat it like a holy document,
but you have to interpret it, but it doesn't have in there. You can't change this. This is the
final word. It has the opposite. No, but like the Second Amendment, the right to bear arms thing,
it has the arms they had at the time are so different that it doesn't really apply nowadays.
So they've had to interpret it in what they thought the founders originally meant, you know,
which how could you possibly know? It's very much a sort of trying to interpret the word of your God
to apply to modern situations. That I don't think though is the main parallel that Friedman draws.
So Jewish law over time allowed, had methods by which you could add rules that were completely
not part of religious law, or that were absurd stretches of the text that you could still claim
were completely in compliance with it. Effective, there actually is a story in the Talmud where
it's basically established that divine religious truth is a matter for God to decide, but the law
has been explicitly entrusted to the care of humans. And the law is in this effectively whatever
the rabbis agree it is. Post New Deal Supreme Court in particular, Caroline products, US versus
Caroline products is one example. Wicked versus Philburn is the more famous one, where the court
held that feeding your own cows on your own farm, wheat that you yourself grew on your own farm,
counted as interstate commerce, because it could affect the interstate wheat market.
Effectively, at that point, we've just the court decided that constitutional law is what the
Supreme Court says it is. And the Islamic law event over time developed the same institutions,
the Ottoman Empire had a sort of pair had they had secular laws and a lot of religion adjacent
proceedings that were either conspicuously different from or outright contradictory to
Quranic law. The Quran explicitly prohibits loans at interest, and the Ottoman secular law
stipulates a maximum interest rate. Basically, the religious laws, as far as I can tell,
Freeman doesn't say it, but this, the law is whatever the interpretive authority decides it
seems to be a very common attractor for legal systems that are viewed as discovered
in a religious sense rather than created. Cool. Yeah, that tracks. I can follow that,
especially the way that we constitutional scholars will bicker on what this exactly meant. It
strikes me as hideously analogous to interpreting the Bible. Okay, yeah.
And this one is quick. There's another simple parallel he draws between Islamic law and the
constitution. If a law professor is talking about what's constitutional, then he's talking about
whatever the Supreme Court says the Constitution says. Yeah. And if a judge is saying this is
constitutional or this isn't, he is in theory measuring it measuring it against some platonic
ideal of constitutional interpretation, trying to get what the actual intention out of it.
Whereas the law professor just cares about what the court ends up deciding. Islamic law has Sharia,
the divine legal code that's actually laid out in the Quran and studied. And it has Fik,
jurisprudence, the actual human legal institutions and the rules deduced from the Quran.
The law professor is talking about Fik and the judge is talking about Sharia to go with that
analogy. I recall hearing that there is no actual right to privacy in the Constitution
laid out explicitly that it's been interpreted back into it.
That's, yeah, that sounds reasonable. It's a sort of logical extension of a lot of Fourth and
Fifth Amendment case law. But it's the word privacy isn't found anywhere. This is one of the
things that your civics textbook will mention about, for example, the Roe v. Wade ruling,
which mentions a right to privacy that's not there. I don't disagree with the conclusion,
but it's pretty obvious that they're not going to the text for the meaning.
Cool. That's awesome. Yeah. All right. So real quick again,
where can people find this podcast? I will be putting it up on the iTunes store. It's currently
on Google Play Podcasts. And I'll try to get it up on Stitcher and the others as the podcast,
very different from ours. If you still can't find it at the time that you're listening to this,
I am on SoundCloud as GSV Bemusement Park. Excellent. And I will include a link to the
SoundCloud at the very least and see if I can find the one to the Google Play and the iTunes
when they're available. Awesome. With that being said, do we want to move on?
Yeah, that was awesome, by the way. I didn't contribute much because I was mainly just,
yeah, it was like a lecture, which that sounds, well, to us, it's not pejorative. To others,
it might be. That was awesome. So thank you. It's going to be really interesting for people.
The book was a blast to read and the process of podcasting. I've learned a lot from,
I know, about podcasting and also about the content from it. I strongly recommend it as a
read, even if you're not the sort of person who listens to podcasts, but those people probably
won't hear it. Me saying this. And as you were saying, podcasting, not quite as terribly hard
as people think. It is a thing that you, the listener, can do if there's something you're
passionate about. Every single person in this room has done it. So that's true. Yeah. Alrighty.
We are moving on to Less Wrong Posts. Yeah, sounds great. The first Less Wrong Post we have this
week is the virtue of narrowness. This is a post about basically going back to how your belief
should constrain what you are going to experience. And he starts out by saying that, well, he gives
a number of examples. The one of the examples I got was that specialists know much more about
their speciality than people out in the public, like a car repair person knows the difference
between a carburetor and a distributor and would not refer to them both just as car parts.
Unlike me, who would? I'd be like, I need a new part for my car. The old one is broken. He says,
a janitor does not wipe the floor with window cleaner, even if the bottles look similar to one
who has not mastered the art. Outside their own professions, people often commit the misstep of
trying to broaden a word as widely as possible to cover as much territory as possible. It seems
undemocratic and exclusionary and elitist and unholistic to call some pebbles diamonds and others
not. It seems narrow-minded. I think the point of the post is this is a case where we really want
to be narrow-minded. The problem with not using narrow categories is that they lead you into
other specific errors. Scott's non-central fallacy is probably the best example. Is that the worst
argument ever? Yeah. We should paraphrase because it's wonderful. Nelson Mandela and Martin Luther
King are both criminals in the sense that they did things that were illegal under the legal system
they lived in. So is the person who breaks into your house and steals all your stuff. The non-central
fallacy and the reason that we want to be narrow occurs when you use this broad category of criminal
enough that you're applying to Nelson Mandela and Martin Luther King the same emotional reaction
that the guy who breaks into your house and steals stuff generates. Yeah. Because they're both
criminals. Yeah. When we think of criminals we think about that awful person that we hate because
he stole our stuff. And so when someone says Martin Luther King was a criminal they're trying to
make you feel that same way about Martin Luther King even though he's not an example of what most
people think of when they think of the word criminal. And he's not a negative example of
things that you should avoid doing that like as a moral matter you should avoid doing because
they're crimes. Ideally we would have a legal system that captured most or all of what was
actually wrong to do and not anything else and then criminal would be a useful descriptor that's
not misuseable in this fashion. But since it's not we have to be narrow enough to recognize
when we're... What I get from this is that it's important to recognize the domain in which you're
thinking about a category when you start using category terms. Yeah. I think he points out that
it's very good to have more narrow categories because while you could take all a bunch of pebbles
and say they're all pebbles there are certain things that tie the ones that you call diamonds
together. They have a different refractive index. They have things in common with them that they
don't have in common with other pebbles. And so yeah someone else could be like well they're all
pebbles man stop being so elitist but on the other hand drawing those categories and narrowing things
down gives you information. It lets you make more predictions about the world and maybe even use
the resources that you have in a better way once you're using diamonds for things that only diamonds
can be used for. I could just imagine someone trying to make that argument in a like in a sense with
actual application. I mean it's all metal man and you're like yeah but we're trying to we're trying
to wire a circuit board here. We're not going to use aluminum right or whatever. I'm not an expert
but it's just it's like yes there's it's hard to imagine even a fake argument of this happening
in real life when there's two people disagreeing about what to actually do but what he's doing
in the post is saying yes that's sort of the point. Like if there's real if there's real
experiences that you're trying to in a lingo of the book if you're trying to constrain actual
outcomes and I'm blanking on the word but yeah that's the point. You would never I don't think
there's any context in which you would it would be remotely helpful to lump copper and mercury
together under the label of metal. Anything you try to use copper for mercury is going to be
profoundly unhelpful for. That's a much better example perfect. They can both conduct electricity
yeah but you you couldn't use copper very well in a mercury switch. No you could not.
I like that he also makes the comment in here that this leads to some people especially like the
the far out hippie types being like everything's connected man it's everything's one and he says
that okay yeah sure maybe but a fully connected graph with an edge between every two vertices
conveys the same amount of information as a graph with no edges at all. The important graphs are
the ones where some things are connected and some things are not connected. I think I just
read that but basically yeah. That's yeah you with on a on a completely connected graph you
can't tell what the right path to follow is yeah if you've got some disconnections if you've got
five points and all four of them are connected to the fifth but not to each other knowing that
fifth point knowing having information about that fifth point on the graph is going to tell you a
great deal more than anything you'd ever learn looking at the connected graph. Yeah he ends
this with the important categories are the ones that do not contain everything in the universe
good hypotheses can only explain some possible outcomes and not others. There's nothing wrong
with focusing your mind narrowing your categories excluding possibilities and sharpening your
propositions really there isn't if you make your words too broad you end up with something that
isn't true and doesn't even make good poetry. To mix his other metaphors your sharp category
your sharp category distinctions will help you carve reality at the joints. Yeah I'm just
picturing a graph with everything connected everything and it's just a black square compared
that to no graph or just a white square. Either one isn't going to help you at all right I feel
bad moving on so fast because I agree with him so much is there anything do we have things that we
can disagree with this about? Honestly I feel like it's one of those ones that not really even a
disagreement but it's not an introductory post maybe this this has a lot of kind of presumed
understanding but yeah I mean if you have that then no it's great I think it's a sink to make a
point and it does so and is in only the way that Eliezer could. I'm kind of like the fact that he
called it narrow-minded mindedness I'm often remembered of the old 40 Warhammer 40k quote
that a open mind is like a fortress with its gates wide open. The 40k universe is a very dark
universe where they everyone has a strong vested interest in controlling your thoughts so a lot
of their sayings are things that we would recoil in horror from but on the other hand I do I do
sometimes you know run up against people who are like oh god just yesterday I walked past a conversation
where someone was saying like but everything was energy in the beginning man all particles are just
energy like I was walking by and I could hear this and someone was protesting something about
physics and she was like but metaphysics is bigger than fit and I was like wow I'm so glad
I'm not involved in this and that that is what I think of when I think of people who are like
you're so narrow-minded man I'm like yeah there's some things that you know what I just I'm not
going to accept and I think I have a darn good reason for that because sometimes it's good to have
distinct individual categories that actually mean things. In the words of Carl Sagan it's
it's good to be open-minded but not so open-minded your brain falls out. Yeah. Alternatively in the
words of Inquisitor Ravner if we're quoting 40k chaos claims the unwary and the incomplete
a true man may flinch away from its embrace if he has stalwart and girds his soul with the armor of
contempt. Nice. What's that one from? That's from Gaunt's Ghosts. Okay. It gives us title to like
the seventh or eighth book. Cool. Now that we are on board with censorship and not allowing people
to think free thoughts let's move on to You Can Face Reality which is a very short post
so we can just read it in its entirety right now. I feel like I can handle this one. Let's go for it.
This is also called The Litany of Gendolin. What is true is already so owning up to it doesn't make
it worse not being open about it doesn't make it go away because it is true it is what is there to
be interacted with anything untrue isn't there to be lived people can stand what is true for
they're already enduring it. It's written in the form of a poem I don't know if it was originally
written that way but if nothing else Ellie has reinterpreted it that way. So what does this
mean basically what I always took it to mean is that you shouldn't look away from things because
you're worried about finding out the truth like specifically sometimes people are like
I don't want to go in and get this test at the doctor because I don't want to know if I have
cancer. That was the example I was going to use. Okay okay and I'm always like you know whether you
have cancer or not you already have it or don't your knowledge of that isn't going to change
the fact of the matter. Right it could change other facts like how you live the rest of your life
or something but it's especially if you take truth as a virtue then it's better to know and not
then to not know. I don't know finding that sorry. Oh as I was going to say you can you can you can
actually make better decisions based off of what you learn where sitting in your uncertainty doesn't
help you at all. Finding out that you have STDs is not what makes you a risk for spreading them.
That's a really good distillation of it I like that a lot yeah. I get reading this the sense
that I get from this one and the last one together is that it's directed to at least some extent
specifically at religious thought the it's all evolution man therefore we're entitled to reject
because we reject Darwinian evolution we're also entitled to reject the entire cut like physical
cosmology of the universe that's assembled by a completely different means and also quantum
mechanics because we describe both of those systems as also evolving even though the evolving has
nothing in common we have one word that is broadly used and that forms an excuse. I think
a lot of times people don't want knowledge because commonly in society if you don't know
something that absolves you of responsibility like if you didn't know that it was against the rules
to do something in a particular place well the first time you make that mistake they let you
off the hook so if you don't know that you have an STD you can't be morally morally culpable for
spreading it and I think I think that is a problem with society in general people should be held
responsible for when they're negligent. I've brought up the example of what was that Clifford's
argument about the sea captain yes about not wanting to investigate whether or not his boat
was seaworthy right because if he didn't know that it's not seaworthy you know then it's not in
my hands clean yeah but Clifford argues that no they're not yeah yeah I think the bright line here
is once you've even can once that choice is even something that you know about as a possibility
responsibility has attached to you and you're not going to scrub that off even
if your response is to ignore the fact you have the choice that's in fact that's about as I would
argue it's almost as bad not quite as bad but almost as bad as knowing the bad outcome of the test
and going ahead and acting as if you hadn't received it yeah the part of those that gives me
her mining and her method of rationality has a panic attack like this where like what else am I
missing out on and she freaks out and goes to McGonagall and stuff and the you know so like I
try to be mindful of if my you know to take the sea captain analogy you know is my car safe
but what are the questions I'm not asking that if I thought to ask them I could prevent something
bad from happening and I don't know of a refined way to go about figuring those things out I
yeah because you don't know what the dark areas to look into are yeah you're not even you think
sometimes you sometimes you do maybe but if you don't um two bits of the Jewish
law thing that are actually briefly relevant to that may a monotheist says in the Talmud that in
order for religious for Jewish religious law to impose capital punishment the defendant must
have been told by two separate people immediately before the offense that it was to be that it was
punishable by death and then done it anyway and there has to be a witness to has having been told
this what that's that is that is the the depth of so right before you're going to murder someone
two different people have to tell you you know you could get executed if you murder this guy
yeah in order for the death penalty to be imposed the amount of the the degree to which the
these religious requirements are added to and hedged around like the stoning of the disobedient
son in chapter four is one of the things that Friedman brings up as an attractor and religious
law and it it occurred to me as an example but uh the the other one relevant to the what questions
am i not asking um this i think is the root of the reasonable person stand this is what the
reasonable person standard in common law and other systems is supposed to embody uh in Jewish
law i think this falls under the the grazing ox tort category um or the the goring ox if you took
reasonable precautions and the ox isn't known to be an angry thing that gores other animals
then you aren't liable for full damage for the full value of the injury if it gores another animal
because it was an unknown risk uh if the ox has gored before you're liable for the full
extent of damages but you're responsible in any case if you took what should have been reasonable
precautions um and the the we moved to the the fire category of torts hazards that spread
if you're responsible for the circumstances under which the fire occurs and you took reasonable
precautions then you're not liable if you didn't take reasonable precautions you're liable for
the full amount of damages period and even if you took reasonable precautions if you did it on
someone else's property even with their permission so that you're not the primary immediate probable
victim of anything going wrong you're also liable for the full amount of damages so it's nice that
there's legal understanding of that but just as as as a person i want to be better than reasonable
right so like um fire puts me in mind of if i didn't know for example that grease fires
were different from other kinds of fire and i'm cooking at inyasha's house and the the the oil
that i'm cooking on the stove suddenly burst into flame what historically works really good for fire
right yeah i got i got a big bucket of water and i throw it on it and then suddenly i've
splashed fire throughout the kitchen and i burn your house down i mean so i might be legally
safe there because you know i did my best with my best understanding but if only i knew better
i wouldn't have done that right so it's i the reasonable person with the information they had
is safe there but i i want to be wants to be better i want to be better but i don't know
questions to ask myself so you can hear it so you know if i said it right but not you tie
okay yeah that's so we we want to be better than that i think we would all agree there is some limit
at how far uh how many causal steps removed from a given situation your you should try to be knowledgeable
before your responsibility is kind of diffused into the background but it's definitely we would
definitely desire as rationalists to be more than one causally causal step aware the to me one of the
most important lines of this litany is owning up to it doesn't make it worse whether you know you
have cancer or not or whether you know this thing is true or not once you find out things aren't
worse off it's exactly the same it was before all that changed as your knowledge so you're
better off having that knowledge well like like gray said it this is easy to point at a religious
person um and so if you if you if a religious person seriously considers and decides all right
you're right god isn't real they might argue they're worse off because they like living in
their diluted bubble right but god never was real in that point so they aren't worse off at all
all that changed was their knowledge and now they can take better steps in life the magic was in you
all along yes or there was no magic all along i actually have pointed that um borrowing from
not you can uh borrowing from is that your true rejection um at a couple of religious people um in
the christian case all right so god comes down from the heavens and looks you in the eye and says
outright everything in the old testament is true and everything in the new testament is not
what's your reaction to this and the first response that i got when i asked somebody
to this was uh along the lines of hooker and hookers and blow until we all died
and i i said really like all you have to find out is that you made one large mistake to turn
into a suicidal hedonist straw man and he said well only if i thought suicide would be enjoyable
at least that's an answer it's what scares me as people who say no no i need to i need the moral
code from the bible otherwise or from god or my religion or whatever otherwise i'd be out raping
and killing people and it's like if that's what's stopping you i want you to lose my number real
fast like i yeah like that that's the the issue you you only you've gone through the whole experience
of parenting for example and the only reason you care about your kids is that you think you have
externally imposed duties to that effect uh one i don't buy it and two horrifying if true
in the same vein the last two lines people can stand what is already true for they are already
enduring it i think is what's for me important to keep in mind when going through the quantum
quantum physics sequences because a lot of that's some of that stuff anyway leads to a sort of nihilism
um anytime i think of the the fact that the universe may be infinitely big i quickly fallen
nihilism because then if everything is happening an infinite number of times why does anything
matter but you know i've already been enduring that being true for my entire life so apparently
i i could stand the truth exactly i like that a lot you know whether or not that's true
yes you put it more i was just going to try and reiterate but you already put it just
perfectly the corollary i guess comes in big gold letters on the
cover of a wholly remarkable book don't panic right you can stand what is true it was true
five minutes ago before you knew about it yeah exactly all right and since that one was so short
we are also doing the apocalypse bet today i think it's fair you grab this one if you'd like gray
all right so uh this is a post by eliezer that doesn't show up this was in the original sequences
right because that's what you're using is source yeah okay so it didn't migrate into uh rationality
from the i to zombies but it's about i totally know why too um should i hit it then or did you
get a chance to read it i did get the chance to read it okay and the the reason so it it covers
the idea of a prediction market on events that are of such grand import that they're going to
disrupt this the either the ability to settle the contract or the importance of settling the
contract in a way that that makes the bet hard to sell like anytime someone wants to bet like i
bet you the us dollar will collapse after you know in the next 10 years you can always take them up
on that bet because if you lose the bet you don't have to pay up because the elica dollar has
collapsed yeah and that there's a the problem with that is the absurd specificity of the prediction
that it implies if you think it's going to happen and give or take 10 years say i think it's going
on january 1st 2030 uh the us dollar will be worth 0.01 vietnamese dong currently the exchange
rates about 50 000 if i remember right okay so that that sounds like some serious collapse
um so you you could set up the simplest contract for this would just be all right uh you owe me
i i bet that it's not going to go wrong uh if the exchange rates higher than that then you pay me
a million dollars on january 1st of 2030 and if it's lower i pay you a million dollars and and
given the the odds involved this is a huge just a preposterously advantageous bet but in the all
or nothing scenario described the the prediction you have to make is so specific that if you were
right about all the reasons for the us dollar collapsing but off by three days and in fact
the dollar imploded on january 4th when uh east timor invaded hawaii then you'd still be out the
million useful dollars at the time of the bet which which isn't desirable and eliezer suggests a
sort of reverse prediction contract that still pays these sort of even odds on this where if i
think gold's going to become worthless in 10 years or you think gold's going to be worthless in 10
years and i think that it's going to be no earlier than 20 years before it's worthless then i could
pay you an ounce of gold every year for the next 10 years and then if gold is still worth anything
then you pay me i mean or if it's not but you're i'm getting a much better deal if it is then you
pay me two ounces of gold plus whatever interest for the 10 years after that and in either case
one of us has obtained the value of the amount originally bet uh net yeah which but it doesn't
have the same absurd uh specificity of prediction because if you if you're betting it's going to
happen in 10 years and it happens in 11 you've still won the bet overall but at much but it's
somewhat lower odds yeah the the so i was raised joe's witness at some i sometimes bring up and
they are very much a the apocalypse is coming very soon sort of religion so uh if you found a
true believer it would be entirely reasonable to set up a sort of bet with them that i will give you
i don't know a thousand dollars a year for the next 20 years and then after that you give me
two thousand dollars a year for the next 20 years and we'll adjust these for inflation every single
year right uh so in which case you know you end up giving them 10 000 and they end up giving you
back 20 000 and you make out unless the apocalypse does come in which case you've given them all this
money until the apocalypse so they lived a better lifestyle than apocalypse comes they've won the
bet basically they don't have to pay you back uh and on its face it looks like a pretty good bet
but it i'm smirking sorry for side barring but it puts me in mind there are businesses
that say we'll take care of your pets after the rapture oh you pay us like a monthly fee and if
the rapture comes we'll take we probably will take care of your pets yeah okay yeah that's
interesting i i would feel bad about practicing dark arts on that level but it's interesting that
you can get people to take that apocalypse bet if you structure it properly yeah i think the
reason it didn't make it in um is that robin hanson pointed out in the comments that it wouldn't
work and eliezer came back two years later long before editing rationality from ai to zombies and
said past eliezer robin's completely right about this and stop arguing with him yeah so what was
robins uh robin had a thing well okay robin had a thing about um some technical economic thing
about how due to interest or whatever interest rates this would not quite work out i personally
didn't understand it all i know is that i saw in the comments uh eliezer says dear past eliezer
robin is just right here your idea doesn't work accept it and move on which first of all i thought
that was pretty fucking awesome because that's like what you want to do as a rationalist right
like you publicly acknowledge you were wrong and you just accept it and you stop fighting it
and you move on with your life and i was like incorporate that into your brain and keep going
and that's that's exactly what you want to do for your rationalist right yeah i i found robin's
reason for it um the reason he gives is that the the interest rate which is effectively going to
be what dictates the odds of the bet um combines preferences about having stuff on some at some
future date versus the present uh and also beliefs about whether you're actually going to have to
give up anything of value to satisfy the contract and you can't in practice separate those two effects
in a way that makes it possible to set an appropriate interest rate so like i said stuff
that's over my head uh though the reason i personally think it would never work is because
if you think the apocalypse is coming you don't save up for the apocalypse you spend all the money
that you're getting from this bet and all anything else that you make and then after the day to the
apocalypse you're like well shit sorry i can't pay you 2000 a year i got nothing and i declare
bankruptcy yeah basically and they would get out of it i would expect to never see that money again
if i were to make such a bet because anyone who really believes in the apocalypse is going to live
as if they thought the apocalypse was coming i have a bet with my mom that i won't hold her to
because i already forgot the specifics but it was something like i'll give her a thousand dollars
if by 2030 the established consensus is that e-cigarettes are worse than regular cigarettes
and if they're not then she owes me like ten thousand dollars or something wow she was really
confident on this which was kind of insane that's why i told and she was like well you know i'm not
sure i was like well then let's let's put money on it not seriously ten to one odds and i i'm so
wait maybe it was the other way around do you have this written down somewhere no that's why it's
it was a throwaway joke on the phone but it was the other way around i told her i'd give her ten
thousand dollars and she'd give me one okay yeah so it was it was where i'm ten more times more
confident than she is right one thing i do want to say as long as we're discussing this sort of
prediction contract structure it's not useless categorically it is useless in case of apocalyptic
events for the reasons we've gone over but i do have a bet going over on whether the us will
invade venezuela to resolve the presidential crisis i expect that they will not and we have
a dollar rolling for every month of this year from me to the other person and two dollars rolling
back if it hasn't happened or from the first six months of the year which i've already gotten that
part but whether i turn a profit quite the size of the original bet will depend on it not happening
by the end of the year interesting that's pretty cool yeah this is a buck so this is just kind of
like just put a little money where your mouth is yeah nice is this on bets all bear witness
and no it's it's not made with another rationalist actually made with the friend that i spent this week
visiting okay but i would actually totally be willing to get behind us suggesting this as a
default form of prediction over time in bet's little bear witness that also like keeps it
fresh in everyone's mind yeah if you're paying out every month yeah so someone just goes in and
posts all right it's been 60 days now on this contract it's the second month and
for those rush more still hasn't caught fire yeah so i'm i have just ven mode two dollars to
david use of for people who are not familiar bets all bear witness is a channel in the less
not less wrong in the basing conspiracy discord where people bet on future events like this
i feel like there's an app idea here and you could just have your bets all bear witness
app instead of like your patreon app yeah and i think at that if we actually had an app for it
we might start running into a gambling law issues yeah that's fair you got to keep it small time
and yeah but but i do like the i mean i just get my receipt for my patreon every month and so if i
got my receipt every month that was you know handled as far as the terms of the bet set up in advance
and that money's either coming in or going out every month that'd make it nice and easy but
it would take some of the mindfulness out of it i want to have to write that check or send that
ven mode every month so cool i love it one thing before we um go that i found very interesting
in the last paragraph aliases says if the predicted date was hovering around 2080 i would
pick up as much of that free money as i dared which uh tells us that aliases thinks the end
of the world is coming by 2080 if was the start of that sentence though well yeah if the predicted
date if someone was willing to offer him a bet for 2080 he would take that oh i think what he's
betting on there though is the ai singularity yeah because that's one of the events he specifically
calls out as likely to disrupt the settlement of trades right and not necessarily the end of the
world but something where the world as we know it right the american dollar will not have any value
at all for whatever reason or because we're all paper clips or be it because we have transcended
the use of money what are the fucking years what are the exact words that harry uses for this uh it
won't end to the world but it will warm up a small part of its surface yeah the um we we are in
almost 2020 so 60 years to go from for from the original prediction i'll try and hold out that
long yeah i just find that interesting information i have i wonder if he still uh feels that is the
case um based on things that have happened over the last 10 years or if he's moved that date up or
pushed it out i hope he's moved it up yeah i think he said that he uh when um when alpha go happened
i think he said at that point he moved up his timetables for everything which i don't know
is it seems like a pretty significant update yeah um this is one of the cases where i would much
rather read uh guern writing about something than eliezer because instead of being a stream of
consciousness of essays guern basically writes a git repo of guern's mind and updates these
things over time and will note he changelogs everything so you could go through guern's
changelog and see january 21st 2020 this crazy thing has happened and i've just updated my
estimate for the singularity from 2060 to 2065 interesting okay and i actually did one of the
first things i considered podcasting was guern but his idiosyncratic publishing style presents
some unique challenges there that i haven't completely figured out yeah plus it's so fucking dense
yeah it's it and in particular his most famous stuff has pictures which on which the essay depends
for a lot of its appeal and like the this waifu does not exist got several times more traffic
but i think you guys brought this one up on a previous uh episode uh it's got several times
more traffic than any other page on guern.net but it depends on pictures so even though it's
the one that people would listen to most in the podcast that's not helpful because it you can't
because it won't work in podcast form did you say this waifu does not exist yeah uh he he trained
a neural network to generate uh anime girls oh okay okay right after the what they made that one
that trained the one to make human faces that exist yeah yeah um okay let's go on to a few quick
side topic things before we go into listener feedback and then end things sure okay uh the
first side topic thing i wanted to talk about was that um there is currently a rss feed for um
we want more that has the first few that has the hpm or podcast episodes right before the we want
more episode in the feed so you can like listen to it if you want to listen to the text if you
want to before you listen to the analysis of it however uh i will add this link and i want to
thank the person on our discord who made it available however you're going to start doing
that just natively well however it works easiest i just saw koi pasted this gigantic xml file that
i had no idea how to put into my podcast feeds so yeah i think it was an rss uh feed but did you
want to do it like i mean we can do it on the official we want more rss as well uh so if i'm
understanding this is sort of interleaved like we would hear episode zero discussing some of
what steven wants to accomplish with the podcast followed by chapters one through five followed
by we want more episode one followed by six through ten followed by the we want more of that
exactly oh that actually sounds although it would just be chapter six because then they
discussed just chapter six in the next episode oh right yeah that just how does it update which
episodes i'm doing um i i think he does it manually on the current rss feed oh yeah the
the thing he set up on github yeah yeah because he can basically just copy paste from the the
hpm or podcast rss feed in the order desired but if you wanted to do it on the official one i could
show you how to do that and it'd be like i said super easy um i'm flexible we'll have to we'll
talk about it afterwards yeah that sounds cool okay um yeah i'll get some thought in that case
the other thing i wanted to talk about is jojo rabbit yeah whole oh man i'm glad you brought
that up because i forgot to ask so it sounds like you liked it i don't want to i i i really don't
want to oversell things because i've noticed that like if i go in with just like medium expectations
for something and it far out shoots those i am blown away whereas if someone tells me this is
the best thing ever and then i go see it and it's like 98 percent of the way to the best thing ever
but not quite there i'm like not not what i was expecting so um you know some people dislike
jojo rabbit i hear some critics really we're not very pleased with it at all some critics are idiots
okay if that's fair uh but that's not even a statement about the critics for jojo rabbit i'm
just saying yeah yeah just it's it's true but sturdens law applies to critics as well as the
things they're criticizing yes is that 30 or 90 90 percent of everything is crap gotcha but uh i
went to see jojo rabbit and uh i was expecting it to be kind of touching and kind of funny but like
not huge in either way and the movie ended up making me cry twice same uh i normally do not cry
through any sort of movies uh so this this was just it was perfect the mix of of humor and
childish innocence plus like the horror of the nazi regime plus just taika boutidi ordinary
germans trying to be people but being subject to this regime and being evil because of it like
the combination of all of that was just so fucking amazing and oh my god it was i loved it so much
yay you might like it as well it's not the best movie in the world but it's really good i can't
give much higher praise than it made me cry twice i can only second what you know i said
i bet we cried at the same points i wish we had seen it together but at times scheduling was weird
yeah um yeah it uh it made me laugh it starts off hilariously i pitched the movie um basically if
you haven't seen the trailers the trailers don't spoil anything it takes place the
the protagonist is what an 11 year old hitler youth and his uh his friend is his imaginary
friend adolf hitler played by taika boutidi what were you gonna say oh i i haven't seen it so i'm
listen i'm following this and literally writing it down to watch later cool yeah and so i won't
spoil anything other than um it if you're familiar with taika from thor ragnarok or from what we do
in the shadows or hunt for the world or people um that's why i wasn't expecting anything too huge
because i was like yeah thor ragnarok it was funny but you know okay i'm expecting that kind of
humor i didn't know he could deliver emotion on this level either yeah and it was wild and again
i don't want to oversell this because that always ruins things for me yeah it's it's it's a good
movie it's not the best movie you'll ever see but it is a good movie and yeah the caveats aside
i or include it i totally agree but um and some people don't like it and i'm i'm for everyone
yeah i was just i was amazed because i i had no idea it was going to have an emotional load
to it and it did yeah and so i think that's what took me by surprise yeah so now we've ruined the
movie for everyone because now they know there's an emotional load to it well i don't think knowing
that will hurt your experience okay it might you haven't actually said which direction of crying it
went in so it's possible that i was crying out of rage at how bad this movie is perfect all right
so yeah now see now now you've primed some low expectations and the movie and people's experience
of the movie can only benefit that's that's the way to do it yeah it's always really hard to get
people to go see something that you really liked without overplaying it too yeah
like how do you tell someone like this is the best harry potter fanfic i've ever read
without them expecting fucking you know the best thing if they've ever read yeah yeah so i as long
as we're doing mover reviews i saw mid samar last night okay which is two hours and 50 minutes
that i'll never get back really bad yeah it was by the same i think director or writers that did
the wit they spelled the two v's because they're idiots oh yeah and um hereditary okay and hereditary
was i saw the i saw the witch hereditary was interesting it was a good spiritual successor
to the witch which if you didn't see it if you like looking at artsy stuff it's great
if you want to spend two and a half hours doing that you can't understand any of the dialogue
because they speak incredibly low with thick accents there's very little dialogue i don't
know any of the character's names the plots sucked there was like spoopy moments but that's it
and and granted i mean i'm a surface level observer of things and the analysis like rachel
showed me the last line of the script that they had for this mid samar movie and i'm like okay
that did not come through to me at all mid samar is this like made up swedish cults summer
festivity thing and their their grad students they're gonna go do this with a friend i've heard
about this movie and they go and the girl the protagonist has this conversation with her boyfriend
that you're meant and worked perfectly to hate because he sucks um that no no we need to get
out of here like nobody knows about this stuff we're all gonna die like that because movies like
she's genre savvy for that for that conversation of saying look you know how this is all a secret
like there's no way that we're gonna get out of here we should leave and then she just forgets
that whole thing and and without spoiling anything else like it's like no man just you had it and then
you just you just pick up the idiot ball for the rest of the movie and in her defense the idiot ball
was presented in the form of drugs being given to people constantly oh well so this is it was
actually a beautiful movie to look at and it was well choreographed and there's several shroom
trips involved and things look like a shroom trip i mean if i was drugged up i might have a hard
time doing anything reasonable too that's fair um but it but so so as far as visually it was a really
fun movie i it just could have been an hour shorter um but like the their their visualization of what
it was like to be outside on mushrooms was actually pretty good okay like things are breathing and
moving in a way that even later on you're like why the hell is oh yeah because she took shrooms and so
um that that that part was fine but anyway that was the most recent movie i saw and i
highly regret seeing it okay did you have anything not related to anything rationalist um
let's see one podcast i would refer to people's attention uh it is not rationalist but the the
author is a Mormon and considers it a Mormon apologetics podcast although it i honestly
listened to dozens of episodes before i picked up on his religiosity so either i'm really oblivious
or he's impressively subtle in any case he disagrees with rationalists on a lot of things
but he's a fan of scott and for a religious writer who most who put out like in the last two weeks
an episode entirely called the blind spots of atheism he is incredibly good at engaging respectfully
with the people he disagrees with so he like i've corresponded with him a little bit by email
about some other subjects like why there there are so many Mormons getting into speculative
fiction these days and the answer to that apparently is because Orson Scott Card got a
professorship at BYU oh okay then it networked effects from there but he's incredibly good at
discussing rationality adjacent themes and being respectful and thoughtful about it even when he's
disagreeing with whatever the modal rationalist position is he's got a moderately scathing
criticism of the Mormon transhumanist association which i didn't know was a thing until i listened
to his episode about them but even when he's basically when he's talking about what an inquisitor
might consider heresy he is still very respectful methodical and not contempt like there's no
contempt and no animus when he's talking about these things so if you want a rationality discussing
but non-rationalist podcast uh we are not saved also readable in text form at wearenotsaved.com is
a really good one and he's he's the second podcaster apart from Anyosh who convinced me that a podcast
was a thing to that i could sit down and do sweet awesome i'm downlining an episode now that sounds
like a lot of fun going on to listener feedback sure uh the first one isn't really a feedback
in so much as it is a list of links which are going to be included in this episode uh but
Lorian Chang i believe from the subreddit gives us a whole bunch of air pollution links which we
didn't include when we were talking about air pollution in the last episode uh there's one
on teen exposure to air pollution reduces IQ levels long term one on air pollution raises
dementia risk one on air pollution deaths and then also uh we got a link regarding medical staff being
fine with long hours doctor suicide rate highest of any profession so a bunch of really interesting
links to um backup things we were saying before about air pollution being bad and contradicting us
on doctors being okay with their hugely long hours when was the doctor conversation um when we
were talking about people who are uh okay working a lot and not needing breaks all the time oh you
guys were talking about that i didn't feel that way because i always feel super lazy that's why
i didn't resonate okay i remember yeah perfect i have a bunch of projects that i don't finish for
that reason and um one of the reasons that i settled on my produce something and fix it later
podcasting method uh people who listened to the first couple of episodes i apologize i am working
on remakes but for the sake of my actually getting anywhere on this project i had to stick to a
schedule and then go back and fix it even if that was more difficult um as far as the long hours
i'm with steven on this one and if i could somehow if i could do what the what i saw in a recent
article for an ad agency ad agency in new york and work a 25 hour week by default plus things that
require you to stay into the late afternoon that would be worlds better than anything i currently
do well because a lot of time is just spent you know filling out the clock yeah like i don't i
don't got six hours i don't got eight hours of work today but uh i'll just work really slowly
so that i go home at the right time and i don't want the company to think that they need to give
me more work and the company doesn't want to think that they're paying me for an incomplete job
so even though neither of us would actually prefer this it's well damn you molak yeah exactly
i'm reluctant to add to that about my current jobs so okay well i'll push through and just
say that we had that conversation the the head of hr was visiting the denver office most of our
office is in royal oak michigan which is two hour two time zones ahead and they leave the
office at six p.m. which basically means that after four p.m. our time we shouldn't really push
to production or do anything because there's no one there's not a full office to help fix if
something explodes so our last hour or so every day is typically pretty slow um and our hr guy
was kind of surprised about that and i was like that's that doesn't mean that we're not working
it means that we can't like finish something at the end of the day it's in in programming it's
common that you don't push things you know the lat at the second half of friday right because
if it takes a couple hours to pop up and then the f4 o'clock on friday everything explodes then
everyone has to stick around till it's fixed so blow it up on monday morning not on friday afternoon
yeah i want to feel like that's couched enough my job safe i want to skip the next feedback because
that involves jess so going on to vape carl marx uh also from the subreddit talking about the straw
thing when we were talking about a pollution plastic pollution that kind of stuff uh every marketing
department was super happy to have a thing they could do that wouldn't cost anything and they
could say made things better it doesn't hurt to do it plus it kept them from having to make
real changes so it's a win win from a rational business perspective uh yeah that's that's i think
i touched on that once before that corporations uh can't like you but corporations can be woke
and it's really much more of a branding thing than anything i just went out in fact when i bumped
into you we went out to the place next door and my brother and my mom were in town and they had
whatever biodegradable straws my mom was like i hate these because they always get soggy and stuff
and useless and yeah and i'm like yeah it's it's a drag because on the individual level what can
you do to fight you know climate change or the pollution of the planet it's like i personally
can vow that i'll never spill 4.3 billion barrels of oil into the Gulf of mexico um but given that
that shit happens it's like all right cool what did you just even oh i i uh i used the right straws
and energy efficient light bulbs my whole life it's like great well thanks like and it yeah yeah
this straws thing really doesn't make any difference but it lets them look like they were doing
something different it lets them create a commercial with one of the genders handing a coke to a
swat team guy which doesn't actually make the world better in any way but all of a sudden you look
like you're you know socially responsible or whatever wait is that a thing that that commercial
yeah i don't know which gender it was because i'm not familiar with them it wasn't the um
Caitlyn Jenner it wasn't camp it was it was it was a child Jenner right it was yeah youngish
i have no i don't that's the only look like teens in my estimation who knows yeah but yeah i remember
there was um there's an snl bit making fun of that commercial okay uh or some other comedy sketch
maybe maybe it was key and peel but that sounds too many years ago but yeah it's hilarious no here
have a Coca-Cola and it was just surreal and stupid yeah yeah yeah car vape carl marx also says
when i think it was me that said the whole nation is more left than right uh the response is what
by what metric i can't imagine one that would be a greed pond that has america as a generally
leftist country if you look at the policy positions of the democratic party they would be
almost center right in most europe which yeah that's that's that's fair
maybe just feels that way because of our nice little bubbles although the far right revival
in a lot of europe has would kind of move the us relatively to the left that's true in western
europe then i guess because eastern europe and is is really having a far right revival yeah
and it we're definitely very very very conservative uh in both small and large sea
senses i guess uh compared to norway yeah yeah now that's that far right revival is is kind of a
shitty thing because you know my home country is in eastern europe and they're having that same
problem well your current country is having that same problem too so that's true but it's worse
in poland where these people are actually okay fine trump did get elected but damn it i'm trying
to say it's worse there um i mean the the hungarian uh closet fascist party yovik actually has
its domestic phone number and in 1488 oh really yeah their their phone number in budapest ends with
that what's the significance of that uh the 14 words uh white supremacist slogan that i'm not
going to dignify by repeating here and then the 88 is hh right right i knew that from worm um
incidentally empire 88 is possibly the best name ever given to a white supremacist gang
and i'm glad that wild bo has copyright to it so nobody else can use it nice well i just imagined
some white supremacist reading where i'm like really enjoying it be like great gang name right
here guys we should change in getting tattoos and stuff wasn't also i don't hope that happens but i
hope it's appear on page 88 of mind calm for something the 14 words i don't know if there
actually are a german 14 words the 14 words are uh two similar formulations of a slogan
by an american white supremacist david lane in english okay well never mind then i was wrong
about that david the anarchy fair facts has has some complaints about how i represented him which
is fair now that he says it um the developing world bit he says was about all pollutants not
co2 specifically i should have made that more clear sorry um okay i i did think you were talking
about co2 specifically at that point but uh if you were talking about all pollutants very much um
i agreed because when you look at maps of where like ocean plastic is coming from and
where all the dirty fuel is being burned and leaving smog that you can literally
like see a few feet in front of you yeah that's that's china that's india that's those places
the uh the main river that dumps out of china into the pacific ocean
is spewing plastic like crazy like when people are worried about their plastic straws getting in
tortoises noses that's that's because of the trash that gets shipped to china which they then um do
not necessarily great things with in the us we have pretty tight controls above where our trash
goes it's usually well sequestered in landfills so yeah your straws weren't contributing to the
problem anyway yeah if you want to reduce overall air pollution you should be supporting
electrification and natural gas like if you get people cooking with electricity and natural gas
in rural china and india you will do an order of magnitude more good than you're going to
accomplish by trying to get american co2 emissions down we definitely burn an unhealthy amount of
oil and it would be good in the long term to fix that but uh cooking on a wood burning stove is
so much worse for everyone concerned yeah uh david says i'd argue the dilly like smog is at
least as important as warming but i got the carbon and pollution wires crossed in my brain
so cool uh he does also say you need to consider the time series the emissions and now we're talking
about just carbon emissions the emissions of both china and india are trending up while americas and
europe's are flat or falling so you can't really say that america and europe are driving warming
since that implies an upward trend um i don't know like sort of point taken i i don't necessarily
agree if we're still putting out the most emissions per capita each year the more emissions being put
out is what's causing more warming right so i would probably say we're doing the driving but
if you mean it in terms of who's increasing their emissions each year then yeah i guess that's more
of a semantics argument well and if you're looking at what's going to cause global warming
catastrophe in 50 years he's arguing it won't be the u.s right um it'll be that said if you
want to feel some optimism here i think episode 170 the great uncoupling of sam harris's podcast
he interviews um andrew mccaffey and it's just it's kind of like a steven pink risk like positive
vibe on uh hey look yeah technology stuff is you know especially emissions is is is terrible
but china and india have access to things that we didn't have when we were when we were making
this big of a mess namely that we've already found some solutions that they might implement
faster than we did yeah so i think i think it's basically unconscionable to ask china and india
to stay in you know levels of poverty that we would not tolerate so obviously their energy
consumption per person is going to reach our levels at some point as it well should um it just
we just want the energy to come from good places exactly yeah we need to start working on that
nuclear fusion i mean start working on it's like it's done we just need to start building them
no we got fission oh yeah okay fine i'm walking off the uh now getting getting fusion right would
be awesome i think if i if i assuming no scaling no economy of scale i think i crunched the numbers
on this once and figured out that a fusion plant large enough to produce like assuming
discounting transmission losses a fusion plant big enough to supply the us overall demand for
electricity would be the size of the port of los angeles okay and uh that sounds like a reasonable
plot of land to give up yeah well once we get fusion working and while everyone in nevada
doesn't want a yucca mountain to be built because solid radioactive waste fusion doesn't have that
problem anything goes wrong with fusion it vents to the surrounding environment you probably don't
want to be within a few hundred feet but it's not going to slowly kill you over years if you live
three miles away i also like the point that someone made is that uh burning coal also has
radioactive uh particulate emissions it's just that when we burn coal it's blown out into the air to
infect the entire world whereas when we have fusion uh the nuclear waste stays in solid form
so we can sequester it somewhere that's safe as opposed to putting it into the atmosphere
yeah there there's a kind of cool uh commodity based on a related issue um the steel that goes
into making geiger counters can only come from one source like one category of source and that is
ships built after we started making ships out of steel but before 1945 why because all because
ships during that period only have background sources of radiation in the gases used to make them
but if every piece of steel made after the trinity test has extra radioactive crap that was
spread through the atmosphere blown into it and it adds an extra source of radiation that
throws off the geiger counter so this low background radiation steel is mostly collected
from like sunken german warships huh so geiger counters are gonna get really expensive so if
you want one buy one now um sort of after i don't know how long it's going to take but eventually
since we haven't had nuclear detonations in air for a very long time um eventually those
exogenous radiation sources will have just decayed and maybe around the year 2200 we can go back to
using to just making plain old steel and putting it in geiger counters and hopefully we won't still
be spewing radioactive waste from coal burning into the atmosphere at that point i don't know if
that's i actually don't know if that's a source that's accounted for because i the the biggest
radiation source i'm familiar with in coal is thorium i want to say but i don't know enough about
specific radioactive decay chains to be sure of how that would affect things oh and at that point
we'd already been burning coal for a long time yeah so i i don't know if that's a source that
if that's actually accounted for and if it is then every geiger counter that's ever been made
is badly calibrated because we started burning coal in what early 19th century yeah well i mean
i'm sure somebody realized that problem and it calibrated well enough for our purposes yeah
david also says uh david also says should be the name of his podcast dude i'm not super
confident in this but i'm pretty sure that coastal china has a much higher per capital
co2 emissions rate per capita sorry co2 emissions rate in the usa they just have their numbers
artificially lowered by having a few million people living in basically third world farms
which don't admit admit much carbon um i i never thought of that i think that's a
damn good point because coastal china lives a lot like the us does in terms of energy consumption
so why are their numbers that much lower per capita very well maybe for because of all those
millions of of farmers in the inner inner country absolutely i want to be perfectly clear i didn't
mean my last joke as a pejorative it's it just uh it's not saying that you say too much it's that
you say a lot which isn't a diss and everything that you say is valuable and it's really interesting
so that's that's actually a really good point and i would be surprised that is uh i'm amazed that
that's not a major part of the consideration right you've got people a large section of the
population that's basically producing no no emissions because they're not doing anything yeah
and then their numbers are relatively like ours and it's like well that's the numbers that work
yeah okay that yeah i'm surprised and intrigued i would include as an example of the problem david's
talking about north korea nobody owns a car so they don't really so they're probably not emitting
much co2 but the embargo has got to be restricting the technology they're using so i'd expect that
all of their power is coal fired because they have plenty of coal and people are cooking with either
coal or coke or wood which put out a lot more pollutants per meal you cook than any than modern
heat sources so north korea as an example i think would i don't actually have specific co2 output
figures for them but i would expect that they emit much less co2 per capita than you would think
but a great deal more in the way of other nasty pollutants mining gold with mercury or that kind
of crap yeah finally david ends with i kind of begrudge you saying that i said most pollution
comes from the developing world putting me on blast because the usa still emits a lot of carbon
and then talking about choking on smog and plastic in the oceans killing endangered species
both of which are far and away driven by the developing world more than the developed world
just wanted to point out that you should feel bad about that but not really bad
and do you feel a little bad i do actually kind of feel a little bad we started talking about
carbon and use the us numbers for carbon but then switched to talking about smog and plastics
which was not fair well what mistakes we made there we didn't have the virtue of narrowness
that's true we were talking about pollution like it's one thing yeah all right hey bring it home
if only we'd read this pot none of this uh sequence before i wanted to say montan bailey but that
doesn't apply here because you're not retreating to a defensible claim these are just two different
claims that are being conflated by bad category boundaries yeah all right and our last feedback
is from philosophist who this must have been on the discord because it doesn't have a uh
subreddit stamp i want to express that permanent hopeless malphoy was something i disliked because
it infers the limitations of rationality at a point where rationality was winning the day uh this
is when we were talking about the final chapter of draco malphoy interacting with harry potter
thinking to solve a problem is so frowned on in the art of story making that this particular
instance works against the cause it was however realistic enough to be something that at some
point happened with a character but draco was reformed from egoist fool to rationalist he's
the reason we should keep trying to convince people to have more rational and thought out
opinions he was our only hope and then his rational soul was murdered not cool i'd never
thought of draco that way before which is why i really wanted to pull this out but i think he's
right isn't that that's kind of what we want draco is the everyone else in the world that we're
reaching out to that we can make better through rationality or not that we can make better but
whose lives can be improved right he's definitely supposed to be i mean harry like harry says as
much to hermyony when he's talking about about draco after the trial it's like okay no he grew up
in the most closed prejudiced pure blood environment that it's possible to have in magical britain
believing that you hermyony for example are the worst sort of human being and need to be
gotten rid of and all this other crap and despite that it took me seven months of manipulating him
at school to the to get to the point where he had trouble dropping you off a roof i think i think
draco is not meant to be every person we're reaching out to he's meant to be the hard cases
yeah right but but just thinking of draco as the people we can save i like that thought me too
that is a happy thought for me knowing that there's somebody you can save already significantly
improves the apparent tractability of the problem like anybody who like does like books of puzzles
knows this knowing that there is a solution is yeah makes it feel like an entirely different
order of problem than not knowing if the problem is even soluble yeah exactly maybe he shouldn't
have been left there in the story that it was sort of an abandonment at the last moment hi
we'll have to give it some thought i read that and i've got it saved but i still need it's
still processing for me yeah well not happy note anything else we've got to we've got to add
no i think on that happy note we can think our happy patron yes for bringing you this bummer
of an episode well actually most of the episode was great mr this episode's patron is christopher
james who i put in the note here was a former supporter and then jump back in so thanks christopher
means a lot obviously thanks for keeping the lights on around here making things sound good and thanks
for helping to bring this rationalist word to more of the draco mouth voice of the world
maybe they will not have their rational soul murdered couldn't have put it better myself thanks
also thank you very much to gray for showing up giving us this episode this week sitting in for
jess it it was really interesting and like i said i'm going to keep listening to this podcast
because it sounds really cool and i'm gonna listen to yours when i can find it and i'm
going to re-listen to this one to better process everything that you were talking about this is
awesome thank you yes it has been just beyond awesome to to be on here um meeting everybody at
both ends of this of this trip i took was just great and uh i have actually honestly been
considering moving so knowing that there is a nucleus of a community of people that are easy
to interact with here is pretty awesome i would add that the issue one of the issues that i've
had with minnesota is that the social norms that we like as rationalists about dealing with other
rationalists the the ass culture in particular are very much not the social norms of the the
minnesota defaults too okay so it's um we have a small core group push up to the meetings i'm one
of the two people who runs the mailing list so uh email you can email me at gsv bemusement park
at gmail.com if you're in the twin cities area and wish to be added to that list how are the social
norms different some people call it passive aggressiveness the term that everyone agrees on
captures it without being pejorative is minnesota nice there's a very low threshold
to engage in vacuous small talk and a very high threshold to advance your interaction with someone
even if you enjoyed the small talk i was acquainted with someone from uh an eastern european country
and this is a thing that like i've noticed from some of my relatives too and uh she she basically
said the same thing that a lot of people from eastern europe come to the us and at first they're
like shocked that everyone is constantly so friendly and like everyone is so open and trusting and it's
like it feels like an imposition because they have a lot of walls and it's like all of a sudden
everybody wants to be like your personal confident confident and best friend and it took her a while
to realize that americans make a lot of very shallow connections where everyone is very friendly to
everyone and happy and smiling and in europe she said in eastern europe if you're smiling
you're probably an idiot because life sucks there's not a lot of reason to smile you unless you
have you know some damn good reason you shouldn't be smiling you know but the when people do smile
at each other and become friends they like form really deep bonds and she said like in america
she simultaneously felt very invited and welcomed by everyone but also very isolated because like
forming those really deep friendships she said was much harder in america because everyone
stops at the surface level and to get to that deeper level like you're talking minnesota nice
to get to that deeper level of friendship is much more difficult people who are more standoffish
yeah i i spent a lot of my early life isolated for that reason i have a strong preference for the
eastern european way of doing things managing a bunch of small a bunch of really shallow connections
is considerably harder for me than managing a couple of high quality ones so and when there aren't
when you aren't in a position to meet a lot of people you don't meet a lot of high quality people
so it's hard to have more of those connections um but the the way that one of the things that makes
me so that makes me find interacting with other rationalists so much more pleasant than
the baseline human is that there are norms that seem to accommodate this there's no encouragement
to just have these shallow connections and there is active encouragement to develop the
connections that you make and it's it's great to be part of a social an expanding social group
that does that so thank you to bayesian conspiracy thank you to bayesian conspiracy discord um
everyone who reads late star codex and less wrong in comments and these sort of things
i know i'm not the only one it's a lot more pleasant with everyone interacting with everyone
doing it this way that's awesome all i can think of is pointless anecdotes to add to that but i'll
spare everybody and just say that sounds great i yeah i agree that's i remember robin hanson this
isn't the anecdote i this isn't the anecdote i was scrapping this is a more useful one when robin
hanson was in town for his um podcast with sam harris we went out to lunch we went out to dinner
with him and he asked like so what is your your guys's less wrong community work on and i was like
nothing and like what do you mean he's like well some people have like a startup they're doing like
a an app or something i'm like oh we just have the community that we like that the norms the
i it was a way less articulate version of what you just said i've actually had some conversations
both on discord and off um with jess last time i was here about what a rationalist startup might
be like and considering that things like dragon army have historically failed and that one of the
chief criticisms i've been reading about rationality recently is the that we're not
doing anything that way it might be a huge piece of branding for there to be one such business
like the first the IPO of the first rationalist startup would make scott and ellie as her household
names and get people reading this well if anyone has a really good idea attach this to it perfect
yeah all right well thank you for listening everybody and we'll see you again in two weeks
you
