Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Inyash Brotsky. I'm Steven Zuber. I'm a flying
squirrel. You did it. I did it. I just re-listened the last episode and it's a good thing I did
because I was like, oh yeah, I'm supposed to be a flying squirrel this time. Awesome.
And before we begin, Steven has a awesome announcement for us. Oh yeah. I have recorded
the first episode of the We Want More podcast. Hell yeah. And it is not out yet. I think
it'll be out, well, when's this coming out in a couple weeks? It's coming out in just
less than two weeks, yeah, a week and a half. I think the precursor episode will definitely
be out by the time this one comes out. So check it out on the Harry Potter and the Methods
of Rationality podcast. Yeah, we'll cross post it. Oh yeah, I guess we can cross post
on it. Yeah. Certainly at least the preamble one. Maybe if there's any interest, we can
just do both on both podcasts. It couldn't hurt. Actually, it might. I'll have to think
about that. Or at least stick it out. Do the first episode or something. Yeah. I'm gonna
be like, if you want more, go back to the HP More podcast. Perfect. If you want more
MLO. Yeah, I think if you want more, we want more. I think we can think of puns to do
for most of the episodes that involve the word more. Okay. That we're gonna do. It's
not that hard to come up with something that uses the word more. No, it's gonna be great.
So puns. Yes, should be punny. It was fun. Brian's great. It's fun. So the premise of
the show for those uninitiated, it's ripped off the name and the inspiration from We've
Got Worm, which was done by the previously the Daily Planet, whatever incorporated, they
have like a whole suite of podcasts, now they're the Doofcast or Doof Media. So Matt Freeman
had to read Worm and Scott Daly hadn't. So they basically went more or less arc by arc
where they'd read and then they'd talk about it. And Matt would kind of just let Scott
think about and talk about out loud what's going on and try not to, you know, spoil anything,
try to be careful with all that stuff. And did such a good job. Yeah, it was amazing.
So it's at a really high bar for this one. But I think this is an easier work to analyze.
There's a lot less like character motifs and that sort of underlying, I don't know, thematic
development going on. Well, this is more directly trying to teach you something. Yeah. So like,
you know what the theme is, you don't have to go hunting for it because it's in the title.
Yeah, it's like the methods of rationale. Yeah, well, I meant like even the individual
chapters were like the whatever bias or the fundamental attribution error. Yeah, a lot of them
are fairly straightforward. And so I can learn stuff. What I can't do is read something and
discern like, Oh my God, I totally am seeing this message. I don't have that at all. But
if if the character is literally spelling it out for me, I can at least read. So yeah, it's
fun. Yeah, I'm just like one third the length of work as well. So that makes it easier to do.
I think it's like a million word store than worm. So one third. Yeah, I guess you're right.
My bad. They're both really long. Yeah. Yeah, one or three times as long. But that's what I love
about web fiction. It's not constrained by needing to be the size of a novel. So I'm somebody that
just crunches through text. And I love having stuff that updates like often enough that I'm just
able to feel like, I don't know, like I'm not just burning through it and then kind of sitting
around waiting for more. Right. What's crazy about worm or especially Ward as they're going
through it is like, it's a first draft every chapter that they're reading, and they're all so
good. And I don't know what it would be like to be able to sit down and not have a review, not have
whatever you call like a pre publisher reading editor, thank you. Some people don't need them as
much. I don't know, I edit the shit out of my writing, because my first drafts come out really
bad. But some people, their first draft comes out like basically what they want. I think that's
maybe they need to do a couple of grammatical and like spelling error checks. But
And audiences, for the most part, don't care all that much. If there's some typos, if there's, you
know, it's not a perfect draft, they really want more, more than they want pristine quality
generally. Yeah, I mean, I really enjoy reading fan fiction, which isn't written by professional
writers. But some of the it's the same thing with art too. I really like looking at fan art or
amateur artists. I love fan art. Because a lot of people, even if they're not like as technically
skilled as someone who's been doing it for 20 years, have really unique ideas. Yeah, one of the
things that I'm afraid to break conventions in ways that are kind of cool. And one of the things
I really like about fan, well, fan art, any sort of fan works is that it always comes from a place
of love. Oh, yeah. This is like something I love and I'm passionate about it. And I just wanted to
do it for its own sake. It'd be interesting to read like a hate fueled fan fiction. I have read
some of this. If anyone could point me to a decent one, that sounds hilarious. I'm not sure if there's
any decent ones because they are hate fueled. I don't know, like I almost feel like worm to some
extent. Is it not necessarily a hate fueled fiction, but like one of the things that I enjoyed
about it, though, is like you would never be able to publish this in in like a conventional format
is that you're rooting for a villain, you're on the side of the villain and like the author could
just really like get really violent or really disturbing. No, there's lots of stuff like that
has been published. Yeah. Like the Joker, the movie that we just, I mean, the Joker is like a small
example. There's there's works out there where there's a violent rape in the beginning by the
protagonist. Oh, man. Yeah, I was gonna say this doesn't cook it that bad. She does shoot a baby
in the face, but it's a baby in the face. It was the right thing to do. It's complicated. It makes
sense in the moment. Are we talking about the Joker? No. Oh, we're talking about worms. Yeah. Oh,
okay. Yeah, I can totally see that in the world. I almost feel like I wonder if we should honestly
wind up that you want to like get them in the brain. It doesn't specify the face. Okay. Okay. I
just sort of assume that it wasn't actually in the face like because they said it so many times,
I think when we've got word as a joke, like a shot of baby in the face that
okay. I actually like my memory was up her shooting it in the face.
All right. So yeah, that is coming out. I don't know soon after you hear this, we will have the
not we Steven specifically as this is his baby. We'll have the first episode up.
Well, Enios is helping to nurture it. We're going to publish it on the methods of rationality
feed. So go back if you're not still subscribed to that, like I am. Make sure you click that
like and subscribe button and or yeah, that's subscribe to podcasts. Yes. Yes. I've thrown
myself through a YouTube loop now, but they also call it that there. So yeah. All right.
Fantastic. There should be a lot of fun. Hell yeah. All right. Today we are doing mostly
listener feedback so we can get caught up because we have been running behind.
How would I start with this one from Ray from the last episode because that was a nice
this is a really nice comment. Actually, one of you emailed it to me.
I did. Yeah. Thank you. That actually cheered me up a lot. So Ray posted this both on I think it
was was it just on the basic conspiracy website or did he cross post it? I only saw it on there.
Yeah. Ray wrote, I know Steven uses the intellectual dark web designation somewhat
jokingly, but if there is such a thing and it's a positive designation for long form
content and thoughtful conversation, you've earned the designation for this episode.
In my opinion, this was your best episode ever. I don't know about that.
Special thanks to just for intelligently articulating their logic.
Yeah. Did you listen to the one that I wasn't on? That one was really good.
But we missed you though. Yeah. We needed Steven to bring us on tangents.
I've seen Jordan Peterson rail against pronoun abuse, but haven't ever heard the other side
articulated in any reasonable way. I've seen lots of illogical stuff on Twitter that has really
turned me off. I had no idea zero of the distinction between gender and sex. I could go on but
suffice to say I learned a lot from just as logical arguments. Just as personal anecdotes
are excellent too. The anecdotes are relevant without being overly emotionally expressed.
That's not how I thought they came out, but which helps someone like me understand a bit more.
Overall, I'm still sympathetic to any Ashes views. Getting used to this is just hard,
especially because I don't know any non-binary people. And if I've ever met, or and if I've
ever met one, I didn't know it. However, understanding the argument along with a bit of
what it feels like to be non-binary, I'll do my best to be empathetic and try to get the pronouns
correct. That was really cool. I'm really happy that that conversation ended up like getting
generally a really positive feedback. I was worried that there was going to be trolls and
people getting offended, as often tends to happen when you get into culture war stuff, but really
like happy with our audience. Yeah, we've got a cool audience. If this was on YouTube, that'd be
different. Yeah. I was really scared. I don't know. There'd be denunciations, all kinds of awful
things. Oh, God. All right. Here it goes. But yeah, it turned out great. And for what it's worth,
like again, from my long view, you guys, from my long out view, you guys don't really seem to
the disagree on really that much core stuff. It's really just about like nothing about like the
experience or the... Yeah, it feels like March. It was just a kind of, we have different preferences
on how to express things or different, maybe strongly held ideas of what the definitions
of certain words should and shouldn't be. And I don't think that's things to end your friendships
over. Apparently, to some people, this is a major transgression and then to other people,
like how dare you try to use pronouns in this illogical way. And it's really rare to find
people that are actually kind of in the middle of it. I would prefer people use these pronouns,
but if they don't, then whatever. Yeah, I was at a thing last weekend where
someone got extremely upset and pre-offended. Like no one had said anything, but there was
very much a, you know, if you don't respect my pronouns, get the fuck out of this convention.
I'm not sure if the word fuck was used or not. It may have been, but the the emotion was very
much there. There was an implied fuck. Yes. And there might have been a said fuck.
Yeah. We're all adults. We don't really care that much about language. I've seen from
from the left. Yeah. No, like I've seen people that there's people that have such strongly
held views about stuff like that, that it almost feels like I'm not allowed to say I prefer to be
called they them, but I don't really care. And it's not a big deal because it's such a big deal to
other people that it feels like I should also acknowledge the fact that like in general pronouns
are a big deal. And I don't know. And then it also feels like there's some pressure to
maybe there's like a competitiveness, maybe a like oppression Olympics,
things sort of going on between people talking about like, I need to also, you know, give my
oppression cred. Like, oh, somebody said something racist to me, like, oh, yeah, well, you should
see how hard it is to be this oppressed class. And it's, I don't know. It's not great to
define yourself by like, what did they call that? Identity politics. I don't know why I
totally escaped my memory. But the identity politics thing I think is
fractious. I've been willing to just understand that from my point of view, the, you know,
the white guy that my identity doesn't really need representation or like need an identity
behind it, because it's sort of like what people picture with a default. Like people have straight
pride. Right. Yeah. But the, so I've come around to just understanding the fact that like, if
someone's proud that they're black or proud that they're gay, it's to me, I've never understood
that just because like, I might as well be proud to have brown hair or like, you know,
whatever color my eyes are, like, for me, you should be like proud of accomplishments, like
things you've done. Yeah. But I understand the difference. I'm now I'm that was years ago. Now
my current my current position is like, I get where it's not so much that like, I did it. I was
born black. It was like pushing back on the people who said I should be ashamed to be black.
Exactly. And I've never felt that way. So I have no idea. I've no nothing in my life really to
compare that to. So I just totally get like, Hey, I'm, you know, that makes sense. Go for it.
But I used to be really confused by that. Because I'm like, how, you know, like,
I don't know, any sort of like national pride too. It's like, you don't pick where you're born.
You can be proud that like, Oh, yeah, you know, I, me or my family or something, you know,
grabbed our shit and emigrated or something like that's, that's actually cool. That's hard,
right? But be like, yeah, I, I, I worked hard. I buckled down and I got born in Colorado. It's
like, great job. You did it. That was some hard gestating you did. I actually feel proud that
I escaped New Jersey. But that's something that you did. Yeah. Yeah. I was watching Stephen
Universe and I forgot that they have this like, short reference to New Jersey in there and it's
fucking great. What was the reference? I don't remember. You don't remember this. It was when they
went to Empire City, which was clearly just like their metaphor for New York. But Stephen was flying
around on one of the gems backs and like explaining about the earth is like, and there's the city.
What's that over there? That dark place. That's Jersey. So it's like, what are you doing flying
in our skies? Get out of here. There's just like smog and filipids.
I was like, ah, somebody, somebody on this animation team is from Jersey.
Someone gets it. Or know someone from Jersey. Yeah. Or just saw their license plate, which I think
is the garden state. Yeah. If you're growing smokestacks, sure. There's actually a lot of
farming that goes on in New Jersey. There's what? There's a lot of farming for such a small state.
It's got a lot of it's got the pine barons. It's got like the whole side of it that borders
Philadelphia and New York. That's all like sub city. George Carlin, you must let me. It's got
beach and it's got farms. All right. All right. Who else has the feedback? I have one from David,
the Anarch of Fairfax. So this is the UBI David or I guess NTI David, since he was specifically
NIT. Yes, for NIT rather than UBI. David said, I appreciate your bit about the Koch brothers
back when I was, you know, saying they did some good things too, you know,
although they didn't say that global warming isn't real. They just said that's mainly being driven
by China, India and the developing world at this point. And that radical social reform in the
developed West to fight global warming would do more harm than good in all but the most catastrophic
scenarios. That could be the case. I don't know. I know that they were pushing towards the, well,
like he says, it would do more harm than good, except in the most catastrophic scenarios, which
I disagree with. I think we should be doing something to reduce carbon emissions. But
significantly, he also added this. He said that it's mainly being driven by China, India and the
developing world at this point. And I thought that sounds really very different from what I've
heard. I mean, yes, I know about China, India, India becoming big polluters recently, but
and the developing world struck me as not true. So I pulled up a list of total emissions by country.
And the United States is number two just below China. And China is almost twice as much as us.
Then India, Russia, Japan, you keep going down the list. Every one of these countries is a developed
country with the possible exception. I don't know if like Saudi Arabia, Saudi Arabia is a developed
country. Every one of these countries is a developed basically first world country, first world ish.
There's no developing countries on this list. So I do not think that is the case, at least in terms of
carbon emissions. I also thought it would be important to point out that China has a per capita
emissions. They're number one, but their per capita is only 6.6, whereas ours is 15.5. So even
though they are emitting more than us, we are emitting more than twice as much as they are per
capita. Yeah, they've got a billion more people. Yeah, a lot more land too. Yeah, I mean, so per
capita, I think I'm scrolling through this this table you brought up, I think the winner is Saudi
Arabia, with Australia as a close second still beating us. You mean the winner being the one
who's emitting the least or the most? The most. Okay, so Saudi Arabia is the worst? Because they
have all their oil subsidized massively by the government. Yeah, so I guess they don't give a
shit about just burning oil. I always like the joke of like, you know, what if all this, you know,
global warming, you know, stuff as a hoax and we clean the air and the world's rivers and stuff,
and, you know, for nothing. Yeah. What if we just live more sustainably for no reason? I think
there's like some kind of counter argument that it's going to cost a lot more than you think,
but I don't know what that counter argument is. And I also like the fact that I do not choke on
the air outside my house. Yeah, that's very important. It apparently particulates in the air
have a noticeable reduction on both intellect and longevity on all humans, where even if you live
downtown, you are going to be one or two IQ points lower than if you were to live out in the suburbs.
And if you live near a busy street, you get the same effect rather than if you live out, you know,
in a cul-de-sac somewhere. So I mean, I'd be curious to see your sources on that. Okay, I do
have I just moved downtown, but because Phoenix is allergic to everything, we have like three,
like high volume air filters. So I'm actually curious how much you could actually mitigate
some of those effects. And also, yeah, what what the data is, my anecdotal data is that just I
used to work in the middle of downtown, like in the whatever two blocks, the actual tall buildings
in Denver. And I just I feel grimy, just from the few block walk from the light rail station of the
building. And I just noticed when I got out of the shower, like I felt clean, whereas like now
showering is like a luxury, because I don't walk through the heart of downtown every day.
Or not a luxury, but it's a it's optional. But yeah, I mean, I just felt slick and probably
probably just psychosomatic. But maybe yes, I will look up the data and put a link on the website.
I don't have it here in front of me, unfortunately, should have thought to do that. There is one
other thing to mention about this data. This data is incomplete, because due to international
treaties, no country has to report the emissions of their military. Since that's considered like,
you know, essential for the existence of a country, the secret. Yeah, we knew how much they were
emitting, we might be able to discern how big the military was or something or something. The US
military is the largest military in the world by far. And the US military is the single largest
user of petroleum in the United States. So this is definitely understated for how much we emit in
the US since we don't count any military emissions. Interesting. And the military in particular does
not give a fuck. They're like, yeah, we're here to not get killed and to kill others as
most efficiently as possible. We don't care about pollution. I mean, my brother told me when he was
in the military regularly and he's trash that they had, they were just to pile up in a big heap,
throw some gas on it and then put a thermal charge in it and just burn it all down. They're like,
you know, we're not a trash service. We're not environmental service. We're here to get shit
done. And I mean, probably a good attitude to have for your military, but overall bad for the planet.
Yeah, it'd be weird if you had, you know, 30 of your troops carrying trash back to be, you know,
processed comfortably if you're at war. Yeah. You know, but if you're just at the, I'm not sure
what the situation is like on bases all over. It's like, all right, it's not wartime. We can
recycle or some shit, right? I mean, it was, it was in Afghanistan. So technically some sort of
war footing, but it's not like there was like a hot firing war happening at the time. You know,
it was more like going on patrol every now and then getting shot at coming back to a safe zone.
Yeah, I still get not making garbage trips in that situation. But yeah, I don't know. It's
interesting. Like I'm obviously from my armchair and I'm not whatever running the world's economy,
but like, I don't really care how much it costs. You know, like when it was discovered that chlorofluor
carbons was destroying the ozone layer, there was just a worldwide ban basically, implemented
fairly quickly. And the ozone layer is now doing great. Yeah. On the other hand, it's also much
easier to ban that than it is to ban the use of burning things. Totally. Yeah. So I mean,
it was a lot easier to do and there were, there were suitable replacements and that sort of stuff.
There's arguments that we've already done enough damage that we're going to have to do a significant
amount of damage reversal. And I'm worried about things like plastics in the oceans and
endangered species kind of cascading. And yeah, although fun fact, species extinction.
If you like looking at fires, wood is the dirtiest fuel by quite a large margin that is used still
in the, in the world, like coal is better, anything is better. So you are sitting on a couch right
now that is in front of my fireplace because I never use that fireplace. And in part, it's because
of the polluting nature of wood burning, even though it is beautiful and we all love it due to
our evolutionary history. It's really bad. Fire is so nice though. They have one of those fake
like propane based fireplaces at the Smoky Hill Library here. It's not the same at all. Actually,
I thought that was really cozy, but I was kind of sad because yesterday after work, I was running
around doing errands and I had to return a library book and the library that was near where my old
house was that I still had the book from was closed for renovations and they had taped over the book
drop. So I had to go to the Smoky Hill Library, which was like an hour away. And then I got there
and it was like cold and it snowed the other day and they had this fire. So I was just like dropped
the book in the book thing, went upstairs, like grabbed a magazine set in front of the fire and
I was like, Oh, this is so nice. And then an employee came and shut off the fireplace. It's
like, Yeah, we're gonna we're about to close soon. We shut the fireplace off a few minutes.
Propane and natural gas so much cleaner. I've got a fake fireplace that we almost never used
just because it's a energy suck. But there is something fun a friend of mine has. I don't
know one of those outdoor cage fireplaces. It's not it's, you know, like not a pit. I got a door
and he's got he chops wood and it's it couldn't be more like rugged. But you know, the the crackling,
the sparks, all that. That's that's a lot of fun. But yeah, it's one of those things like I'm
willing to give that up too. Like, there's the the benefit it's relaxing and cool. It's like,
you know what, I can, I'll put on like Netflix has like fireplace things, right? I'll put that on
and put on a blank, you know, just wear a blanket and just pretend. And yes, I only I get a third
amount of the, you know, you know, make the number up, I get like a third amount of the fun or
something. But like it's so much, it's greener that way, right? Yes, it is. Yeah. I don't know.
I feel like on the individual level, it's the same thing. I was like, if you personally decide to
take 10 minute showers and compost your extra vegetable bits and, you know, like one person
deciding to make a bunch of sacrifices isn't really going to does almost nothing. Yeah. Compared
to I was even going to say like manufacturing. I get so frustrated. I didn't think about the
military. I get so frustrated by people who are like are switching straws and putting so much
effort into like the plastic straws. I'm like, really? The few dozen plastic straws you use in
your life compare at all to a single industrial company out there? Yeah. Jesus man. Just like
one one load of trash versus their lifetime consumption of straws. Right. Yeah. Yeah,
I've got a coworker and it's laudable. There's nothing against doing that, but they take it to
a pretty high degree as well. You know, we're like we went to like a company barbecue and they
brought their own plaster silverware so that they could wash it and not throw it away. I'm like,
that's dedication. Right. And, you know, again, good for them, but it's and it I can't say anything
bad against it. You know, if you want to go nuts, if everybody that if everybody did that would be
great. But like you said, it's but it's everyone that would make almost no difference. This isn't
the level that we're going to solve the problem at. We can all buy energy fission bulbs and it
won't make it. I don't think it will make a very marginal difference. Yeah. I think if everyone
used energy fission bulbs, it would make some difference because there are so many in the US.
Yeah. But that wouldn't that would hardly solve the problem. Right. Right. Right. If everybody if
every citizen did like basically everything that they could, it would still be a gigantic problem.
Right. Yeah, I think we're at the point where we're going to need to bioengineer trash eating
nanos. Oh, yeah. I am terrified of of what the Greg. Well, no, of creating something that can
eat plastic and gets out in the wild because one of the points of plastic is it doesn't decompose.
You can use it to store your food. You can, you know, use it to protect your
delicate parts of the stuff that's out in the wild because nothing's going to get through it,
you know. And now, all of a sudden, it can decompose just like any sort of paper or cloth
bagwood. It loses much of the utility of having something that is completely
inevitable. It's fun that we've reached the point and I
I guess our history, although I think of that as being like a retrospective word,
but we've reached that point where now these are things that we have to actually start thinking
about like we can crisper mosquitoes out of existence. But there's a bunch of debates about
should we like we've never actually intentionally just made an entire species extinct. They don't
seem to be keystone species of any kind. Nothing like relies on them for predation or pollination.
But we don't exactly know what would happen. I totally think we should just go for it.
So here's what we do. We save a few mosquitoes and like crowd preserve them or, you know,
whatever their larva or something in the event that this is a disaster, we just reintroduce them,
right? There, problem solved. I'm actually good with that. Yeah. Honestly, yeah. I mean,
when you weigh it against the number of people that are killed by malaria and other
mosquito-borne diseases, I feel like the risks, I don't know if they outweigh or the benefits
outweigh the risks, but it's a lot of people. As far as we can tell, the risk is really,
really low. Yeah. And the benefits would be huge. Well, as far as we can tell a bit again,
we haven't done it before, so we have no prior to. That's not like we haven't wiped out species
before. I know. That's another thing, though, that we kind of, I said we never intentionally
wipe them out, but we're unintentionally wiping them out left and right. We just have the safety
switch if we can put them back if we want to, but I say we just throw science at the wall and
see what sticks. I like that. That was a Cave Johnson quote from Portal 2. Oh, nice.
Steven, you got a feedback for us? Yeah, I'll read it. It sounds like
Jess is going to be the best one to quit to answer it, but this was from Babel on Discord.
I'm listening to the Replacing Guilt podcast, and it seems to be a given that bad things happen
when people don't rest. There have been people throughout history who, we have evidence, literally
did work all day, excuse me, did work all day long, no restful breaks, et cetera,
and work-life balance wasn't a thing either, and they seem to live lives as long as people did
back in the day. If they didn't, it was often due to worse conditions and nutrition like slaves,
and not necessarily because of their long hours. I remember watching this conversation
back and forth on the Discord and it was happening, and I feel like you had some
disagreement there. Wait, was it you? I had an agreement. Someone else had disagreement. Someone
was saying, show me an example of people who are working 16 hours a day, and they were like,
well, servants and stuff, and it's like, no, they would rest and they would take breaks,
whatever. Yeah, I mean, I was going to say historically, my understanding is medieval
peasants, for example, actually had a lot less strict work days. They had a lot of holy days.
Yeah, I don't know. Today is St. Yogurt's Day. Nobody works. I think we can find probably
current examples of people working 16-hour days in factories, but I don't think they have great
quality of life. It's not just about their longevity either. I mean, I worked 14-hour shifts for six
weeks at one point in my life, and if that was going to be my life, I'd probably get why they
put nets on those factories. This was only two floors, so the fall wouldn't have killed me,
but I would have found some way to get the hell out of there. If I knew that was going to be my
life. Yeah, I think you want to maximize not just for longevity, but also for quality of
life. How much are you achieving your goals and feeling fulfilled, having family and friends,
and good experiences? I think Babel's point was that with the whole bad things happen in quotes
is that it seems to be a lot of people say that if you don't get regular rest and if you're really
working that many hours, you die from overwork after a while, or your productivity just goes down
the tubes, or various other bad things happen. I think your productivity does go down the tubes,
and then it varies with individuals. There's definitely people that need less sleep than
other people or have the ability to focus on things much longer than other people. A lot of
the most productive people, I think, have borderline or actually just outright mental disorders,
usually bipolar. A lot of inventories and great artists, I think, were bipolar.
So you do have this incredibly prolific period of your life where you sleep four hours a day,
or you just don't sleep at all, and you're constantly working on this thing, and maybe you
improve humanity a lot, but I don't think you have a great life after that. I personally agree
with Babel based on what I've seen in my own life, that probably if you're working in a factory or
something, it gets really demoralizing, and it's awful and people can't work that long just because
it is bad. But in my own experience, the busiest times of my life were also a lot of the happiest
times, and it was mainly because I was working for myself. I would some work for the man as well
to pay the bills, but I'd wake up, I'd go to work. In my spare time, I would work on the podcast.
In other spare time, I would write. In other spare time, I would be fixing up my house or
buying this place and getting it gutted and fixed. For the first week, it's really hard.
You're fucking exhausted. You're like, oh my god, I can't do this. But after about seven to ten days
of doing this, it just becomes normal, and you get sort of a flow state. I've gone entire months
where basically I was working every waking hour with occasional breaks for food and to rest up,
and I stayed just as productive and I was really happy for the most part. The real downside is that
my social life went to hell. I lost touch with a lot of people because I was constantly working.
I remember when you were putting this place together and I would come by and help move the
occasional thing or whatever, and you were always like, you never like, I gotta keep doing this.
You were like, all right, cool, we're gonna put the floors down now and get the cabinets and shit
up. At that level of work though too, you're doing it, like I said, for yourself. You can see the
fruits of your labor, which to me was a big part of it. I think it makes a lot of difference how
much you actually are working on things that are personally fulfilling to you.
Yeah. For even just having something to show for it, I remember the difference. My first job
worked at a trophy factory. Yeah, it was silly, but it was in high school and it was one of those,
you know, someone wants to order 60 soccer trophies. It's just, I don't know, I thought it was funny
that you said that you have something to show for it. I'm imagining you having a trophy at the end of
the day. What I would have at the end of the day though is I'd start, I'd go upstairs and I'd get
all my shit, like all the bases and all the columns that you make these things out of. Then
at the end of the day, I've got this gigantic stack and I'm like, hey, that's the big pile of
stuff I built today. Whereas at McDonald's, you're just there, you know, like I think I mentioned,
my job was what they called fry bitch for a month. Yeah, you may or may not see your productivity
metrics or it may or may not matter to you. Well, yeah, the metrics, I had no discernible way of
A, knowing them or B, giving a shit. But at the end of the day, like the place looked the same
when I left as did when I got there. Whereas like, I didn't get to see what I did. At my current job
too, I'm stoked because we're going to merge all the stuff we've been working on for like the last
month. And since we've touched every file in the in the app, basically, of this, you know,
100 million line app, my name is going to be all over it. And like, sure, it's not a pile of stuff,
but my name is going to be all over the history of this thing. So that that's kind of fun. Yeah.
Yeah. I was going to say I find some amount of competitiveness to actually be motivating at
work too. Like, if it's just your mindset is kind of, okay, I just need to like make the fries
and like, not fail at making the fries and get yelled at. But like, if you kind of are looking
at like, oh, man, like, Steve's really good at making fries, but like, I'm going to make
fries better. I don't know, like, at any job I've worked out, I've always kind of been able to,
like, if I'm really trying to motivate myself, like, just try to find some kind of metric to
measure myself against and then try to beat it. Yeah, there's definitely part of that. I mean,
so I delivered pizzas through college, and more or less, it was luck of the draw and who got more
deliveries, but it was always fun to have more, especially if you got more tips. And so it was
never like an official thing where we'd, you know, put money on it or something. But it was like,
hey, I got five more than this guy, and we were the same number of hours or something, right?
And then at my current job, it's like, I try to keep up with my co workers, the ones who started
to ride around when I did. And so like, as long as I'm not my own personal metric for like, job
security and for like, self affirmant and growth is like, I'm not I'm more productive than the
least productive person on the team. So as long as I'm not that person that I'm then I'm feeling
good. So it's a low bar, but I'm that's one I can jump over. Yeah. I'm back in the ancestral
environment. I think all the work mattered. You always, you know, got some reward for what you
did. Everyone depended on you. It was important. And even I think in the pre industrial age,
that was the case, like you could see what you made. Other people knew that like, that's the
guy who's really good at making shoes. Or if you were a servant in the house, the running of the
household depended on you. Everyone could see like, if you were doing your part or not, and we all
had to live in this giant manner together, whether you were one of the upstairs people or the downstairs
people, it was it was like a group effort. And I don't think it's been until until the industrial
age came around, and people were just grinding down into like, so this one helm for 12 hours or
sharpen these needles for 12 hours and do nothing else that it's just, that's what really wears away
at the soul. Even back on like the savanna, you know, if you're if you're sharpening spears all day,
might be super boring. But you know that this is crucial to the lifeblood of your tribe. Yeah.
And it's like, yeah, all I have to show at the end of the day is this big pile of sharp sticks.
But we're going to use those to kill our food. And that's fucking cool. Yeah. Yeah. I remember my dad,
he's a carpenter telling me that he found his job really fulfilling, because he was supplying one of
the like three necessities of life, you know, like food, water, shelter. And any gosh, when you were
talking about like that really productive period, it struck me that you're working in a lot of different
types of work. That's true. Like, mixing it up, I think, between intellectual work,
like writing or like accounting, and then physical work, like, renovating a house,
I think has a refreshing effect on your brain, where like, it would be much harder to work for
14 hours straight on just writing, you'd burn out. But I think probably switching tasks like that.
I know some people, not personally, but people generally in the medical field tend to spend
their entire lives just working with, you know, occasional breaks for food and sleep. And that's
it. And they seem entirely happy. Like, I think, I think humans easily can adapt to working basically
all their waking hours with, you know, occasional holidays and stuff.
Hmm. Maybe. I think it depends on a lot of things. It depends on the individual.
Some people just don't have as much capacity. Some people have extra capacity. I know Elon Musk works
like a machine. And I need typical minds of the shit out of that, too. He's like, oh, I just figured
I could get twice as much work done if I didn't work twice as much. And it's like, yeah, sure,
but that's not how the rest of us work. You're free, which is awesome.
Even that kind of, I remember what you were saying, your secret to exercise is that you
give yourself two choices, exercise or exercise. And that works for you. And it's just like,
yeah, well, that must be nice. I mean, also, I should point out that anyhow,
she seemed like in the upper percentile of productivity and ability to focus.
I will definitely. I am not there.
A test of that. I took, I don't know the name of the test. I've still got the results for whatever
reason, floating around the trunk of my car. But one of my old jobs from like five years ago,
I had to take a personality assessment. Oh, yeah. And I got this like long printout and
I had a vitality score of zero. Well, what's vitality? Were you dead when you took it?
It was like, I, it sounds like a video game style. Well, it was things like, you know,
I'm not sure what all the other metrics were. I just remembered that because I talked about
that in my sort of exit interview. What was your dexterity? I'll have to check not as high as it
should be. But yeah, I spend more or less all of my free time like recharging and doing nothing,
which I like doing stuff. When I don't have stuff to do, I get depressed. So yeah,
so it's not like you're doing like, it's not like you're lazy because you don't like working.
I think that's the definition of acracia, or I forget if it was even a procrastination, but
the metric really, or if I keep using the word metric now, I hate when you get a word stuck in
your head. It was, you're lazy if you can just sit on your ass and play video games or watch like
Netflix marathon all day and just feel fine. And you probably have a procrastination or a
crazier issue if you're doing these things, but you don't want to be and you feel terrible.
That I'm just lazy. It depends. But for the most part, I can just, it depends on what I
guess I did with the rest of my day. If I did something productive, then I can live with it.
But I'm totally fine. All right, cool. It's 4.30. I'm done with work. I'm going to go home and
watch TV. Yeah. And that's also healthy attitude. I have a really hard time making myself relax.
I've had like, I'm at the point where I have other people in my life checking in on me like,
like once a week, like, Hey, have you had any solo time this week at all? Or like,
have you been sleeping at least six hours? And I have to ask people to check in on me out with
that because I will try to, you know, take a step back and look at my week and be like, man,
I really didn't sleep great. I should probably sleep better next week and then I will be happier
and more productive and not have mental breakdowns and stuff. But then that next week comes around
and it's like, Oh, but I've been invited to this party that's really late and this person wants me
to stay up and help them with this problem. And I need to, you know, get all the safety
data into this study before the safety cut off. So I'll just work on that. And before you know it,
it's like, Oh, I've given away all of my time. So we got sort of on a tangent there. But I think
that was a good discussion. I agree. Yeah, no, that's interesting. Luckily, I have a small circle
of friends and not a lot of people are urging out to me to help with things. So I also don't think
I'm in the top whatever percentile of productivity anymore. For the past several months, I've just
been not doing things. I think you think you've earned it. Which makes sense. I don't know.
According to my hypothesis, I don't need to recharge.
Doesn't mean that you doesn't mean that it's not good. Just means maybe you could get by without
it. Or maybe you just need it less frequently than other people. Yeah, I've got another comment
on replacing guilt. This was on the actual website, again, BayesianConspiracy.com and
tepid gruel. What's the username? They say, I think this is your best episode yet.
It's starting that the replacing guilt series has already had a positive impact on my life.
And I plan to read it several times over. These days, when I hurt or offend someone,
I write about it. First, I write a letter of apology. It's uncomfortable, but a therapeutic
exercise, similar to how Lincoln wrote angry letters and kept them secret.
Only this time, whenever it's appropriate and I can work up the courage, I actually send the
letters and make amends. Second, I write down a list of things that I learned and the ways I can
use the experience to become a better person. The writing helps me move on. I have tangible
documents at the end of the process, so I'm no longer afraid of forgetting what I learn.
This usually stops the recurring loop of lingering guilt. I find that journaling in
general helps move my thoughts along. It's like doing math on paper instead of in my head.
Totally agree with that. Anyway, when I first started this exercise earlier this year, I was
only writing apologies. After I read the Updating from the Sucker Punch post, I started writing lists
of learnings too, and it's already helping. So thanks for introducing me to Nate Sorer's work,
and I think that was a really great reply to the post. I'm glad that that was helpful to other
people to learn. I wish I had found it earlier in my life too. I like the suggestions that this
person has about writing the apology letters. I want to try that. I also like the idea of Lincoln
writing angry letters. I didn't know that, and I always find it really funny to think about
historical figures like Lincoln, who you think of as being these kind of monastic people,
kind of coming home being like that fucking bitch. I can't believe that. But then he gets it out,
and he's like, oh, I can't even get back to being chill. I was just going to say, I'm wondering
what it says about myself that I never feel decapulsion to appall it. I guess I don't hurt
people. If I do, I'm not aware of it. Partly it's me because I minimize my interactions. I work from
home three days a week, so I don't even talk to people most days. But I don't know. If ever I do
hurt somebody that I'm aware of, I usually try to reach out and fix it. I can't think of
anything that I've done where I'm pretty sure someone was hurt by something I did,
and I was just, I'll leave it alone. Unless it was like 10 years ago, I'm not going to like
find something to call them, right? Anyway, what we're going to say?
I sometimes, I don't do this like to apologize because, I don't know, I guess I'm a bastard who
doesn't apologize for things, but I have on several occasions written long emails listing my grievances
or how I think something, how I think I was wronged and why I'm angry about something.
And then I generally do not send those emails to the people. Sometimes I will, if it's a more
generic complaint about society, sometimes I'll put it up on my blog. More frequently,
I'll just show it to like one or two close friends and get their input on things. But
just writing it out and like maybe letting one or two other people see it really makes a huge
difference. Yeah, it's really cathartic. And it does actually have this feeling. I've been
noticing this too with going back to writing on paper. It feels like it gets it out of your brain
in a way that feels like it actually like lifts a weight off your shoulders in a way that I think
talking about something hard often doesn't give you that same feeling of closure as like having
written it all down or that feeling of it's like now somewhere where I can manipulate it in some
concrete way. I don't know if this makes sense, but yeah, I find writing about stuff to be
a more productive way of thinking about things sometimes.
And sometimes it helps me to articulate things in a way that I didn't even realize
before I started writing it. Yeah. Like, oh, hey, I see that thing now that I wasn't thinking
before. Yeah, I think the process of translating it into actual words. Because often you feel a
certain way, but it's not actually been put into sentence form. And having to actually like
put it down in a form that somebody else could read makes you have to articulate it to yourself.
Here is a comment from Orb Father of Autumn, who in this case is... It was other David. It is
other David. Yeah, David Youssef. It's also worth noting that they changed their handles on Discord
at least once a month. So maybe once every two. But yeah, it's pretty frequent. And it's sort of
become a thing. I am glad that the avatars at least stay the same because GSV recently turned into
Giant Science Vehicle or something. Science Vessel. Giant Science Vessel. Which I actually like,
because now I know what GSV stands for. That's not what GSV stands for. It's from the culture
series. General Systems Vessel, I think, something. It's a generic term for these giant ships that
do most of the stuff in their society. Okay. Well, GSV, Giant Science Vessel also works.
Yes. But Orb Father of Autumn says, this is kind of two parts. The first part is an article I read
posited the theory that part of the reason that rural and small town America is dying
is that there used to be a structure where almost every small town had a few wealthy
individuals who acted not only as major employers for the area, but also helped shepherd the town
through bad experiences and put down roots there. The other side effect was that these
liberal elite in small towns used to go to college and then come back and they would become more
liberal as a result. And because they ended up being leaders of their community, they ended
up pulling the entire town in the course of a generation or so to a more liberal equilibrium.
But with the flight of young people to cities, a lot of towns no longer have this. And I think
that this is tend to gentile, but related to the topic of the rich abdicating responsibility,
which was during that. We did that. Was that the show where you were post? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah,
the Yale episode. And I think I also heard that somewhere. But yeah, I got a lot of small towns
tend to have like, like one major employer, one kind of like head mayor, small cabal of people
that are sort of like the leadership of the area. And they're really looked up to. And the
townspeople generally both follow them and expect them to help, you know, help shepherd the town
through through bad times, be like, you know, leaders of a tribe. Yeah. And and like he said,
the rural America has been being gutted out for the past at least decade or so,
because they're just ain't shit there for young people anymore. They're on the way to the cities
and the towns die. I've seen there's some, I forget if it's states or specific cities,
but they're like actually paying people to live there or giving them certain types of
discounts on things. I forget what exactly the deal was, but I remember hearing one that was
actually really tempting. It's like, if you if you just want to move to like North Dakota or
something and have your own comfortable house, like this, there was this place that was
a some city that would have actually like subsidized your mortgage. I heard an interview
with a doctor who the the town sent him off to college and helped pay for his college. But
the deal was he comes back and he does medicine there and they gave him like great great rate
on his house to like all sorts of perks. But on the other hand, he also doesn't get paid shit.
And he has to live out in this rural small town where he doesn't have a lot of peers and
doesn't have access to like the cutting edge technology. I know like I I have a hard time
thinking about what we should do. I think this is definitely an issue and it's like related to other
similar issues, but like rural America is kind of collapsing. You can't like force people to
stay somewhere or like you it's not it seems like it would be bad too. If they're like they're
leaving for a reason if there really is nothing for them there. And it is making city life a
little bit uncomfortable to like costs and all the cities that people are moving to are skyrocketing.
Yeah, and they're getting kind of crowded are to navigate. Yeah, and I have heard some people
complaining about the like that this was like, you know, a liberal city and now you get people
moving from all these small towns and it's changing like the politics and the social norms and
ways that city people aren't appreciating. But yeah, what can you do? I don't know. It's
it's interesting and I'm really curious how where people live is going to evolve as
the future goes on, especially if we end up like we're on the cusp of developing
synthetic drugs that might increase people's lifespans to like 110 115. And it's somewhat
frustrating working in clinical research because you get to see all this cutting edge stuff,
but it's not available for the general public. And I don't know how long it's going to take before,
you know, because generally have to go through three phases of trials. And then maybe the FDA
will approve this as a treatment or not. And then maybe it's going to be incredibly expensive and
unavailable or not. But CAR T is I knew it was on the horizon people are thinking about developing
CAR T for solid tumors because right now these are for blood cancer because your blood goes through
your entire body and circulatory system. So you put a bioengineered cell and it's going to be
transported where it needs to go. It's a little bit harder to make ones that are targeted towards
solid tumors. But they have already started working on one. I was talking to a doctor from New Jersey
actually when I was at the investigator meeting in Dallas, who knows of a trial for brain tumors
using CAR T. I didn't even know that that was in the worksheet. And like, that's really cool.
And I've also heard about I actually heard my coworker like laughing and saying like,
did you hear somebody like is injecting their own CAR T? There's these people called biohackers
and like, man, they're crazy. And then like, I go on Facebook and one of my friends is talking
about doing this. And I'm just like, Oh, yeah, he would do these things, certainly not me and my
friends. But what weirdos are these? You're secretly sneaking stuff out of the lab in one of
those fake shaving cans. I would not be able to. Their security is pretty tight, actually. Damn.
The guy to do is cut the power to the fences. Oh, I think I forgot to send you guys photos of the
cryo preservation. They did a little cryo demonstration at that. I did send that. Yeah.
Yeah. So you see that they've got them in these like things that look like bunkers.
Insulated really like heavily and locked up. Mostly that's just so they don't get damaged
and transit because these are incredibly expensive to make and they have to be delivered to the person
whose body they were taken from bioengineered and then like put back in them quickly. So it's not
even so much a security thing as it is like a it's not like somebody's going to steal the CAR
T. It's we need to get it to this patient and quickly. But you were saying something about
longevity and how it affects your cities or small towns? Well, I'm curious how it's going to affect
society as far as people living in family groups, people living in like,
I mean, we've already got we were just talking with Drake. We might have ended up cutting that
part out. But we're talking about his mom had just sold her house and she's moving into one of those
older folks community things. I forget what the politically correct term for that is. My
grandmother's in one of those two and it's like really nice. It's got like a pool and a salon.
There's also different kinds of places. I'm not sure what this is if it's like an assisted
living or if it's an retirement community or something. Yeah. Or if it's just like a 65 and
up community that otherwise is pretty much like any other apartment community. But if you think
about like age 65, if people are living to like 120, that's like half their life. Then they've,
you know, if you're retiring at that age already and then like moving into one of these retirement
homes, like, maybe it's good if you've only got a, I don't know, if you live to 80 and you retire
at 65, you've got enough time to enjoy your grandchildren and live comfortably. And you're
probably not like going ice climbing in the winter or anything like that, you know, like
you're going to be like kind of sticking around your house doing low effort things, maybe walking
your dog. But like, if you stay young and healthy or like, even if we make kind of moderate advances,
but like, so you're still intellectually as curious and as motivated and able to work. I mean,
people might just keep working. A lot of people still are working into their,
I don't know, the neuropsychologist that I saw is definitely past retirement age. And he was even
saying he's like, this guy lives in Hawaii, and he flies to Boulder to do neuropsychological exams
on people because he likes it. He just didn't want to retire. And he keeps his practice open.
And he makes just enough money to pay for the building and the licenses and then like his
plain fare. So he's not actually even like, he's retired, he's just doing this for fun.
And like, there's a lot of people that I think are like that, you know, I know,
my parents aren't going to retire until they're physically unable to move.
My parents could be retired, they could have retired 10, well, not 10 years ago,
they could have easily retired five years ago at least though, but they just keep working because
they enjoy it. Yeah. I mean, I know that there's also a lot of concern on the other side about
people, we're going to acquire all of these non productive citizens. And it's whether that's
ages or not. I guess you can be non productive and young. So I know a few of those. Yeah. Well,
I think there's already countries that I know, like a lot of Asian countries have this rapidly
growing older population. Japan is really bad. Yeah, because nobody's reproducing anymore,
because they really need to like make a lot of social changes to make that seem attractive again.
And a lot of like the most developed wealthiest countries are experiencing the same kind of shifts
where people are waiting longer and longer to get married and have kids or they're not,
they're deciding to have careers instead or have dogs. And people are living longer and
they're dying less. So we're having this kind of worldwide shift towards more elderly populations.
And it's interesting to see, to think about like, how are we going to rearrange ourselves around
this? I wonder if that's one of the reasons our population is less violent. Like Peter
Singer has talked a lot about the reduction of violence and Stephen Pinker. You're right, Stephen
Pinker. I said Peter Singer. Yeah, similar names just swap some of the syllables. But
but yeah, you know, I wonder how much of it is just the fact that people are less prone to violence
as they get older and there's a lot more older people now. They have more to protect, less
impulsive. That's interesting. I had never heard that as a hypothesis, but it makes a lot of sense.
Should we go into the second part of David's thing here? Go ahead. Okay. The second part was
that the first part was the whole towns are being hollowed out and the educated aren't coming
back anymore. The second part was we're having a major internal crisis society about what the
purpose of college is. David says the tradition of college was never meant to prepare you for a
job. It was assumed that that would be learned on site, or that you would get a job through family
or social connections. And the purpose of college instead was to make you well educated and well
rounded member of society. I would like to add also I recently read a interesting, I don't know,
position hypothesis that a lot of college was about a culturating people into their social
class, which was one of the reasons why if you were someone from a lower social class and you
got into an Ivy League college, you did so much better in your life afterwards because you were
taught how to be in that social class, all the norms and mores of that one. So you could interact
with those people and work with the extremely rich in a way that you can't if you aren't part of that
class. Anyways, he goes on to say that David goes on to say that middle-class America uses
college as job preparation, but since the colleges they're going to are modeled on the ones that have
very different expectations of how students will get their first job, it's very ineffective. Although
modern colleges seem to be becoming wise to that problem. For example, I'm 30, I'm now going back
into college and the colleges I go to actually require that not only do you have experience in
the lab or making products, you are actually required to do at least one internship. They
encourage to. We have an entire class called Stepping Stone that's supposed to get us ready
for the workforce by doing stuff like making us work on our resumes and interview people in the
industry and work on how to give a two-minute elevator pitch. Man, I wish I had that. Yeah,
I had that at my boot camp, but that's what school I felt was missing.
It seems like college is starting to bifurcate. Bifurcate? Yes, thank you.
Into the ones that are more the traditional, introduce you to a social class and teach you
how to be responsible and ones that are like, here is your job prep. We are a very long training
camp. I'm like, if colleges actually combine to both of those, maybe they can have different
splits at the percentages, 60-40 or whatever, but I feel like having someone get a well-rounded
education and the social stuff is also really important. I feel like that is true even with
the, I mean, I think less so even with college. I think that's really important in middle school
and high school that we don't teach kids about social interactions or how to manage your emotions
or any kind of like self-care for mental health issues. You were expected to pick that up from
your society and your culture, but I think you're right. You're not taught it though.
Yeah, it would be good if we had a more... I mean, I know I've complained about this before,
but we don't have any kind of coming of age. I keep wanting to say ceremony or ritual, but like,
I don't know, there's no process really. I think a large part of the problem is that America has
so many different cultures within it. Yeah. If anything like that was implemented on a
national level, it would be extremely, I don't know, insulting, not just insulting,
but like trying to force people into taking away their culture and imposing a different
culture on them. I don't even know what the culture would be. I mean, even if you
go smaller, like, I never felt like there was a culture that I belonged to
when I was living in Ocean City, New Jersey. There's not a Ocean City culture. It's made up
of a bunch of different groups of people who maybe had their own cultures like...
But you're definitely more of the like liberal, educated social class.
I came from the lower middle class. My parents are actually pretty anti-education
or like anti-intellectual. And I don't think that that was exactly the norm in the location that
I lived, but... How did you get out of that?
Because generally, kids tend to follow their parents.
I'm not exactly sure. I almost feel like my parents were outliers in their families.
My dad had two sisters who both married up. And so I have two aunts and uncles on my dad's side
that are very wealthy and my cousins who have gone to Harvard and shit. And then on my mom's side,
they're much more of the lower class kind of, I don't know, my grandpa was a mailman.
Marrying up is a good strategy if you can get away with it.
Not for everybody, but if it's a good plan, if you can and you're okay with it.
It's been one of the classic strategies. Even half our fairy tales are based on that, right?
Yeah. Maybe it was actually the culture that had the impact on me and my sisters,
because I'm thinking like all three of us kind of... My sister's a veterinarian,
my other sister is a school teacher, and I'm like a cancer researcher now. And they're all
probably not professions that would have been predicted based on my dad being a laborer,
my mom being a preschool teacher, you know, all the teacher thing. But also we were like,
I was the first one to get a college education in my family. And then both of my sisters also
went to college. So it might have just actually been, yeah, that like the people, the place that
we lived was more upper class than my family. And us kids ended up kind of following our peers
more than our parents. I don't know, that's interesting to think about. I think I'm like,
so David's experience of having basically useful college classes, I think is probably
not specific, but constrained by what he's studying, right? So like, I got a squishy science major,
and it's like, oh, squishy, I guess soft science, squishy science, I call biology.
Wait, what was your major again? Psychology. Okay. So like, there was, there was no such thing as
like, here's how you get a job in the field. It was very well understood that like, you're not
getting a job in psychology with a bachelor's degree. Yeah, like you technically could, some people
might, but not as psychologists. I'm not really sure. Yeah, I mean, my sister did education and
psychology together. I think that's a pretty common, like you want, yeah, yeah, I think you
want a psychology education for teaching, but then you also have to have the education degree.
I think for me, I'm pretty, pretty vehemently anti college in that the things that you're supposed
to get from it, primary school should do better. You know, like social skills and all that stuff.
And to the extent that it doesn't, you can read a book and figure that shit out yourself if you
need to. I gotta take this. No worries. All right. So this is disjointed because we got a phone
call distraction. But I think I was railing against college that my main thing is that
the social things and the networking, I guess networking is something that some people can
do it some depending on your discipline. And if you're actually going to school for a job,
but most people, I think you go to college aren't going to college to go to college,
or they're going there because they feel like they're supposed to, or because it's a stepping
stone to like an actual degree that they want to go towards or something. But I think for me, it's
just like, like Jess said, it would be cool if they had like a hybrid of like, you know, 60, 40,
where like part of it was like more boot campy. I'm kind of putting words in your mouth at that
point. But I think that's what I was saying. Like, yeah, for me, it's just like, if you're going to
have that, I think it'd be really hard to sell the rest of the college, right? Hey, do you want to do
this 20 week program or this four year program that costs five times as much and gets you
a third of the same, you know, job marketability? I don't know. I think
if you're going to get educated for a job, there are ways to get totally fast track that and save
yourself tens or many tens of thousands of dollars. And like, yeah, coding boot camps don't give you
big O notation and a large background on like the the large
history of computer science, the history of computer science, I was going to even completely ignore
that part. But I was just thinking like algorithm design and stuff and design structures and all
that. Well, that's not even all you get. You also get, you know, some exposure to the classics of
literature and stuff. That's the other thing that really bugs me. And like, so I mean, I,
and I get why that's valuable. I really do. I don't get why that's valuable at $8,000 a semester
for the non essential classes, you know, like, if you're if you're an in school tuition student,
I think college is like $15,000 at a state university, at least I think at CSU years ago.
And like, that's a stupid amount to spend on, you know, being forced to read Moby Dick.
So I can fucking rent that book at the library, right? I believe it's called borrowing, because
they don't charge you money for it. Right. So whatever. It's public domain, probably, right? I
could read it online for free. Like, so why am I paying you $7,000 to explain this book to me?
And why do I have to pay you $7,000 to explain this book to me when all I want to do is fix cars?
Right? No, let me just go to an automotive school. And I can learn how to fix cars in six months
and go get a fucking job. I can't think of what the steelman version is like, no, you should go
to college. That's that's an important life step. Some of it was the scarcity of education. But like,
just in the past 10 years, you can learn anything on YouTube now. Like, it used to make sense for
you to go somewhere specialized to learn special, you know, learn from experts about a bunch of
different subjects that are culturally or historically significant. Historically, yeah.
But like now, anything you want to learn about, yeah, you can go to the library.
I have two comments about this. The first one being that historically, this came from a time when
less than 10% of the population went to college. And if you were going to college, you made it.
And so everyone knew if you want to get a good job, like be one of the smart educated people
that are looked up to you, go to college. And that's done now that, you know, a much larger
percentage of the population goes to college. They don't even really know what the college
is for. They just know all of society is saying go to college if you want a good job. And
the message has not been updated for how things have changed.
Right. And it definitely wasn't the case 10 years ago, 12 years ago when I was graduating
high school, that was still drilled into you like you need to go to college and that'll get you a
job. And that's really important. And we're still at the age where that's changing slowly now.
I think it is. But even now, I think 18 year olds, I went to a high school graduation last year,
my cousin graduated high school. And she's doing a smart she's going to community college first,
which is if you're going to go to college, that's the way to do it. I should have done that.
It's the it's the same books. And like, you're getting the same credentials.
Oh, you're getting you're getting different credentialed. Like here's my certificate. Yeah.
But it's it's the same. We can also knock out a bunch of your requirements to that aren't really
related to your subject. Like I was going to school for illustration and literature, but I had
calculus and for some reason, like rhetoric and persuasion and like that there are a bunch of
required classes that are kind of general. That's what I did for community colleges,
not got the core credits that are expandable to whatever degree you're getting. But my point is
you could knock those two years off any off of any education. Yeah. And, you know, if you want a
major in literature or philosophy or psychology, let me just go to school for two years and get
the degree for that. Don't make me take underwater basket weaving and art of the 1600s. And I basically
agree with you. And our society has swung too far to the, you know, just get general education
and everything in my opinion. But David Youssef did point out on the discord. So I'm bringing
this up now. It can get too specialized. He said that in Egypt, both his parents are highly trained,
highly educated professionals. I forget exactly what he said they do. But like his dad is in a
very prestigious position, doing something really fucking complicated with engineering, I don't know.
But he said, and he doesn't know who Napoleon is, despite the fact that Napoleon invaded Egypt.
Like there is just all sorts of basic common knowledge that his parents don't know at all.
And generally, people in his society don't know at all that he thinks people probably should know.
I can see that. Like their, their specialization starts in fifth grade.
Yeah, what I was gonna say, I could feel that, like, I could see that being the kinds of things
they teach you in the lower levels. And then by the time you, I think, probably by the time you
get to high school, that much money per year of college, you probably don't want.
I think even in high school is the point where like, I think that's a good point to start specializing.
But I think specializing by fifth grade is a bit extreme.
And I get historically where, you know, this is how colleges came about. And I can only speak
to how things are done in the in the West, like, or at least in the United States. But my,
my thing is, yeah, I was talking with one of our frequent visitors to the local meetups about
Hannibal, the military leader. And I had no idea what, you know, what age this guy was around.
I was like, was it 2000 years ago? Was it 1500? Was it 500? And like,
but if I, if I was curious, I could watch a history lecture on YouTube, right? And granted,
I should probably know this, but I don't. But I mean, you knew at least that it was before gunpowder?
No. Okay. I know, I knew that there were elephants involved. So I figured if you could
shoot the elephants, they wouldn't have been half as scary. So okay. Yeah. But my, my thing is like,
yes, I think there's definitely an asset to having a modestly rounded education so that
you're familiar with, you know, you shouldn't be able to enter society without knowing what the
word utilitarianism is, you shouldn't be able to not be able to like basic math and spelling and
yeah, science facts, all the core stuff. But yeah, I think the annoying part for me is that,
all right, cool. No, but you have to do that at college where you're going to spend twice as much
as what your parents bought their house for. And you'll be paying this off for 35 years at 9%
interest and go fuck yourself. Is it 9% interest? I think seven or nine. It depends on where you
get it. I thought student loans had a really good interest rates. I think it depends. It might be
new. Also, like they might have been trying to improve more recently. My point is it's insane.
Student loan debt is the largest debt deficit in the country. And that's including all the
mortgages and credit cards and, you know, combined. And that blows my mind. Combined.
Wait, combined? Wait, whatever. But student loan debt outpaces both of those. And it's like,
and I know I sound like- And it's put disproportionately on the young
who are making the least. Yeah. And then you go, you spend $130,000 getting your education,
and then you're told, oh, you don't have any life, you don't have any experience,
we're not going to hire you. And it's like, oh, so you want me to be able to do my job,
not just know, be able to set off facts about, you know, the origin of computing.
Together, I want you to be able to fucking code. It's like, okay, well, they didn't teach me that.
They taught me Alan Turing's favorite birthday cake flavor. So like, I mean-
Probably even go quite that far. But yeah. And I'm being, my hyperbole is for comedy. I'm glad
it landed. But the point is, it's like, that really pisses me off. I can't think of, if you
want to get into a job, go learn how to do that job. And yes, you should have a well-rounded
education, but you should be A, getting that earlier on, or B, doing that for free in your
own time. There's some jobs I don't even know how people get into, because I know that this is
a common joke among millennials, where they want you to have a certain number of years of experience
in order to get into various fields. And it's like, how do you get those years of experience?
Basically, like a lot of companies, you have to do free internships in order to get the experience.
It's a fucking racket. First, they want a number of free years out of you.
Yeah, three years of experience for an entry-level job. And it's like,
where am I going to get an entry-level job without three years of experience?
Yeah, nobody will hire you unless you've got several years of experience doing something,
but you don't. You just graduated school. And then I know a bunch of people from
New Jersey, like a bunch of my friends, very used to deliver people that have
a college degree and have just been working as a waitress for two years, while trying to apply
for some job for the degree they have. They're working several part-time jobs.
Yeah. Why aren't millennials buying diamonds? Oh, because I'm bagging groceries and I'm having
to fill out applications that make me upload my resume and then enter it again on the next day.
Walking dogs, direct to cash. Delivering meals on fucking Uber Eats and like...
Yeah. And that's just the nature of how it is.
So... Do you have a feedback?
I'll let just take the next one.
There was somebody complaining that the Discord killed the Reddit and I feel a little bit
bad about that, but not that bad because I'm on Discord a lot more than I am on Reddit.
I'm kind of okay with that too. Like Reddit's great, but I only see some of the posts that
come up on there unless I go manually check the subreddit, which I almost never do.
I just scroll through the front page. I'm not nearly as okay with it, but...
I'm just wondering how to resolve the situation.
Oh, well, I don't think there's anything you can do to resolve the situation, but
I really, really like Reddit and those sorts of forums because you put together an entire
coherent thought with some thesis and you have a maximum of like three, four, maybe five paragraphs.
If it starts getting more than that, it's like long form. So you try to limit yourself to that.
And it's preserved. There's an archive. There's a back and forth that you can do.
It feels very structured and I like the historical archive aspect of it.
And you don't have to be sitting there to have the conversation.
Exactly.
You can hit send, leave for two hours, or a day and come back and reply and people still be there.
And Discord is much, first of all, intensely time consuming because you're going back and
forth one line at a time. And since you're only doing one line at a time and you're going back
and forth with someone, it can take hours to go through a conversation instead of just putting
forth your thesis and someone putting a counter thesis. And you have to be really involved in
it. And I mean, I understand this is what builds communities because people sacrificing their time
to interact with each other is that sort of thing that you need. But God, not only is it a huge,
much bigger time investment, it's also ephemeral. It's like...
Really? Because it's archive too. It's actually like really pretty searchable.
It's disgustingly hard to catch up if you like even leave for an hour and a half while there's
a conversation going on.
Yeah. It's searchable, but only if you want to, if you know what to search for. Whereas with a
subreddit, you can look at the title, the post, and then scroll through.
Because in subreddit, if someone is kind of succinct and on topic, it doesn't take nearly as
long to catch up. Whereas the Discord is like going back and forth and there's a change and
people go off on for 15 minutes. And then they come back and you're like, I just read all that.
It didn't matter. And you have to do scrolling instead of having these replies and reply to
replies. It's just a constant scream of consciousness scroll. And the whole thing I find
very community building, but also it's not good for the conversation of the type that
I prefer to have on these things. So I really miss the subreddit. But I mean, it's not entirely
gone. But a lot of the energy has been pulled into the Discord instead.
Yeah, I totally feel we're coming from. And if I said I was fine with it, replacing it,
I'm not. I guess what I meant was, well, I guess I hadn't fully thought it through because you
make perfectly good points and they're all entirely truthful to me. So I think
what would be ideal is that people like, hey, slow discussion on Reddit, hang out
sessions on Discord. Because that's basically all you can do.
On the other hand, I mean, it's really engaged people. People like are on there all the time,
including myself. There's a ton more going on on Discord than we got on even our busiest
subreddit threads. So I mean, it's a good thing too. This is the sort of thing that
sucks people in. Yeah, I feel like it's got a lower entry barrier.
Yes, absolutely. Because with the subreddit, you do feel some pressure like put together a
good paragraph form short essay sort of thing. Whereas on Discord, you're just kind of chatting
with your friends. Like we're doing now. Yeah. And you don't have to, I guess this is kind of
the same thing you said, but write a whole long thing to get involved. You can kind of just
very easily slip into a conversation like, oh, that wasn't my experience. I went there this year
and that thing happened. And I guess it kind of feels less intimidating, especially for people
just starting out or who aren't really comfortable with the long form post style. I think that maybe
as time goes on, the community might kind of divide itself into the
here's where the people that want to write essays go, and then here's where the
people that want to chat go. Well, I think I kind of suspect they already did. I think you go to
the SSC subreddit. I don't know. I think just if the Discord's new. So maybe it's just kind of
people are playing with it and eventually like, I don't know. But the basin conspiracy subreddit
was never all that big, especially when you compare it to something like the Slate Sarcotic
subreddit. Yeah. That thing's huge. And all the people who like that sort of thing go there.
And with us, it seems to have been really the Discord that took off. Like the subreddit was
always interesting and we had some good comments on there. You know, we always had something cool
to read, but it never popped as much as the SSC one did. I mean, but to be fair, SSC also has
about a thousand or at least 500 times the readership we do. I think there's a Discord too,
and I'd be curious to see how many people are on the Discord versus their subreddit.
I can tell you how many people are on this Slate Sarcotic subreddit really quick.
The problem is you don't want too many people on a Discord because once it gets up and the
hundreds of people all trying to talk at once, it's like everyone trying to talk in the large
cafeteria to everyone else. I'm on a couple like that. And I'm never, well, let me rephrase that.
I've been on a couple like that. I'm never on them. Like the Doof media, they've got 40 different
channels, which is nice because everyone can actually keep their conversations in there.
And I think it's necessary because it's insanely active. You can't talk with 12 people at once.
Right. So they make it work, but I will occasionally go there to skim,
but I've never participated there because like you said, unless I'm ready to sit down and
have a conversation, which I never am, I'm ready to leave a comment and leave,
which is what I do on the Discord, on our Discord too. But yeah, Slate Star Codex has
21.6 thousand subscribers, and the vision conspiracy has 480. That said, I brought
this up because somebody posted what's Rosie Roseman posted on our subreddit.
Did you read the essays? I read the essays and I got involved in it to our conversation.
Oh, I haven't seen this. Not on the subreddit. Oh, on the subreddit. No, no, no. He apparently was
told, hey, go to the Discord and put it up in the Discord. Oh, by you. Yeah. Okay. Well, I had said,
thanks, Stephen. Well, now I need to go find this in the Discord, which sucks. Wait, no,
you gotta send it to me and I can, I can lose two hours too. So, yeah, well, I can send,
it's on the base, it's on r slash the vision conspiracy. But no, that doesn't suck because
now you've been left out of the conversation and it's almost impossible for you to get into it.
Yeah, I can go, I can go see what happened, but I can't get involved. That sucks because I would
have liked to because I just got around to reading the one on death today and it was,
it was nice. I loved the references, hashtag wheel of time, but I disagreed with it and I thought
that that had been a fun conversation to have, but now it's already been had. So.
And, and once, yeah, like once the conversation moves on and moves on, whereas on the subreddit,
you can come back, you know, days later and add a thing. I can ping, ping Rosie on the, um,
Rosie, Rosie might not want to interact with you after, um, how, how I interacted with Rosie.
I will, I'll mention that. I gotta see what this is now.
Oh, basically, I was like, there's a deathist in my house, GTFO, motherfucker.
Which is, first of all, it's not my house. And second of all, as a good rationalist,
I shouldn't be all like, get the fuck out of here with your deathism. But, uh,
but that's totally what I did because I was, I was grumpy. I was in pain and I was like,
fuck deathists. In, in, in your defense, Rosie said here, and I keep saying Rosie,
I'm pretty sure it's a guy, but Rosie Roseman is their, um, yeah.
You weren't saying. Well, but I'm short, I'm shortening it to the first half.
And I don't know if they want that because too many syllables and talking. Anyway, um,
I really do feel like I want to start a debate here or excuse me, I really do want to start a
debate here. I feel like I'm in the right, but the only way to test a sword is combat. So fight
me please. So they, they totally wanted whatever they got. I assume you don't go into fight club
to get your, you know, you go into fight club to get into a boxing match, not to get your shit,
you know, he's knocked out. Right. But every now and then you go and look,
expecting a boxing match and someone like brings a shiv and puts it in your testicles.
Like this is, I didn't think this would be fighting. Right. So if you, if you shiv their
testicles, then maybe they weren't expecting it, but if you just, if you hit them in the face,
I think that's what they wanted. I, I did like the post. I, their essay in the sense that I enjoyed
reading it. It was well put together. I just didn't agree with it. Um, but yeah, it's worth,
it's worth checking out. You can find the archived version on the subreddit r slash the
basing conspiracy, but I guess or search deathist on the discord and see if it comes up. I'm not
sure I actually use the word deathist. I'll see if I can find, like I'll just search the word Reddit
and see if it comes up. But yeah, I don't think that's going to happen. I'll find it. Reddit.
I read first. Search. Hey, Rosie Roseman. I'm new here. Perfect. Found it. So do I just click
this thing and it takes me to that chain? Yes, it does. Oh, this was like a five sentence thing.
Like, like a five back and forth. This wasn't that long or does it go on? It goes on. How
do I get to the rest of it? It just keeps rolling down. I did. It didn't, it's gone. Oh really?
Let me try again. All right, I'll figure this out later. It goes on and like three other people
jumped in as well. Oh man, this did go on for a long time. Oh yeah. It went on until I left work
at 530 and then it went on a little bit longer. Oh no. Yeah, people got mean. Yeah. That's sorry,
but sort of not sorry also. Well, I will, I still want to read this song. Oh yeah, I can't wait to
read the drama. Hey, Thanos Gif. Yeah. I can't wait to see how this becomes relevant. You're
right. This is going to take forever. We're going to get cut off. Cut off. Uh-huh. 275 new messages,
through any new messages. Yeah, see, this discord is impossible. It's fun. I'm glad it's a place
to hang out, but it does not replace long form chatter. Yeah, I think that's just, they're just
different styles. Yeah, they do different stuff. And I am also sad that the one of them has suffered
due to the other one, although I don't think the subreddit is killed, killed. I just think it's
anemic now. Yeah. So I guess this is our way of saying, hey everybody, do more subreddity stuff,
or once you're done talking a whole bunch on the discord, copy it all into a single
file and put that on the subreddit as a comment. Yeah, maybe we could try to norm people taking
any long form comments that they write on discord and cross posting them. Or maybe there's a bot
for the, there's probably a bot for the, some kind of scraper. Yeah, I don't know. But that also
took away part of the point, right? Yeah, and I know that I would have, if it was on the subreddit,
I probably would not have been nearly as tacky as I was on the discord. That's because you're
kind of like, I need to reply while they're at their keyboard, rather than like, they'll see
this in two hours, right? Yeah, and I can take some time to compose a, to calm down. Yeah, basically.
Okay, I had two short ones that I think I just wanted to say because they made me happy.
Bio Pudin, or Pudin on Reddit said, just to put it out there, grammatical genders in Spanish
follow the final vowel of the noun, such as A for feminine and O for masculine, 99% of the time,
rather than just following social conventions about gender, which is not to say that there aren't
gender stereotypes in Spanish speaking countries, or that language doesn't affect the way we think.
Native Spanish speaker here, by the way, if you want to talk about wacky, check out German
grammatical genders, there are three, and there are a ton of fairly inconsistent rules. I still
love German, though. That's fun. I like hearing from people who actually live in those cultures,
because obviously, I'm familiar with some language structures that are different than mine,
but I don't know what it's like to actually have grown up speaking that language. And whether or
not you are aware of how much it changes, you're thinking about different things. I'm curious
about the three genders in German. I'm guessing there's one that's neuter or okay.
Well, my family lived in Germany for a few years, so I had up to a kindergarten level of
learning German, which isn't very much, but yeah, they have the neuter gender, which is generally
only used for certain objects. I'm reminded of the Ancillary Justice series, where I remember
the point of that book for people that aren't familiar with it is there's a future society
where everyone uses the word she, because humanity's been taken over by this.
They never really specified whether it was a future human subspecies or actually just an alien race,
but it was humans. Okay, it was humans. So anyway, the dominant culture just uses she as a
the standard gender, and then they don't have gendered language really, and to represent that,
everyone in the book is she. Yeah, except for when they would, because it was from the point of view
of a character coming from this dominant culture, but they would interact with people from other
cultures that they had colonized who would still sometimes use their gendered languages,
and then this character is thinking like, oh, I realized that I messed up and I'm supposed to
say he for that one. And now they're looking at me weird, like, I gotta remember to do that.
Why do they do that? That's weird. But I also remember that they were talking about
trying to get the same effect when they translated this book into other languages, and it being
really interesting and difficult, but having different different difficulties in different
languages, like the ones where they don't have a bunch of gendered pronouns, you lose a lot of
the effect. So they had to find other ways of making things like default feminine in order
to give you that kind of like, this is another culture. But then like, German, for example,
it's like, Oh, no, no, like, this is going to mess things up because there gets to be a point
where things stop making as much sense. If you're not using the correct gendered word. Yeah. So
do you, the God, Terra Ignata series by Ada Palmer, did you ever read that one?
No, I haven't. It's an interesting society where the there is a social norm against using any sort
of gendered language at all. And so everyone is just referred to as they them. But the person
who's telling the story, the protagonist and the narrator is slightly mentally unhinged and also
gives zero fucks about social norms. So he goes around gendering everyone, but he genders them
the way he wants. So there's this one female character who's like an aggressive assassin type,
and he always refers to her as he, because he's like, obviously, you know, this is the violence
that a male would do. So he's a he for me. And anyways, it's really interesting. But one of the
interesting problems, Ada, I read some interviews with her, one of the interesting problems she
ran into is that in Poland, there's, you know, they have their own culture wars right now. I
did not know any of this because I don't keep up with my own country. So I learned it from reading
her interview. But in Poland, the far right is pushing for gender neutral, everything more or
less. Whereas the far left are the ones who say like, no, I'm a doc dress. And this is a, you know,
like pilotess and all that. They're very much pointing out that women can do these things
just as much. So acknowledge that they're women when they, when they have the job, you know,
don't call a woman, sir, if you're addressing her, and don't call a captain, captain, if it's
a woman captain, use the correct turn captain s or whatever the Polish equivalent is. And,
and so she said, so when it was translated into Polish, it looked like in my society, the far
right had one, their view of society, when in fact, the exact opposite is the case, you know.
And so they had to like redo it for the Polish version, which I was like, that is, that is just
like shockingly interesting. How translating things into different cultures can drastically
alter what you're saying in the book. That is interesting. Yeah, the thing that strikes me
is interesting about that is that it's kind of the way we have the weird, like red, blue tribe
things where things that aren't necessarily even related to your being conservative end up getting
lumped there. And that ends up being like, you would think the like flying the American flag,
that should be a thing any citizen could be proud of. But it's very much associated with the red
tribe. That makes sense from a conservative perspective, though, I'm thinking even like
things about like gun control. Wait, how does how does that only red tribe gets to fly American
flags makes sense? Well, because of, I want to say jingoism, but like, oh, nationalism, nationalism.
Yeah, because the blue tribe wants to change the nation and make it better. Whereas I think
the blue tribe has just as much right to be part of this nation as anyone else. I totally agree,
but I'm saying where I think it comes from. Okay, no, actually, yeah. Now that I'm thinking about
it, like the nation as a whole is more left than it is right. Yeah, flying a Confederate flag,
definitely signals that you like losers. Yeah, that just shows how ingrained it even is that I
it's like, well, obviously, flying a flag is red tribe. And now that I'm thinking about it's like,
oh, no, I could easily like, think of an opposite world where fly it like, you know,
maybe conservatives are disappointed with the direction the country is gone. And
it's all on a fly a flag. They're the ones arguing in favor of burning flags and stuff.
Yeah, or flying Confederate flags instead. Yeah. Yeah, maybe the original flag with only 13 stars.
Right. There was a, oh, I remember this was back to the gendered language. So
my first piece of like, feminist literature that I read that I actually liked the first one I read
was like, it was the last chapter of the God Delusion. It might have been the last chapter.
Anyway, Dawkins was talking about how, you know, like he is the default and everything and that
he now makes an effort to use she for the default for everything, which I'm now it's 15 years later,
maybe now it should be neutral for every everybody instead. But I like that. So, and I noticed this,
it jumps out of me like on Brian Dunning's podcast, he's like, you know, a lot of it is like medicine
and you know, woo or something. So yeah, when you see your doctor and he says this, and I'm like,
you could just say she or they the doctor. But my default for years was using she. And I liked
that unless you're talking about a bat, you know, an individual or a group of deplorables,
then you could just you could use he's right. Women can be just as deplorable as men sir.
Right, right, right. But I but this way, if someone was just reading the one thing I wrote
and say I was talking about, you know, whatever, speech or terrorism or something,
in which case, it's still men dominated go us. Not hate speech terrorism.
I hate that personally. I was kidding. Okay, what do you think I was actually happy about that?
It is the way things are, though, like it is always men when it's a group of bad people. And
usually statistically, that's also true. Yeah, white guys are crushing it in the
mass shooting category, right? You know, so there's other factors that
by all means, I'm trying to take that mantle from us. I'm, please, I'm not I'm not attached to
the to the people I guess I'm not I don't feel any attachment to the very first school shooter
was a woman though. There we go. Yeah, I was interesting when I found that out. Cool. Oh,
I didn't know it. Yeah. Well, what was the body count, man? I don't know. Well, then, you know,
I'm just kidding. Okay. Yeah. I and I feel no attachment to being a white guy. So like I don't,
if someone's like, Oh, you know, this is associated with white people, I'm like, Oh,
that sucks. Like, I but I don't feel anything personal about it, other than the fact that I
know that some idiots in the internet will assume the worst in me because I the color
of my skin. But by all means, you racist, you racist pricks go forth and be that way. I remember
in the early 2000s, a lot of gaming materials that were coming out rule books, role playing
rule books in particular, since they have to use like a lot of examples of this player does this
and you know, he does this, she does that. One of the ones I read was really interesting,
they had all odd numbered pages using he pronouns and all even numbered pages using she
pronouns. Nice. Which was really cool. And a different one had like odd numbered chapters
with were he's and even numbered chapter for she's. That's fun. Yeah. It'd be fun with it'd
be even more fun with the just doing web page. It's like part of the tutorial. Like it's the
same paragraph going on to the next page. Yeah. I could see that being distracting though.
Totally. Yeah, I don't have to be intentional and hilarious. And generally, they always keep the
examples in like little letter boxes. So they're contained on one page.
Okay. Yeah. Like here's a little insert that's on this page. I like how this thing happens.
Yeah, it sounds more inclusive. Granted, it's less inclusive than we are now in 2019. But
but I love I love the need to say that was in the early 2000s. I think so. Yeah. Yeah. I mean,
that's that's forward thinking. Well, it was already a big thing back then. Yeah, but it was
less heard, I guess, right? Like maybe, I don't know. It was already pretty, pretty big. I was
young in the early 2000s still making efforts or some of the earlier feminist waves.
They were already, you know, trying to fight back against the he is default and come up with
new ways of like for a while it was he or she and then that's incredibly clunky.
The singular they is a more recent solution to this problem. But I have seen a lot of the
just occasionally switching from he to she. And I use they almost every time now.
I've seen singular they I think my entire life. Yeah, like in official manuscripts,
it was always he or she because they was considered ungram ungrammatical,
grammatically incorrect. I don't know. Yeah, but that was a more recent decision. Yeah. But in
in casual conversation, they was used all the time. Yeah. I mean, it's again, it's older than
singular you. Yeah. All right. Do we have more feedback? I got a quick one and this should
have gone right after the college one. Closed limelike curves wrote in and said, or I'm not
sure where this came from. I think the discord. Probably. Yeah, all I have to say is that I'd
bet my ass off that if colleges were teaching stuff like what the right thing to do is there'd
be a lot of complaints, probably including from this podcast on how colleges nowadays are just
brainwashing and they've abandoned their original goal of actually teaching people or helping them
acquire knowledge. I think you're probably right. I think I think a mandatory philosophy like rough
rough overview of philosophy should be included. But like, but if it was, you would complain not
in college. Okay. I frankly, like again, my so I think this is consistent with my anti college
rant. But just like put this in high school. Okay, everybody should get through school,
you know, knowing what an atom is, you know, what evolution is, what
how sex works. Yeah, how sex works. Try to get a big discipline. They should know their numbers.
They should know you can't get a man pregnant. Basic history. Yeah. I remember in BBC Sherlock,
I think about it in the second episode of season one back when they were still good.
There was this whole wasn't the second episode. It doesn't matter that like Sherlock didn't know
what where the earth was in the solar system or something. Right. How does that help me be a
detective? Yeah. You know, so he's like, you know, why would I know that I can identify 19
different types of cigarette ash? I don't need to know. I think it was that he, he didn't know
that the earth revolves around the sun or something. That might have been it was some glaring
thing. Yeah. So you shouldn't be able to graduate high school not knowing that. But you shouldn't
have to pay. But he also had a good point. But that wouldn't help him solve any mysteries ever.
Yeah, exactly. So to the extent that you just really care about your one thing, that's fine.
But Sherlock also strikes me as the kind of person who didn't pay attention in school if you had to
go to school, right? I'm not sure what BBC or these Sherlock canonical upbringing was like. It
doesn't really matter. But I think they have some episodes where like, when they meet Minecraft,
they talk about it. And yeah, I feel like they kind of made that character is like a Asperger's
is like slash autism walking stereotype character. Totally. But that does also ring true with a
I know a lot of people that have autism or ADD like tend to not do well in the conventional
schooling atmosphere. I mean, myself in particular. There's a thing of being able to hyper focus on
your favorite thing forever. And then maybe that person just ends up being a geologist because
they love rocks. And yeah, I kind of everything ever can also make you enough money to live on
then go nuts. Yeah. And I kind of want to push back on I was leaning into the, yeah, like you
should be able to learn these things at these grades and whatever. But actually, like, I am,
if I had a kid, I would radically unschool them. And I think that
I don't think that it should be necessary for someone to know something maybe in order to be
in a certain job. Like if you want to be a healthcare professional, you should understand
evolutionary biology, like on a basic level, like cellular biology stuff like that. But
I strongly disagree. Okay, I think to have a functioning society, you really need some things
that everyone in the society has to know. Everyone needs to know how to read.
To the point of enforcing it, though. Yeah, everyone needs to know how to do some basic math.
Everyone should know the at least the most basic laws that we live by. And a few things like why
medicine works, what vaccines are, those sorts of things that are important to a society running,
I think, should be if you haven't taught your children this, not only are you doing them a
disservice, you're making society worse off and hurting all the rest of us.
Yeah, unfortunately, most people don't learn these things from their parents. These are things you
learn from school. But then like, most of what I learned was not from school or my parents. And
the reason I am less paranoid about the world becoming idiocracy if we get rid of the school
system is that people do really well in radical unschooling environments. They tend to pick up
everything they need to know anyway. And that I think encourages kids who are lifelong learners,
because they don't learn to hate learning. Right. I think you guys aren't disagreeing as much as
think you are, but I was going to push back with the same thing just as hard with reading.
Because that is the one thing that you need to get out and do whatever. You can't self-educate
on your favorite subject if you can't read. And if no one made you learn, and your parents were
like, oh, they don't need to read. You don't have to make kids learn. They teach themselves.
They many do. I guess I can imagine circumstances where it's like, no, we just work with,
or you know, you can even just rule out the whole religious fundamentalists,
but they don't want them to learn how to read because it's dangerous and they could read the
wrong book. But fuck it. Our family has been craftspeople for 500 years. You don't need to
learn how to read or you don't need to read any of the classics of literature to be a good wood
worker. So you're going to just, I'll teach you how to work wood. You can read a tape measure
and that's all you'll need to learn how to read. I could imagine.
You're still thinking of an education system where it's being handed down to the child by someone.
This is like radical on schooling is the child directing their own education. The parent wouldn't
be able to say like, we're craftspeople and you're going to be a craftsperson too. The point is
the parent helps the kid gather whatever information they're interested in or help them
if they get stuck. But otherwise, like minimal intervention.
Then I guess I'd mandate that the parent actually do that. Yeah. Yeah. So yeah,
I guess I don't know what radical on schooling was. How many children can we
so I don't know very much about children at all having not ever had one and having not been around
very many for at least a couple of decades now. But how many children can we actually trust to
learn how to read on their own? Because if it's less than 98%, I would be for, you know,
forcing them to learn how to read. I don't know how you learn to read just by looking at
swiggles. Someone needs to show you how to read. There's I'm remembering this. I don't even know
whether to call it an experiment or an intervention or what, but somewhere in Rwanda, I want to say
some humanitarian group just built a bunch of community centers and put computers with internet
access there. And the kids educated themselves to the point where some of them were sending
themselves to college overseas. And nobody was teaching them how to do anything, but they
by messing with the computers, talking to each other and trial and error,
were able to teach themselves to read, to speak multiple languages, all kinds of, you know, like,
all the information in the world is now at your disposal. And if you're a kid who lives in a
village who maybe has fun by like kicking a ball around or like playing with a cat,
you're going to fucking love to learn. I mean, like, it's also probably really like
an environment that pushes home how important being educated is and how much you can,
you know, improve your life circumstances. That is interesting. I wonder, like specifically,
because I don't know, I mean, if I was, if you locked me in a room with a book that was written
in Arabic, I could spend the rest of my life in there and never understand a word of that book.
Right. It's just squiggles on a page. I would need someone to show me what squiggles
mean what, and then I could piece together the rest.
Well, you can do that with the internet, because the resources are out there.
Right. But that's what I mean, like just basic literacy.
And so if these kids were really just given a computer and like just, you know,
you can figure out the mass works, you can figure out how to play with the computer.
But if they could figure out how to Google, teach me English, and without being able to
read anything or write themselves, I mean, you would just be striking keys that all look like
just, you know, elvish to you, right? Well, apparently, the first thing these kids did when
they watched them was look up soccer games. I don't know if they knew how to spell it or if
they were kind of just clicking around and like navigating by images, I'm not sure. I actually
want to, I'll see if I can find the article about this and link to it, because I'm curious to follow
up on that more detail. And I'm really curious about what their baseline was going in. Yeah.
Yeah, you're right. You'd have to know something. You can't even Google soccer.
I think it's very hard to like, get to a certain age and not have learned anything.
Yeah. That's true. Even if you go to a soccer stadium, you'll see the word soccer on like,
these are places where they didn't have public schools. So these kids hadn't been to school,
but you do still learn from your peers and your family and your society around you a certain
amount. Yeah, you're right. I'm picturing something that can't really happen. The kids actually
learned to read in school because I learned to read before I started school. And I basically
taught myself to read. I mean, my parents would read me bedtime stories and then I would be able
to link, this is the page where this thing happens. And I guess eventually like,
enough repetition of kind of getting to the point where I'd memorized some children's books. And
I don't remember though, like my memory is not good enough to
remember what kind of mental notions I was making when I was learning to read.
But I know that like, I just became such a voracious reader that I just taught myself to
read from then on. None of the instruction and reading or anything was very valuable to me in
school. Yeah, I'm not saying that you need to go to a classroom and have someone do this. And so
I think I'm imagining a scenario that can't really happen where you can't lean on up here.
So somebody in your group has, like I said, been to a soccer stadium, seen a soccer ball at a store,
and it says soccer on the package and you're looking at the ball. So that's what it says.
Yeah, you could find the keys that spell out the word soccer on the keyboard.
Yeah, I'm basically imagining where, you know, you grab a bunch of random people who don't speak,
you know, Arabic or something. I'm just picturing something, you know, non-NATO
phonetic alphabet even. And you put them all in a room with no outside resources. Of course,
they'll be able to figure anything out. I think basically just saying is that
never happens in the real world. Everyone has some society.
I was trying to stand up a straw man. So yeah, anyway.
We've been here for a while. I have one last one that we can hit if that's okay.
Totally. Yeah, let's wrap it up there and get on to the sequences though.
Okay, within reason, back on the discord says, and this is back on our episode on conflict theory
versus mistake theory, within reason proposes an identity theory. Identity theory says that
people will only change their minds about things that do not imply anything strong about their
identities. I think it tracks because it predicts how and why people have such trouble
changing their minds in the face of evidence. Conflict and mistake don't address that.
Conflict just says that it's all about power, but people should still change their minds if
they're given evidence about who has the power and who the bad guys are, but they don't. Mistake
says that everyone is trying to reach the right answer in good faith, so people should change
their minds when confronted with evidence about any beliefs, but they don't. Identity theory says
that they'll change things when it doesn't imply things about their identities.
Keldini talks about this in influence. He explicitly connects it to a person's self-conception
and shows how one of the most effective ways to influence a person is to do something
to facilitate them forming an identity where they are the kind of person who does that kind of thing.
Commitment and consistency. Yeah. I thought that was an interesting thing to point out.
I forget if Scott says this openly, but when he writes essays like Conflict versus Mistake,
I think he is pretty open about saying that this is a fake model, that I am kind of constructing
in order to use it as an analysis tool. I'm not saying that literally there are only these two
styles, but I do like the addition of identity theory that tracks with some conversations I've
had with Wes, who's a within reason. I also want to link to Wes's blog. He has a good rationalist
blog. Do you know Wes Persona? Yeah, that's my partner from New Jersey.
Oh, Meet. Oh, hot damn. I didn't know that. Cool. I'm hoping that if he visits Denver again,
I can bring him to one of our Western Meetups. That would be awesome. He was here when we went
to Valley View, but we were up in the mountains, so I didn't get to introduce anybody though.
Is Wes out as within reason on their internet handle? Yeah. Okay, cool.
All right, let's move on. I'll just say that I like that analysis too.
It was cool. Yeah. Before we get into the less wrong posts, do we want to do a quick recommendation
of things? Because I actually have things to recommend for the first time. Sure.
For the first time, but I don't very often. Yeah, please, no. Recommend stuff.
So, the first thing I have to recommend is Raw by Sam Hughes, which I have to think-
Oh, that's been on my reading list for a bit. Yeah, I have to thank Zeke for getting me to read
it again. Way back in the day when it first came out, I started reading it. And at this time,
I think I had just finished up HPMOR. And I heard, oh, more rationalist fiction. I'll check it out.
And it's so stylistically different from methods of rationality that I got two,
three chapters in and I was like, I'm not really interested in this. And I dropped it.
And really what mainly what I remembered was like, this was something I wasn't really interested in,
right? But it's been like years since then. And Zeke was like, really, check it out. I think
you'd like it. It's pretty good. And I was like, okay, fine. So I went back and yeah, I think it
was just because I was in a different mood for a different style at the time when I first picked
it up. But now that I started it again, I was like, oh, this is really interesting. And I read
through the whole thing and I really liked it. Cool. Yeah. What's it about? Oh, what's it? Okay.
It's basically a world where magic exists. And it was discovered in 1970. And now,
as in any world where real magic really exists, it is a branch of applied engineering. There's
like college courses on how to use magic and how to use it to get these industrial facts and stuff.
And since it's only been about four decades, they're still learning new things about it,
you know, it's like learning a whole new field of physics and like, they're experimenting with
it and seeing what it does. And I mean, that's, that's, that's how it starts out. It's not all
that it's about, but it's interesting where it ends up going. Okay. Yeah. So I definitely recommend
it. It has two endings also, notably the new revised ending is in my opinion, a much better one.
Okay. To the point where definitely read the new one first. I would say you don't even need to
bother with the old ending. If you want to read it anyway, just for comparison sake, go for it.
But you can tell that many years have gone by and he, he's not only did he get better at writing,
but he managed to make it a emotionally complete fulfilling ending in a way that the original
ending was not. So yeah, sounds awesome. And it sounds like a really fun premise too.
Yeah. And it's a great rationalist work. I mean, Sam Hughes has written a lot of things. I've read
some of his short stories back on the HP more podcast when that was a thing. So which one
do you remember? Yeah, the one that I really liked was humans and transit. The one about an AI
who's basically staying on the down low while human society is evolving when an asteroid
smacks into Australia. And it has like what eight, 10 minutes to get everyone on the planet
uploaded and then shoots them via radio transmitter out to Alpha Centauri. And it ends with, okay,
now that I've saved as many people as it is physically possible, I need to figure out a way
to travel faster than light so I can get to Alpha Centauri and build a receiver. And yeah,
it was so good. It just fills you with this warm feeling when you read it.
That's the kind of safety net that I'd like that I think that must be what it's like being religious.
Yeah. It's the things that if you got really bad, God would step in and save us.
There was a message like that in Cosmos Carl Sagan's book. I don't think it was in the TV series.
Probably not.
There is no one outside to come help. This is on us. And that's empowering, but also tenuous.
It would sure be super cool if we, I guess the short story maybe didn't talk about the origins of
this dormant AI that was hanging out. I don't think it's that much about it. So maybe they just
built it and like, all right, that'll keep us safe if something happens and that's something
did and it kept them safe. That's so cool. Yeah. All right, so.
And I actually have a second recommendation which is just shocking because I normally don't even
have one, but this is a thing I saw yesterday. So this is a fresh recommendation. I did not
know I was going to be recommending this. Had off the purse. Had off the something.
Yeah. This is a hot take. I just crapped this out. Anyway. Paul Rudd, Ant-Man? Paul Judd?
Paul Rudd. Paul Rudd is Ant-Man. I can name the Avengers. Okay. Yeah, that's that's my
list of actors. But he's not an Avenger, is he? Ant-Man's an Avenger. Okay. All right. I'll
give him the title. Okay. The extended Avengers family. But he is right now in a Netflix show
called Living With Yourself. It's good. Oh my God. Oh man. We were literally just a week ago,
like discussing one of the main topics of that show on in our discord, like a lot contentious.
This is the thing that many transhumanists, even just many sci-fi nerds talk a lot about,
and they did a great job bringing it to life. And it's fucking, it's, it's smart and it's hilarious.
I would say it's like the good place in the fact that it both tackles interesting cerebral subjects
and it's really funny, except I think it's better than the good place. On the other hand, I've only
seen two episodes so far. So I don't know if it like stays this good all the way through, but
I like it more than the good place. I think it addresses smarter issues and it's more funny
when it's funny. And there, it has like a few like dark things too, which is fun. I enjoy this.
Yeah. Yeah. Anyway, Living With Yourself. It's great. I'm stoked. I saw him pitch it. He was on
Hot Ones a couple of weeks ago. Cool. We'll talk about it briefly. Yeah. Hot Ones is this YouTube
channel where this guy will eat increasingly hot wings with a guest. Does he eat them too?
Yeah. Oh, okay. I thought he just made them eat it. No, no. He eats them with them. Oh, wow.
Which is insane because he's eating, you know, bowel destroying hot wings a couple of times a
week with famous people, which is the funny thing. Yeah. Anyway, Paul Rudd crushed it on that show
and he showed me a fun trick where he's, he can, you put your fingers in a certain way in front
of the camera on your phone and it looks like you're taking a picture from between somebody's
legs and like your fingers folded just right. So it looks like there's like a butt crack.
And so my brother told me to watch that he's like, Hey, Paul Rudd's on Hot Ones. And so while I'm
watching it and he shows you this trick, I take a picture of the TV from between, looks like,
looks like between somebody's legs and he got the joke because I showed Rachel the, I'll show you
guys, you know, I'll post the picture on the, for this because it was hilarious because I showed
my wife and she was like, he knows what this is, right? Cause it looks distinctly like, like you're
taking a picture from a human from behind. Cool. Anyway, so Paul Rudd has a bunch of pictures
of celebrities like that on his phone and this isn't a perfect picture, but you can kind of see.
Oh, so Paul Rudd shows you how to do this.
So yes, in addition to him being an Avenger and able to crush the Hot Ones challenge,
I heard the show was good because he pitched it and he's a great guy, it seems like. So I'm all,
I'm all in, I'll check it out. Yeah, it's fun. It's also an amazing, they did an amazing job of
having the same actor portrayed two different people and they look so different even though
it's the same actor. Awesome. Yeah, it's great. Oh, I love when people are good at that. So the
good place was great through the first season, I think, and that's about it. I think I'm, I saw
all of the second season, which I thought was pretty good. The second season was pretty good,
but not, I didn't like it as much as the first. Okay, yeah, yeah. And then the third season kind
of is just like, what are you guys even trying to do? And the fourth season, I think they're
bringing it home in a way that will land well, but it's week to week and it's not that much fun
for me, but I'm still watching it. I enjoy it. It's just, it seemed like they had their big idea
the first one. Yeah. But that said, I think it's in the third season. Darcy, fuck, I figured her
name, the person who plays Janet. Okay, yeah. They, she, she, she plays all of the characters.
Oh, neat. And they're dressed like themselves, but she's, she's playing all of them. And she's got
their mannerisms down and their, their reactions to everything perfect. And it is one of just the
best pieces of acting that I've ever seen. She's playing five characters in the room at the same
time and she's nailing all of them. So it was, it was really fun. Okay. I'm looking forward to that.
Yeah. So that happens at some point, but as far as, so I bet the, yeah, this was just you saying
one person looking different, playing two different roles at the same time. Yeah.
She managed to do five. Yeah. Nice. But it was, it was for basically one scene, not a whole series.
Right. So, yeah. Anyway, cool. No hot takes from the Stevanator this week. So I've got,
I've got a few. One is actually this cartoon that Autumn, who hosts our
last round meetups and was McGonagall in the methods of rationality podcast
showed me this cartoon called infinity train. Okay. I remember when the, when the trailer for that
came out like a year and a half ago. Yeah. They've got like 10 episodes. I think that they didn't
end up picking it up. Although like people are trying to campaign to get it, to get more episodes
made. How is it? Is it as good as the trailer looked? Yeah. If I hadn't heard of it until
just yesterday, but if you like adventure time and like Steven Universe and the kind of
the cartoons that are coming out now that I think are pretty like suitable for adults to watch as
well, well written, well animated. The story is a girl from Wisconsin is trying to go to coding
boot camp, but her divorced parents can't get their schedules together. So she's wandering around
angry and steps onto this train that magically appears and then each car of the train is a
different universe. And she's trying to figure out what the hell is going on. And she's got a
number counting down on one of her hands and keeps hearing different rumors from different
like wacky characters on the train that like when it gets to zero, you die or various. So it's
basically you're just in this universe. You have no idea what the fuck's going on. And I really
like this style of storytelling where a character has to persevere through wits and maybe just hard
work. So quick two questions. One or one clarification that I think the first three seasons,
the good place are on Netflix. And that's also where Paul Rudd's show living with yourself is.
Where can I watch Infinity Train? I think that was on Cartoon Network. Let me make sure. What if I
don't have cable? I mean Cartoon Network.com. Like their website. I have to watch my computer then.
I can cast it to my TV. Yeah, it's on Cartoon Network. You can watch it for free on there,
or you can stream it for free from other places. I liked that show. I watched the first season,
but not that closely. I think Disenchanted was that the one by the end of the future drama?
It had a very similar vibe. Excuse me, let me rephrase that. Completely different vibe,
different show entirely, same animation style. But the same kind of like there's lots of
low level background things and like you can rewatch ability. I'm looking forward to rewatching
this show because I only paid half attention the first time. I saw the first episode and I just
didn't get into it. I didn't like it either the first time. It took me a few episodes to get
into it actually. I had the same reaction where I was like, ah, it's like The Simpsons, but in
like a fantasy RPG land, okay. It gets a bit better. I'm not plugging it nearly as hard as
you guys are. I was just thinking of cartoons. That doesn't go on my official recommendation list.
It's well produced. I haven't been up to shit the last few weeks. I don't know what else. I've
watched Killing Eve. You don't have to watch a new thing every few weeks. This is my first
recommendation like half a year. I know, but I'm going to take that super seriously. I'm going to
go and watch that episode before this party tonight. Cool. I forget if I have recommended
this one already. If not, I'm going to plug it again. Another rat fic that I've been enjoying,
the Pokemon Origin of Species. Did you mention that? I did mention that. Okay. I'm just going
to plug it again. And also, I'm thinking about reaching out to the author and seeing if I can
podcast it. I think I don't know. You may have just mentioned it personally to me rather than on
the podcast. I don't recall. No, somebody wrote in on Discord. I forget if it was actually on an
episode or if it was on one of our Patreon snippets. It might have been like some pre-episode chat,
but yeah, somebody replied and said somebody's recorded up to episode nine, but they haven't
updated it in like nine months. Yes, I was going to mention that. Patreon posts are public,
right? So I can read their name. First name only just in case. Luke wrote in and said,
you may already know, but Mars Oliva has done the first eight chapters of Pokemon on the Origin
of Species, but they started two years ago and they haven't released chapter nine for months.
Yeah. So do with that info what you will. Yeah. I'm assuming that it's abandoned at this point,
and I would be happy to pick it up. Do it. I know Mr. Oliva can put you in contact with him. Well,
don't know personally, but I have his email. Talk to him once or twice. Nice. I assumed Mars was a
woman's name. Is that reverse sexism? That's she default, I guess. What did you call it before?
You said he was the default. Something, there was a word for that. I mean, Mars is also the name
the Roman God of War, so I don't know why there would be a female name necessarily. I guess I've
got a co-worker and what, Mara? Yeah, and I call her Mars. Okay. Mars bars, which I'm amazed that
she made it into her 30s without anyone calling her that, so. I've never even seen a Mars bar.
Do they still make those? Do they? I don't know if they do. I don't know if they do either.
Were those actually a thing or were those in a cartoon or something? I remember my dad talking
about them being a favorite candy of his. I knew I hate one when I was a kid.
All right. Well, before we forget, we've got two last wrong posts to get back on.
What could I do by other recommendations? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. One is a book,
I've been trying to learn more about cancer. The book Emperor of All Maladies by Siddhartha
Mukherjee is a very well researched and put together. He calls it a biography of cancer,
writing it as though cancer were a person. I don't know, it jumps back and forth a bit,
but it ties everything together in regard to what we know about the history of cancer,
how long people have had it, ways people have tried to treat it, what they thought caused it,
and then the evolution of modern cancer remedies. It's been really fun and horrifying to read about
early discoveries in cancer therapy where it was just very experimental,
especially where they required the Belnaut report and the Helsinki Declaration.
They're basically requiring that you need to give informed consent before you are allowed to
enroll somebody in medical experiments. But apparently back in the day, it was just like,
oh, your kid eyes leukemia, I'm a doctor, I'll take it from here, and then you could just do
whatever the hell you wanted because you're the doctor, and nobody, the kid, the parent,
had to sign off on any of it. So yeah, they were doing some pretty horrifying things to try to treat
cancer. On the other hand, your kid was probably going to die if had a leukemia anyway. Like before
the 60s, if your kid got leukemia, it was a death sentence. Yeah, yeah. But yeah, you're right,
the informed consent thing is really important. It certainly is. Was there anything particularly
horrifying you remember that they did? Well, I mean, a lot of it was just experimenting with
early chemotherapy. And it took them a while to find the ones that were, because like cancer is
not like a virus where it's something, we can identify this as being not the host and create
drugs that are targeted to destroy it. Cancer is the host, it's still your own cells, they're just
mutated. So you have to find something that will selectively kill cancer cells. We're just getting
to that point. That's actually what like one of the things I'm working on is CAR-T. But chemotherapy
is indiscriminate, it just wreaks havoc. And so like you'll get like these five chemotherapy
drug regimens that you'll try. So like we've still got this, we got like a R chop, which is like
rituximab and a bunch of other drugs with long names that are really, really poisonous. And like
back in the day, they were just kind of like, Hey, let's throw these six drugs together and
put them in this kid and see if they survive. I knew I recognized Siddhartha Mukherjee's name.
They were on episode 98 of Sam Harris's podcast, Into the Darkland was the name of the episode.
What were they talking about? Was this the one where antibiotics might fail?
No, that was another one. That was more recent. I just knew I'd heard this name before and it
was driving me crazy. That's why I did my victory thing, because I couldn't get the search thing
on my podcast app to work, so I had to Google it twice. Cool. Yeah, I want to check out more of
their books because this one's, I'm enjoying it a lot. Cool. And then like the last recommendation,
I forgot if I've brought this up before either, but I know other people in the nationalist community
have been doing this. I got a PlayStation VR and I've been using Beat Saber as my solo exercise
routine. And it's very good for people who like video games or have a competitive streak. I was
having the hardest time trying to establish any kind of regular exercise routine after I moved and
all kinds of things shifted around. So I think that there's other benefits to playing Beat Saber
too aside from it being good exercise in that you can watch yourself get better at something
really quickly. I think it's structured in such a way that especially if you play through the
campaigns and they like go through the various difficulty levels that you can actually like
see yourself in real time learning and getting better at something. And it's really good like
motivational boost if you're struggling with other things in your life. Fine, I'll come play
this. This sounds awesome. Please come play it. It's fun. I'd like to be happy about introducing
people to watch me sitting there with a headset on ignoring you playing a game, but it's actually
pretty fun to watch too. Cool. Um, yeah, that's all I got. We should probably move on to sequences.
Alrighty. Does anybody else had anything to
this? If anyone else has anything else, wrangle them.
Focus your uncertainties. Our first one. I was gonna, you're already beat me to my joke. I'm
like, Oh, I got something to recommend. Focus your uncertainty from lesser on.
So yeah, how do we want to do this? Should I jump in or what? Yeah, you're already there. Okay.
Focus your uncertainty is the first lesson post we're reading this time. It starts out with
Eliezer proposing a hypothetical scenario where someone is asking you will bond yields go up
or down or remain the same. If you're a TV pundit and your job is to explain the outcome after
the fact, then there's no reason to worry, which is first of all, great dig on TV pundits. Like
they just make up whatever after the fact, right? But he goes on to say, suppose you're a novice
TV pundit and you aren't experienced enough to just make up explanations on the spot,
you need to prayer prepare remarks in advance for tomorrow's broadcast and you have limited time
to prepare. You only got 100 minutes to come up with excuses. You can spend the entire 100 minutes
on up and also spend the entire 100 minutes on down and also spend the 100 minutes on stay the
same. You got to prioritize somehow. You don't want to spend 33 precious minutes on excuse.
You don't anticipate needing in your uncertain state of mind. It seems that you anticipate the
three events differently that you expect to need some excuses more than others. And this is the
fascinating part. When you think of something that makes it seem more likely that bond prices will go
up, you feel less likely to need an excuse for bond prices going down or remaining the same.
It even seems like there's a relation between how much you anticipate each of the three outcomes
and how much time you want to spend preparing each excuse. Of course, the relation can't actually
be quantified. You have 100 minutes to prepare your speech, but there isn't 100 of anything to
divide up in this anticipation business. And so, I just thought that was a absolutely wonderful way
of illustrating the idea of what a probability distribution feels like inside your brain.
Yeah. Basically, this post is, Ellie, as you're making the case for why you should apply math
and other thinking skills that you should have learned in school to real life.
And I like how it's, for some reason, making me think of, I've been digging back into the
Getting Things Done GTD method again. And David Allen proposes natural planning. And it really
it's a systematized way that you can create steps for a project that is based on the way
your brain naturally thinks about stuff. And I like how this is kind of the natural planning
version of how you come to have probability distributions in your head. Because I guess
maybe the thing that's the similarity between the two of them is maybe people might come at
planning a project or trying to develop a probability distribution with some trepidation.
Oh, that sounds hard. That sounds like that's something that requires a lot of study or
knowing higher level math. But actually, it's just like, no, this is the thing you're doing all
the time. You're doing this naturally like behind the scenes. And you just don't realize it.
And I like that framing of the minutes that you have to spend because a lot of times people are
like, well, I don't know how the hell to put like a 10% probability on something versus 90%
of something else. I just think like, this is really unlikely. And this is very likely. But
once you put it in terms like, okay, you have 100 minutes to
prepare for these scenarios, how much time are you going to spend on each one? That really helps
someone get the feeling for what their probability feels like.
Yeah. And the novice pundit like having to justify the expenditure of their time and resources
and deciding to go with the one that's more likely. It's explaining how you can think of
intuition as this conserved resource like money. There's a limited supply and you have to decide
where to allocate it. And that makes total sense if you think about it in the metaphor.
Totally. And I liked the ending remark as well, which was, if only there was an art of focusing
your uncertainty, squeezing as much anticipation as possible into whichever outcome will actually
happen. But what would you call an art like that? And what would the rules be?
Yeah, that's perfect. Yeah. That would have been, I get why that wasn't the first post on the blog,
but it's, it almost feels like it should be. Yeah. I wonder, I haven't read AI to zombies.
I wonder if it's one of the earliest ones in that. I don't think it is. I have no idea.
This might be a good introductory post for someone that wants to get into,
well, at least learning about like Bayesian rationality, but if they want to, you know,
learn about the sequences and read kind of all that I have to say about that one.
Good way of visualizing what uncertainty feels like.
Mm-hmm.
The next one is the proper use of doubt.
Yeah, I can take this one if you want. Excellent.
Eliezer says that organized belief systems seem like they flee from doubt. So, doubting or skepticism
seems like it's scary or not allowed or unvertuous to people.
A friend replied after he says this that Jesuits are supposed to doubt.
And at the time, Eliezer wasn't able to confirm or deny whether this was true. And I'm actually
not sure if that's true either. I intended to look it up and forgot. But yeah, this friend was
basically like, oh no, like, organized belief systems love doubt. We're encouraged to doubt
ourselves all the time. And so Eliezer thought Jesuits wouldn't be properly described as fleeing
from doubt or they'd be rationalists. They claim that they're, or the claim that they're really
doubting it all seems suspicious to him. What his friend described sounded more like
a desensitization program for phobia, like exposure therapy. If you're afraid of spiders,
like slowly introducing you to a photo of a spider, or like here's a tarantula in a box,
and you can just like gently touch it and it's tame.
Like first doubt for a little while that God exists, and then at the end of the class,
it's okay kids, God does exist.
Yeah, so he was thinking rationalists should be comfortable with doubt.
Whereas this, like they're making doubt sound like a phobia here. So he likens
doubt to the idea that by unweaving the rainbow, you ruin the grand mystery, like the,
the, um,
Keats poem.
Yeah. But like the unweaving the rainbow was also one of Richard Dawkins books about atheism,
or generally like, not even about atheism about this whole idea.
World view of science, the whole, the thesis of that book in my one sentence summary would be
that Newton didn't destroy the rainbow by explaining how it worked. He made the universe
that much cooler, and that was more beautiful, and that all of science does that. It doesn't
take anything away other than your, your fantasy of how things, you thought they were.
Yeah, or you're like, ooh, what a cool mystery tingles.
Yeah. But then you get the, oh my God, what a cool phenomenon, which get you off way more.
Yeah. And I like, I don't know, I always thought that.
And either one phenomenon tends to be even more, uh, cool than like the whole mystery vibe that
you had before.
Yeah, everything's so much more complicated.
In, in the right framing, way more fun than just imagining Thor up there throwing a temperature.
Now that would be cool, but, um, you know, it's
earthquakes, how that actually happens on something the size of the, of a planet
is really interesting. If you just thought, oh, it's because gay people are having sex. It's like,
like, I, I don't see how that's nearly as satisfying as an explanation.
Or even if you just don't know the, that feeling of mystery is still like,
it's not as good as like actually learning it and seeing how complicated it is and how
all these different forces go into what you end up seeing in the world.
Yeah. I feel like learning something just gives you more questions. Like, well, how does,
how does the rainbow work? Light is a spectrum of these seven colors. Well, how does that work?
And like, you start talking about wavelengths and then what is light and it's a wave and a
particle and you're just like, the mysteries just keep going all the way down. And so like,
you're actually just stopping yourselves from having more cool mystery tingles.
Anyway, yeah, if you want understanding tingles and mis-routingles, science is the way to go.
Meanwhile, uh, the act of solving that mystery,
Eliezer thinks that's the virtue of rationality. And I pulled a quote out,
I doubt that neither destroys itself nor destroys its target might as well have never existed at
all. Oh, can I read the few sentences just before that? Oh, sure. So I pulled that little longer
quote, all curiosity seeks to annihilate itself. There's no curiosity that does not want an answer.
But if you obtain an answer, if you satisfy your curiosity, then the glorious mystery will no
longer be mysterious. In the same way, every doubt exists in order to annihilate some particular
belief. If a doubt fails to destroy its target, the doubt has died unfulfilled. But that is still
a resolution and ending, albeit a sadder one, which I think is also an interesting commentary on
his personality that he thinks it's sadder for a doubt to, um, annihilate itself rather than the
belief. Like either one is interesting information and some people would be like more relieved that
the doubt was, you know, false. Yeah, I mean, if you think about the book methods of rationality,
like, it's kind of like the character gets really excited when they find a new mystery,
something they don't know or something that challenges them. So I do kind of see that as a
virtue. But yeah, then he says a doubt that neither destroys itself or destroys its target might as
well never existed. I think it's maybe he says it's sadder because you didn't learn anything
new if the doubt destroys itself. But yeah, you're just confirming things. Yeah. Yeah. He says it's
the resolution of doubts, not the mere act of doubting that drives the ratchet of rationality
forward. Yeah, and then he goes on to say that not all doubts are rational. Wearing it, this is
another quote, wearing doubts doesn't make you a rationalist anymore than wearing a white medical
lab coat makes you a doctor. And I agree with that. It reminds me of people who
doubt stuff with scientific evidence like anti-vaxxers, trying to argue that their opponents
aren't open minded, or science is a dogma, where yeah. And that's that sounds like anticipating
that sort of weaponized doubt where it's like, oh, I'm just being a good virtuous doubter,
skeptic by not by not buying into all this vaccine business. The doubt should either
annihilate itself or annihilate the the belief that it was aimed at. And it could be applied
both ways. All right, so let's look at let's doubt the the anti-vaxx position and see what you get
there. And if you're, oh, I don't want to look into that. Or, you know, if you're if you have a
reflex to shy away from that, then that's not the proper use of that. That is the exact opposite
of what you should be doing. He says a doubt should point to the way to destroy the doubt.
So pointing out kind of the idea that untestable hypotheses are pretty worthless. That's why I
like bust on string theory. But if you are going to put forth a hypothesis,
it should be something that's testable. There's not really much point to sitting there and being
like, well, what if there's an invisible fairy that causes milk to turn into cheese? And I don't
know, like just start coming up with this whole history behind like other than like maybe making
some entertaining fiction. This isn't really a useful productive use of your time or brain power.
He says, here's a quote, that you need a particular reason to doubt. An unresolved doubt is a null
op. Yeah. And then this ends with, if you don't really doubt something, why would you pretend that
you do? Because Jesuits want to pretend there's virtuous as scientists, or they're doing this
modesty signaling thing by going, but I doubt my religion. So I'm as good as you. But this is not
real doubting. It's, I think he said, maintaining the tribal status hierarchy, instead of actually
having a real doubt seeking to annihilate a belief. I did have an interesting conflict while reading
this. Do you guys think this, this all doubt seek to annihilate themselves conflicts with the previous
post at all? Because like isn't, isn't holding a probability distribution in your head kind of
the same thing as, as being kind of doubtful? I think that it's kind of using probabilities.
Because like you can't always test every hypothesis. Or you can gather more evidence
in support of it. But most things don't come in a black and white, like, okay, we're gonna
do this experiment. And then like, this is definitely going to prove it. So that's just like
a tool that you can use to kind of bring your doubt into higher resolution. I don't think that this is.
I think I get what you're saying that you can use doubts to alter what your probabilities of
things are. Yeah, or like, I think it's a more sophisticated, like, first you have to be able to
know what is worthwhile of doubting and why and then like what the purpose of a doubt is. And then
once you start developing the skills to think about these things in terms that are,
this is really hard to explain. If I might just jumpstart my thought on it.
Yeah, go ahead. No, I was just like, struggling. I think I think that the key stepping stone is
to think of things in probability distributions rather than in, I believe this is true or false.
So if you like, if you're 80% confident that bond yields would go up, you'd spend 80% of your
minutes, you know, present or writing that analysis for it to present the next day or
something, right? And then if you have a doubt of some kind that it's that strong, maybe the doubt
will motivate you to find out whether you should revise it down to 60%. And it doesn't be capable
of doing that. Whereas if you, maybe this hypothetical TV pun doesn't have any real
vested interest other than not getting fired, but like if you really cared about the outcome of
something, you're ready to accept that, all right, here's my assumption that this will work and
here's my confidence. When you're thinking about it in those terms, rather than I believe this,
in the colloquial sense of I believe this, then you're open to chasing that doubt and
changing your mind, right? Updating more up or down.
I guess I dislike how dissonant these two posts are in tone. Like the first one is very much about
holding probabilities and not, you know, you aren't 100% sure of things, but here's how you can
think about your uncertainty. And then in this one, it's very much like
doubts exist to annihilate a belief or to annihilate themselves. And a doubt that does nothing
is worthless. And that's very much a black or white thing. It either annihilates itself or
the belief. And that just feels like so, that black and white is so in contrast with the
spectrum thinking of before. I think I had a similar reaction to it. I actually wrote
a doubt that neither destroys itself nor destroys its target might as well have never existed.
And I wrote, is this a good way to think about doubt? It seems kind of extreme. And then I wrote
under that, well, actually, like, if I try to liken this to the scientific method, it actually
makes a lot more sense. Right. That the doubt should motivate you. Yeah. Or like,
there's no point in doubting something that like, if you discovered that it was true or false,
like it wouldn't mean anything, I guess. There's no point in doubting something if you're just
going to hold on to the doubt and like reify the doubt as something valuable, as opposed to as a
motivator. Right. Or if you're not actually open to the possibility of changing your mind, which
is what he accused the quote, doubting on quote, Jesuits of doing. Yeah, pretending to doubt.
Well, the Jesuits, you know, they can, they have no intention of pursuing the doubts. The doubts are
just there in their minds. And that's what's bad about them, that they're going to hold onto their
beliefs without following the doubts. Because I don't know, maybe they're scared of what the
doubts will find. Yeah, we're just curious to look up. I don't know very much about Jesuits,
but like how that's actually structured. Like, I just actually like psychologically find this
fascinating somebody who, okay, I'm required to sit here for 10 minutes and do a meditation on
how much I doubt this religion, but then at the end of it, I'm supposed to actually not doubt it.
What does that look like on the inside? If anyone was raised Jesuit and actually has first-hand
experience, I'd be interested in reading about it, or rather hearing about it, if you want to write
in. So I'm just like, how much work we have to do to make these two things like feel like they
cohere? Even though I think I know what he's trying to get at, I think it could and should have been
written clearer. I can dig it. Yeah. Although in this vast of a body of writing, it's not surprising
that not everything's perfect. Yeah. And I think that these weren't originally written to flow
together. So probably the way that they rearranged them for... We're reading them in the order that
they were put online. But I mean, like, I don't think that Eliezer was actually writing one after
the other kind of sequentially. Right, right. Like it was more like, okay, today I'm going to write a
post about this thing, and it wasn't really meant to be read as a book. They do often jump around,
yeah, in topic. And sometimes in tone too. I like that he was kind of experimenting with the way that
the kind of tone, the kind of structure that he used for some of these, and then also it makes
it a little hard to read sometimes too. I like that I think methods of rationality
pulled it all into one tone. So that stops kind of being distracting when you're trying to figure
out what kind of like literary narrative trick things going on in this one.
Yeah, I don't know. I don't think it's necessarily a flaw of the writing either though.
Just that sometimes it maybe it can be a bit distracting when you come across something like
this where... But then again, we've also thought about it more than some of the others because of
that. So shrug. Okay, for next time we have the virtue of narrowness, you can face reality,
and the apocalypse bet. So three for next time because one of them I remember was really short.
Okay. Also really quick again, just plugging Stevens, we want more podcast coming out very soon.
And I wanted to ask, I found when I was making the podcast, after I was done with it, you know,
I went and uploaded it and typed out the title again, like looking at the title of a chapter
again, when I got to the end of the chapter, often like reinforced what that chapter was about.
I was like, oh man, I now see now that I'm done with the chapter, how this title showed up a
number of times throughout that chapter as themes. Do you guys do that at all?
We've only done the one episode so far, and we sort of, we didn't put together enough notes for
the first episode to really, like I did because I have a stupidly encyclopedic memory of what
happened when, but I will make a point to do that for every ongoing chapter, because you're
right, the chapter names aren't arbitrary, they're not chapter one. Yeah, I'd be curious to also hear
from, who's your reading partner? Brian. Brian, I'd be curious if you asked Brian, like,
could you, after having read this chapter, tell me in your own words what the fundamental
attribution error is, or whatever the subject of, because I mean, I remember when I was originally
reading Methods of Rationality, before I'd had any exposure to any of these ideas, and I think
I went and tried to read the sequences a couple of times, and I found them to be
too confusing, or the wording to be, like, if you aren't familiar with any of the
rationalist jargon, it can be really hard. If you're just jumping around, it can seem like,
you know, some of these are building off of other things that came earlier,
but I don't know where to go. I just, I don't know. I found it to be too intimidating at the
time, so I never really got into reading the sequences until I was, like, more comfortable
with a bunch of the other rationalist writing out there. But I do also think that it's pretty
clear in some chapters what, like, the moral of the story or the lesson was, and some of the others,
I don't know if they're as well explained. So. Cool. Yeah, no, I think that'd be a really good
exercise. Yeah, and it's hard to go back and think of, like, put myself in the place before I knew
what these things meant. Yeah. So to ask, basically, do you understand what science was presented in
this chapter? Yeah. Or what kind of technique is trying to teach you? Or do you understand why
this chapter was named what it was named, even? Yeah. Okay, yeah, I wanted to do the first, yeah,
the first chapter was, or the first episode was sort of a rough draft, but one that's going to
be published, we're not going to redo it. But yeah, there are sections of things I want to,
as we go through it, especially, cover the rationalist techniques that Harry uses
in each chapter, you know, some of them are couldn't be more in your face, like there's the whole
basically explaining of Bayesian probabilities when they're doing the hypothesis testing.
I remember there were a few chapters that when I read the title, I was like, Oh,
not only are there multiple examples of multiple characters doing exactly what the chapter title
was, there was even in one case, like sort of a meta narrative of this whole thing happening. And I
wish I could remember which chapter it was. But it was, it was like, Wow, that was fantastic.
All right. Anyways, sorry, we got off topic again. We have to think of patron. This is
an interesting one. Our patron this week is progress.fm, which is that like a
that's the name that showed up on Patreon. Interesting. Now I kind of want to go to
progress.fm and see if it's a thing. But progress.fm, whether you are a person or an organization
or an FM station, we thank you for your for your patronage. It helps us bring us bring you all
this stuff. And hold on a second, I'm going to Google this right now. I'm already there. Oh,
what is a lot? It's assuming this is the same person. Progress.fm takes you to a page that's
just says launching January 1 2020. Oh, interesting. Well, now my interest is piqued. Yeah. If you are,
what was it? Practice? Progress. Progress. Progress. If you are progress.fm,
and you're listening to this, maybe tell us if you're working on something cool.
Because I would like to check it out. Oh, that's a good logo. And if you are not affiliated with
progress.fm that we just Googled, thank you very much, sir, or ma'am, or whatever. Thanks, fucker.
Thanks, Comrade. Yeah, we appreciate it. And it really does help us. It does. Thank you very
much. All right, see y'all in a couple of weeks. Perfect. Good night, everybody.
I'm okay with keeping this a little bit shorter than ever.
