Hello, and welcome to Today's Injury Seriously, my name is Katrina Stanton.
I'm Minyash Brotsky, and I'm Stephen Zuber, and today we are...
We are talking about, we are talking about important topics that don't make it to the
main stage in the public conversation. So things that are not covered in the US
presidential debates. But should be. But should be. That's right. I... But maybe
should be. Dun, dun, dun. That'll be up to you and us. I will go ahead and
caveat that last week's, or last episode was supposed to be this, but I insisted
that we wait until we had a chance to discuss it with our local Leseran group
and get some ideas and... Yeah, so now we have their ideas all written down and we
are ready to just read them out to you. Ready to set go. Straight from the horse's
mouth. Okay, what would we like to start with? So I asked them for different
topics that should be discussed and are very important, but are not, and I
started off with the first couple. Okay. Animal welfare. Animal welfare? Wow, that
is not at all related to things we've just been talking about a whole lot
recently. It's incredibly important. It affects more than our entire human
population. Yeah. And it affects a lot of the human population. I don't think a
candidate would touch that and certainly major newspapers don't. Yeah. Why, why do
you think that candidates don't want to touch that? I think it's because so many
people eat meat and I mean I could go straight to the because the farm lobby is
massive. Right. Because it is. The United States does sort of worship farmers. Yeah,
we're really into farmers. There are all sorts of different, different special
exemptions for farmers from things like the Clean Water Act, for example. It
blew my mind. I had to verify it when I was told that if they don't make their
expected yield and crops, the government just pays them what they would have
expected to make. Oh yeah, farm subsidies. Yeah, but that whole thing blew my mind.
Like so wait, if you have a bad year, like you get paid anyway, but how's that at
all capitalistic? Because we love our farmers. Yeah, exactly. So that's that's
the thing. Not shooting off farmers. I mean they make our food and we eat that
to live. So good on them. Accept less shit on some of them. Because they're irresponsible
and causing a great deal of harm. The animal farmers in particular you're
talking about. Yeah, those people. I think the problem is that people really
like meat and as long as they don't have to see how it is produced they just
want it as cheaply as possible. That's true. Exactly. I don't think it would be
politically expedient for a politician to get up there and say I'm gonna
make this a central thing. We're gonna cut back on meat production because it's a
horror show. Well not right now, but it could be. Or increase some sort of
regulations or in order to. I feel like this maybe even has been an issue in the
past where people are talking about lifting up family farms and small farms
because people actually are concerned about that in the political world. But
it's because of the small farmers not because of the animals. Right, exactly.
Yeah, that makes sense. I think it is. I mean this is probably the case for
pretty much everything we talk about here is that it's not gonna win a lot of
easy votes to bring up some of these issues. Okay. So there's not enough
time. You only have 30 minutes to talk. You're not gonna spend five of it on
something that's gonna win you point two percent of the vote. Right? Okay. So it's
because so as far as the candidates are concerned. Right. It's because they're
in it to get votes. I think so. That's what candidates are always very focused on
and I think that's fair. But what about what about like newspapers? Or why
doesn't the populist care? Why doesn't the populist care? In my experience they do,
but they. Why do they care so minorly? Exactly. They don't even want to talk
about it or think about it. I think at least the people I've talked to they're
used to eating meat and you know you see trying to bring up how I like the word
horror show just because it paints a good picture. How nasty the process is that
gets their food from you know birth to their plate and I'm like I don't want to
think about that. I just want to have dinner and I'm like well I mean I get
where they're coming from but I don't agree with it you know. Like it's not
convenient or comfortable to think about these things but it can be really
important. So that is but I guess as far as newspapers and stuff don't care. I
have no idea. Because not enough people do right? Yeah I suppose they're trying to
sell newspapers which I guess are still an actual thing so. There's probably a lot
of people working at the newspapers themselves who are of also the opinion
that the animals really don't matter. Yeah also I want to make sure that when I
say newspapers I'm also referring to online. I know. Also it's the different
news and media sources. I was teasing and making fun of tree wear newspapers that
I don't know are super popular anymore. Did you call tree wearing? Tree wear as
opposed to like. I see. I thought you meant that they're wearing trees. I did too.
Like they're like yeah wearing some some true paper. I'm like but what is that
they're just paper. What is the wearing at the ink? Anyway glad we cleared that up.
Yes. The other thing that actually I think has been getting some minor minor
traction is antibiotic resistance. Yes. But it's been a huge problem for a long
time and people actually die of infection. I think it's been getting more than
just a little bit of attention. They recently passed the regulation that you
can't have antibiotics soap anymore. Uh-huh because there was a UN resolution on it.
And there's been a lot of attention paid to it in medical circles where
doctors have been trying to prescribe antibiotics less often and being very
conscientious to tell people to complete your prescription. Don't don't stop halfway
through. Do you think you're going to hear anything out of the major party
candidate's mouth on that topic? No because most people don't know or care
about antibiotics. Like I said I think in the in the campaign season it's gonna
be a lot of popular topics. You know if only 20% of people care about it maybe
20% is big enough but 10% of people know what antibiotics are and care or
something right. They're not gonna spend time they're at their platform time
talking about it. That's my prediction. Okay. I think it's just because a lot of
people aren't affected by it yet. Wait until we get our first antibiotic
resistant superbug scarring the country and then people are gonna care a lot. Yeah.
Do you remember that ship I've already sailed? Yeah do you remember when
everybody was really mad at that guy with I think he had antibiotic resistant
tuberculosis? Yeah. Who wouldn't go into quarantine? No but that's insane. And
people were just really mad. They're like oh that selfish jerk dude with his
antibiotic potentially antibiotic resistant tuberculosis. I think it
turned out that he was it was fine. I haven't heard anything about it since.
There's no plague. Yeah. I was wondering out loud or I am wondering out loud
whether or not it makes sense to like force people into quarantine saying like
look you don't have a choice. We're gonna you're gonna stay at home or we're
gonna take you to a hospital where you can't leave until you get better. So
that sounds like a really slippery slope but it doesn't sound like the worst
idea if implemented correctly. Well we've already been doing it.
Remember Ebola earlier recently? Oh yeah. Yeah that wasn't too long ago when
people are really upset about being kept in quarantine coming back from Ebola's
drug areas. I'm gonna go home and kill my family and friends. Well they didn't
necessarily have Ebola. In fact a lot of them didn't. They just had to stay in
quarantine until everyone was sure that they didn't. I'm kind of okay with that.
Like you know like this guy with potentially antibiotic or potentially
resistant TB right? Like if you have a reasonable concern it's not worth you
running out during risking lots of lives. Right but let's say that you're
coming home from visiting your family wherever they're living. You were on a
plane with him and now you have to spend the next two weeks sitting in a
quarantined hospital room where you can't you can't see anyone. You can't go
back to work. Your bills are piling up. That is a major inconvenience up to your
life. Some people might lose their jobs because what you might have Ebola. There's
a small chance you caught it. I don't have to. Or not Ebola but tuberculosis.
If I were to endorse a bill that would require the sort of thing I would say
it's like jury duty where you can't be fired to lose wages or something right.
Well I guess jury duty you get like what 50 bucks after three days or something.
Yeah it's not. But let's pretend it was enough. So like yeah especially if you're
gonna be gone for a month or something right. They can't ruin your life but it
does make sense like no I'm pretty sure I'm fine. I've got just a bit of a
fever I'm gonna go back to work. That seems also hugely irresponsible. I mean
would you be okay with being locked up in prison for a month if you shared a
plane with someone with tuberculosis? Not literally prison. Well because it's
basically prison except without criminals. Do I get wifi? Yes. Don't you get wifi in prison though?
No. You don't get phones and like I'm not not like to play with all the time.
You don't get free internet access. Why not? Because you're in your cell with
things that like your prison. I don't know. I don't know what the policy is. I imagine it's
different at different facilities. But to talk about to talk about antibiotic
resistance again. Yes. This is a situation where we have these um of public health
responses including quarantine and all sorts of other testing being tested
for Zika right now in areas that have been affected. But an ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of cure right? So but we're not hearing a lot about a lot of the
preventive techniques. I have a question for you regarding to how long of a quarantine
you're willing to put up with? Because I recall I don't know I think this was in the 80s. There
was an actual proposition that anyone with HIV be permanently quarantined. So that sounds
excessive because you can take steps like you can go to work and have a life with HIV and not
risk you know it's not like airborne right? Right. But if AIDS was airborne and you know you just
got it and you were dead in a month then it would kind of make sense. That would be a completely
different disease. Right. But I mean that's you know like we're talking some super bug or something
or you know maybe crazy TV. You're thinking Ebola again. Yes. Except Ebola was not airborne. Sorry
I take that back. Well I mean super Ebola right? So I think uh I mean we've extended up to 11
and say like if you're patient zero for zombie virus it might be worth killing you over. Right.
So like I mean then we can scale from there to like you know cold we're gonna hold you at gunpoint
in prison and like figure out some place in the middle to where it makes sense right? Yeah.
I how long did I like to be held? I mean depends on what I had. So like if I had Ebola. Right but
the problem isn't necessarily that you have it. It's that you might have it. So like if I might
have Ebola I'm not sure how bad Ebola is or how much it's I guess what the survival rate is or
something but. I think it was a 20 percent methylvary. It was higher I think. It was over half. Oh wow.
I would absolutely be okay being held per month if it meant that there was a chance I could kill
one or two people that I interacted with. So interesting to listen to you guys talk about
the sensational side of of the idea of antibiotic resistance or you know because people absolutely
will talk about superbugs and really get into it but for whatever reason talking about preventative
care is not super interesting why do you think that is? Imagining zombie virus is way more
exciting than like the new soap that helps. Okay okay so it's sensational. Yes I also think it has
to do with being able to see the costs the same reason that regulations that help you know just
one industry a lot and harm everybody else a tiny bit generally get passed because you don't see the
fact that all the prices for your food went up by one or two cents but you do see that all of a
sudden you can't buy this item that you love for super cheap anymore. Well here's something where
you definitely can I guess you can measure it and it does affect people's lives a related topic which
is. Can we stick on the disease for a second? This is actually also on disease that's how related it
is. Okay. Doctors not washing their hands. Oh yeah. Which is still a problem. Which is an easily
preventable and significant cause of death in hospitals. It's like this was breathtaking emerging
medicine 140 years ago and now it's it definitely should be out there. There is another was a push
and I'll I guess in 10 to 15 year old medical training to like hey wash your hands in front
of the patient when you get to the room. You might have just come from washing your hands but do it
anyway where they can watch that way they know you did it and you know you did it. So that that's
where things makes a lot of sense. The fact that it's still a problem is to cut your mind blowing.
Again there are really easy solutions for that but people don't like to ask doctors to wash their
hands. Right. Because they're and people have different theories for why that might be one of
them is that they're you know high class. Well I'm like the doctor's the authority you're going
there to ask their judgment and it's like hey can you do me a favor real quick and wash your disgusting
filthy hands. You're a dirty person don't touch me. You are not touching me until I see you wash
your hands. I think somebody might be some stigma on that. Yes definitely. I think even though people
sensation people focus on like the sensational diseases the zombie viruses and Ebola and whatever
but I think just the fact that our viral viral and bacteria load is so low nowadays
has really radically transformed our society. Back in the day when you would have 10 children
and maybe have four full grown adult children you'd give birth 10 times but only have four children.
There was much less I feel investment in children done and because you just couldn't
put that much care into something that was going to likely die you know and so I think the human
race has as a result of the fact that we generally expect everyone to live all the way into adulthood
gotten a lot better. We put a lot more care into children. We have a lot fewer children.
So why are we not taking better care of our children and immune compromise people
by pumping up these issues to mainstream. Well I think because we are so good right now people
are used to things to everyone being healthy and people not dying and I'm worried if we ever got
back to the point where there's enough disease load not not even anything you know super Ebola
or anything but just something like some of the major childhood diseases coming back and killing
maybe five ten percent of children at a regular basis that we could possibly see a lot of slide
back into the battle times where people don't don't care about their kids as much and society is not
as kind and as caring. I wonder if there's an outrage factor there because things that that
people do talk about including candidates are people not getting vaccines and I wonder if that's
because people can be outraged at their fellow citizens because I think the people really like
being outraged at their fellow citizens. There's a lot of outrage. I think it's the drug of choice
nowadays. There it is. I think that's a good use of the word drug of choice where people just you
know will find stuff to infuriate them and just get off on it but it does sort of make sense to be
inclined to have a conversation about vaccinating your kids right. It's bad for them not to vaccinate
them that is let me make that clear and it puts people who are immunocompromised at risk right
so you lose too many vaccinated kids and you lose herd immunity. Relating to vaccines actually I think
you know so like it took what two or three decades of concerted effort to eradicate smallpox from
from the world and it's the only disease that's been eradicated from the world. 2018 is expected
to be the last year that polly will be around. I think it's only been 67 reported cases this year
it was like 360 something last year so polio is on its way out which is kind of cool. Well as a
highly privileged developed country person I haven't thought about polio for my entire life.
My grandparents had polio. Yeah there's still some people who are counted in this.
They grandparents all got polio but I didn't. As far as the conversation level it's getting
I haven't I don't I should make it clear at the outset that as far as the current candidates I
don't follow that closely at all so I'm not sure what their what the current candidates are currently
saying. I watched the debate they didn't actually get into that many topics. No although the debate was
kind of fun to watch I will say. I watched a few minutes of it. I really wish that we could have
Donald Trump every year just like as a jester and without any actual you know chance that he'd get
elected. So the goal for this podcast or this episode was to not talk about the camera. Sorry
yes no my bad we should cut that. Well we'll just we just won't go any further on that. Okay I will
say as long as we're on the topic. We're not on the topic. The saturday night live version of the
debate was less funny than the real one. That's true. All right that's all I'm gonna say. That is
true. There's just a whole lot of medical medical ones apparently anything involving medicine
anti-aging research. That was the big one I was going to bring up. Yeah neurodegenerative disease
research all of that stuff that would you know potentially greatly improve human life. There
is at least some research being done in the neurodegenerative diseases but there is no one okay
there are very few people willing to say we have to find a cure for aging and get on the
shit now and I think we're we're getting close to the point where we could actually launch some
sort of aging manhattan project and and get at least a good toehold on this problem start start
things and there's still no one talking about it because I don't know I talk I talk to sometimes
people especially uh when you talk to religious people or when I've talked to religious people
there's always this feeling that it is against God's will and that humans shouldn't be immortal and
even a lot of people who aren't religious are like well who wants to live more than their 80 years
you know that's just obscene. Do you think that people are comfortable with diseases like Alzheimer's
and Parkinson's which primarily affect the very old? No I mean there is research on those being
done which I am grateful for. There is but I know somebody gosh I don't remember if she was with the
Parkinson's or Alzheimer's Foundation but she was talking about how research for for new cures
is they don't even fund that. Really? Yes um what they turn their money towards is things like
dealing with Alzheimer's um having good life with Alzheimer's just stuff that already exists because
it they get more bang for their buck that way. That's interesting. In terms of actually improving
people's lives. Every year or two I do hear something about like we've made another step forward
on possibly treating Alzheimer's. I think people do care a lot about those diseases especially
Alzheimer's. I think I've never met anybody who's relaxed about the topic. It's impacted almost
everyone. Right well I'm just the idea of losing yourself while still being able to walk around and
do stuff. It's terrifying for everybody. Alzheimer's really terrifies me because it's the thing that can
kill my brain before I can get frozen. Exactly. Speaking of like funding cures though there was
an interesting um I think it was Will McCaskill the author of Doing Good Better and the founder of
the Center for Effective Altruism. I don't think this was his his proposal but I heard the idea from
him of not necessarily funding research directly but giving a huge cash prize to the group who
comes across like a cure. Whether it's a cure for a disease or a new antibiotic or whatever
that way you're not blowing a million fortunes on everybody who wants to try their hand at
researching it but the group that does get there gets a big payout. They do have a Methuselah
prize right now I believe. Is that a Methuselah the old age old dude in the bible? Yes the oldest
living supposedly the oldest living dude something like 900 whatever years. Oh because he's still alive
No no no no the oldest lived I guess not living uh sorry. He was born in the future according to
the bible and still alive. He uh but the prize was for someone that can uh what is it create a mouse
or keep a mouse alive for 10 times longer than the normal mouse lifespan I think. Oh that's a
safe time to like plan out your bet then right so like yeah I'll pay you in 50 years when you've
proved that you can do that. Um was that was the Methuselah prize given up by the government or by
the Methuselah foundation like Aubrey de Grey's group. It was a private foundation. Okay yeah
probably the Methuselah project then. Okay. Aubrey de Grey is the guy doing all that research.
Yeah awesome guy I think he's close to 50 now and he looks like he's 80 it's kind of interesting
he's anti-aging he doesn't look unhealthy he just looks super old he's got this old Gandalf beard
it's I think he hasn't shaved in 40 years yeah since he since he could not have to start shaving
right right no razor has ever touched that face I uh but other than his beard he's a pretty awesome
guy check out Aubrey de Grey I'm sure he's got a TED talk and YouTube videos in fact we'll find one
so check it out on the website. His uh his charity the one that does research on and high aging
is the second one that I give to behind Mary in total uh you know dollars per year right on
which I mean still isn't very much I don't give as much as I probably should I find it kind of
disgraceful that it's still a private thing and not something that we as a society are working on
because people will throw money at all sorts of you know rare diseases for cute puppies but
everyone it's it's a stalling tactic everyone is eventually going to die of aging if we don't
figure out this aging thing. I heard something really interesting the other day on the radio
that uh pharmaceutical companies are not interested in developing vaccines
okay anymore because they're one-time use and since there's such a great deal of time and money
and resources that go into creating a vaccine or creating any kind of product that the only
way that they can really recoup that is with something that people use regularly like heart
medication for example. We're treating chronic conditions yeah which is another freaking reason
we need to make research less costly pull back the FDA a little bit yep well that sure is political
well so it is but at least it's not red or blue political is it it is it is yes okay I think it
is not intentionally because usually um I usually are I guess our red side is the anti FDA side
and our blue side is the pro FDA side I'm not anti FDA I'm for um not having the yes
not having them quite as as rapid and expensive as they are and it not just FDA it's also a
legislation problem when the current holders of medicine can sue anyone that makes anything even
remotely similar to their thing and that part is weird yeah I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna have to
parts also highly discussed that's true it is I know it's weird to have an episode it's weird to
pull especially Enya's back from talking about things that people like to talk about to talk about
things that people don't like to talk about so I will I will pull back I'm sorry well the things
that people don't like to talk about are tend to be things that we like to talk about tend to yeah
that's why that's why I thought that we could exactly get some mileage out of so I don't know
if it's being so much pulled back as it is just being redirected exactly um I just spin you around
bulldog you're a bulldog right now in this analogy oh okay I will start chasing my tail then
as far as like the charge that you know like big pharma likes to treat chronic conditions and not
cure them I mean there's not it's it's not a like to it's that the that there is a serious
incentive oh yeah sure and disincentive but there's also like you know if you could develop an AIDS
vaccine like that would be awesome I think that I mean I'm not sure if uh not just awesome like
because it would be great but it would be uh or great for people I think it would be a big money
maker too even if it was a one-off shot I guess it's it's a red flag for me that goes off like a
like an alarm in my head at the charge of really anything big pharma this uh well I see so I think
I understand I mean that was the first thought in my head when I heard this person you know on the
radio who's saying that they just do not have the incentive right like it's really hard for a
business to work on something where they're not going to be able to recoup their costs absolutely
no and that's and that's that's a completely uh fair and accurate thing to say uh I guess I was
that was just my knee-jerk reaction was just mentioned something that uh along those lines but
no it's certainly true I mean imagine if um if iPhones lasted for 15 years right it'd be really
hard to uh like unless you sold them for $5,000 to make any money off of them so the idea that you
know you're the new one comes out two years later helps keep those companies in business right yeah
well luckily technology and um technology and innovation constantly improve iPhones are the
first thing in my mind because there's one sitting in front of me there are better examples
there's that saying the used cars mill the used car salesman saying I was a tongue twister
I don't want to sell you one car for 15 years I want to say three cars over 15 years
in that it's more lucrative for me to have you keep coming back and buying more cars and it's
for me to sell you one great car you know what could fix all this soft driving wait that wouldn't
fix it necessarily no no what post scarcity economy yeah which is a thing I bring up because
that is also a thing that uh the canons don't talk about very often because resources are scarce
and and human needs are infinite that's funny yeah Russell brought that one up but right but uh
we are getting to the point where less and less people are going to be employable in in the near
future because more things are being taken over by automation and this is a thing that I see people
complaining about sometimes but the politicians do not address it at all they're like we're gonna
bring the jobs back to America it's like no you're not the jobs are going to the robots the jobs are
gone this is actually a great segment another one on the list yeah well I mean literally yeah that
is literally a piece on the list someone was really excited about the idea of basic income yes as a
potential solution for that issue I was remembering an article which I'm going to be sure to link
about how steel jobs are not coming back to the US they haven't really gone anywhere it's just that
the industries become so much more efficient so kind of interesting yeah it's up there that is going
to be a huge change for society because we at least in America I don't know how it is in other
countries but we very much have an ethos that in order to deserve being alive you should be working
and if you aren't working there's there's no reason for you to to collect well that's our that's the
only way we have to to move around resources yeah well it's not the only way but it's the main way
that we have but I think the ethos that you know it's just alluding to is that it's not just that
because it's what we have it's it's a a character thing you know if there's something about the
work a day person who goes and labors and that that's that's a more meaningful existence yeah
that's uh that is going the way of the but it's fine but it's fine to be a child who doesn't work
and it's fine to be uh maybe I guess less fine now I don't know but it's fine to be a
wife who doesn't work right well there's a lot of work in the house I guess a spouse
who doesn't work maybe maybe some and it's fine to be an independently wealthy person who doesn't
work right it's I I don't know how much of that's tied up in in this value judgment and how much of
it is actually related to people literally have to work in order to get money but there's there's
that's how we show value there's gonna be a sharp break at some point because if this isn't going to
happen overnight it's going to be slowly more and more people just cannot participate in the economy
because they don't have these skills and the intelligence to do it anymore and I mean everyone
is going to get there eventually right I'm not looking forward to the day when I can no longer
contribute anything of value and at some point a large massive people are going to say we don't
want to die of starvation there's nothing we can do give us some resources and other people aren't
going to want to give them the resources I don't think and I hope it doesn't come down to violence
but what else are you going to do you're gonna either have to convince everyone that we need a
basic income or there's going to be bloodshed right yeah and I think that's I mean so there
is something like to be said about like the work for what you have kind of mentality that is out
there whether or not like it doesn't really apply to children because they don't have you know the
skills to have jobs but people look down on people who don't work for a living not necessarily in
some of the education that you mentioned but like if you get handouts right uh you know even if it's
like legit people are like oh I I guess maybe not everybody but I this is a mentality that I think
some people have I guess it depends on who you're getting those handouts from if it's a family member
or if it's um through a through a taxpayer program right sure I think even I guess I mean that's
a bit of a no entity versus an unknown entity right but uh you know some of the first jobs to go
are going to be um I guess maybe maybe the first thing that people are going to really freak out
about well I mean one of those already happened like nobody makes cars anymore come yeah machines
make cars that used to be you know a huge employing thing but we were talking about uh automated
driving right yes exactly and it's like three million jobs right now something like that I know
that it's uh we were we were seeing um Matt actually looked this up kindly during our meeting and
said that more than I think it's Matt more than 3.5 percent of our working population works in the
trucking industry which doesn't necessarily mean that they're drivers but I think a lot of people
are drivers right and then that doesn't necessarily include taxi drivers and people doing other kinds
of driving work I know that just taxis I think is something like 230 or 270,000 jobs in the
United States and I don't think that includes Uber and Lyft yeah and so you know it'll be in 10 I don't
know we can guess years but at some point they're not too just in future in our lifetime is likely
you can either say well I can either wait for a human to show up and then have to listen to their
radio and tip them and stuff or I can order an Uber with my car it'll be here shortly and I don't
have to tip them and it'll go you know I want to worry about human error while being behind in the
vaccine so nobody's going to be there will be no human drivers for Uber at some point.
I asked my Uber driver last time I took one how he felt about self-driving cars and the
automation of Uber and he made a frowny face and kind of an angry noise and then wouldn't talk about
it yeah I mean how do you feel like that you won't let go out of work one exist in you know
in some years right that's a that's a rough question but it's a it's a reality question right
I'm trying to think of another industry that's not driving that I guess uh we were talking briefly
too about fast food uh a lot of these are being are not a lot yet but there are some test locations
that are fully automated I think they're just drive-throughs maybe you can go in and order on a
kiosk or something but you know even if it's just a drive-through location that's going to bring
plenty of people your stuff will be perfect every time if you order it properly and it won't it won't
cost uh whatever they program it properly properly and bring in both the correct stuff
whatever eight dollars an hour times five is per hour to make your food right five employees
right eight bucks an hour roughly unless it's peak hour and there's more it's two in the morning
there's less but that's the minimum wage currently in Colorado is it actually eight bucks I was
throwing out that number as slightly above minimum wage oh I think yes I think it's around eight
dollars go Colorado you're 47 cents above the last time I looked oh still well below what you need
to live but give them what rental rates are like here yeah so I was I was kind of thinking about
the idea that people aren't really interested in talking about machines and efficiency and innovation
as what is taking people's jobs because those are seen as positive things and I was wondering
you know why for a lot of these different subjects they're not discussed um Tangela suggested
that there isn't a good guy bad guy situation the the the thing that would fit the bill for bad guy
is not something that people are willing to put in the bad guy slot like innovation oh okay right
yeah um innovation increased efficiency right doctors farmers are not people that we want to
put in our bad guy slot the increased efficiency thing brings back is reminiscent of our conversation
with Robin Hansen right one avenue this can go down is just having a million times
duplicated person running on drugs doing all the jobs right yeah it's hard to see how that would
be shut down you know it'd be an innovative solution technology to get us there and hey it's
just capitalism when it's happening you've got there's an interesting thing that no one is talking
about because it seems very far out right now but the concept of a singleton to to avoid these
sorts of fates a singleton being a single entity that has absolute control over the government
and you know the entirety of the world government not just one country or one state
because really the only way you could prevent something like Robin Hansen's age of n that he
was if it is technologically possible would be to have a sort of totalitarian ruler that makes it
impossible to do anywhere they don't have to it doesn't have to be a single ruler
yes it has to be a unified it just has to be a unified regulatory system so is it like a a group
of people or is it one super villain with a regular mars i believe a group of people would be okay as
long as they were able to stay sick uh unified Robin Hansen mentioned that the you know when we're
like wow seems kind of weird that people would be cool with killing themselves every day um he's like
yeah there are weird people out there but at first there's not really enough weird people
that they can do things if if they've been told that they can't do it you know what i'm saying
it only needs to be one person that's okay with being killed every day not really not really if
the vast majority of people are the ones who are making the rules right so it can be as long as it's
as long as the majority of people are making the rules in that case yes but all you need is one
small country like north korea that says yeah go ahead do whatever you want with this technology
and then they will take out compete everybody else right with their robot that's why i said it just
doesn't have to be it doesn't have to be like a group of clones or a single person with a ray gun
on mars it can be just most people using what they think is common sense in order but with the power
to then enforce that worldwide right right yeah the the power to enforce on everyone worldwide is
really the important part and i think that is something that we will at some point have to
talk about even though no one wants to talk about it because that's basically saying i think that we
should install a tyranny that can control everything i've never seen the problem with that
body was cool about it well that's that's always the problem right
but like a powerful king would be awesome if the king wasn't a dick all the time so i mean
that's the king never made any mistakes really exactly you fuck up one time when you're all
powerful that can be a pretty bad fuck up well there are you know organizations like EU right who
are now getting a lot of referendums thrown at them but even the EU doesn't have that much power
over individual member states and people just know as it turns out it does turn out that people
can just leave so like you couldn't this the singleton i'm assuming the singleton position
wouldn't work if people could just like i'm opting out no you are not allowed to opt out so that
sounds like a that doesn't like a hard sale right it sounds desirable if done perfectly but it would
be a hard sale i think well it's um or you could do a what you can offer as part of the group is so
great that opting out so that a few weirdos can copy themselves a million times is just not worth
it there's there's no such thing there'll always be someone who thinks it's worth it even if they
just want to say someone i mean like a country there's not gonna be a country that thinks it's
worth it there it is depending on how powerful the technology is you could have a large town of
i i i don't think you need to be i don't think you need to be singleton minded i in order to make
this work i i like that we disagree on this because then this is something we can actually talk
about unlike the the people the politicians who are not willing to talk about that whatever let's
move on to the next okay wait sarcasm it was sarcasm but also not you know you do not want to spend
very long on this particular topic i'm actually spending at least two more minutes on it okay
maybe okay why don't why don't you weigh in i'm i'm sort of on the fence that's why i'm
i moved to hear more about this uh this is the first i'm maybe the second time i've heard of
singletons and the first time i've heard it spelled out in detail and i'm curious what the
strong case is for it the strong case for it is uh have you read meditations on malik by it's
got on xander it's been on my list for a while i got through half of it at one point and then i
fell into my breath my open tabs and i'm not found it again okay it's well i mean it's probably his
most powerful work at least so far but it's also not a very accessible one you have to have already
read him a bit in his other topics to really get it but uh what it basically comes down to is
coordination failures are um slowly driving us to destroy our values in order to get economic
gains it's a lot like the three bodies amitani story where in order to survive you have to give
up a little thing that you value in order to get a little bit of a economic advantage and as everyone
is doing that it is kind of a race to the bottom it's like now you cannot have a well most people
cannot have a single earner household anymore both parents have to work because that is how much the
cost of living has gone up and part of the reason the cost of living has gone up is because it's
because so many houses do have uh two uh two incomes and so drives up the cost of education drives
up the cost of housing drives up the cost of everything so that you can't have single earner
houses anymore and all things considered for each individual household it's better to have two incomes
but uh and taken as a society as a whole now that everyone has to work if to do to pay the same
amount of bills that uh only one person had to work for before is kind of a downside and so it is
sort of it is this sort of coordination problem that you keep trading off more and more things
and eventually you get to like an age of n thing where you're trading off even the ability to uh
feel love because that takes away from time you could be working right you're trading uh away
your ability to have to be in awe of art because that is again that's a emotion you could be using
to be in awe of your wonderful uh accounting algorithm that you've put together instead
and so uh as singleton is a way to combat malik who is the the the uh the metaphor the metaphor
in the story um that drives everything to this ground state uh singleton would be a way to say
no stop i am the czar of working or whatever and we are not going to go down this road even though
it would be individually better for each one of you because if everyone does it it's worse as a
collective for all of us as far as uh state star codex and scott luxander i'll say really quick i
was reading his review of age of n and he talks about nick lands i think he wrote a book or something
where it's kind of like if age of n went poorly and age of m already looks kind of bleak so it
kind of painted the picture that i think maybe he mentions the maybe i'm assuming alexander
mentions it again in the meditations of malik because it sounds like it was going straight
there yeah everything's automated in fact there's not even people around any works industry just
running itself so i broke my back racing malik to the heavens and all i got was this disney land
without any children oh man that's awesome so is permutation city what happens if the age of m
goes great yes i think so not not miss permutation city is well in my opinion it's a horror novel but
uh it's it's definitely a much brighter take on the age of m scenario i'm not as well read in
science fiction as i should be so judge me into like everyone um fiction isn't a thing for everyone
yeah no it is it is for me i just haven't gotten around to it they're able to get to a point where
they have infinite processing power pretty much and they can do whatever the hell they want for
forever yeah that doesn't sound so bad so seeing how it's a horror story well so people
oh yeah no spoilers um people are able to focus and get mastery on all sorts of different
topics they spend a lot of time together they can modify themselves however they want to
it's modifying yourself they can have lots and lots of children um anyway it sounds kind of
awesome um and it's a paradise kind of dreamt up by by someone so yeah that's that's it that's all
you need to know about the book now you don't need to read it you got it it's a fantastic book well
i've already heard that so i guess i don't need to read it to know how fantastic it is right i'll
check it out it's on my it's on my list here's something that is definitely spoken about um in
in newspapers because it's quite sensational but it's not spoken about by serious political
candidates at least for the most part and that's things like settling other planets
i think it's spoken about minorly in terms of funding different interplanetary space exploration
programs but when it comes to like settling mars yeah it's interesting that i guess i guess one
reason for that might be and this is something i can't remember where i heard this as as a general
rule of considering what candidates talk about but it was years ago that a lot of these things if they
have a trajectory of success that was like 15 years well you're gonna be in office for max of eight
and you're running you're gonna you know you're running for a four-year term so you're a senator
yeah right but if you're running for president in the united states you can serve for two four-year
terms and that's it then you can't be president anymore i'm assuming i don't know why i spelled
that out everyone knows how i'm assuming even if you're a pavelist there's no that there's something
like that over here if you have a 15-year track plan that would just reform education make everything
awesome well you don't have time to implement it so you don't you're not going to waste time talking
about it maybe right yeah uh you know we won't be on mars in eight years you show results fast
exactly and big big things don't happen fast so maybe that's why some of these things aren't on
there but as a general rule to keep in mind i guess as far as interplanetary thing but doesn't
seem like a selling point though at least get every nerd to vote for you and there though
yes i don't think i for one would not be convinced i'm not i'm not convinced i was saying
somewhat somewhat jokingly but i mean it would be nice if one candidate was like hey you know what
this musk guy seems to have some idea what he's talking about what's uh i want to bring him in
on at least for lots of meetings even if it doesn't have time to be a cabinet member and we're gonna
look seriously into what he's doing maybe give him all the money that he wants and uh like he
doesn't want that much he's already super rich right but maybe give him a dedicated landing
pad i don't know whatever it is we're gonna work with we're gonna work on these cool things that
are not just fun but useful tech right well the government's already partnering with private
satellite launchers to um go to the space station for example that's because they don't want to pay
massive to it you supply it yeah something else that somebody mentioned that i think falls under
the same purview as the it's not gonna happen in 48 years is the heat death of the universe
jesus is what is what somebody suggests is an important issue the candidates and the press
i mean i think that's an almost no one ever talks about the heat death of the universe
i think that's an important issue essentially but uh we have so many other things billions of
years out yeah billions but yeah so like probably trillions the south the the the headline is like
trillions that's right i'm actually not sure because it's five billion years until our sun burns out
yeah i thought how much longer after that a lot i'm assuming at least a week
but the uh i think what could a candidate say other than like yeah at some point in the very
distant future the universe is gonna basically wink out and there's nothing we can do to stop it so
vote for me right so i think so there's no solution there's no at least nothing that we've
plausibly thought of yet yeah there's no solution nobody cares not even i care about that right now
i don't even care i have a lot of long-sighted goals but it is it is something they don't talk
about that's technically true all right but there you have it wrestled that's why nobody talks about
heat death of the universe wrestled brought that up yeah that sounds like a wrestle sort of thing
to bring up do write it do write in and tell us why they should talk about it or if there's something
if there's a steel man of that because you gotta get started early i'm sure there's something i mean
just stomping ideas into the ground i guess literally the early is better but i mean there are
other priorities right yes um i do think that you could get some cheap points and it wouldn't
even cost that much to say yes we're in favor of of a interplanetary humanity right um that's one
sentence and you don't have to elaborate you don't have to know what you're talking about but i think
you could get some some wins that way uh how many is some i mean let's think back nobody's going
after the vegan vote maybe more than you would lose whereas whereas you might lose endorsing
vegans okay no i mean you might not you might lose votes right because you piss off every meat
eater try to get the vegan endorsement might might alienate you from a lot of other people consider
like consider someone campaigning for the atheist vote right like there's uh somewhere between six
and twenty percent of the united states doesn't identify or what identifies atheist and no one's
clamoring for that vote because it would shun everybody else seemingly so i think part of it
is that kind of cost-benefit analysis of is it worth getting this many people pissed at me to get
this many people to like me i also don't think it's a very good signal if you're trying to convince
people of stuff no one's going to care if you say i'm in a supportive interplanetary humanity
because there's nothing you can do about it anyway you can say that and sure both sides can say it
and it doesn't mean anything well you can be like i'm taking all military spending and i am redirecting
it all military spending is costing lots of jobs i don't think presidents can even do that
they could say i'm in i can say i'm in favor of doing that and then not get votes yeah that's true
um there was that that presidential candidate some years ago i think it was two elections ago
one of the moon base is that newt gingrich oh no that was much more than two elections ago was it
i think so yeah in any case whatever the story is that at one point there was a candidate who didn't
end up being a major party candidate who wanted a moon base and people made fun of him for it so
so it's true that that talking about doing space stuff isn't enough to make you the president so
there's we do have one case example of that yeah all right okay how about electronic rights
that's a fun topic this is actually something that i hadn't given that much thought about until uh
i don't know if we want to name names or not who was it do you remember chase okay talk to me about
this a couple months ago and uh it's a i mean it's something that i thought about but i didn't
know it had a formal name and it turns out it's not just a page on wikipedia there's a whole thing on
digital rights the idea that you own your uh i guess digital memory the same way that you own your
mental memory like my iphone knows where i've been how long i've been there who i talk to um
everything about that and that that shouldn't belong to the government that should belong to me
like that that is as much me and this phone is now is sort of an extension of your brain
and in actuality that will be some case that was something like that'll be the case in the future
yeah like more literally yeah yeah so you know even pre-neural implants whether i get like a gps
in my arm that you know interacts with my smart house um or something like that right so at some
point things will be literally inside your body that will have digital components well there's no
no no there's already things literally inside your body what uh i don't know if you followed the
article i've chased uh sent or maybe posted on facebook but there are a lot of electronics in
people's bodies right now like they're uh pacemakers oh yeah that's a good point which they are not
allowed to uh fix or or touch in any way at all because of digital rights management that's insane
yeah there okay there's a good reason for saying that you shouldn't have an app on your phone that
you can swing like you can you know just your thermostat you know just kill yourself because i
mean uh but to to say that yeah it's not unusually modifiable no matter what you have to go to
technician because that's how the law is written that seems like an absurd misappropriation of the
intended reason uh i know that you can treat parkinsons with uh electrode implants there's a
there's a lot of electronics inside people now probably shouldn't be able to control that with
your phone but you shouldn't have to i mean maybe you there's there's a head there's a heads right
maybe maybe if it's inside your body you should be allowed to do whatever the hell you want to it
that sounds like a safer general proposal maybe even saying someone else should be able to well
and certainly safer than saying that you are not allowed to and only someone else can there's
nowadays they have drms on tractors uh in regular use apparently a tractor needs an oil change uh
every 16 hours of use or so that's what he said yeah yeah so more than once a day if you're running
it all day oh did we do it here on the contractors no this was that the last lesson i made a month
ago okay yeah and and he was saying that uh they have a little toggle on the on the oil uh reservoir
yes that that's the scientific term yes that is uh drm protected so that you cannot change your own
oil and you have to call someone out and do it for you every 16 hours even though changing oil
has to be done every other day and is the simplest thing in the world but because they put this little
electronic thing on it which you legally cannot fuck with they uh they they can't maintain their
own tractors tractors are shockingly interesting considering considering how how boring they sound
let's do elaborate i mean for example um when i was in gis okay a lot of these tractors are hooked up
with satellite data so and and they're able to take data from measuring nutrient levels in
different parts of the crop and perfectly mix the fertilizer that's gonna it's gonna go on the
crop in different parts are you serious yes for the correct nutrient level okay that is
magnificent exciting that right that is not i yeah that's awesome i i thought that you know big
lawn mower no that's why i'm telling you i know that's exciting that's awesome tractors that's
that is really interesting that might sound sarcastic but i meant that oh no i know you did
she can see my face so yeah no that's that's that is kind of mind-blowing think of all the other
things that change your own oil yeah and they could also you know plant different crops for
different you know kinds of places and a lot of that's automated and where they turn and everything
take that farmers i'm kidding well this is this is part of efficiency right that's right no the
reasons we've gone from 90 percent of people farming to less than two percent of people
no problem there we can just keep that going efficiency all the way right right yep they
could never be any downsides to that but speaking of automated things general intelligence
general artificial intelligence would possibly become a huge issue in like a humanity threatening
issue if if it is not programmed correctly which no one seems to be really talking about because
it sounds too crazy science fictiony well maybe it sounds that way because people who are in the
ai i feel like robin hanson said it's saying it's 200 to 500 years out i mean some people like robin
hanson but there's other people that are saying that could be as little as 50 years and the important
thing is to get started on it now that's not in eight years you know how hard it is to get people
to do anything about climate change it's actually affecting people right yeah it's one of those things
there should be some way to spell out the difference between like yes things get a little hard for us
on earth for a while when climate change gets out of control versus well that that is the the way of
putting it versus literally everyone who could ever possibly exist in the future will never make it
because ai went bad right or i went wrong so there is like a utility weighing there that even though
like it might be farther out and you could even say less likely makes it way more important anyway
right like there's if there's people working on creating a god we should be at least a little
bit concerned that this god is not a bad sort of god so there's a there's a future future items
discount right um it's one of the things that's going on there the other thing is that it may be
that there's a general consensus in most people's minds that it's incredibly unlikely i am actually
very happy that this has been getting more and more traction recently there's been a lot more
people coming out for this there's several foundations that are now looking into the problem
that have been created over the past few years and i think this is one of the uh areas where
people like elia zaryatkowski should get some credit because he was on the forefront
and even though no one wants to very few people uh are willing to say yes i was influenced by him
he was a a large driving factor in the early years to actually get this sort of research started
speaking of willing to draw attention to the problem speaking of will mcaskill again and
know that he mentioned utkowski as far as one of the earliest people to start talking about
ai safety and all that sort of thing so yeah somebody's not afraid to associate with him and
will is a pretty cool guy um sam harris just came out with a ted talk last week on ai risk and it's
like 14 and a half minutes worth checking out if you've never considered this problem it's a great
quick introduction uh then read superintelligence um which is a little more of an investment but i
i think that's by nick bolstrom that's right yeah i think we could easily be 10 years behind where
we are right now if it wasn't for elia is there speaking of less than 10 years advanced on this
than we are now and 10 years can make a huge amount of difference in something like this i
think if god king ilang were to run for president he'd become president almost immediately oh he was
born in the u.s and when i insert now that i don't think that any of these people are gods or kings
oh that was meant to obvious jest uh to anyone who wants to quote mine you're doing so disingenuously
i am disappointed we can fix this problem by making them god kings can we did that well not us
personally oh then forget it i'm not willing to collaborate with people that sounds exhausting
yeah that's another maybe if there was some sort of singleton around they could do that for us
that's another question um is it worth it to to raise up these these subjects into the political
sphere or is that actually um something that might make them more divisive and difficult to
take action on i see that's a good question because there's only so much political capital you have
and i think that is one of the reasons people don't in general uh very often talk about animal
welfare because you only have so much political capital to spend on issues and most people don't
see that as an issue that it is worth spending their resources on they'd rather talk about global
warming or uh or the minimum wage or something something that they personally feel is more
important so there's a personal risk to people for bringing it up but is there a risk that otherwise
topics that people wouldn't disagree about might become politicized in some way that's exactly
what i was thinking when you mentioned the question was what if you know the reds you know
we're like you know what this a i thing is a thing then the blues would have to say no it's not
and uh would they have to uh there are some of them might feel like they have to there are bipartisan
issues there are i wonder how i guess i don't know enough about political history i'm sure
something has come up lately that both sides agreed yes this is actually important but it's easier
to think of examples where they don't think that right uh it is because those get a little bit more
traction don't they that's true everything something that everyone agrees on people can get behind
but maybe i think in general nuclear proliferation is uh both sides are against it hopefully true
i would uh so yeah there's an example of being able to come together on a serious risk maybe
but i wonder if it's like an edge thing you know like ai is not super mainstream yet maybe in a few
years yeah it really does if one side were to jump out and say something then the other side might
feel inclined to put them down for it look they're thinking they're agreeing with all these
yeah or start awarding golden fleece awards what's that for getting fleeced oh i don't even
remember what what politician did this way way back in the day but they were looking at different
expenditures for research government expenditures for for all sorts of different research programs
and some of them sound ridiculous but are super important like collecting grizzly bear scats for
dna right to figure out how many different bears there are in a certain area or all sorts of different
information about them and so you'd be like and he would read them off read off these descriptions
think about the ignoble awards right so um he'd be like our taxpayer money's going to this project
that sounds silly but it's actually super important and it wins the golden fleece award
because the taxpayers you just got fleeced that's one way that it can happen that a lot of these
things cost a lot of money right potentially cost a lot of of taxpayer money and if you are concerned
about the government spending and you're concerned about about people losing their income to projects
that they haven't approved to approved of personally then then that's one direction to go on that
that is interesting i do have a candidate related question to somebody who's no longer on the ticket
i know that bernie sanders talked about universal income did he do so anticipating
projected loss of jobs or was that just something he liked does anyone know i didn't follow that
closely because that would be an interesting example of a candidate that did actually care
about an issue that likely will be a problem in 20 years right so can i bring up one last one that i
just read about i think yesterday please do sorry no uh the possible coming of the the possible
ending of the age of the gun which it was why are you saying that this is something that's not
extremely talked about what how is this different than the whole gun control no no this this is not
in gun control at all this is uh the issue that so back in the bad old days of which there are many
but uh pre pre firearms the uh political power was wielded by people who basically spent their
entire lives training to be the killer elite and spending vast amounts of capital on things like
full body suits of metal armor and war horses things that are really expensive that the average
person could not afford i remember things differently in yosh but i'll say i'll get into that in a bit
because i've been around that long yeah right god i am younger than i thought but uh so a lot of
political power was projected right by this by a small elite group of people who spent the warrior
class and uh once militias were easily could easily go up against these people with only a few weeks
of training and no more than a metal tube and some gunpowder it quickly brought down that whole
regime and now people had well governments were much more concerned about their people rebelling
and were also i've heard it argued helped bring about the whole middle class as a thing that exists
in history because uh aside from the merchant class but uh people now had some political power
they could organize a large enough group of them and attack the government itself
rather than being beaten down by the warrior classes and with the growing power i guess of
drones the growing what is independence what is it when you are not dependent on a human
to control the automation okay the drone warfare nowadays you could get back to a situation where
a single person with vast resources can lay claim to a large territory and doesn't have to care about
having other people there to help him defend it that's interesting that's a really interesting
substitution where'd you read this oh i don't remember it was just yesterday yeah it was just
yesterday i don't remember exactly where it was that i read it all right he'll find it and we'll
put it up i will find it but there you know as as we were as i was saying earlier about the basic
basic guaranteed income as a way to combat the fact that most people will not be able to be
employed in any sort of meaningful way the thing that people have is there's lots of us and we
can band together and we can take these resources and redistribute them into what we consider equitable
whether or not it is equitable there is the fact that there's the threat of violence uh of the masses
and which is one of the reasons people think that capitalism was ranked in a bit in the 50s
because the guest world governments were seriously worried about communist revolutions
even in america and so we're throwing a lot of concessions out to workers once that is no longer
an issue you can just say i am one of the elite one percent that can still make a living i own
all of colorado and i have the factories i need to make drones to defend all of colorado what are
these other people going to do they they could just starve to death outside the borders because
they can't fight against factories full of drones that are just being pumped out that's an interesting
course before one man could not defend colorado by himself he would need a bunch of other people
on his side to help him defend it that's not interesting i want to read the the long version
of that okay lots of futurism going on here folks yes so what was your uh alternate remembering of
the past oh oh um it was just a bunch of stuff about knights okay super interesting not going to
get into it not important listener feedback listener feedback yay steven do you have russell's
comments i do on our very first listener feedback episode we read a section of an email from russell
and and apparently it was the wrong section and actually having reread the email i still had it in
our in our folder and it was kind of obvious actually what part was the feedback and what part
wasn't so now i feel bad sorry russell but i told you we get we'd fix it and here we are quote
the halo and horns effects describe the tendency of overall impressions of something to influence
one's opinion of specific properties of that thing which we kind of talked about one or two
episodes ago the halo and horns effect might talk about the halo and horns effect yeah back
to the question back to the feedback it's also true that reputable people are hard to come by and
that reputation is a good heuristic for believing true things in situations where we lack direct
evidence how do we reconcile this how how do we reconcile this should we consider bill gates
as concerns about ai safety important because he's proven himself successful to be wait excuse me
because he has proven himself to be a successful it business person with the same line of thinking
indicate that we should trust the coach brothers about climate change cook cook whoops there i am
not knowing what i'm talking about they're financial people or something right yeah uh they're
they're major funders of uh libertarian think tank great well that shows how much i i shows how
little i know about stuff they also make a lot of money off of uh things that emit carbon
gotcha well so do we all welcome especially me and my and my backdoor business and coal mining
so got the black lungs the big lung pop um so the the claim is that we have a great heuristic
for determining if information is true or not right or reliable or not and that is the
reliability of the person who is giving us the information right next that's a reasonable
heuristic a lot of the time yeah it is reasonable heuristic a lot of the time that's why we have it
and also because it is a huge pain in the butt to go do all of the original research yourself
right and um become a specialist in all these different fields literally impossible it well
it is now in because we're not in permutation city right or ends where you can where you can
learn whatever you want because you get all the time in the world and all the resources
so i think he's i kind of feel like he's uh conflating reputation with the horns and halo
effect though because that bias is specifically about if one thing is good about someone you
tend to think everything else is also good and you give that more weight whereas reputation is
more along the lines of i know this person is good at this thing so i should trust him at this
thing i don't know if he was conflating them or if he's using it as a specific example just to
yeah sorry so bill gates in the situation um if bill gates is concerned about ai we know that
we know that he's actually involved at high level tech right and would actually know about
things like that and so we should value his opinion but with the coke brothers they are
not only not climate scientists they also we can say that the coke brothers are incentivized to
not be supporters of climate change referent reformations this is correct yes i want to um
contest the bill gates is a good authority on ai okay i don't know that he is i mean he might be
because he worked on uh operating systems back in the 70s 80s and then was very successful in
business does not necessarily mean he has kept up to date on research and really knows much of
anything about ai well i don't know that he's even said anything about ai yes oh okay well good for him
well so i think this is something that the question eludes to is uh you know i might not
take my neighbor's position on astrophysics seriously but i'll take nilda greys tyson's
word for it and that's because he happens to be an expert at it yeah um so that's a reasonable
yeah so the domain the domain of expertise is kind of a good narrowing down of when to
know whether to check your your heuristic for but do you believe what nilda greys tyson says
about say evolution or uh well no he's actually terrible on that stuff so that's why i brought it
up i was actually talking to somebody about this he's actually like he's flippantly uh neglectful
of considering ai risk as well it does come down to what they know about and so you have to do a bit
of research into it's like if i had no idea who bill gates was and someone said bill gates says ai is
uh not a problem and lindsay lohan says it is who do i whose word do i take for it well not knowing
who either of those people are i'd have to do a little homework to see whose word i should take
or i could do the homework myself but but then you would decide bill gates probably right maybe
lindsay lohan has a secret ai enthusiast i don't know um i pulled a name out of my head i should
remember the one of that i think this brings up eliezer's argument that uh argument screams off
authority because we would both think that bill gates is more of an authority than lindsay lohan
on these things since he works in tech worked in a technical field and he's older and he is
possibly smarter i i don't actually know how smart either of them are but my prejudice says
say the nerd with the glasses is smarter than the hot check right the bill going i know going
entirely off of stereotypes wow i so i don't believe you i don't think that you're going
entirely off of stereotypes i think that you have additional information about both of those people
okay like building a tech empire that actually is something that you reasonably have to be
very intelligent to do and to not bankrupt your company after windows 8
he wasn't he wasn't the ceo at that time oh that's how he touched that right
some patchy right yeah he retired a while before so um but i i don't i mean i assume lindsay lohan
is slightly more intelligent than average but not as intelligent as bill gates but i don't have
anything to base her intelligence on aside from the fact that someone successful generally
tends to have something going for them so that they aren't fleeced by uh all the people around
them trying to take their money sure so you have other reasons i just i don't want you to say that
it's a hot chick versus a nerd with glasses i do not accept that from you okay okay all right
weeks have better weeks we expect expect better from me yeah fine um i see what i see we're going
with painting the broad picture and using like general stereotypes though um well but but oh
sorry as i was saying yeah because i i got off like totally got off on the subject by using
those terrible arguments and i'm sorry but what i was saying is that uh but if you are presented
with arguments from both people without knowing who they are you can judge based on the arguments
because maybe lindsay lohan has spent a lot of her free time researching this sort of thing
and talking with uh ai researchers she maybe she has access to those you know people who knows
and bill gates is probably spending all his time working out the malaria foundation and about
getting better schools since that's a lot what a visit gates foundation does now and hasn't had
the time to look into uh ai research just because he's busy doing other good things you know not
because he's a tool or anything and so lindsay lohan may have better arguments and the fact that
the arguments are better thought out and presented screens off that authority effect yes okay that's
true but that also does give a benefit to like a better argument for the better presenter right
yes it does so like uh good call it there is something to be said about looking into somebody's
past credentials and all else being equal if my crazy neighbor and i don't really have a crazy
neighbor so i mean this is a completely fake person um my crazy neighbor and uh you'll do
ask tyson tell me something even if it's tangentially science related even knowing
tyson has some failures of of perfect information there i'd probably take tyson's work for it
tentatively until i have a chance to look into it right um so like well but but should you because
we already have some examples of him being less than rigorous that's true of his opinions so but
also very confident in his presentation exactly right but yeah that's kind of both so so it um as
again we talked about in the previous episode it hinges on you being able to deeply understand
both of the arguments and understand the evidence that's presented and be able to compare it right
but in the event that you can't i mean in the event that you can't it doesn't matter what they're
saying because you're gonna you're gonna do you're gonna go with the authority figure this is kind
of what we talked about in the conspiracy episodes or conspiracy theories episode where you no one
has the time to really become an expert on everything and you end up having to trust some people
right so you're an expert on some then then it comes down to like who who which experts do you
trust right i think if you're best off trusting the consensus if there is a solid consensus that
sounds like because then at least there is a large body of experts who have all looked at things and
come to the same conclusion yeah that's that's sort of us trying to go with this but then i was
i was having a conversation i was having a conversation with somebody uh actually before
i came here who is a very intelligent person and a beluga literalist like talking snake and
flood and all that stuff um well if you think that we live in a fun video game so like to him
he might hear that and he would say yeah i did go to the experts and talk to all the elders of my
churches right so it's i don't i can't think of right off a general way to combat all of that
and that might be beyond the scope of that question i do want to get some more listener
especially if he goes to his elders a lot and they usually have good answers or at least
satisfactory answers to him right right well i mean just answers in general about life things you
know sure oh yeah they have answers in other domains where they aren't obvious or like where they
aren't uh saying we the bible are closely right so yeah that's that's a good point that is a tough
thing and kind of far afield from halo and horn's effect how do you combat them i guess do your own
homework for the best that you can and look into the reputation of that domain of expertise of the
person who's giving that argument if you can't and for and for where halo and horn's hits you most
which is in people that you know and various personalities um just try to take each argument
on its own merit i do do a kind of thing where or i do kind of do a thing that if i find myself
agreeing to something strongly when i'm reading i try to if i notice myself doing that i'll try
and go back and read it and tear it apart because i think like the fact that i'm really enjoying this
and you know liking the delivery and agreeing with it i want to try and counter for that and
make sure that it can stand up to like i might not have been as scrupulous reading it as i otherwise
would have been so i i do deliberately try and go back and do that that might be one way too to
try to keep that in mind so do we have other listener feedback i i also like just having
a wide variety of friends because when there are people that are invested in one opinion they tend
to have better arguments for it this person uh said that they think we spent a lot of time talking
about the moral value of simulated beings and they are not sure that simulated beings had
necessarily have any weight at all uh they put forth the example of if i were to give you a black
cube and say that in this cube is simulated the entire earth aside from the cube itself obviously
for recursion reasons would you give it the moral weight of the entire world they said specifically
that um if a simulated being only interacts with a simulated environment they have no moral
weight at all and that you know what if he can prove that the black box actually has
a thousand people or the entire world within it does that change our answer at all
and they went on to say that if the black box was hooked up to a camera and a robot arm
they would maybe assign a tiny bit of moral weight to it because now it can interact with
the world a bit with the outside world but still not very much yeah i don't think their opinion
holds much water no no why is that let's say that you copy paste the entire world and all
of its inhabitants right does does one version have more moral weight than the other that's just
kind of i don't know it's a silly question um and as for simulate simulated if i guess the question
is is it perfectly simulated let's assume yes assume yes don't any yeah right because otherwise
you're talking about dualism you're talking about like oh do we all have some magical magical soul
stuff that's floating around um right above our heads you know recording everything i don't know
what it would be doing but or are we like the idea of philosophical zombies so we created a
world of philosophical zombies no because there's no such thing as that yeah no i i i see i agree
on one hand and part of this is because first of all i expect that there is a good likelihood
if i survive that long that i will someday be a simulated being and so i would like for there to
be a some moral consideration given to me and i'm also not entirely sure that we're not in a
simulation right now which is just my own personal little weird hang up and i apologize for that at
a time you don't have to apologize okay but i would i would prefer that the substrate i am
being simulated on if that is what is happening we're not to be turned off right also we are
just just the way that we understand the world it's not like we're we're special little amazing
right we're all we're all groups of molecules and atoms and energy and in different patterns
it's not like we're something like freaking special compared to something that is an exact copy of us
like that's just but to bring it back to uh what i was saying in the previous episode the you know
the only rights that anything has is the rights that it can convince other people to grant it
whether it's by being charming or by force and the the box does not have ability to affect anything
in our world and so we it wouldn't really have any rights aside from those that or any moral
weight aside from what we could convince other people to to grant it you know right again it
doesn't have to do any convincing right right um i think the because he used the term intrinsic moral
weight and i think that is a problem with yeah there is no such thing yeah and so should we
value those things yeah do you have an obligation
to trillions of of life forms um on in including including the all important human life forms
even if they're not in the same form as you yeah probably yeah obviously you do like i do
normal people would what's that i want to weigh on this weigh in on this too um so this was the
question from dark lord asriel uh i think was a batman character other than the dark lord part
i bet asriel is a lot of a lot of things i i know i'm pretty sure the uh the smurfs uh
in the smurfs the name of the cat that always was hunting them that's probably where batman
got it from okay um i i found your question on reddit and uh assuming that we could verify
that the black box contained a perfect simulation of earth other than the black box itself um
if we could verify it it's hard to see i'm i guess i'm kind of just seconding what
inyash and katrina said that it's hard to see why it would matter like the substrate that you're
running on would make a difference as to how much you matter like but there is something to be said
about the externalities that your behaviors have so like uh if killing you would destroy the environment
then that's a bigger concern than if it wouldn't right like we talked about that with the animal
stuff um but that doesn't mean that like you literally have no matter if the if the environment
isn't affected by you yeah somebody handed me a box and said there is an entire copy of earth in
here and also it's going to destroy the earth that you live in i'd be like smash right you know
it because uh you know half a dozen of one and six of the other right so i read a interesting
short story which i think was actually uh posted on the less wrong forums back when it was when it
was a thing uh that an alien race had contacted humanity and they had several million of these
little black pebbles and in each one of them was a simulation of earth and they were torturing
everyone on that earth unless we were and they would stop doing that if we were to give them 10
percent of our gdp i'm paraphrasing i don't remember if this is exactly what it was if we were to
give them 10 percent of our gdp every year the entire earth's collective gdp uh then they wouldn't
torture these millions of earths of people and the uh there's a lieutenant reporting to his
general he's freaking out he's like what the hell do we do do we declare war on them right now
this is going to be a hell of a fight these are really advanced aliens but we can't just let them
do this and the general's like whatever he takes the pebble crushes and says we've gone going back
to bed fuck off because i don't know we don't negotiate with terrorists i mean not just because
we don't negotiate with terrorists it was it was implied that those simulations had no moral weight
at all hmm or that if they did it was it was the aliens that would be that would be considered the
you know moral bad actors of this and we didn't have a responsibility to go fly out and try to
rescue every single earth that is being that is being threatened i think the ladder's there okay
because what are they gonna do right like there's there's there's no power no no control there and
also maybe they'll get bored of spending all their time torturing earths right they know that
they're not gonna get anything out of it but versus if you if you give a mouse a cookie i've been
using a lot of phrases like that if you if you give an alien 10% of your earth's GDP then they're
going to win a glass of milk so for game theoretic reasons we shouldn't like like steven said we
shouldn't negotiate with terrorists yeah yeah i think that he was being sarcastic but he was being
somewhat serious too i think it was also just it was i'll take both okay so there's also you know
like the the Pascal's mugging kind of reverse scenario right where so like when the when the
initial question it's like if i told you this box had a million earths in it and it's our trillion
beings in it like okay so it's a shoe box you're insane but if i could verify it then this becomes
like an important question right so the verifiability is kind of what makes that a serious conundrum
if they just handed me this pebble saying this is this contains a trillion beings you better give me
a billion dollars a year or i'm gonna kill them all or something like that's i don't know that's
that's a that's a weird set of affairs but i don't know if we did all that much justice to
the question but i will say i think you don't necessarily have a moral obligation to a being
unless you had something to do with them coming into existence so future civilizations shouldn't
care about your emulated mind i don't know i don't know i i i think yeah but not 10% of their
gdp care just to keep me running i hope that i could provide something of value that they would
want to keep me around for or if not i could threaten them with something that would allow me
to stay alive but i don't know in the end why should they care or just that question right
so like my time is done yeah and then that brings you back to so what is the obligation of the guy
who owns colorado to feed these people instead of guarding the colorado borders with his army of
drones right uh everyone's gonna think that he's a jerk and he won't have any friends he can make
his drone friends thank you so much for listening um you can comment on our subreddit for the
basing conspiracy podcast you can email us personally at basing conspiracy podcast at gmail
dot com yes yes and go to our website at the basing conspiracy dot com something we just got
us short and all this to tbc dot com tbc so i do want to say really quick too as far as a quick
plug because i don't think you know i should do it uh his podcast the methods of rationality will
be going back a week after this episode airs so check into that yes with the first chapter of
the metropolitan man which is a superman fanfic rationalist superman fanfic that focuses primarily
on max luther it's pretty exciting nice plugs bye bye see you in two weeks bye
me
you
