Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Enya Ashbrotsky.
I'm Stephen Zuber.
I'm Jess Dickey.
And before we jump into our topic, I wanted to do a little bit of self-promotion, if I
may.
You may.
Yay!
Promotion granted.
Okay, so as some of the listeners might know, I do like to write things from time to time.
And I've written a number of short stories and I eventually realized that short stories
are good for like experimenting with one quick idea and learning how to, some of the craft
of writing.
But in the end, no one really reads short stories, no one talks about short stories.
It's not something you do nowadays if you want to have an impact and or be noticed, right?
And I want both those things.
So I started working on a novel.
This was specifically a novel that's based off one of my short stories where I ran into
the editor at one of these cons and she was like, oh my god, I loved it so much.
This was fantastic.
And I was like, oh, thank you for telling me that because I've been wanting to write something
and there was so much more I could have done and I had to cut shit out just to fit it into
the word count.
And all right, I'm totally going to do this.
So then I spent the next year and a half writing, which also contained a fair bit of reading
up on Ancient Rome.
And eventually I finished this book and I actually finished this right around the time Trump
was being sworn in, I think maybe a month or two after.
It would have been like the spring of what, 2018 then?
2017?
2018.
Because I remember you went to Burning Man for the first time that summer.
Yeah.
You sent me a PDF of your book and you said, if I die, make sure the world sees this book.
Yes, exactly.
I'm glad you were thinking ahead though.
Right, because I mean, you didn't know to expect.
Yeah, that's all I really wanted.
Just put it out there so people can see because this is what I wanted to do with these years
of my life.
Wait, did you think you were going to die from Burning Man or from Trump being elected?
No, no, no, no, no, from Burning Man, not necessarily from the Burning Man, but from
the drive there or the back.
Or maybe if I'm an idiot and I got dehydrated out in the desert and somebody didn't find
me, whatever, I don't know.
Or one of those roaming bands of cannibals got you.
Right, right, right, because it's a complete wasteland simulator, so coming with the cannibals
as well.
No, so, you know, I didn't think it was a high chance of me dying or else I wouldn't
have gone.
I thought it was basically miniscule, but non-zero, higher than if I would have just
stayed in my apartment.
I didn't mean to get you off track.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But anyways, what I'm trying to say is this book has been completed for a while.
I've gone over it several times trying to make it as good as I can.
I am releasing it online a chapter at a time if you want to read it, but when this episode
comes out, it will be out for pre-order at Amazon.com.
There'll be a one month period where you can pre-order it and then it comes out and then
everyone can buy it.
Woo-hoo!
That's awesome.
Yeah.
Congrats, man.
Thank you.
That's super exciting.
I am very excited by it, yeah.
So I put a plug for this story and you sent me the original short story and if you like
dark stuff, you should read this.
I actually had to stop reading it.
And you put worm.
And I read worm.
It was pretty dark.
Really?
It was darker than worm?
I don't know if it was darker than worm, but like it actually disturbed me enough that
I had to put it down for a bit.
Sweet.
I can see the gratification in your face.
You're like, yeah, I got somebody.
Happy he is.
That's awesome.
Yeah, no, recommended.
Yeah.
I like the short version too.
I read the first chapter, the long version, and it's not that I, I wasn't not hooked,
but my reading bandwidth is terrible because I'm a shit person.
So I spent all my time reading board right now.
So, but no, it'll be great.
That's really cool.
You were thinking of doing an audio too, right?
Not to push you into anything that you don't want to do, but I would, I would listen to
it.
Okay.
Maybe.
I don't know.
Maybe.
Maybe Steven would listen to it.
That's well.
My bandwidth for listening to things is really good.
So.
Okay.
Yeah.
It's a large undertaking.
So.
Yeah.
No doubt.
That's really cool.
Yeah.
What was I going to say about, oh, I might have mentioned this before because you're
publishing a chapter at a week, but it wasn't written serially.
No, it was written all at once.
I learned that the, the Martian was originally written as a serial fiction online, which is
like why there's so many like little cliffhanger moments in it and that it being then published
as a major book and then a major movie was like, what's the word, vindicating to like
other serial fiction authors.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And he was posting it just on a forums.
Yeah.
It wasn't even like a real dedicated thing.
Yeah.
So cool.
But yeah, the chapter time story will complete sometime in, I think mid September.
So this will let people get it like two months early if they want, or, and you know, also
have the whole thing and also be.
You want people to buy it.
You're allowed to say that.
It's not that I want people to buy it necessarily.
It's that I want it to be seen and like if a bunch of people buy it on opening week,
that's like when Amazon goes, oh, hey, let's promote this to more people.
So yeah.
Have you said the name of it?
Oh, I know.
It's what lies dreaming and it's by me.
So by Niasz Brotski.
And you can also find it at whatliesdreaming.com if you wanted to like read it beforehand
or whatever.
Cool.
Yeah.
That's awesome, man.
And it's awesome.
I'm quite happy.
I originally wanted to go through like a traditional publisher, right?
And I could not get anyone at all interested in like alternate history, ancient Rome, Lovecraftian
horror.
They're like, you've got to be fucking kidding me.
No one, no one's buying alternate history right now, much less Lovecraftian horror,
alternate history.
Yeah.
So I guess I'm not enough about the market, but that sounds interesting to me.
Yeah.
Apparently they said the only alternate history that anyone is bothering to publish right
now is romance because that actually sells the rest of alternate history is like such
a niche thing that publishers don't bother.
You could make whatliesdreaming a romance.
I could actually.
I could.
Yeah.
I could see it be marketed as a romance, but also like if it contains Lovecraftian monsters
in what sense is it like alternate history?
Well, it's alternate history, but like it's alternate history in the same way that like
Harry Potter's version of World War II was alternate history, but that wasn't an alternate
history book.
Yeah.
It was it was a fantasy book.
Alternate history can be like a historical setting with fantasy elements.
Yeah.
It's like a Lincoln and Zombies.
You have to make up your own continent.
Yes.
Forget that.
It's got certain tropes.
It's called second world fantasy and that's what people generally want.
If it's just set in the past of our own world, it's some version of alternate history.
It's the past of a different version of our world.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, that's the weird thing because alternate history usually focuses on how history
would be different if certain events and it had changed, right?
And this book does not focus on that at all.
It's just it happens in that time period.
That's my understanding of alternate history, too.
So I mean, I'm not the the people who know these things are defined the categories, but
it didn't.
If you're calling, you know, what if, you know, JFK survived this assassination and
I'm going to write a book about the decade after that.
Yeah.
That's traditional alternate history.
If that's alternate history and what universe is, you know, hey, it's ancient Rome with
a lot of fictional characters who get, you know, there's magic and shit involved.
Like that's those can't be in the same category to me.
I don't know how publishers categorize things, but I'm saying they do it wrong.
All right.
But I was, yeah, that part, that really sucked for a while, but I got to see what it's like
to like commission your own cover artist and have to do all your, all the, you know, interior
stuff by yourself and have a higher cover designer to put it all together.
I don't know.
It was interesting, single process.
I've been on the other side of it, so that's kind of fun.
The only the only bummer part is that like, I do not have the skills or the time to go
around to bookstores and get it in bookstores.
I don't know who to contact at Barnes and Noble and they wouldn't listen to me anyway.
They'd be like, yeah, you're Joe Schmoe.
You know how many Joe Schmoes approaches.
So you had a thing at the bookstore downtown last year.
I did.
And I'm probably going to get a stock in this one, but that's because they're a local
bookstore that, you know, I know the owners.
I don't know.
I mean, this is just my journal advice or anything, but you said you wouldn't even
know how to get in hold of them.
Just Google how to market a book to Barnes and Noble and see if there's a phone
number to call or someone, an email.
I'm really sure they're just going to be annoyed that another guy from not a publishing
house is trying to contact them.
Maybe everybody thinks that and no one tries and they have like shelves ready
for books.
Oh, there are so many awesome horror stories about about the guy who gets
contacted by the person who thinks their book is the shit.
And when they're turned down, they go on this rant for pages about how you don't
know good writing when you see it and all that.
Yeah, it's kind of hilarious.
I mean, to be fair, that stereotype person is out there in droves.
Yeah, we had like people that when I worked at the library, we're trying to
like bring their own books that they had written.
And like, can you put this in the library?
Yeah, like no, there were a few that have been like local authors that had
actually been published and we're like, absolutely.
We'll put you in our like little, we had a little South Jersey history section
and South Jersey authors.
But like, yeah, then somewhere like, you know, some manuscript that they had
printed on their printer and it was stapled.
This is my book.
And it's like, we're a very small library.
We can barely fit the amount of books that we have right now.
So we're not in the archive.
Aren't places to donate books?
No, you can't donate books.
Was that a joke?
That wasn't that was a real question.
So I shouldn't go to library.
Oh, we're getting, we've got like 30 books we're getting rid of.
I don't know.
So don't take them to the library.
Um, well, when you bring books to the library to donate, generally what
happens is they either get put in like the little free public libraries
to be distributed or they get sold in the library's book sale to raise funds
for the library, but libraries have limited space and they do actually have
to stock like they run statistics on what gets checked out the most and what
people have the most interest in.
I think they make me sit there while they do all this for all my books.
No, they will take the books and be like, thank you.
Oh, good.
And then people think they're going to get stuck on the shelves, but generally
they are duplicate of something the library already has or are destined for
book sale or to be given away, which they're still, yeah, they're still going
to good places.
Um, all right, that works.
Anyways, that's everything that I had.
Thank you guys for indulging me for, for a little while.
So check out what lies dreaming on Amazon in when this episode airs.
Yes, I'll have a link in the show description or just, you know, search
for it yourself.
Great.
Yeah, that's what lies dreaming.
Uh, okay.
We should go on to our topic.
Yes.
So last time I gave a quick shout out to the, uh, consolidated morality thread,
but I forget the full name now.
Consolidated nature of morality thread.
Excellent.
And, uh, you guys were like, Hey, this is actually interesting.
Why don't we actually talk about it?
And I was like, okay.
So now we have an episode where we're going to be talking about that.
And I'm sorry, I, I sounded more, um, bled about that that I meant to just now.
I was now, I guess we're going to talk about it.
Oh God, you were more, you're more exasperated that you were like, why
didn't you say that we could have done this?
And we still can.
And you're like, we can.
And so we're here.
Here we are.
Yes.
Yeah.
We're doing it.
Awesome.
I was going to bring on a friend of the podcast, um, Lyric Lee to, uh, be our guest
on this and I was only able to ask her last night and, uh, I phrased it in such
a way that didn't come off as like a request to come to the show.
And then when I got, when they got back to me this afternoon, it was like, you
know, five hours out and there wasn't time, but I had said, Hey, um, I know it's
short notice, but we're discussing this post tomorrow and you're the best
resource I know to help us navigate it.
I thought it was implied.
They're like, you should come and help us navigate this.
But they wrote us a very long, uh, detailed reply here, which will be nice to
go through as much as we can.
Um, cause it covers a lot of the beats that I think they would have been able
to hit in person too.
Um, what was I going to say about the other thing on the episode?
Oh, I mean, I want to, I only have the person who took notes, so thanks guys.
I have my notes in my head.
Okay, great.
Well, I'm also all over the place today.
So everyone can enjoy that.
I'm getting used to like working at home for 60% of the time.
And it turns out when I'm at home and have no distractions, I just like grind for
too long and it really wears me out, which you'd think would be the opposite.
Like I'm at home, I can get up and do stuff.
I'll go to the dishes and like I don't, I'll run downstairs and like I keep, I drink
a ton of water, so I'll like change out water bottles from the fridge.
And then I'll see them and like, no, I'll get them later.
So yeah, it's weird.
Are you on Madafnil when you do this?
Yeah.
I hear that Madafnil really makes you hyper focused.
It's not so much that.
And I mean, it could be.
I'll try less tomorrow.
Yeah, that's not the problem I have when I work from home.
Yeah, I don't know.
My thing is just like, I'm also desperate to like make sure I'm doing things.
Like if I'm at work, people can see me trying.
It's different.
We're trying at home.
They don't even know that I'm doing anything.
So like, I need to think about your results.
I need something to work by the end of the day.
Oh, yeah.
It's kind of interesting.
Yeah, I think it'll it'll level out when I get better at the stuff.
It sounds like more people should work from home.
I think if you have a job that allows it, there's a lot of jobs that, you know,
you go to the office just to make a presence.
Like, yeah, if you have to send something at the end of the day that like is a bug
fix or, you know, you've written a new program, you're showing your results.
Whereas if you're in an office, you have to just look busy.
Yeah, that's the worst, which is so much of the job.
I am my last place going to the office every day with a big company
and like upper management never is around.
So you're as long as you're like in the building, nobody knows or cares where you
are. So like, you can be like, well, I've been here all day.
I'm going to go home now, guys.
And it's it's a whole different environment.
So I found that being being in an environment where you're
watched makes makes me anyway work slower.
Because when I when I know that I just got to do the thing
and then I have my time to read or surf the net or write or whatever you do the thing
in 10 minutes. Yeah, exactly.
But like when I can't do that, because if I'm not working, it looks like I'm slacking off.
I'm like, well, going to be a slow day of very leisurely moving numbers
around on spreadsheets, because it doesn't matter.
Control C, move the mouse, control V.
Don't want to strain any muscles while I'm doing this.
Yeah. Well, that's, well, that's the measures from working from home.
Not very exciting, but it's an interesting different pace for me.
So and it explains I'm trying to justify why I'm, you know, I'm bracing myself,
bracing everybody for my performance here in the next I feel like this part
could be cut out for the patrons.
Maybe that whole part for everybody.
They all get to hear they all deserve an explanation.
Yeah, I don't know if like, I don't know if I'm doing so good.
It's spreading sequences, the anime.
Damn it, you're just making things worse for everyone.
It'll happen to you, too.
It's infectious.
All right, so diving in.
So we mentioned that there were 10 kind of bullet points in this thread.
And his purpose of writing this was saying, you know, I'm going to be
talking about morality stuff later, rather than get bogged down
with all this stuff every time we do a morality related post.
Just have that conversation here and save the comments, a lot of the trouble.
I'm not 100 percent sure what, like, why that should be.
I guess not to rehash the same argument over and over.
Specifically, it was distinguishing between moral judgments and factual beliefs.
Right. And so he's got 10 kind of brain teasers,
thought experiments and just kind of intuition pumps to try and answer that
question or to address that point.
And he doesn't say this up front.
But once you get through them, you realize they're not unrelated.
They are like, like I think I said last episode, they're a stealth
takedown of the is, ought dichotomy distinction.
Yeah. Well, let's let's let's get into it.
OK, then. All right.
So the first one, it certainly looks like there's an important distinction
between a statement like the total loss of human life caused in World War Two
was roughly 72 million people, and we ought to avoid a repeat of World War Two.
And when it argues that these statements are of the same fundamental kind,
must explain away the parent structural differences between them.
What are the exact structural differences?
I think this one is pretty easy.
The first one is just a statement of fact.
This is how many people died.
And the second one is a normative statement we ought to not have.
Are we ought to avoid? Yeah. Yeah. But yeah.
So when you say normative, this is a thing that should be like
this is where we want to push reality to be like like a prescription.
Yeah. So so one's a judgment about this is basically one's an odd statement
and one's one's a reading of nature, right?
Yeah. Yeah. So one's a just a statement of a fact, the thing that happened.
And the other one is a like a moral judgment.
Yeah. I'm reminded of the regulation sequence that we did a while ago
where I think the same issue came up.
Elisar had said something like if you create these stores that legalize all drugs,
then some poor mother of five is going to come in and buy Dr.
Snakey's oil for arthritis and die.
And people interpreted that as him saying that we should not have that store.
And that was what that whole post was kind of motivated by.
Yeah, I can easily see two people hearing the statement
that total loss of human life was seventy two million
and interpreting it as meaning the same thing as the second statement.
That sounds like you're making a negative statement about World War Two.
And that means that you personally are against World War Two.
Yeah, I could do that.
I was funny as I agree with you.
But I guess to me, it's not as obvious as an intuition leap.
Like, I mean, if I was on a game show
with someone asking how many people died in World War Two and I said seventy two
million, that's not a prescription of whether, you know, of judgment on that.
Right. Right.
It's not. Yeah, exactly.
So I think it depends on the context, though, like say somebody had asked you like,
so what do you what do you think about?
Was World War Two just?
And if you said, well, the total loss of human life was roughly seventy two
million in response to that, that would sound like you were arguing with them.
Yeah. In fact, that would be like that'd be a comeback.
Right. Or to me, that would be non sequitur.
Yes. And I think it depends.
Like you're you're packing in the value there, like, you know, unless unless
they're asking, like, so what, it wasn't enough.
I think what they're to read from that is like, oh, yeah, he thinks that the
the loss of life is unconsciously high.
That's maybe all to cover on that one.
Well, we want to the next one.
We've got ten of them.
Yeah. So like the way my only one sentence thing on that is like the second
statement packs in the first statement as just like as axiomatically bad.
Right. Yeah. I don't know.
I think they're different.
But the second one takes like the first one as a premise, like we are not.
We ought not to we ought to avoid repeating World War Two.
Why should we do that?
Because seventy two million people died.
I think the second statement is more sneaking in the assumption that
people dying is bad.
And let me read a statement to we experience some of our morals and
preferences as being voluntary choices, others as involuntary perceptions.
I choose to play on the side of rationality, but I don't think I could
choose to believe that death is good any more than I could choose to believe
that the sky is green.
What psychological factors account for these differences in my perceptions
of my own preferences?
So I think that is there's a couple things to look at this one.
One are some of our moral preferences are voluntary and others seem like
involuntary perceptions.
Like maybe we see like babies getting murdered as like involuntarily like,
oh, my God, that's terrible.
And others kind of need you to look at it and scratch your head and be like,
you're right, we shouldn't be doing that to chickens or something.
But it's not as involuntary, maybe.
Or what is there?
Or is he saying that we experience some of our morals that way
or our perceptions that way.
But in fact, that's an illusion.
What do you guys think?
It sounds like the second thing.
I think that the those examples are too easy.
I think more like a.
I mean, maybe maybe examples might be like factory farming and it's hard for me
because I can't think of any moral perception that I think is voluntary.
I guess when you say moral perception, that's different than moral judgment.
And even moral judgments aren't voluntary, I guess.
Like you look at factory farming and your only your judgment is like,
whether or not to live differently based on how you feel about it.
Like most people don't look at at the treatment of animals there and say,
you know what, that's great.
That's why that's why beef or something.
Right. They say that sucks, but beef's super cheap and I like it.
So most people, some people might.
That sounds I mean, to me, that sounds like a moral trade off.
The part where they say that sucks is the moral judgment.
Like I'm looking at an animal suffering and I think that is bad.
Yeah, I guess that's where I got it got held up, though,
because like I don't I don't get to choose what I think is is right and wrong.
I sort of like get these my consciousness in my my sense of moral scope is broadened.
And then I realize that new things are in my sense of moral scope.
And then it's more just like how do I want to change my life to acknowledge
that information and sometimes there's a lot of times it's very little.
So this is kind of like debating the nature of free will.
I mean, I want to say that, yeah, some of your, you know,
moral intuitions come from your upbringing.
From instincts that you have as a evolved animal.
And then like, but some of it you choose yourself, right?
Can you give me an example?
I mean, say that you were raised a Catholic and then became an atheist.
And now you're kind of moral considerations have shifted.
Well, I was raised a fundamentalist and I became an atheist.
And none of that felt voluntary to me at all.
I was vegetarian for like four years or six, I forget.
And my family definitely isn't.
They gave me a lot of shit about it.
Not like because they're mean, just because they're whatever.
Sure. But how it worked out.
Stop being morally superior to us, Stephen.
That might have been it.
But I don't think that way.
They would say stop thinking you're morally superior to us
without actually being so right.
I know that it was morally superior than they would have to feel bad about it.
I definitely think that vegetarians are morally superior to me.
Do you? Yeah.
Yeah, I think so, too.
But they're obviously right.
And we're also not giving vegetarians shit about their choice, right?
No, I think that they're very admirable people.
Exactly. But I think what you're saying is that if we were mocking them about it,
probably because we thought that they we actually thought that they were better than us.
So that was a decision that I wasn't like
wasn't part of my upbringing, part of my taking philosophy classes in college
and reading one Peter Singer essay.
And I was like, oh, shit, I'm a vegetarian now.
So I mean, I guess you can choose
to expose yourself to certain things or not to expose yourself to them.
But once you see those things, I'm not sure you have like a choice in the matter.
Yeah, there's not putting a cat back in the back of a lot of people.
I mean, I've heard people know.
I mean, like my sister saw all the same things that I did
and she's still Christian and I'm an atheist.
Yeah, that's more.
I mean, not to like say that there's no moral implications of one's religiosity,
but that's different than like a I wouldn't say like being an unbeliever is
like necessarily more morally desirable than being a religious person.
Well, but it's like what you do.
You don't think she made the intentional choice to stay Christian, though, right?
Well, I think she did.
I think a lot of people do after a certain point.
It was probably harder, I don't know.
OK, I can't read people's minds, but like my intuition is that
before there was like pretty solid proof,
or at least like very strong evidence that there is no God,
there's no evidence for God.
It was pretty easy to believe.
And now I feel like it actually like requires you make the quote unquote leap
of faith after you hit puberty or whatever, you get to a certain point
and like you start learning about science and realizing that like
magic does not seem to exist anywhere in the world.
Yeah, but it's I mean, this isn't that new of a thing.
The ancient Greeks were talking about how God's don't actually exist.
I mean, some of them it's people have been noticing that there's
no evidence for God's for a long time.
I think but lots of people believe anyway.
Some people like and just that you can't read her mind and that makes sense.
Like it's not clear that she can read her mind on this, right?
Let me know the difference between like belief and belief and actual believing
when they they have no compunctions about what
yeah, called the leap of faith, where they're just like,
I'm just going to keep believing it.
And I don't know what that means.
And I don't think any of us are equipped now.
I remember what that means.
I remember being a child and like it not feeling different.
What do I mean by that?
I was like, basically, you know, I was raised Catholic,
but I definitely compartmentalized even as a really young kid between these
are like the stories I'm told.
And this is what I, you know, I'm supposed to believe is true.
And then here's what I'm actually observing.
But you're like softwares running so hard on modeling the other people around you
that you actually believe what they say you should believe so you can conform really good.
Yeah.
I like remember being a kid.
And I think like if I, you know, went back to that headspace now,
I could actually probably like look at my own thoughts and beliefs and be like,
huh, that's really interesting.
I noticed that I'm confused that my expectations for what is going to happen
when I run around in reality and interact with physics are different
than my expectations about like what I'm supposed to believe.
Well, I mean, if everyone in your tribe is running away as fast as they can
from something, there's probably a good reason, right?
Yeah.
So you're going to do that too.
And you're also going to be scared
even though you don't know what the fuck's going on.
Yeah, your nervous system should react.
And you shouldn't just sit there thinking, OK, they're all running.
But has anyone seen like that?
I mean, I need to run.
Because in that like two minute comedy sketch of that guy jogging,
like walking in the park and he doesn't know jogging is a thing,
apparently, because he sees people jogging by and he's kind of like looking
at them running and then he's looking back at where they're running from.
And he kind of goes running the same way they were going.
And then that keeps happening.
And then like two joggers go by in different directions
and he's kind of just freaking out, doesn't know where to go.
I mean, I have not seen that.
It was it was funny.
So I guess what I'm saying, number two, is that I disagreed
that there's some moral beliefs that are voluntary choices.
So he's not saying that some are and some aren't.
He's saying that we experience them that way.
So are there any that you experience as voluntary choices?
Because I don't I don't really think I do either.
I don't know.
I think I absolutely experience becoming an atheist as a voluntary choice.
But I just what I was saying about free will is I don't know that I believe
that it really was a voluntary choice.
You know, like people are born with their personality types.
And I had like a very high openness.
And I guess my sister had a high conformity.
That's interesting.
Yeah, I don't know anywhere that I'm at now that I felt like I decided to get there.
It's more just like either I was like, oh, I guess that's the way to go.
And I went there or I pushed that way and just, you know, by mountains of argument
or evidence or something, right?
I can't remember.
And I don't think I could decide to push back at this point.
So no, I forget it.
I'm going to change my mind on the moral salience of animals or something.
So that's that's the next part of the post.
It's like, I don't think that I could choose to believe death is good anymore
than I could choose to believe the sky is green.
I think if we read point number three,
this might clarify a little bit with what he was saying.
Cool.
Any us three point three.
Sorry.
I forgot that it was my turn at a relatively young age,
children begin to believe that while the teacher can make it all right to stand on your
chair by giving permission, the teacher cannot make it all right to steal from someone else's
backpack.
I can't recall the exact citation.
Do young children in a religious environment believe that God can make it all right to
steal from someone's backpack?
And I think that's where he was going that maybe the the the rules based morality,
the rule giver can make something morally true or not true.
Well, I think to me, the difference there is that there's not a moral statement about
standing on your desk, like no one's hurt or anything, right?
And not damaging somebody or something.
Well, you're damaging the desk, maybe, but whatever.
I guess as a as a young kid, though, if I didn't know what morality was yet,
if the teacher told me it was wrong, then I might believe that it was wrong.
Interesting.
I guess I don't remember being a kid that much.
Yeah.
So they didn't say this is morally bad and you shouldn't do it.
They just said don't because it's wrong.
And like as a kid, you might.
You often don't even get that because because it's wrong, but you just say don't.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And which is how I remember being told not to stand on desks was don't not you shouldn't
because it's bad.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Whereas like if I had taken somebody from something, they might say don't you shouldn't
steal because that's bad, right?
Right.
Right.
Maybe yeah, I guess the fact that it's dealing with kids kind of takes away some of that.
Although I do think that there's been questions asked about this sort of thing,
whether it be like in Jonathan Haidt's book or maybe Paul Bloom, anyone who's written on
like child psychology and morality and stuff.
I think that this is definitely a question that's certainly been asked by somebody.
So if anyone Googles it and finds out, that'd be cool.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think as to the second part, do they believe that God can make it all right to steal from
someone's backpack?
Yeah, I think so.
People believe that God can make it okay to kill people.
Some adults certainly say that they believe that, right?
Yeah.
So it has to it seems to follow the kids and think that way too, unless kids are like
more morally pure or something.
I don't think so.
I don't think so either.
There's so many stories in the Bible about God asking people to just do buckwild things.
And in most of them, he doesn't change his mind partway through and say it was a test
or something.
He just says, go ahead and set your daughter on fire for me.
So yeah, I don't know what to make of that.
I mean, I also don't know what to make the adults who say that if God came down tomorrow
and said it's great to rape and hurt people, that I would then go forth and feel it's an
obligation to do it.
I don't know if they're serious or like if they
really believe that because I don't believe anyone doesn't do something because it says
not to in the Bible.
Maybe some people do and let me rephrase that then.
I don't think any significant number of people are running around not murdering people because
the Bible says doubt shall not kill.
Right.
They're not they're not doing it because they don't want to go to prison and because they
don't want to kill people.
And it's mainly the second one, right?
I think a lot of it is just the social environment.
It's not because the Bible says not to kill people.
It's because their pastor and their neighbors and everyone in the community says don't kill
people.
And sure, they use the Bible as a backing for that.
But the Bible has lots of things it says in there that the rest of their community is
not enforcing, like don't eat shellfish.
Yeah, but what about gay people in the Bible belt who don't have sex with other gay people
because they feel horrible guilt?
I think, well, yeah, but I think that was inculcated into them by their culture.
Everyone's saying that this is wrong.
This is bad.
Yeah, but they're saying it because it was from the Bible, though.
But there's lots of other things that their culture ignores that are in the Bible.
So I think the Bible is the term proximate college shit.
Now I don't know my vocabulary.
I think that sounds right.
What you're saying is that they're not ashamed and burdened by their cause of homosexuality
because it's in the Bible.
They're burdened by their society.
Yes, and their society is based on the Bible.
No one's up at night because they're wearing woven fabrics or eating shellfish, right?
Yeah.
And this society is fucked up because of the Bible.
There's some things that chose not to ignore, which is stupid,
but it's society is the ultimate enforcer of these things.
Right on.
Is my opinion.
So what do you make of the difference between the kids thinking that it's all right,
or the kids thinking that it's not all right for the teacher to make it all right to steal
from a kid's backpack, but thinking that it is all right if God does?
I think that's just the kids noticing that their teacher is not all of society.
Okay, explain that more.
Well, the teacher is imbued by society with the power to say standing on your desk is wrong,
but society will not go so far as to make the kid does not believe society would go so far as
to back up the teacher if they were to say taking stealing from other people's backpacks is wrong.
Okay, so the kids understand that society is stronger than the one teacher.
In some respects, yeah, I think they correctly intuit that no one gives
two fucks about the rules the teachers make about standing and not standing on the desk,
but that there would be greater repercussions if the teacher started making rules about stealing.
That may contradict everyone.
That might make sense.
If I remember being a child at all, my reasoning might have been something like,
I'm not afraid that my parents are going to be mad because I did something bad.
They're going to be mad because the teacher got mad at me because I disobeyed an order from the
teacher, whereas they might be disappointed in me if I stole from somebody's backpack.
All right, and as a kid, that's like your society, your classroom and your parents.
I don't know, maybe I'm wrong about that, but if the studies did indeed show that, that would be
my intuition that it feels like a moral fact of the universe because that's what being taught
morals by our society feels like, but that ultimately it's not obviously because they are
just a moral fact of the universe. It's something else.
Steven, four.
All right, both human, excuse me, both individual human beings and civilizations appear to change
at least some of the moral beliefs over the course of time. Some of these changes are
experienced as decisions and others are experienced as discoveries. Is there a systematic distinction
to at least some of these changes? And how does this systematic decision, excuse me,
how does this systematic direction arise causally? So these aren't five questions. These are five
jumping off points, right? So there's a lot in here. So I guess...
I said it's going to be a whole episode.
What are some examples of discoveries versus decisions? That's what I wanted to ask.
So society might have made a decision about like ending slavery or desegregating schools.
That was like... I guess maybe the discovery came first. Maybe that's how the order that
it's usually happens in. Maybe that's partly how these things causally arise is that...
The discovery that you can use slaves or the discovery that...
That slavery is wrong.
That slavery is wrong. Okay.
Or in the case of the 1960s, desegregating schools turns out, oh, you know what, that is a bad thing.
And then it took some arguing and some social demonstrations to pass legislation to make that
change, right? But it seems like the discovery comes before the decision.
Isn't the real discovery in quotes here that all humans are of equal moral worth on the outset?
I want to say all men are created equal, but that's problematic nowadays,
both because of the men and because of the created part.
But to take older phrasing, isn't the discovery all men are created equal?
Well, I think...
And then the decision is to like, well, now that we've discovered that we can't have slaves
anymore, because what the fuck, guys?
Okay, I was thinking about it in terms of agriculture being a discovery.
And yeah, something like the decision to desegregate schools being a decision.
Because we have been doing things this one way, but we debated about it.
People changed their minds and now we realize this is bad.
So we're going to do it this other way.
Whereas like with the discovery that you can do agriculture, it's just...
So are there any moral discoveries then under that paradigm?
I think it...
I was thinking of a slightly different direction where like you discover...
So like to take the all men are created equal example that had a very narrow definition
when it was first uttered, right?
Which one?
All men are created equal.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
So it was that, you know...
Oh, in this context, women are men too.
Oh, and black people are men too.
And some people, or you know, you could say humans are created equal instead of men,
make the quote less annoying.
Humans evolved equal.
Yes.
And then if you make it more generic, and that's sort of...
I think the direction of moral progress is that the moral horizon keeps going up
or keeps expanding, right?
I would argue with that.
Well, I think part of it is like you realize that there's...
So it goes from like men, which is like white land-owning slave owners,
to, you know, the rest of white men, to the rest of white men,
including some of these immigrants, then women, et cetera.
And it's getting expanded.
And then...
And there's ways in which it's shrunk too.
Well, to finish my thing really, to get where I'm going is...
So you quit saying man, you start saying person.
And then you can kind of say sentient being.
And then you realize like, okay, well, if I'm not just caring about my fellow men,
I'm caring about my fellow humans and my fellow, I guess, you know, people, you know,
maybe chimps and elephants and, you know, sentient beings.
Okay, well, that broadens it to basically everything that's alive, right?
So in that sense, that seems to the direction that it happened, at least historically, right?
Whether or not that's the way that it felt like going from then to now is different.
But what was your thought?
Oh, well, I mean, I think there's some entities that we don't consider important
anymore that we used to.
Like what? Like real entities?
Well, I was guessing that you're going to say like gods or something, right?
Yeah. And they, I mean, gods is obviously a big one.
People who are not alive anymore, I think is a pretty big one too.
That used to be a much greater concern of people in the past that they,
if something were to dishonor the memory of one of their ancestors or their loved ones,
that was like really important to them.
Whereas nowadays we're like, well, they're dead.
That's interesting. I think you're right.
So like the scope of harm, maybe was more refined there.
Like on the one hand, I don't burn a lot of concern over like the leprechauns I step on
going to and from my car, right?
So if my ancestors thought there were leprechauns that they were stepping on,
then, you know, they were worried about it.
That's their own problem.
So, but the other part about ancestors, yeah.
So I'm torn on that.
Like on the one hand, you know, we talked about years ago with Katrina,
like about harming dead people and I could go to your grave and like,
pull out your skeleton and set it on fire.
Like I'm not harming you. You're dead.
In that sense, it's pointless.
But in the sense of like, I wish I'd said this at the time.
I might have mentioned this in the air before, but like if Katrina died and like,
so if I desecrate her corpse, I'm not harming her.
But if I put a bunch of child porn on her computer and a bunch of human meat in her fridge,
I've harmed her reputation, right?
And somebody might take offense at that, right?
To put it mildly.
And I think they'd be kind of right to do so.
I'm ruining all that's left of this person by destroying what's their legacy.
And even if you aren't destroying their legacy directly,
doing something like supporting, like if I was dead and my children,
in assuming I had any, were to start passing, to bring it back to their last episode,
anti-abortion legislation, that I would hope that at least they would think
this would really piss off Yinesh.
This is harming the memory of what he would want, you know?
Yeah.
And I think, you know, the only time I can think of anyone saying it like,
you know, fighting free ancestors is like, you know, Viking Norse, you know, Thor stuff.
And I think-
That used to be a much bigger deal.
Yeah.
But to make your ancestors proud was less about like,
maybe it was like you actually thought that they were up there caring about this,
but it might be more like, you know, they didn't fight to, you know,
keep Scotland independent.
And I'm not talking about Vikings anymore.
Only for me to give it up.
Right, exactly.
I'm not gonna piss on their sacrifice by giving this in.
The people didn't fight Hitler in World War II just so that we could censor the
fuck out of everyone now and start burning books and shit.
Right.
Or have Nazis now.
Or have Nazis.
Yeah.
Either way.
Yeah.
So.
And I mean, those were the two that I came up with.
Gwern, I think, did a much deeper dive.
And at one point, which I was like, oh, that's cool.
And he pointed out that people used to have much more reverence for objects.
Like you could actually harm a forest or harm a river.
And that was a morally bad thing in some cultures.
Japan even as little as a hundred years ago, I think.
The, you know, leading religion in Japan is Shintoism,
which still has that kind of reverence for objects.
Yeah.
And that was, that is another thing that, at least in the Western society,
we have drastically gotten away from.
Like you can't really nowadays hurt a book by burning it.
I think we still have reverence for religious objects.
People get really upset if you burn a Bible.
Or desecrate one of the communion hosts.
Yeah. There is, I guess, some special exceptions to the most part.
At my first ham, there was somebody who gave a presentation.
I want to say it was Masimo Puclucci, but it doesn't sound like his field.
So I'm not sure who it was.
But, and I think that the, well, what they found was that people,
they would like, hey, you know, thought experiment,
I'll give you a hundred bucks to give me your wedding ring.
And I'll duplicate it and give you the copy.
And I'll make it, you know, like a Star Trek multiplier thing.
Just give you the backup.
And like in the thought experiment, people would be like,
I don't want to do that.
Like this is mine.
It's, you know, it's, it's my whatever magic imbued essentialism to it.
Right. Yeah.
And he was like, it turns out this finding wasn't that sharply diminished,
if at all, in the secular community as it was in the religious community.
So people still like care about like the original version of their thing.
People definitely form attachments to objects.
Yeah.
Whether or not it's the same level of reverence.
Yeah, it certainly, it certainly can't be punished.
Well, I guess you can be punished by law in some way for damaging someone's property.
And I mean, if you're throwing a fit over a burnt Koran or a burnt Bible,
you're not doing it because it was your favorite copy of that book.
Right.
You know, and it was, you know, unless it was like the one
that your family's passed down for generations or something.
But it was just one you saw on TV.
You're doing it because you think that there's,
you think that you're doing actual harm that like the greater the universe is now
pissed at, you know, us or something, right?
But like no one here would put someone's way,
a friend losing an arm versus a Picasso painting being burned up, right?
As in like one's worse, like because one, no one here would choose.
Yeah, I want my friend to lose their arm rather than this painting being burned.
Yeah, totally.
It'd be like an art historian.
Maybe an art historian, but I would call that person a bad person.
Not a good friend.
Yeah, exactly.
Whereas more in the past, that would have been a much bigger deal.
Interesting.
All right, that's that's something to think about.
Yeah, I think we're got off topic though.
What was this about?
Decisions and discoveries.
Oh, right.
Yeah.
So what's what's the difference, I guess?
Like I said, I think the decision is when you when you make the choice to implement what you found
through through your moral introspection or broadening horizons or something, right?
So from the inside, a moral change always feels like a discovery?
I think so.
Certainly on the scale of a lifetime, maybe on the scale of a society,
because that's how it's felt for me.
It's me, I'll read something or I'll come to realization and I'm like,
oh, that's how I should be doing things.
I think this goes hand in hand with how whether or not you feel that you have a choice in your
moral intuitions.
Like I think both of us said, we don't feel, did you say this to just that we don't feel like we
have any choice in our moral beliefs?
No, I like that's why they feel like discoveries.
I made the distinction that I feel like I have a choice, but I think that I don't actually have a choice.
Right, right, right.
Old free will thing.
Yeah.
I think most people probably feel like they do have a choice.
I mean, because we feel like we have a choice of everything we do.
We don't feel like we have a choice over what we believe, though.
We feel like we have a choice if we drink tea or coffee, but not if we...
We should get some neurotypical people to ask on this.
Like, do you have a choice to believe this guy is blue?
Where's neurotypical Karen when you need her?
I'll put that on.
Like this is actually, I can't remember the full...
Yes, I do.
Well, it was me and a friend were debating, you know, this was like the quintessential
like hipster coffee shop with a bookstore in it.
And me and this guy were sitting around debating philosophy for like 30 minutes
and Rachel was sitting there.
She was bored and she'd wandered around the bookstore and she came back
and we're talking about justice or fairness or something about like returning, you know,
the whole Socrates example of like, is it just to return someone's axe?
If you've barred it, well, of course that's justice.
Well, what if they're going to murder somebody with it?
Well, then no, of course not.
And so we were like going back and forth like, well, if we were sure they're going to kill
somebody with it or kill themselves with it or something.
And Rachel's like on her phone or something.
She's like, without looking up, she's just like, I would just call the cops.
That's a very good answer.
And it was very grounding because like that we're getting so esoteric about this
with all this mind reading bullshit.
She was like, why don't you just do like the thing that makes actual sense?
And I'm like, that's, that's a really good point.
So the challenge or to do my best to put on her hat here, like you don't,
you don't decide that you're, you know, you look at your hand.
Like you don't decide that there's five fingers and or five digits,
whatever, if you're going to be pedantic.
If you look at my hand, right?
Or that I'm wearing a ring, like you don't, you don't get to decide that you,
you don't get to decide, I'm going to choose to believe he's not wearing one,
even though I can see it.
So like in some sense, moral, our moral discoveries like that, or are they like
something else?
I think it's the question, right?
Like I'm just going to decide that slave recent bad thing.
Yeah.
Or could you decide it's a good thing?
What if somebody's just really torn up about it?
And then they like spend a very long time researching and pondering,
and then they come to a decision.
Well, you spend a really long time researching and pondering about the
physical laws of the universe too, but you don't come to a decision of what
they are.
You come to it to discover what they are.
And you think those are equivalent?
I think that they feel equivalent at any rate.
We might, we might be hitting this as hard as we can for now.
We haven't resolved it, but we might be, if we want to.
We've run out of words to say on it.
We did, I think there at least was, I touched on how I think the systematic
direction arises causally.
And is there, well, I guess, what do you guys think?
Is there a systematic direction that these have been moving in that
discovery or decisions of morality?
So I gave my answer a while ago.
Yeah.
I think that as society has become richer and more convenient,
everything has become much less restrictive because we have the
luxury to be who we actually want to be.
So in that, in that respect, yes, but that's because we are rich now as a
people and we can afford to indulge in those things.
We can afford to live morally, but maybe like you could be a philosophical
vegetarian, you know, 700 years ago, but you're like, if only I didn't.
No, we're philosophical vegetarians.
Yeah.
Right.
And they had the luxury of having enough, like,
vegetation to eat, but you could be like a farmer or whatever, some peasant.
And you're like, I wish I didn't have to kill and eat these animals,
but I'm hungry and there's no other food around.
So like, you're just, there's the difference between like having the moral
judgment and then being able to live by the implications of that judgment.
And that could be driven by circumstance.
Like my help, my nice, whatever, nicely sourced food budget goes down when I,
you know, made less money, right?
So.
Well, I don't think it's a coincidence that the richer a area or society gets,
the more liberal it gets.
Yeah.
And also conversely, you know, the poorer an area is, the more conservative it is.
Well, I think the farmer from your example, Stephen,
probably doesn't actually have the time to sit there and like think about
whether or not eating meat is ethical.
Maybe he heard the argument once and was convinced by it.
I mean, like, and now we're stretching the thought experiment,
but I guess I'm saying is that it's possible for me like to buy unethically sourced food
because I'm making 10 bucks an hour.
And I'm like, I sure wish I didn't have to buy cheap, you know,
harmly sourced food to sustain myself.
And yes, through a ton of extra work, I could probably make stretch my $10 to buy,
you know, nicer sourced food, but I just don't have the other resources to do that,
like time and energy.
But then when the resources open up, you can, right?
So it's that kind of the slack to have the freedom to do those things.
Yeah, I think the slack is exactly what I was trying to describe.
Like, not only the ability to actually afford to eat vegetarian,
but like the time and I guess the education.
That works.
No, we'll move on.
I think you're up next, Jess.
Yeah, suppose I involuntarily administered to you.
We're on number five.
Sorry.
To paraphrase Alfred Tarski, the statement,
my car is painted green is true if and only if my car is painted green.
Similarly, someone might try to get away with asserting the statement,
human deaths are bad is true if and only if human deaths are bad.
Is this valid?
Okay, well, as the guy with the blog called death is bad, I think this is absolutely valid.
And I think that it is true that human deaths are bad.
So the next obvious thing here to point out is like, I can point to my green car.
My car is actually some shade of green, but I can't point to death being bad anywhere.
No, you cannot.
But you can point to the fact that there is no intrinsic value anywhere in the universe,
that things are only valued in as much as people value them.
And if you remove people, you remove all sorts of value.
But I don't remove the greenness of my car.
Right.
So if you're removing value and the ability for things to have value, that's a bad thing.
So don't go wrong.
I agree with you, but I could see how this doesn't sound convincing.
Okay, right.
Well, I like with without something to place value on stuff, then you don't have any value at all.
So destroying that is just, I don't want to say, no, I'm not going to say that.
I don't want to as I won't.
Exactly.
I don't know how else to put it aside from that.
You know, if the only things that can give things value are destroyed, then value has been destroyed.
So you're both kind of making an observer argument.
Well, I think I'm being more facetious about my observing than you are.
I think you're right.
It's just like the difference that someone might test to and he brings up math later,
which is a great thing because I can't point to two plus two equaling four anywhere, right?
I can, I guess, grab two things and grab two other things and put them together.
We can call those things four things.
But that's also something that only exists in the head of a being that can comprehend it.
Yeah.
I mean, if you got a colorblind person and you said, look, my car is green.
I mean, so we could do digits again in my hand or something.
I guess the difference is that like there's there's facts of there's objective facts about nature
and then there's subjective facts about what it's like to experience things.
And death is bad because it makes us all sad.
It cuts off the person's subjective ability to go on and do things and their actual ability to.
So like, I guess I'm just trying to take this from the point of view of someone
who doesn't agree with it and why I wouldn't find that like there seems to be a step missing.
And like the the justifying the leap between like pointing at stuff and pointing at subjective
perceptions, whether it's value judgments or something else, right?
Well, OK, to be fair, in not 100 percent of cases,
do I think all death is always bad?
There are sometimes where people genuinely want to die.
And I remember the the suicide twins story from Sweden, I think, 10 years ago,
with these just two blind, badly disabled, chronically depressed twins who really
it looked like they had nothing to live for.
I would never make that judgment for someone.
But for them, life was awful.
They said it was awful.
They wanted to die.
And they eventually managed to to have I think it was doctor assisted suicide.
And that's very sad.
But I would not want to force anyone to live if they don't want to live.
I wouldn't want to force them to live.
But I feel like the idea of death is bad isn't just saying that like
if the Earth stayed the same way it was today, but we got rid of death, that would be great.
Like the sentiment, I think, is they wouldn't have wanted to die if they hadn't been born.
In horrible pain or whatever it was.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
People generally don't want to die if they're not like if they don't have major
depressive disorder or right.
And and so that's death is bad in almost exclusively because people don't want to die.
And that is, I mean, like I said, people are what give things value.
So if everybody wants to live, then dying is bad.
And there's some very rare exceptions where people may legitimately want to not live anymore.
And I would really encourage them to find other ways to to deal with that then killing
themselves because lots of times it turns out life actually does get better.
There are things you can do.
But in some case, I can see how death might not be bad in very rare exceptions.
But again, that's why I'm saying without people, there is nothing at all because
people have to want to not die to make that bad.
All comes back down to the whole idea of either desire utilitarianism is what Alonso
Fife called it, preference utilitarianism is what some people call it, like wanting something
makes it either good or bad.
Yeah, I was inspired right now.
That was good.
I would add the caveat, you know, the those conjoined twins or whatever that were in pain,
like they presumably would have wanted that fixed before they wanted to die.
And they look around and they're like, there's no way to fix this.
And so I would say that for anyone, you know, in any situation where it's like I'd rather
die than have this, like, well, can you solve this in any other way?
And sometimes the answer is no, unfortunately.
But I think more often than not answers yes, or at least there's a way to like get by with it.
And then hold on long enough for technology to catch up to where you need it to be,
or at least try to.
But yeah, I guess what I'm saying is that I if somebody sounds like they're a sound moral
mind, and they're like, well, I want to kill myself, I feel like life sucks.
I would say like that sounds like a symptom of depression.
And like you're you're saying that this is like the most rational decision you can come to right
now, you wouldn't feel that way if you were psychologically healthy.
You should try and get there first and see if you still feel this way.
So it sounds like the point of this one was that the car being painted green is a measurable fact
about the universe which exists.
And human death being bad is true to humans.
Yeah, it's a measurable fact that people don't want to die.
Cool.
Yeah, but I mean, like you have to still define the word bad there.
Okay, it's bad in that we don't want it.
Yeah, like the universe doesn't care if humans die.
No, no.
Unfortunately, it'd be a really nice universe if it did.
Anyway, Eneash sounds like sounds like we're delving into
theological territory with that last one.
We are, yes.
I was going to say we should just keep going because that'd be a whole new episode.
Well, in one sentence, that was one of the things that one of the things that drove me
away from religion was as a kid, I was like the world wouldn't look,
the universe wouldn't look like this was built from scratch by somebody who just built the Earth.
Oh, hell no.
Well, I would be like a little like marble flying through space that's gigantic.
It would be like this like infinite flat plane or, you know.
Oh, you mean just like the physical structure?
I read a lot of biology books when I was a kid.
That too.
I didn't read biology books, but that's life is horrifying.
And yeah.
But yeah, it was like looking around at nature like this.
It doesn't make any sense.
But of course, you know, the mind of God is incomprehensible or something.
I'm like, the universe clearly doesn't care if bad things happen to good people.
So or to people at all.
Right.
Yeah.
So that's that's not that it was really just like a like a 10 year old coming across
like the problem of evil and like having realized like, oh,
theology hasn't answered a 10 year old's question.
Yeah.
So I mean, the universe makes much more sense if the Earth is the center of the universe and
probably the largest thing in it.
You know, it's kind of kind of nonsensical that God would care about this little speck
or make the speck for some reason.
Have you seen that like stretched out like panel by panel of the, you know, like here's
the Earth and then here's the solar system.
Here's the planet.
Here's the galaxy.
Here's the cluster.
10 times a zoom every time, right?
Well, this one's just captioned pictures.
Oh, okay.
And then it goes all the way out.
Yeah.
To the observable universe.
And the last picture is Jesus standing over it saying, don't masturbate.
Nice.
Okay.
All right.
So now six.
Yeah.
Suppose I involuntary admit involuntarily administer to you a potion that would
cause you to believe that human deaths were good.
Afterward, would you truly believe that human deaths were good?
Or would you believe falsely that human deaths were good?
I don't know.
I don't know what it means to believe something falsely.
Well, like to have a wrong belief is it, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think your car is blue, even though it's actually green.
Right.
So if I gave you a potion, let me take my car as blue.
Would you believe, you would truly believe that, but you'd be wrong.
Yeah.
Okay.
Let's define you though.
If I took a snapshot of Enias's brain state right before you received that potion,
that would be Enias, right?
And the other would be something had altered Enias against his preferences.
Yeah.
But I, even though I would believe that deaths are good, I would be wrong about that.
So I would believe it falsely.
Yeah.
And then I guess depends on the definition of Enias there.
I would define you as the snapshot that I took before you received that potion.
Aw.
You probably would, too.
You would consider this like sub-Enias, Enias beta.
You'd be Poisoned Enias, or Poisoned Enias, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, Enias from the darkest timeline.
Now the thing that's like awkward about that is that you can take a snapshot of us from any
point in our lives and we're going to have change through external forces.
Oh yeah.
So yeah, that's a bit of a stretch definition of you, I guess.
But I still think I endorse that definition of you, the unaltered one, although I don't know.
So you got bit by some kind of parasite that also changed your personality.
If I got bit by that parasite that makes me unable to eat and eat physically.
Yeah.
Or just makes it repugnant to you or something.
I mean, that also changed you.
I meant more like one that changes your personality, not your dietary habits a little.
That could change your personality.
But that happens all the time, right?
Like I identify very little with myself of 15 years ago.
So like since that kid was an asshole, I don't really like worry a lot about the things that he did.
It's weird how much I've changed since 15 years ago.
Yeah, frankly, I think it's good.
And I realized when I was like 21 or 20, right around when I was coming on like full sentience
as like a human.
And like I thought that like I'd like woken up a few times before that.
And at this point I was like, oh no, this is just going to keep happening.
And so like in a few years, I'm going to feel the same way like about my younger self.
Me realizing this now is I feel about myself five years ago.
And I was also correct then assuming that I would feel actually like that same like a similar
distance but less like I guess emotional disconnect from that person because at least
that person was like awake enough to like see that future person existed.
So do you think intergenerational conflict is inevitable?
I think that's a complete curveball.
Well, because people change as they get older, will there always be conflict between older
people and younger people?
Oh, I thought you meant would like be like through generations would a conflict go on?
Like I was thinking from like, you know, younger self to older self.
And then you were like, well, what about generations?
Like that's different people.
I see what you're saying.
I think the way we are now, yes.
Transhumanist future us would still, you know, have to go from baby to adolescent to 21.
But after that point, I feel like if we and then even maybe we don't necessarily have to
grow that way, I think there probably is some process where you have to
build on experiences and actually grow neurons.
But I don't know.
But once you reach like full adulthood, then you could just kind of download all the information
in the universe, maybe like train yourself like the matrix on all like past experiences
of human life.
I feel like there's going to be like maybe something that's going to because like a lot
of intergenerational conflict is say elderly people aren't tech savvy anymore.
And they're going to be overtaken by younger tech savvy people.
But that's not like if their brains were still operating on the high levels of openness and
flexibility and whatnot that they had in their youth.
And they had the drive to learn technology.
They could do it.
But if everyone all downloaded every experience that happened, we'd all be the same person.
Well, that gives you a different backstory.
Maybe you weren't allowed to upload to your 100.
But I think you could make it even less like everyone over 100 would be the same person.
Well, but you'd have the different prior hundred years, right?
So like, no, you wouldn't because now everybody else in the world also has your prior hundred years.
Oh, yeah.
Well, so that yeah, we can make it even easier than that, right?
What if we just lived to be 50,000 years old, right?
And everything else stayed the same for sake of the argument, right?
And like there's if you knew somebody who was, you know, in junior high dating somebody who was
in college, like that was gross.
Like that was like a seven year difference or something.
Yeah.
And there's a lot of psychological distance between like a 14 year old and a 20 year old.
Yeah.
Even though it's six years.
And yet an 11,000 year old person dating a 10,000 year old person,
like a thousand years is a lot more years.
But I imagine there's a lot less psychological distance between those between those two people.
I don't know, man.
You don't know what happens in a thousand years.
We haven't run it.
Like maybe 40,000 year old me would be like, God, I hate 30K me.
I have to undo all my old stupid policies.
Well, I guess I could go back in time and assassinate someone.
I would assassinate me.
I can relate that like with with rolled examples of like, I knew a friend whose parents met.
Well, I made the joke that they met in high school, but they didn't because one was 15
years old and the other.
And so, right.
So, you know, if you're 55 and you're married to a 40 year old
and you met when you were, you know, say two years younger than that or something,
that's not that's not nearly as like frowned upon by society or like, frankly,
bizarre and uncomfortable as like a 20 year old dating or a 20 year old dating a 13 year old.
Right, right.
But it's still, it's still significant.
But like you're both a significant, but I feel like it's less significant.
Like you're both adults.
Yeah, you're pre-matures after a certain age.
Yeah.
And then it kind of stops developing.
I mean, it doesn't.
Six years younger than me and six years older than me.
And it actually, I think seven, eight years older than me.
It actually makes enough of a difference in life experience that you notice.
You're like, this is, this is kind of.
You notice, but it's not insurmountable to like, at least have a relationship
or have a try at one.
Yeah.
Like it may make you, you could even just be friends.
Like if I was 20 and I had 13 year olds who are like my friends that I called and
chatted with, that'd be super.
Like what do I have in common with a 13 year old at 20?
I may be both are into rationality, man.
I mean, I think.
I talked with a lot of 20 year olds when I was 13, not about like atheism and computer
tech and all sorts of crazy shit.
All right.
You bought it over your interest and I guess I try to, like if I went over the house and
hung out, I don't know.
It just seems like there's something weird about that and not to me.
Like we're 10 years apart, nine, nine or 10.
Yeah.
Like, and this doesn't seem weird.
Like, but if this was true, if this was 20 years ago and you were 19 and I was nine.
Maybe it's more about like upbringing.
Cause like we, I think we have had enough similar experiences that were cool.
Whereas I've dated people who are like into music that I was like, those are the oldies,
man.
And like we watched totally different cartoons.
I was talking with someone who, uh, I forget which cartoon it was, but I was like the old
man watching the old cartoons.
And I was like, this is weird.
You were like seven when Batman the animated series was on.
Like to Jess's point though, like once you've reached that maturity though,
at least there's like a level that you're all, you're all on this.
You're at least playing the same game.
Right. Cause you know, all the, you know, at least know most of the rules.
Yeah.
Like you can color inside the lines most of the time.
Whereas, you know, I don't know.
I feel like this got just really far from the post.
I can't remember what the question was.
So, um, what was the question about?
The potions?
Falsely believing things.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
Would you believe it falsely or truly?
In my opinion, falsely, but.
Yeah.
I, I agree.
I think.
Yeah.
You'd believe something incorrect if, if I made you change your mind with drugs.
Yeah.
I think the problem is that we agree too much on all these things.
Well, that's why I'm trying to play doubles advocate.
Okay.
And I'll, I'll see what else we can do here.
It's also because like this is like an accepted canon of the rationalist community,
basically.
That's true.
So like there, there's going to be, you know, discrepancies between people, but there's,
I don't know, this is sort of like everyone here kind of agrees that death is bad.
Like there, or what are like the other things that we think like probabilistic judgments and.
Science.
Good.
Yeah.
Death bad.
Death bad.
All right.
Number seven, although the statement, my car is painted green is presently false.
I can make it true in the future by painting my car green.
However, I can think of no analogous action I could take that would make it right to kill people.
Does this make the moral statement weaker, stronger, or is there no sense in making the
comparison?
So like I can change a fact about my car, but I can't change a fact about killing people.
Right.
Well, I think you can change facts about what is desired and masked by humanity.
Yeah, you could lie about somebody.
Yeah.
Oh, I killed them because they were a child rapist and I have faked evidence.
I think, I think pinning it down to individual people or like hypothetical or or thought experiment
people.
Yeah.
Isn't the point of the thought experiment because like you, I mean, I think is it all right to kill
whatever the next big terrorist before, you know, as he's driving to shut up his car bomb?
Sure.
Right.
So I think it's, but like, is it all right to kill people?
Yeah.
It's a different question.
I think that one would be very hard to ever change because if you did manage to get the
species on board with not desiring life, you wouldn't have a species for much longer.
But I think there's other things that can be changed.
I think that people should be treated as if they are all equal is something that used to
not be considered a truth and now is.
By enlighten folks anyway.
Yeah.
So over the course of history and many generations of effort, we have managed to make a more a
altering moral statement or introduce a new one, I suppose.
And yet there's no way that like, I guess I could think of ways where society could swing
its back, right?
Through enough propaganda or something, but then we'd all just be wrong.
We wouldn't be changing a fact about the world if I like if I painted my car, right?
So I'm taking that as granted.
I think if you manage to somehow through a combination of like biohacking and meme hacking,
get to a point where everyone truly desired to only be around people that looked and thought
very similar to them and did not want to be around people who were different, but it actually
like gave them emotional pain to do that, that it could be morally right to.
Kill those people if they came into your neck of the woods.
No, not killed because people still want to live, but to treat outsiders differently and
to discourage them from being around you.
I think that's the same equivalent as giving you the magic potion.
Yeah, that's just tricking.
That's just instead of magic potion, we're just fucking with you through propaganda and biohacking.
Yeah, if what you define is you as like a snapshot of your preferences at the time,
and then like something perverts that, then like humanity would not be the humanity that you
bioengineered to make racist.
So then I'm wondering, does that make the moral statement stronger, weaker, or is there no
sense in making that comparison to change the subjective preference?
It seems like a weak word for it to change the subjective judgment about the nature of morality
and somebody.
It's changed that person.
So it doesn't seem like it makes the question that makes the comparison weak or strong.
It just seems like there's no sense in making it.
Change, you know, changing somebody's subjective experience of something or perceptions is
different than changing the number of or changing the, you know, the paint on my car.
Right.
Well, okay, so to make this a less convenient thing, what if it turned out that having highly
integrated societies actually was bad for civilization?
I mean, it appears that the exact opposite is true that having integrated societies is better.
It fosters more creativity.
We can use everybody's talents to their best effect.
And that is why, you know, integrated Western societies are winning and working so well.
But let's say the opposite was true that it made society stagnant and unable to
work.
And these societies eventually would fall into collapse and either die to diseases that
they couldn't fight anymore because of lost technology or just be overrun by the next conquerors.
If it literally led to people being wiped out and dying,
then it probably would be a moral good to have more racist societies because it would prevent
mass suffering and death.
Right.
But I mean, that's that's just keeping with our current extrapolated our current coherent
extrapolated volition, right?
Yeah, because we don't we don't value inclusion and desegregation for their own sake.
We value them for their what we expect and are probably right about their being their like
actual consequences.
Well, I think we were wrong value them for their own sake.
But but we've come to that because it has been beneficial for the species.
Yes.
But I think like anyone it maybe I'm missing the mark here.
But like if if I was like to prove to somebody like, no, look, this will actually kill
everyone in a thousand years, like, no, I still think it's a good idea.
Then they're just wrong.
Right.
So I don't think that most people would like lean into that unless they're just posturing
for the sake of looking moral to their current people.
But well, I think the people who are left that are racist believe something similar to this.
Right.
And they're why they think they're good people.
And then they're mistaken.
Right.
So exactly.
That's the point if if I I believe that that desegregating societies is a good idea because
of, you know, again, like I said, cross cultures and it diminishes.
Well, dimension diminishes racism by being able to sit next to black people in school.
Right.
So I and I believe that's a good thing for society.
If I believe that was a bad thing for society, I wouldn't want that.
Yeah.
See, I wouldn't be racist even if I thought that it was true that interracial mingling did
cause more violence.
I would just want to change the part of our brains that makes that true.
Yeah.
Like here, I guess I'm going pro trans humanity again.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, I'm anti something else coming in and changing your preferences against your
will.
And I guess I'm pro being able to hack your own source code.
I would like to be able to change my own preferences if I think that they're wrong.
Yeah.
But until we could do that and the solution was like, look, sorry,
society will just be a lot better.
Literally, everyone will be happier if we cut everything apart.
Then it's like, all right.
Well, I guess until we can fix that and let me hang out with all my friends again,
then let's just do we'll make everyone the most happy on aggregate, right?
Right.
I don't even know if I would call that racism at that point though.
No, because you're doing it for, I like, I think the best reason possible, right?
Again, so people do bad things for what they think are good reasons.
But if you learned they were actually good reasons.
Yeah.
Right.
That they would still be racism.
It just wouldn't have negative connotations anymore.
It'd be like, I want that man as my president because he's a racist.
Well, it would be more like I want that guy to move over to the next town over
and it's a bummer because I bet he's cool,
but I just know it'll ruin our society if he stays or something, right?
Okay.
Versus like I want him out because I don't like him because of whatever his height
or his skin color or something, right?
Yeah.
So, all right.
I think we're on number eight and I think that means it's your turn, Jess.
Did we skip you, Nash?
Did we?
No, I read six.
And then I did seven.
That was the potion one.
Okay.
It just took so long that we forgot.
There does not appear to be any place in the environment
where the reference of moral statements are stored,
analogous to the place where my car is stored.
Does this necessarily indicate that moral statements are empty of content
or could they correspond to something else?
Is the statement two plus two equals four true?
Could it be made untrue?
Is it falsifiable?
Where is its content?
I love how these aren't rhetorical questions.
Like they sound like they could be, but they're not.
He's like, no, no, seriously, what do you think?
So, yeah, does that mean that they're empty of content?
I certainly don't think so to take the questions in order.
It just means that they don't have external reference.
Well, I think they do have external reference.
It's the desires of sapient beings.
Yeah, it's the neurons that hold that thought.
They don't have ones that I can show you right to your face.
Yeah, I think.
I think we basically answered this earlier on accident.
Because I brought up math.
Because, yeah.
So this was very natural of him to bring up.
Damn, it's Stephen always bringing up math.
Yeah, me, the mathematician.
I'm certain I'm the worst mathematician in the room.
The statement 2 plus 4 is true.
Or yeah, the statement 2 plus 2 equals 4 is true because math, right?
So could it be made untrue?
Not really, because I mean math is its own, it's just, it's logic.
You could hit the mathematician on the head really hard,
and then they might think 2 plus 2 equals 6.
I mean, if 2 plus 2 did equal 6, then 2 plus 2 equals 4 is false.
But since it doesn't, and it can't, it's not.
So is it falsifiable?
What's fun is this is just like a logic, you know, syllogism, right?
And so like, could you falsify a logical syllogism?
No.
If all ARB and all BRC, all ARC, I can't falsify that unless my axioms are wrong.
And since they're not, then I can't.
I once read a really cool, very short story about a secret number,
that there's a secret number between 2 and 3 that has been hiding,
and it doesn't want, you know, anyone to know about it.
So for the most part, whenever 2 and 2 are added together,
you always get 4 because that thing is fucking with the universe, right?
But it's basically the story about a detective showing up and finds this,
this mathematician whose dad apparently looks like suicide.
There's a suicide note and everything.
Some things don't check out, but he's reading this weird manifesto
about the secret number between 2 and 3.
He's like, okay, dude's obviously a kook, whatever, man.
This is like one of those 50s gum shoes, right?
Kooks do kooky things, like kill themselves.
But at the end, there's three raisins on the table,
and he like picks up a raisin, puts it in his mouth.
That's a tasty raisin.
Looks down.
There's three raisins on the table.
That was the coolest thing.
Were the other numbers sent in in this short story or was it just a secret one?
It was just the secret number.
Sounds nuts.
There was a secret number of raisins on the table, and he just thought there were three.
Is that standing?
If you remember the name of the story, you can find it.
I'd be interested in reading it.
Okay.
So I think the last one I want to touch on this one is,
where is the content of 3 plus 2 equals 4?
I mean, it's in the axioms of math that we have created.
Right, and that seems to be a third place, for lack of a better word,
for things to be true or false.
But we created them because they accurately model reality,
as far as we can tell.
But 2 plus 2 is 4 isn't even subjectively true.
Right.
It's logically true.
Yeah, it's definitely true.
Right.
So you have this many things we call that 4.
Yeah.
And there's words for all these in philosophy, I forget,
but there's objective and subjective, and then there's this third thing,
which is just something else that there's a word for.
The content of this is stored external to all of us.
If the universe went out like a light, and well, if everyone died,
2 plus 2 would still equal 4.
Well, there'd still be that amount of objects.
They wouldn't have a name anymore.
But the logic would still be sound.
Whereas if all humans are dead, and there was no way to make the judgment anymore,
human death is bad, wouldn't be true anymore.
This sounds like the if a tree fell in a forest,
and no one was trying to hear an argument.
Yeah, I think we're, I'd rather not argue about the definitions.
Right, definition of sound.
I just think it's fun that it seems like there's at least three different places
where these kinds of facts are stored.
One is the stuff I can throw on your face, like your tea is hot, splash.
One is bad to splash you.
And two is, or three, for those of you keeping count at home.
The secret number between two and three is 2 plus 2 is 4.
So, all right.
Number nine?
Yes.
The phrase is-ought-gap refers to the notion that no-ought-statement can be logically derived
from any number of statement of is-statements without at least one-ought-statement in the mix.
For example, suppose I have a remote control with two buttons,
and the red button kills an innocent person,
and the green button sets them free.
I cannot derive the ought-statement, I ought not to press the red button,
without both the is-statement, if I press the red button an innocent will die,
and the ought-statement, I ought not to kill innocence.
Should we distinguish mixed ought-statements, like I ought not to press the red button,
from pure ought-statements, like I ought not to kill innocence?
If so, is there really any such thing as a pure ought-statement,
or do they all have is-statements mixed into them somewhere?
And this is where I think the stealth assassination came in,
because, you know, from all this talking, we obviously believe that I ought not to kill innocence
isn't a final ought-statement, it's just a statement that death is bad,
and killing an innocent creates death, or ends their life, right?
I mean, those are two is-statements, and you don't need an ought to force things.
Because the ought's implied, or I guess-
The ought's not even implied, killing someone is bad.
Right. But, yeah, you know, I know that there's a lot more to this, and it's weird,
I guess, maybe that maybe I'm finally getting old enough to forget,
I used to know more about this sort of thing.
I, maybe it's just been so many years since I read anything by David Hume,
and he was the guy that had the whole is ought thing that made it at least popular.
And now I can't really remember what he was like, his stuff.
What's on about?
But what's weird is I know that I used to know this, this is actually rather disconcerting.
I think I probably know more new things now than old me.
It's all right. It's okay, Stephen. Yeah, that's weird.
So, yeah, I'm mourning the loss of my memory, you go ahead and answer me.
Yeah, I think all of these kind of make you look at, here's a fact about the universe independent
of my perception, and here is what my perception of these things tells me.
And this is the same thing.
I ought not to kill people is my perception, and if I press the red button,
then someone will die, isn't his statement.
And you can get, you cannot get any ash help.
Well, I just disagree that there's a meaningful distinction that
when someone says you can't get an ought from an is, I say, no, you're wrong, you totally can,
because death is bad. Therefore, you shouldn't kill people.
I didn't hear an ought in there anywhere, because therefore is an ought.
Therefore, you ought not kill people.
Oh, I was just, yeah.
I was saying you dodged the argument by not using odd, but is there and therefore.
I'm spent on that one.
Yeah, well, I think.
I think we need someone who disagrees with us on this and has thought it through to
challenge us on this.
All right, moving on, number 10, which has nothing to do with morality.
The statement, this painting is beautiful, could be rendered untrue by flinging a bucket
of mud on the painting. Similarly, in their will control example above,
the statement, it is wrong to press the red button can be rendered untrue by rewiring the
remote. Are there pure aesthetic judgments? Are there pure preferences?
I have no idea what he's getting on about here.
Yes, it's wrong to press a red button because of what it will do, not because it's a red
button and you should press red button. Right.
And so, I guess, are there pure aesthetic judgments or are there pure preferences?
I'm not really sure I'd answer that question.
Well, the painting being beautiful is an aesthetic judgment,
and someone might think that the painting covered in mud is more beautiful.
Yes, I'm not sure what a pure preference or pure aesthetic judgment are.
Well, are you making a judgment based purely on aesthetics?
I'm literally asking, I have no idea.
I also have no idea what question 10 is all about.
Yeah, I'm not sure what a pure judgment is supposed to be.
To me, art is fun to look at or it's not, and it's universally overpriced.
I guess I have no idea what kind of judgment that means or what it means for that to be pure
or impure. I don't think that he's using pure in the sense of it being good or innocent.
I think what he means is are there judgments that are completely
aesthetic versus are there preferences?
Like, there's no objective part to it if the aesthetic is entirely subjective.
Oh, sure, then in that case, definitely. I mean, I've complained over and over about
like some of the artists out there at the Museum of Modern Art in New York,
and I thought it was just pointless and disgusting and hate to have it in my house.
And yet, like, it's there being revered by all these hipsters.
And so that's definitely, like, I think a purely subjective thing.
Or everyone there is just like, you know, posturing to each other about how they
get it because they're woke enough or something.
But there's no doubt somebody who thinks it's really cool.
And I think there's ways in which aesthetic preferences can be more complex or less complex.
I know there's a lot of songs that are dead simple but are loved anyway because of that.
And there's nothing wrong with that, but that's that's different from like saying,
this is an objective measure of whether something is aesthetically good or not.
Right. It's like, yes, it's simpler or it's more complex, but that doesn't necessarily mean it's
better. It just occurred to me that Eleizer is a computer scientist.
So he's probably he might be using the word pure in the form of like a pure function,
like in mathematics or in programming, it's like a return to the same output given the
same input no matter what. I don't think that's the case right here.
Because it could be like, so there's a purely aesthetic judgment would make,
you know, give you the same give the same aesthetic judgment based off your perception of it
based per every input and never change or something, right?
I think that's the same as saying a wholly aesthetic judgment.
Could be. I clearly need to learn more English.
Well, no, I mean, I just think that's possible, but it's a esoteric enough use of the term that
I think he would have defined it beforehand if that's what he was doing. He would have said
meaning in this way.
I don't think so. He's not big on defining the terms that he uses.
If he's not using them in a standard way, he usually makes a note of it at some point before
doing it that way.
So there's like pure in those and I didn't even think of the way that
Jess brought it up in that like innocent or, you know, that that sort of thing.
And I was thinking pure like this crystal is pure caffeine. It's not diluted with other things,
right? And so those are the two I was thinking of. And then there's the other kind of pure as
like in terms of functions. But since he didn't say pure function, he probably didn't mean math.
All right. That's that's all I got for that one.
So we took a brief, brief recess to refresh on what what lyrically wrote in for us.
And it's great. It's actually really engaging. And it's a drag because it's it's fairly lengthy
and it's really well distilled in that there's like not parts I can chop out.
I can grab about quotes, but that's not the point.
Honestly, they've agreed to come back and be on the show at some point when they have free time.
So I want to talk about a couple other things with them, but we'll just, well,
we'll revisit this when they come back. How's that sound, guys?
Sounds good. Yeah, I think that's a good idea.
All right. I will throw in one thing really quick that we touched on, but we didn't articulate.
So Lyric raised the point of AIs could be programmed to throw their values you want.
And they could have like moral truths to them, right? But I'm being less eloquent.
That's why there's no point in paraphrasing this. All right. Yeah, Lyric, we'll have you on to talk
about this IRL only because we were at this for a while and I think we're all philosophyed out.
So we are going to skip the three less wrong posts that we mentioned last time because this
entire episode was a last wrong post reading anyway. And just get straight into listener feedback.
There is one last thing on this subject regarding less wrong posts that there are other posts
weighed on the line that answer some of these in more depth. Yes. So this isn't like the last place
that this sort of thing is ever explicitly addressed in the sequences. It's just the first place.
Yeah. So, all right. Okay. At heart engineer says, just so you know where you've fallen my
priority risk list, you're ahead of radio lab. And they touched a screenshot of all the total
hours played of various podcasts. And yeah, we were ahead of radio lab. We were ahead, I think,
of 99% invisible as well. Yep. Like I was floored. That's awesome. And past making sense of the
Sam Harris, which is saying something because he puts out a lot more hours of content than we do.
Yeah. I wasn't at all hurt that Joe Rogan had three times the time on here than we did because he
puts out like 12 hours a week. Right. Yeah. That's crazy. That was that was really awesome. I felt
just super cool. Yeah, thanks for that at heart engineer. Yay. Yeah, that's awesome. I don't have,
I guess, much else to jump on here. But we never are out of time to do what?
Thank our awesome patron. Thank the patron. That's right. And this episode's patron is
Jacqueline Newsom. Thanks, Jacqueline. Thanks so much, Jacqueline. You are awesome. You help us
play this lottery every day. That's right. And this is especially to you, but to everybody,
we don't like have good rewards on our website. We've had one person like ask for the little
sound bite that we have on there. They don't have anything. I think I try to message,
I try to try to message everybody who, you know, signs on as a patron. And sometimes they get
backlogged and I occasionally miss some. But if I missed you, message us. And if you want to,
and if I have, I always try to say like, let us know what we can do. And that stands for anybody
before we call your name. Hey, this is fun. Do that. Suggest your own rewards because we don't,
we didn't think of good ones who put the Patreon accounts. So we consider things within reason
that are proportional to the effort involves and all that stuff. But and I will say that the best
reward is the warmth you put in our hearts. That's right. That's the reward that we get. So
that's the word they get to, if you want your reward, that's more tangible for yourself.
Right. Then, then you know, making us do funny things on air.
Funny how. I don't know, reading things in silly voices. Yeah.
What? All right. And on that happy note, are we ready to call it? Yeah. All right.
Thanks all for listening. We will get back into much less morality stuff going forward.
That's right. See you in a couple of weeks. Bye. Bye.
