Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy. I'm Manny Ashbrottson. I'm Stephen Zuber. I'm Jess Dickey.
And today we are talking about Baselista Codex Post, which we sometimes do on here because
the posts are always very interesting.
And we don't have a David with us this episode.
Darn it, no David.
If your name is David and you want to be on this podcast.
My dad's name is David.
You've got him on the podcast.
He's got a thick accent though.
Yeah, he'd be hard to understand.
Accents are great.
Plus, I don't know, you know, if he'd have much to say about these sorts of things.
I mean, as long as we're on the topic, maybe he'd want to talk about lying about being a Jehovah's Witness for 50 years.
That could be a thing.
Oh my gosh, that would actually be really interesting to hear about.
I don't think he wants to talk about it. I brought it up with him once and he was like, yeah.
Yep, that's the thing that happened. Let's keep going in this conversation.
Great, thanks dad. All right, cool.
Yeah, exactly.
Oh well, so the post we're talking about now is his review of the book, The Secret of Our Success.
Which, to my disappointment upon reading the first paragraph, isn't a strategy for how to win at life.
Well, I mean, kind of?
It's how humans are successful on Earth.
Yeah, yeah.
So less of like, I can use this to my immediate win.
You could go join a really cool culture.
Yeah, there should be one of those around.
I don't know what they'd call it though.
They might call them the Bayesian Ration List or something.
Yeah, that has a ring to it.
Yeah.
I like that culture.
This is a really cool book.
I have this thing where every now and then friends of mine who are into like, cool, smart Ration List stuff,
but aren't specifically Ration List or Ration List adjacent will recommend things to me, right?
And I'll go out and buy the thing and then I'll like, read a little bit into it and get distracted and put it aside.
And then a few months later, I see Scott Alexander write a post on it, right?
I'm like, damn it, I should have read it and wrote about it first, which I would never do anyway.
But at least if I'd have read it, I'd know what's going on here, right?
So this happened with Red Plenty.
It's up there on my shelf in my room with my other unread books.
No, I was never able to finish that one.
Okay.
What's Red Plenty?
It's about the early communist success sort of in Russia.
They actually did a really good job of bringing a, you know, pre-industrial society right roaring to the industrial age.
By taking all the excess that they produced and putting it right back into capital production.
Can I make two quick side notes about communist Russia?
Sure.
All right.
So one, there's a fun movie that came out a couple of years ago called The Death of Stalin.
I've heard it's, yeah, really good.
It was amazing.
Super dark and funny.
Yeah.
I mean, amazing is like, I usually say that from her like Avengers movies.
This was, if you've ever seen the show Veep, it's exactly like that.
Okay.
Except it's, so like it's that level of humor, but it's realistic and it's Stalin.
And like there's, there's a partner at the beginning where like he gets a call that he's like a conductor for this gigantic orchestra.
And he gets a call like, hey, you know,
Was it Stalin?
No, Stalin's guy.
Oh, no, I'm sorry.
This random guy runs this orchestra.
Okay.
And he gets a call and it's like, yeah, Stalin like a recording of tonight's show.
And he's like, oh, okay.
And like it's like done.
They're wrapping up.
People are leaving.
So he runs out there and he's like, everyone back to your seats.
Everyone, you know, I know you guys are just here.
We're doing this again because he didn't record it.
Cause why would he?
So then they record.
So like it's, and then it's late because they came by to pick it up at, you know, what the time the show is supposed to end.
He's like, well, you know, Stalin will be hearing about why this was late.
So like there's, there's like the palpable horror of living there too.
But it's also truncated with a lot of funniness.
Like how when he died, like everyone was afraid to move his body, you know, so like that sort of stuff.
And well, he literally just randomly terrorized people.
So they, I don't know, for whatever reason, just keep the fear of him around so they wouldn't bother him.
Like if someone came to him with a request or something, he'd often have them killed just because like, don't fucking bug me.
He reminds me of Lord Voldemort.
Yeah.
And the other one was from a comic.
He doesn't do a lot of stand up.
He apparently does a lot of freestyle rap whose name I can't remember, but I'll put.
I thought you were still talking about Stalin for a second.
Nope.
Talking about a comedian now.
And he's a British guy.
I think he's like 21.
I'll find the video of his like five minutes stand up thing.
But he does just like two line jokes, kind of like Demetri Martin and stuff.
And he's got one.
And I wish I'd known this because like the icebreaker at my new job is like, what superpower would you choose?
And so he's like, if when people ask me what superpower would I choose, my answer is always Cold War Russia.
Exactly right.
It takes a second, but that would have gotten me such a laugh.
I would have made it in so good at that crowd.
And but I think what I chose, I described contests as path to victory from Worm.
I said, I'd want that.
So I don't, I don't think I would want any of the powers from Worm because all of them are these double edged swords.
Yeah, that's true.
But I mean, I guess being to throw metal around or read minds would be a thing.
But yeah, I don't think I'd want.
Well, I don't know.
I'm not sure the powers themselves are double edged swords.
Most of them are just the way that people use them.
But like the whole thing is this is how people would really use these powers.
Well, this is how, you know, optimizing processes that are concerned only about one thing would use those powers.
I'm not sure all people would do that.
In the context of Worm, it's the whole thing.
But yeah, basically, anyway, they're fun to read.
Yeah.
So we were talking about a Slate Star codex post.
Yes, we were.
Sorry.
So you did that with red plenty and then a Seth Dickinson, who is an amazing author and he's actually included in the Red Fick online anthology.
I've done one of his shorts before on the other podcast.
He recommended Secret to Our Success to me.
He was like, this is like everything that's important to know right now.
Not everything, obviously, but you know, he was really excited about it.
So I picked it up.
I read a little bit, got distracted, and then this came out and I was like, oh, damn it.
So I read all of Scott's thing and then I read a little more.
But anyways, really good book, good in the inside porn sort of way.
When you read it, you're like, oh my God, I never knew.
And now I've realized that, holy shit, my brain is blown now.
Yeah.
And I've always been an evolutionary psych enthusiast.
I think that's a good word for it.
Like I'm for someone who's like interested in things, but not like knowledgeable.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Enthusiast.
I like it.
So this is all that stuff.
Exactly.
Yeah, I have an interesting relationship with it where it's like, this is very interesting and I hate it.
Oh, that is an interesting relationship.
I don't hate the book.
I hate the concept behind it.
We should get deeper into it.
Okay.
All right.
In that case, we should jump on in.
Let's do it.
All right.
The book is Secretaric Success and we should say who wrote it.
It was Joseph Henrich.
Thank you.
Which is a book about, well, the quote that I pulled is, Henrich wants to debunk or at
least clarify a popular view where humans succeeded because of our raw intelligence.
In this view, we are smart enough to invent neat tools and help us survive and adapt to
unfamiliar environments.
Again, such theories, we cannot actually do this.
And then he provides a bunch of examples from the book of how we cannot actually do this
in, did you want to, I saw you pulled that.
Yeah.
So his alternate hypothesis is obviously that our success is due to our ability to transmit
culture down through generations.
His counter example for the, we succeeded through intelligence hypothesis.
He pulls up a whole bunch of examples of Victorian era explorers just absolutely failing to use
their wits and toll inventing skills to survive in hostile environments, which weren't really
hostile.
These are places where other human civilizations were actually thriving at the time.
So even though these were explorers who had these huge advantages over our early hominid
ancestors, and they mentioned they were highly educated, they were young men in the prime
of their health.
They were selected for their experience with wilderness craft and survival.
He also points out that they were not weighed down by having to support women, children
and old people at the same time.
Yeah.
And I think the women thing is kind of like women help out with the survival thing, but
children and old people can sometimes be a burden.
Well, in the context of 1700s or whatever, you know.
Yeah.
The women probably wouldn't have been helping as much because they weren't allowed to.
Because it's hard to breathe in a corset.
Yeah.
And like a 90 pound petticoat.
But anyway, these very seemingly like skilled and adept people usually just starved to
death because they either failed to recognize any edible food, or they failed to effectively
hunt any edible animals, or they failed to cook this food in ways that unlocked its nutrients.
And these were all things that the indigenous populations had learned how to do through
cultural evolution, according to Henry.
And in a lot of cases, they were in areas that were just full of natural abundance, lots
of food, lots of plants.
Like these are places like Alabama and the jungle, right?
Like.
And the Arctic, which I would argue was not full of abundance, but there was a culture
living there.
Yeah.
Henrik makes that point, though, that like the Arctic, or I think it was Alexander that
made the point, like this place is already hostile, but because of cultural knowledge,
people figured out how to live there.
I want to, I can imagine Elias Yudkowski saying cultural knowledge doesn't exist.
Like it doesn't exist in the kidneys.
It exists in the brain.
It is part of intelligence.
So whatever like we're talking about with intelligence, it's encompassed into this.
It's not what people mean when like, when we typically think of it, like, yes, our ability
to think things through and make tools and stuff.
But this is, if it's a thing that like, quote, intelligent things do, it's part of the smartness
that made us rise to power, right?
But it's a hive mind smartness.
It's not an individual person who's like the smartest man on earth could not use his brains
to figure these things out and even keep living, whereas opposed a hive collective of humans
could.
I know.
I just, I can imagine a little pedantry there, but yeah, I mean, it's still the humans that
took over the world as opposed to the monkeys because yeah, and it's kind of jumping ahead
a bit.
But Henry did actually point out in one of the chapters, or at least it was in one of
the sections of scouts review that part of it was not in the brain, part of it was in
the gut.
Yes.
But I guess we can try to stay in order.
Yeah.
Jumping around.
Henry describes how difficult it actually is to find and kill, for example, a seal in
the Arctic, or to make well-crafted arrows from scratch.
And Scott broke it down to I'm not going to do it, but they're very complex, multi-step
and unintuitive practices.
Scott said it's no surprise that Stranded Explorers couldn't figure all this out.
It's much more surprising that the various native groups did.
It's definitely something that you couldn't have figured out just by being like, I'm going
to build an arrow.
Like I look at it and like, oh, grab a straight piece of stick, sharpen the end and put something
on the back to keep it flying straight.
And like it sounds super intuitive, but the steps that the author lays out is like 17
things long.
It was first to like find the most knurled stick, apparently there was this one type
of stick that made the ideal arrow that you had to actually just straighten with your
teeth.
Yeah.
Like you heat it and straighten it with your teeth.
Like, so it's way more involved than it sounds to me.
I would fail to make an arrow and fail to shoot my prey with it for sure.
I would like to think I could sharpen a stick though.
You could make a substandard arrow and it might get the job done, but on the other
hand, it also might not.
And oftentimes survival is the difference between those small things.
Oh, totally.
Yeah.
There's only so many arrows you can make before you run out of calories to do things
with and you still need some for the actual hunting.
And that might not work so well if you don't have great arrows and so on.
Yeah.
His explanation for how people figured out this like incredibly multi-step complex process
was cultural evolution, which I guess it's based on the idea of biological evolution.
I don't remember if this was covered in the post or if it was in the book itself, but
the way he explained it was basically some families institute certain practices almost
randomly in effect, much like evolution and random genetic mutations.
But those families whose practices end up being useful in some way that they almost
surely aren't sure why they will do better.
If they were their children will be more healthy, they will have more calories, they will in
fact even have more children because calories was very much tied to how many children you
make back in the day.
And how many survive.
Exactly.
And other families would either die out or much more often see what that family is doing
and then be like, Hey, we should do that.
And there was a cool example about like a tribe, well, an area with a whole bunch of different
tribes in it.
And one tribe was really good at how they like were succeeding.
And they were all various pig farmers, I think.
And all the other tribes were like, what are they doing right?
Why, why aren't we having the success?
So they decided to implement a lot of their policies.
And one of them was like that in the morning you go and you sing to your pig for 10 minutes,
which is I guess what that other tribe did.
And maybe that does something or maybe it doesn't.
But it just kind of shows that there was just this bunch of things that tribe did and the
other tribe was like, well, okay, let's take them and try them.
Something here is working.
It's very much a cultural evolution where you don't know what's happening.
If it works, it works.
I wonder how you settle on 10 minutes and not eight or 12.
Oh, I don't think it was exactly.
Oh, I know.
But like, I imagine somebody experimented, you know, like if they're watching people
do it, they're wondering, like, maybe more singing means better pigs or something.
Stop, Jeffery, you're singing to the pigs too long.
Right.
But who gives them all sorts?
I've heard people make arguments about like this is sort of like the, this might be a
Jordan Peterson-esque argument about like the utility of religion for Medan religious
context.
Yes.
I think it's around like eating certain things, you know, like pigs carry whatever that cool
disease does that gives you lock jar or something.
Some back, I need to know what I'm talking about before I can go further.
I think it's, I think it starts with a T. It doesn't matter, but
It's not Ted in a shirt.
No.
Yes.
Okay.
They can carry that bacteria that can cause lock jar or something or whatever it is.
So like, oh, that's why then the Jews didn't need it because they got sick.
So now, and my main thing is like, you can do all that without believing that a bearded
man in the sky made the earth or something.
Right.
So as, you know, all that goes, but it is sort of that example, like these things become
part of the culture.
And when they're codified, whether through cultural selection, rather maybe the natural
selection or through like someone saying God told us not to do this, then it becomes,
you know, if it's successful and it sticks that way, then a lot of the rents repeat
and it's popular, right?
That was the big theme of the book or the review of the book.
And that's why I said earlier, I hate it.
There were also a lot of other cultures that did have pigs in them at the same time the
Jews were around that didn't have massive health issues, could have very well been a
sort of thing where they tried to introduce pigs like those other cultures had.
And they didn't have the cultural evolution to not pick up the Trichonomous.
They're like, fuck this.
God says no pigs, man.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Two different strategies.
Yeah.
I guess the thing I do like about cultural evolution versus biological is you can't just be like,
that individual has a good mutation.
I'm just going to adopt it myself.
Right.
You just kind of are like stuck with the ones you're born with.
Yeah.
That is nice.
Like because you can pick up tricks and culture, but you can't get taller or whatever, you
know.
So those sorts of things.
Alrighty.
So we just covered that part.
Should I go ahead and read this little thing that I pulled?
Read the thing.
Okay.
This is again pulled directly from Scott's post.
Everything that separates us from the apes is part of an evolutionary package designed
to help us maintain this kind of culture.
Create this kind of culture or adjust to the new abilities that this kind of culture gave
us.
But it's not just, and this was about, you know, what cultural evolution does.
He speaks a little bit about how our guts have shortened significantly and how we just
can't process food anymore that hasn't been cooked or something first.
It'll make us sick.
He then says, but it's not just about chopping things up or roasting them.
Traditional foods, traditional food processing techniques can get arbitrarily complicated.
I don't know if I'm going to pronounce it right.
Nyxtamalization of corn necessary to prevent vitamin deficiencies involves soaking the
corn in a solution containing ground up burnt seashells.
The ancient Mexicans discovered this and lived off corn for just fine for millennia.
When the conquistadors took over, they ignored it and ate corn straight.
For 400 years, Europeans and Americans ate unnyxtamalized corn.
By official statistics, 3 million Americans came down with corn related vitamin deficiencies
during this time and up to 100,000 died.
But I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
I was just going to say I'd never heard of this before.
And apparently the only reason we're now still able to eat corn is that we have a synthetic
version of this process that is done to corn.
They don't teach you that in school.
Yay, GMOs.
But it's like it blows my mind that at some point somebody was like this, you know, maybe
it'll taste better with some ground up burnt seashells on it and their family happens to
not starve with that winter or something, right?
Like that to me, that that's like the really tight parallel with natural selection where
it's like, let's throw this random thing in and see what happens.
I don't know.
I mean, did they try burning other random shit and throwing it on corn?
I wouldn't have actually.
They must have, right?
Yeah.
I mean, humans are always trying to do anything for flavor.
I was also pointed out, I think this one was in the book because I don't remember
reading in Scott's thing that people develop tastes, tastes for spices when they're young
and they're the spices that their culture uses.
And those spices are generally the ones that are best adapted to making the food not
spoil in the climate that their culture exists in.
That was not in the review.
And that's really cool.
I was actually trying to look up what causes people to develop tastes for different things
versus others, because I know that there's certain evolutionary reasons why we think
that bitter things taste nasty and sweet things taste good.
And that makes a lot of sense.
But then I'm like, so why do people like fermented things?
And I was kind of just looking that up on my own.
And it's because fermented things can are more resistant against bacteria and good for,
you know, your microbiome.
Yeah, I never just develop the taste for capsaicin.
So I really hate all spicy things.
But like when people ask me why I don't like it, I tell them that I don't think my food
should hurt me and I stand by that.
But there's people who like love the flavor of it, even though it is painful and you see
them like churning red and sweating and sometimes crying, but they're like, so delicious.
I like the pain.
It's not even the flavor of it.
It's like, you know, when you drink, I don't I don't know if there's other things
that you like, like bitterness, like maybe lemonade has like a tang to it.
OK, I like whiskey or something to figure out what you like.
Yeah, whiskey.
Yeah, OK, I've managed to I didn't like alcohol when I first had some as a kid.
I'm like, this is gross.
But then like I got drunk as an adult.
I'm like, this is wonderful.
Yeah.
So like there are things that spicy foods you can pick that up as a
kid by watching adults and copying the adults around you and you get a positive
reinforcement from copying adults.
And then with things like alcohol, obviously you get like a little dopamine
surge from the like other positive effects that it has.
And eventually you associate that with the flavor.
That's so cool.
The capsaicin is really good at keeping it keeping molds and bacterias off the food.
Yeah.
And you can anti develop tastes by having negative associations with them.
Like some people who get really bad stomach flu can't eat a kind of food that
they used to like anymore when it made them sick.
Oh, yeah.
My dad doesn't drink whiskey for like the last 35 years because he got crazy,
just like alcohol poisoning from it at some point.
So quick plug, super relevant for the YouTube channel, Hot Ones.
OK, if you guys are you are familiar?
I saw one of those.
I think it was with Weird Al.
Yeah, probably.
Yes, he has the gimmick is he has celebrities on and they eat increasingly
ridiculously hot hot wings and then he'll grill them with random questions.
And it's a fun little interview show.
But try one with any celebrity you've heard of that's fun.
And then watch the one with Alton Brown, the TV chef from, you know,
Good Eats and Cutthroat Kitchen.
And first, like people react differently because they get insanely hot.
People get sick.
People, you know, sweat, they cry.
Alton, just when it gets to the really hot ones, he's just like, you can't even
taste this. This is just this is just pain.
Like this one sucks.
It's not like then you'll get like to a hotter one even.
It's like, at least you can taste this one.
I can get, I'm getting some of the flavor in that.
So there's, there's something there to where you can enjoy as his thing is
mainly like, I'm not going to eat it just for the pain, but as long as there's
some flavor to it, but he also handed it really well.
Like he, I'm not sure if he completely shaves his head or if he's just bald
now, but he, I don't think he's sweated a bead the whole time.
He was crushing it.
So.
Well, maybe you just rubbed a bunch of aluminum into a skin before he went on.
The other trick for surviving hot foods apparently is tequila or like super
strong alcohol, but tequila is Alden's go-to.
And what does it do?
It helps neutralize it in your mouth.
So it burns less, but I don't think they were going to let him drink a bottle
of tequila on the show.
So he had a cup of half and half.
Yeah.
Milk is pretty good with that.
The fats I hear.
Yeah.
But I mean, so he went, he went over, he went overloaded with it and got half and
half.
Right.
So, um, yeah, anyway, hot stuff.
Yeah.
Um, we're getting close to the food part, which is, uh, like the plant part related
to that, so I'm, we're almost there.
Okay.
Um, yeah, then I've got an anecdote.
All right.
The next part was about how culture gets passed down.
So obviously, you know, you don't just inherit it the way you do with genes.
Scott pulled out this graph from the book that showed how infant humans compared
to apes on various IQ types tests.
So the apes and the babies scored almost exactly the same on a bunch of other measures,
except in social learning or like the ability to learn, uh, from another human or in
the case of an ape from another ape where human babies quote unquote, wipe the floor
with the apes.
Can I interject real quick?
Have you guys seen the video of the ape IQ test where the chimpanzee has to hit the
numbers and order on a screen after they are flashed really briefly on a screen?
I haven't, but I've heard the chimpanzees are better at certain kinds of math than
humans.
Uh, I don't know if it was math or just memorization.
Like they knew the numbers one through 14.
I think what order they come in anyway.
I don't know if they actually knew what they're supposed to represent, but
they knew the shapes and the order they're supposed to be in really quickly.
Like split second was flash on the screen and the disappear and the numbers just
randomly over the screen and the chimpanzee would go and touch on the screen in
order exactly when each where, where each one was.
Like there's no fucking way I could have done that.
I don't know any human who could have done that just with a split second flash on
the screen and the chimpanzees got it 100% of the time.
You seen something like that.
I can't remember it was the same thing or not.
That's, that's really interesting.
Like the real fast memorization of a visual thing was astounding.
I didn't get a chance to dig into that chart because I was reading this on my
phone on the train, but like it said, it was not, it was, it was toddlers and
that surprised me because I didn't know that toddlers had any sort of culture,
but I also don't know what the age range is for toddlers.
Oh, well, this was even talking about babies.
I mean, like we learn a ton from age zero to whatever age they're going to cut
it off for toddlers.
It's just a, you don't often see very much of the output of that learning.
Pretty much the first thing babies do is start imitating the humans.
In the womb, apparently they're still listening.
They were pruning phonemes from the native language.
Yeah.
So that surprised me.
We were talking about trying to document surprises earlier.
So I made a note of that.
I guess I just wouldn't have figured that they're even aware.
I mean, I guess not on reflection, they're obviously aware of each other,
but I guess I just didn't notice, I didn't consider babies.
I mean, I just didn't think that they could look around and like see what
another baby is doing and think about what they should do themselves.
I don't think they mimic other babies so much.
They mimic the adults around them.
They mimic each other too.
It's easier to teach a kid to swim if another kid teaches them.
Because even, I think, talked about that in the book.
You learn from people who are the most similar to you.
Yes, they did say that.
Anyway, that was interesting.
Scott brought up a couple of examples of about how infants are
obsessed with learning things, which we're kind of just talking about.
They even mentioned humans seem to have these built in slots in their brain
that they're compelled to fill with, specifically language, animals,
gender roles, and which plants are edible.
The language thing I've known about for a long time, I think it has been
known for a long time that humans are most susceptible to learning
languages in the early years of life.
And if you try to learn one after that period, it's always harder.
And often, especially once you get out of your teens, the accent will be
impossible to get rid of unless you have like some extreme coaching and practice
at it.
Sometimes just literally impossible to get rid of the accent no matter what.
And I mean, you got to think too, learning to talk is even harder than like
as an additional problem on top of learning a language, right?
Like how to make different sounds when you move your mouth.
Like that's not something that we're aware of and we're talking right now,
right?
So they've got to figure all that stuff out too, on top of learning how to
actually make the sounds they want to make.
I was really, I mean, I am really curious about the accent thing, though,
because apparently I could speak Polish early in my life with no accent,
just like fluent Polish.
And when I see video tape of me as a kid talking, oh my God, it's, I have a
bad Polish accent and I'm really annoying and I'm not surprised other kids
didn't want to hang out with me.
But now when I speak Polish with my parents, they say, you speak with a
heavy American accent.
And, you know, it's just, it's so weird that someone who can be taken out of
their home country, like Schwarzenegger, perhaps, right, lived his entire life
here since the twenties in America, probably doesn't speak his native
language all that much.
And yet he has this thick accent, which will never go away.
He probably couldn't even, I don't think he could even fake an American
accent with a lot of coaching.
You probably can.
You see a lot of British actors who have perfect American accents and vice versa.
Yeah.
But I met Schwarzenegger in particular.
I mean, if maybe he just never tried, because his accent is part of his brand.
But there was an interesting thing there about plants, which makes a lot of
sense, you know, observing what your parents, if you're a toddler, are eating
and stuff, but apparently babies have a huge aversion to plants.
And there was this long snippet in there about, um, like putting babies in a room
with like two unusual, two plants that never seen, in this case, it was like
partially in basal and like two objects that never seen, like a wooden spoon and
a lamp.
And they would like always go for the spoon and lamp, even though in the
traditional environment, those aren't things they saw, but they have then the
version to plants.
And so I sent this long wall of text to my sister, whose baby just turned one
a couple months ago and she said, uh, um, scrolling.
She says, that's interesting.
It explains her first reaction with basal screams and tears, but she'll eat it now.
Um, and I was like, Hey, that's so cool.
Not cool that she was crying, but now cool that we have an evolutionary
psych context for it.
Right.
And she's like, Yeah, exactly.
Apparently they wouldn't even, uh, they looked to the adults to see which ones
they would touch and then which ones they would eat.
And I think they did the experiment where they would pick the, they would pick
some fruit and then they would put it behind their ear versus eating it.
So those babies would touch the fruit.
And I think they wouldn't eat it unless the person had clearly just put it in
their mouth.
That's so cool.
I think like somebody else in the comments was questioning whether that's
real though, and they're like, my kid will shove anything in its mouth.
So.
Yeah.
I do think Scott mentioned later also in the comments that he asked the person
with a two year old in their house and they said, yeah, our two year old puts
everything that's mouth, no matter what.
So don't know.
Maybe it's only when you're younger, maybe it's not quite a solid.
Maybe if they grow up with a dog, see the dog eating everything.
Well, I mean, cause the dog also manipulates everything with its mouth.
Right.
So like the mouth, like its mouth is its hand.
How old is your, uh, your, your sister's kid?
14 months.
Okay.
I have my sister as a kid now too.
It was like five months.
I should ask her the same thing.
Or better yet, just bring a plant next time you see the baby and see if it freaks out.
Yeah, I was just going to say, like one of my sisters needs to have kids.
I got to do some experiments on them.
Do some science.
Uh, I pulled another quote out of Scott's post here.
In the cultural intelligence hypothesis, humans live in obligate symbiosis with a
culture, a brain without an associated culture is incomplete and not very useful.
So the infant brain is adapted to seek out the important aspects of its local
culture, almost from birth and fill them in through the appropriate slots in
order to become whole.
Yeah.
And that was like, uh, kind of in reference to these four slots, one of them was
gender roles and Scott pointed out that gender roles vary across cultures.
So not necessarily always like blue equals boy and pink equals girl.
Apparently that changed at some point.
Oh yeah.
It used to be the other way around the kind of dress changed, you know,
but it still kind of fits with that.
You learn from those that you're most similar to.
Yeah.
So if other little boys are playing, whatever, but you got to figure out what they are.
Exactly.
Although I heard that, um, this, like even with chimpanzees, the female, uh,
infants are much more likely to go for toys that are like of a baby looking toys,
like, uh, dolls and things like that.
Whereas boys were far more likely to go for objects, sticks, balls, that sort of
thing.
Yeah.
That's the kind of thing has been proven over and over again.
There's a, obviously there's overlap.
It's a big Venn diagram, but young female assigned people do go for like
nurturing type toys and young male assigned people will go for more like,
uh, measurement type toys.
Uh, Scott, actually, I thought this was funny, uh, said maybe the reason that
little boys like trucks so much is that like that's filling in the slot for animals
because trucks are the only megafauna that kids are going to see nowadays.
Oh, I liked that, like that point too.
I think, um, you know, it, this is me now, armchair, uh, evolutionary
psychologizing.
So, uh, but I mean, if you, especially in the context of like doing these
studies in the seventies, you know, the, the dad's out winning bread and the mom's
home taking care of stuff.
So the, the babies will internalize, oh, you know, women caregiver, I want, you
know, and if you're, if you're a little girl, I want to play with dolls then
cause that's what the people like me that I've observed to do.
Um, but I mean, I, I, I maybe I'm stretching that whole learning from
things that you learning from people that you're similar to, right?
That seems to be a bit more innate too, though.
Like they have done the, let's raise a child in a genderless environment and
they still have those preferences.
Interesting.
Except for, um, some kids like me, but then again, I'm trans now.
So I do remember that the boys, uh, uh, or at least one of the boys raised
genderless, uh, didn't have any problem to using like a baby stroller, uh, but
would use it more for moving things around rather than like as a baby
stroller, you know, but he didn't have any of the association of like, oh,
that's a girly thing.
I can't touch it.
And there was like the stories of the little girls that would like wrap
up the train in a blanket and be like, my baby train is sleeping now.
Yeah.
Hmm.
I do like the idea of, uh, of, of cars and trucks is mega fauna though.
Me too.
Yeah.
Makes you feel, makes me slightly more able to understand people who
would like name their cars really attached to them.
Oh, I named all my cars.
Oh, I'm on my fifth car and I haven't named anything.
I've never named a car either and I don't care about my car.
I'm like, if it gets wrecked and I get the payout, that's fine.
Anyway, yeah, the next part of the book is about post childhood learning and
it's mostly focused on prestige, which, uh, we talked about a little bit
already and it's that whole idea that it's hard to figure out how skilled
somebody is just from judging one technique against another.
If you're an outsider or new, someone who's trying to learn this skill and
you're just watching, you have no idea what components of that skill contribute
to how effective it is.
Um, Scott was talking about a basketball player and I forget what the
five things that he had were, but he said, if you were watching this
basketball players, like pregame routine, you have no idea which of these
things matters.
Was it like how many times he practiced layups or was it how he tied his
shoes or was it his pregame prayer or was it the fact that he ate carrots?
So we have no idea how to know which ones are good.
So instead we seem to have developed this mental shortcut where we equate
prestige with skill.
And then of course, unfortunately, this has led to celebrities in modern
culture having more influence than maybe arguably they should.
The prestige thing is really cool and reminded me of an old after hours
video that I saw where they were basically deconstructing like the turtles
and other common archetypes, right?
And pointed out that everyone kind of hates Leonardo and everyone kind of
hates Cyclops and the X-Men and like whoever the leader role in these made
up groups is people always tend to kind of hate them.
And really the main reason for that is because they're not a natural leader.
They're like someone that someone in authority, like Professor X or Splinter
pointed to and said, this is your leader now, take his orders.
And so all the audience kind of hates that.
Whereas in real life, the real leaders are usually people who are really fucking
good at something like it would be the best ninja that just kind of becomes
the leader because everyone else wants to be like him.
It would be the most capable X-Men that would kind of become the leader
because everyone was like, yeah, let's do what he's doing.
Or at least the most charismatic.
Or that, yeah.
I mean, like, arguably somebody who's good at managing people might be better
at being the leader than the best ninja.
Yes.
Yeah.
I mean, like everyone likes Splinter and Professor X, but they're not the
de facto leaders of like the combat squad, I guess, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
But both Splinter and Professor X are good at what they do.
So things that I pulled out is also from this section.
Hunter gatherers really want to learn the essentials of their hunter gatherer
lifestyle and learning it is really hard.
Their heuristics are one, learned from people who are good at the things.
If you haven't already read about the difference between dominance and prestige
hierarchies, check out Kevin Simmler's blog post on the topic, which by the way,
I would also really recommend.
I wanted to do a show about this at some point and I've been wanting that for
years and maybe someday we'll get to it.
But yeah, it's really good.
I think it's, it's either melting asphalt or meaning this.
I always get those two blogs mixed up, but he has a great, great post about how
humans are very much a sort of hive mind creature.
And the way the reason this works is because prestige and admiration are how
we coordinate ourselves.
And yeah, it's a great post.
And Hanson talks a lot about prestige and all of his stuff, but most recently
in the elephant in the brain, I mean, the, I think it's, it's, you don't even
have to understand like why they're prestigious to, I guess, admire them or
like want, like if you're wanting to get into it, to like mimic that.
You just see that everyone else appreciates it.
Right.
And it's, I think it's just one of those.
I think Scott called it prestige cascades or like the concern being that
somebody just becomes famous by being famous or for being famous.
Yeah.
But yeah, it says people will fear and obey authority figures like kings and
chieftains, but they give it, but they give a different kind of respect,
prestige to people who seem good at.
Two is learn from people who are like you.
If you are a man, it is probably a bad idea to learn fashion by observing woman.
If you are a servant, it is probably a bad idea to learn the rules of etiquette
by observing how the king behaves.
And vice versa.
Yeah.
People are naturally inclined to learn from people more similar to themselves.
Heinrich ties this into various studies showing that black students learn better
from a black teacher, female students from a female teacher, et cetera.
And three, learn from old people.
Old people have already learned the local culture and can teach it to others.
Heinrich asks us to throw out any personal experience we have of elders.
We live in a rapidly changing world where an old person is probably behind the
times, but for most of history, change happened glacially slowly and old people
would have spent their entire lives accumulating relevant knowledge.
Imagine a Silicon Valley programmer stumped by a particularly tough bug in
his code, calling up his grandfather and also the note that sometimes important
events only happen once in a generation.
And Stephen, you as a programmer, um, said once that you knew a guy who was
like the guy who knew everything and like had mad prestige and everyone went to
him and you want it to be like someday just be like half as cool as he is.
Right.
He's 26.
Yeah.
So he's, he's exceptional and that gives them kind of bonus prestige.
Right.
Um, but I mean, on my last team, on my last job, uh, the other senior that I
worked with, he was in his sixties and he was that guy.
He'd been doing this since they were, you know, programming with punch cards.
Exactly.
I mean, he talked about that.
Yeah.
So he knew all the ins and outs down to the, you know, top and bottom of, of what
he was doing with everything.
So that was another kind of like getting, getting a lesson from him was also really
gratifying.
Knows the shit.
Yeah.
And there's always the impression, I imagine, you know, just like asking an elder, you
know, how, why am I crafting my arrows with the right wing feathers of a bird
rather than the left wing feathers?
And they could give you an answer, but you got the impression that they knew a
lot more than just what they told you because they probably did.
And that's, that was my experience too.
Talking with really like senior devs who'd been in this forever.
So the 26 year old guy is just a savant.
I mean, so he knew stuff that he'd been able to pick up in his time doing this,
but he, it wasn't the same kind of seniority experience.
Different kinds of prestige.
Totally.
Yeah.
The, uh, important events only happening once a generation.
Um, the example that they used in the book was elephants and elephants live a
very long time and they're one of the species, like us, uh, long live mammals
who do keep elders around, uh, post, uh, menopause.
And for pretty good reason, they talked about a couple of instances where
there were these droughts and because of poaching a lot of these elder elephants
don't exist anymore, but the elephant tribes that had a matriarch were able
to find the last resort water holes while the others weren't.
Cause the, the older ones had, you know, found water in hard times before.
They remembered the, the really hard to get to water holes that you normally
don't get to that they were brought to once when they were a kid, when there
was a horrible drought.
They also had better survival rates, um, because they knew which lines were
the most dangerous, I guess some other things too.
So keeping your elders around apparently does directly affect the success
of the younger generations.
All right.
I guess I will try to respect my elders a little more.
Well, apparently our elders are behind the times.
That's true.
Well, so you won't consult them about your, you know, 21st century problems,
but, but I mean, like a life issue, like, you know, grandma, what happened,
you know, did you ever have a situation like this?
Like, oh yeah, I had 10.
It's your first time having this and they can talk to you all about it and
give you all the wisdom they had from that.
So grandma might be able to remember what happened the last time a populist,
you know, blowhole was elected.
Yeah.
Not, sorry, I shouldn't bring it back there.
Why, why did I do that?
Let's go forward.
Cause everything's been totally foobar lately and we can't even go there.
And we know this shit's happened in the past.
Yep.
Onward.
Yeah.
So at the end of the essay, Scott talks about examples of cultural evolution
that he found the most interesting in the book, which, uh, I think we talked
a little bit about these, but they were Maniac, uh, divination and shark taboos.
Uh, Maniac, I'm not sure if that's how it's pronounced, but it's a type of
tuber that is only edible if you use this complex processing technique to get
rid of the cyanide, which, uh, I believe you had to chop it and then soak it
and then boil it since let it soak for like three days, right?
Something like that, but not four or five.
Cause if it's soaked too long, I don't, something happened.
It was like exactly three days.
And if you pull it out too early, it would still have some cyanide.
And if you pull it out too late, there's probably steps that we're missing there too.
I'm sure it's very precise.
Yeah.
So, and then like since I'm so glad I can just buy food at the supermarket.
Oh yeah, guaranteed to not have too much cyanide, just the right amount.
Uh, since cyanide poisoning would take a while to become evident, uh, the only
reason that people would keep using the more complex technique is tradition.
And by a while, it was like decades before you started noticing the bad effects.
It would be a good 20, 25 years before it started really affecting you.
So this is really like modest doses of cyanide.
Trace amounts, yeah, but not enough that it builds up over time.
Gotcha.
Yeah.
And then there's like divination.
Um, apparently acts as a crude type of randomization tool, uh, which would be
useful in war when you're deciding whether to attack your enemies, left or right
flank, or for deciding where to hunt or where to plant your crops.
These are all, um, techniques that require real randomization.
And Scott went on about how humans are very, very bad randomizers to the point
where somebody could write a very easy AI program that could like with 76% accuracy
or something like that predict whether you're going to click one side or the
other when you're trying to be random, or I forget what it was.
Yeah.
What number you were going to pick.
Yeah.
It could out predict you.
It was, uh, also, they went into some examples of why these sorts of things
would be useful.
Like it doesn't, it's not intuitive to me why it would be useful to randomize
where you're hunting or where you're going to plant crops, but it turns out
that going back to the same place that you had a great catch last time is
actually probably counterproductive because the animals also remember where
they were killed last time or well, where their family members and kin were
killed last time.
And so they start staying away from those places.
And you killed a lot of the ones that were there.
That too.
Yeah.
And, uh, there was something similar with the, the planting that if you over
plant one area, you start pulling the nutrients out of the soil.
And so just having a truly randomized process actually is a little bit, uh,
beneficial, more than a little bit beneficial.
It's actually beneficial.
I read about this at one point a long time ago about precise order of crop rotation
to keep your soil good.
And there, there is, you can keep using, I'm sure you have to add
whatever fertilizers and stuff, but you can, if you rotate crops, not randomly,
but in the right kind of order, different kinds.
I don't remember the specifics.
Um, the soil stayed good for longer.
And that's definitely this kind of like trial and error thing.
It's like, well, we had a great soybean harvest last year.
Let's do that again.
It's like, no, no, no, because it's written on the stone tablet that you guys
can't look at, or because grandma said so, we're doing it this way.
Apparently it was weird birds.
Oh, for the Romans, it was weird.
Well, I think it was for planting too.
Okay.
If you see a, um, fortuitous bird doing a particular thing in this particular
spot, there was a whole complex process behind what the bird was doing.
But like that's generating random numbers was not the reason why the users
of these techniques thought that it worked.
Right.
They thought that we burned this bone and it creates these cracks and that
creates a map that will guide us to the hunting grounds and the spirits are helping.
They didn't know why it worked.
Yeah, but they knew it did work.
I also liked someone in the best of comments later on pointed out that, uh,
divination processes that are long and complex and difficult are much better
than simple, easy ones, because then you can't just redo them until you get the
result you would like, and, uh, making it be long and complex is like, uh, once
you get to the end, you're like, fine, we'll fucking take this result.
Less room for humans to un-randomize it.
That's a good point.
Yeah.
If you're just flipping a coin or dropping a stick to see which way it
points, you can be like, I'm going to try again.
Yeah, that's two out of three.
But, but if exactly, but if you're, if you've got this hard to find, you know,
substance, then you destroy it in the process of your divination.
Then it's like, well, we've got to just do that now.
We don't have all the time and effort to go do this all over again.
There was also a cool, I didn't, I don't, I didn't pull it, which I kind of regret
now, but there was a, uh, cool anecdote about how in the fifties when, or maybe
it was the seventies when computing got, uh, much cheaper, uh, people started
redoing calculations, uh, especially on data from, from experiments to get
results they liked better.
So, uh, that kind of had a negative impact, the, the introduction of the
computer into the science process, at least for a while.
Womp.
Got to have some kind of divination process.
That's, that's what I'll say next in our right bug.
You know, there's 20,000 people across seven years.
We just can't afford to do this twice.
I'll explain the value of a good divination process next time.
Like my stuff only works like one out of 20 times, or why, why, why it fails
one out of 20 times.
Like, you guys have no idea how valuable this is to cultural evolution.
And then the last, uh, tradition was Fijian women who refused to eat shark
when they're pregnant.
And when asked why they said, because their babies will be born with shark
skin, uh, but the actual reason's more likely that shark meat causes birth defects.
Which sounds like a better reason because being born with shark skin sounds
kind of cool.
I know, right?
Like, wouldn't that be awesome?
I imagine they're harder to cut and pierced than squishy human skin.
It's probably in a society where being like a mutant is considered bad.
Yeah, being a shark person probably wouldn't have been good for you.
Now people aren't sure you have souls anymore.
And yeah, it might be hard to give you a hug to be all scratchy.
Uh, yeah.
So each of these cultures accidentally discovered a true fact about the universe,
but they have no idea why it's true.
So they developed a tradition around it and were motivated to stick to that
traditional way of doing things, even if the traditional explanation actually
makes no sense.
Uh, and other methods might seem faster and easier and more tempting to try.
Instead of cutting up the maniac and then soaking it for three days and grinding
it and boiling it, it's like, well.
Process was ridiculous.
Why don't I just do this faster thing?
It literally sounds like a ridiculous magic ritual over a number of days for no reason at all.
Yeah.
And, uh, they pointed out, or I guess it was probably Scott making this a point,
not the original author, but if some person was like, Hey, I want to spend more time
with my kids, uh, I'm going to cook this stuff faster.
And, you know, maybe they ate it themselves and they're like, Hey, it's fine.
Cause it would take, you know, maybe 20, 30 years for the sign.
I poisoning to really start building up to where, uh, you start getting sick and you
can't even point to the maniac necessarily as why, why there are these people getting
sick, um, could be a number of things.
So the fact that they developed this tradition around it kind of fail safe.
The correct technique, um, Scott says that this might explain why we as a species tend
to be a versed to logic and reason, doing what seemed like quote unquote logical and
reasonable and the ancestral environment could get you and your whole tribe killed.
I, I'm thinking about the food preparation.
I think this was on one of the like first series of planet earth documentary series.
Um, it was these capuchin monkeys, they would get these nuts and then they would set them
out in the sun for like a day or two and then they would smash them with rocks.
And then they were good to eat after that.
Maybe it was because they're easier to smash after a couple days of drying or
something, or something, but there was, that was some little cultural evolution.
Plus capuchin monkeys are among my favorite.
They're like nine pounds.
They're really cute.
They got their little hands in the little closet video of them using rocks.
Like the ones that have like the mains, right?
Those are, they have some.
There's, I think we're thinking of different ones.
Cause maybe I think I'm thinking of a tamarin.
I think maybe.
Yeah.
I don't know a lot about monkeys, but I'm someone, these aren't monkeys.
Someone's going to correct me, whatever these little primates, but the
little video, like he's hefting what's like, you know, about the size of like a
coffee cup, but it looks like he's heaving this huge boulder and then throwing it
down onto the, onto the thing.
And they, they sit there and try it over and over until they hit the thing.
But it was, in addition to being informative and related to this article,
also super cute.
So cool.
I, I get your hatred and I kind of feel it too.
On the other hand, I also have this sort of morbid fascination, which I hear a lot
of people get like with a thing about zombie apocalypses.
They're like objectively, I know it would be horrible.
I would probably die.
And even if I didn't die, I'd live a few years in a horrible wasteland where
everyone I love dies and then I die of like a bad infection or something.
But man, a zombie apocalypse would be so fun to be in, right?
Zombie land makes it look like a lot of fun.
Right.
Right.
And I know a lot of people who have that kind of fantasy.
And I kind of feel the same way about what we just read about human civilization.
Scott says, says it this way, one of the most important parts of any culture,
more important than the techniques for hunting seals, more important than the
techniques for processing tubers is techniques to make sure nobody ever
questions tradition.
Humans evolved to, to transmit culture with high fidelity.
And one of the biggest threats to transmitting culture with high fidelity
was reason with a capital R.
Our ancestors lived in epistemic hell where they had to constantly rely on
causally opaque processes with justifications that couldn't possibly be true.
And if they ever questioned them, they might die.
Historically, reason has been the villain of the human narrative.
Which, holy shit, guys, that's fucked up.
And it makes so much sense to why there's so many stories about
there's so many early civilizations that have this kind of myth where a woman
comes out of the forest and she's like, I will bring you great prosperity,
but you just can't eat a squirrel.
And then, of course, the dumbass always like eats a squirrel after, you know,
however many years of following the instructions and his kingdom prospers.
And then like something horrible happens and there's like the same kind of myth
just over and over the structure of do not question, you know,
strange women throwing swords at you from lakes.
Forget what the quote was.
But like, I mean, it's even common to the fairy to today.
Like a lot of sci-fi is cautionary tales.
Right. I mean, I guess 1984 is the first one that jumps to mind.
But there's a lot of to the point where one of my favorite comics is Caveman
sci-fi where there's this caveman who has invented fire and he's like, look,
me make fire. And the other caveman goes, no, you go too far.
You employ God. He says, no, now my food better.
And then the next panel is the entire world caught fire.
And it's the caveman saying me and play God.
And one is another one with like a shot, a sharp rock.
I'll be cavemen have like dull rocks on the ends of their axis.
And this one was like, look, me make sharper rock.
And the other one goes, says, you go too far.
You employ God. He goes, no, me hunt better now.
And then he takes the rock and hits the ground and the entire earth breaks open.
You know, flat little island of land and space that's now broken in half.
And he goes, me, I'm go too far.
But there's a lot of sci-fi like that, you know,
like don't play around with jeans like Gattaca because you'll make terrible
things happen and don't implement this other technology
because then all of society will crumble.
That's actually as distinctly different than like not doing things for no
for known impossible reasons.
These aren't known reasons as the thing.
This was an old person saying this bird is lucky.
Right. Yeah, exactly.
But like, why shouldn't you tamper with jeans?
Well, because we're pretty sure we're not sure of, you know,
the things that might happen, you know, the cascading effects from that.
And like, there's there's a reasonable process behind that, right?
It's not because some witch told us not to.
But the science fiction stories generally tell you, show you, you know,
future scenarios that are kind of ridiculous, like humanoid robots
walking around shooting people and when they want to infiltrate them,
they put on hyperalistic human skin, you know.
And yeah, OK, the the lesson that AI can't be trusted is actually a very good one.
But the scenario that they play out is kind of ridiculous and hokey.
And yet that is the sci-fi that is forever with us.
Yeah, like there's a lot of this taboo against playing God in general,
which playing God can be doing anything new.
And specifically, I guess there's probably certain areas that are
especially bad to tamper with, like anything that involves creating life
or messing with life, cloning, people were all about, no, cloning is going to create super sheep or.
Yeah. Or yeah, I mean, there's there's movies where all that stuff happens.
But I guess I'm just thinking like there was horrible things about both organ
transplantation and in vitro fertilization for a while.
Like the Catholic Church literally wasn't sure if these people would have souls
if you put in someone else's liver into your body.
Like what happens then?
Do you have like 10% of somebody else's soul inside you now?
It was a huge thing until it actually like was done and someone's life was saved.
And the people were like, yeah, fuck that, I would like a new liver.
Some people still don't accept organ transplants.
Jehovah's Witnesses still don't accept blood.
So we're talking about the parables of like science fiction, not like the lessons that.
Right. I mean.
But I mean, like the ancient parables of don't eat shark meat or your children
will have shark skin is the same kind of ridiculous story that yet
somehow, you know, was for a good reason.
And well, what about people that don't eat GMOs because it's franken food?
Right. Yeah. But but they're doing it that that that's that's kind of the
example I'm thinking of. That doesn't make any sense.
No, it doesn't. And so like, but you can kind of see where they're coming from
when all of cultural evolution has been pushing people to not try new things
because sticking to old things is what made you not die.
I guess I'm like, I'm lucky, more sympathetic towards those people.
It's it's fun in the sense of understand.
It's to me, this is I get like, kind of the like, oh, man, this sucks.
That you guys have.
But it's for me, it's more just like, oh, cool.
I found where this bug lives.
And now, now we know how to address it is saying it's not a bug, though.
Well, it it's a bug in so far as if because now we know how to make
corn properly or something.
Now we've now we fix the bug.
We don't do it the hard, weird way with, you know, burnt seashells.
Stephen, did you go to a university?
I went to I got a psychology degree.
Oh, shit. OK, well, I didn't.
I feel that college, especially nowadays, is wasteful and stupid.
It wastes people's lives.
It wastes a ton of money, which is not necessarily needed.
That's still true. OK, yes.
That's more true than ever.
All right. I kind of consider it like the ivory tower magical thing, where
if you go to this special magical tower, now you become special.
If you spend four years of your life there and people want to hire you more,
there's a whole cool post with your link.
But the thing is, as Scott Alexander pointed out,
most most people in the rational sphere now kind of think of university
as sort of like this passe old institution, which has outlived its usefulness.
But what if that's one of those things that works in ways we don't entirely
understand, that makes our entire culture possible?
And sure, it's extremely expensive, but maybe it's a good reason.
Maybe it's a good thing we haven't gotten rid of it, because all of a sudden,
30 years from now, we all develop not having college poisoning and die.
You know, I wonder, like so the.
Again, I'm thinking this from like a Hansonian lens, where like the point
of going to college now is that you can get credentialed and put that on your
resume and people will be like, oh, they can tolerate going to school.
They can tolerate sitting in a cubicle for eight hours a day. Right.
But the solution to that now, like so again, I got a useless degree
that I never used and instead went to a boot camp trade school and now do that.
So like the I it could be that there's some secret benefit of, you know,
exactly. That's the horror part. Yeah.
We hate the two-party system. What if there's some secret benefit?
I mean, like one that is a little bit more near to my heart is what about monogamy?
Yeah. Yeah.
What about other like traditions that I hate?
Yeah. Or what about sexism?
Oh, God.
But in that way lies madness, right?
If we start saying, no, we can't change these things because they might be secretly
useful. Yeah.
How can we possibly better ourselves?
That's literally where the hatred for this post comes from.
We might be living in a horror world where everything we're doing to better
the world is secretly making it deadly.
Well, that's part of cultural evolution and we'll figure it out.
Like, you know, if tribe, you know, groups of people starved to death,
but humanity didn't, right?
Yeah. See, I'm not so big on the starving to death part.
Yeah. Like, communist Russia had this great idea and it worked for a few
decades when they rocketed them into the industrial age.
But it ended up with millions of people starving to death.
So in Venezuela right now is like, what?
I just can't even begin to like out of water.
Well, the average wage is not enough to buy enough calories to live for,
like, if you work for an average wage and spend all your money on food,
you will die of starvation.
So, I mean, that obviously we can see the failure mode there, right?
But I guess we're turning into a lawless sort of Mad Max world.
I had something that was, I thought, really engaging and I just dropped it.
Or were we a second?
We were saying that they tried out a cool new idea that everyone
thought in theory should absolutely work.
Right. So, like, if we, if we dive into that a little bit,
like the cost of getting that wrong before in the ancestral environment
where the ancestral environment of 200 years ago was starving to death
or getting sick and dying 30 years later.
But is there anything that we can possibly think of?
And maybe we can't, the three of us in five minutes, but we're like, all right, cool.
Let's think if we got rid of factor X, we can say sexism, we could say college,
we could say segregation or something.
If we were to change what we're trying to do to any of those variables,
the consequence of that isn't starving to death, right?
So, like, if we, if we live in a post sexism, you know, country in 50 years,
if it goes wrong, it won't go wrong from us starving to death.
I mean, I would say so.
And I think sexism is such a bad thing anyway, that I very strongly want to pursue it,
even knowing that maybe it will result in half the country starving to death
because I don't think it will.
But now I have to have this constant fear for the rest of my life
that this is a thing I care deeply about and am pursuing.
But, you know, unintended consequences, maybe we're all fucked because of this.
But that's what I'm asking, like, so then unintended consequences
of not cooking your tubers right back in the day with cyanide poison.
The and so like then hence like personal death or death of your family and tribe.
Yeah, I can't think of any mechanism by which like, all right,
our family is going to go to trade school instead of college.
That that's not going to lead to starving to death.
Yeah, you're much less likely to suffer really extreme consequences
like that in the non ancestral environment.
So we have more of a safety net to experiment now, which is cool.
Yeah, so didn't know that cyanide existed.
Something might exist that we don't know of that has, you know,
long term build up 30 year consequences that's only pumped in the air
conditioning units of universities or something like the whole point is I don't know,
which is why you I mean, you have to pursue what you're going to pursue anyway.
This is something I think is important and I will work on it.
It's just that now I can no longer do it with the unalloyed belief
that I am doing everything perfectly right.
There's always this, well, you might be wrong, which is actually like a good
thing to always have in mind, right?
It is.
I think that I mean, I'm sure if you'd asked me a minute ago, I would probably
would have said, I'm sure I'm doing some things like the best way that I can or
something.
But now I mean, my answer is like, and now I feel like it's always been this way
because I just had this thought for the first time is like, I'm doing it in this
context, I'm doing it to the best that I can with the information I have.
And so like, if it turns out that, you know, the first country to solve sexism
and by 21, by the year 2100, it's this nightmarish hellscape where some crazy
thing happened.
I, they did, they made an honest mistake by doing what seems to be the best thing
to do, which was fix this problem, right?
Yeah.
I, I'm not so concerned that any of like the ambitions that I have, because I'm
not trying to, you know, do large world scale changing things.
I'm not, I'm not concerned that anything I'm going to do is going to help
bring down society.
And I, I, I'm still, I'm like trying to hold back like a grin of just like
the amusement of what could possibly go wrong.
And I realized that's what someone might have said.
It's like, all right, I'm hungry now.
I'm not going to wait for this to cook or sit in the water for another day.
And yet this is, our situation now is not like that.
Or is it?
Am I missing something?
The, or is it is the thing that you're missing?
How can I be sure it's not?
Yeah.
Hmm.
I like, like Jess said, we have a safety net.
We have more freedom to experiment because if whatever, I mean, we should just
pick an example and stick to it.
But like if desegregating schools is a bad idea, I think we would have known by now.
Well, Hey, yeah, we would have known by now.
So maybe pick, you know, I don't know.
Um, no, I think that's a good example.
Yeah.
But I mean, like something that we're trying to aim for now then, right?
Like getting more women in programming.
Sure.
Yeah.
Maybe that ruins the tech industry in a hundred years for some crazy
reason, right?
I can't imagine how the women get all their cooties all over here.
Yeah, code base.
Damn it.
Those, those cooties are like bugs.
And yeah.
Si actually exists and female Si makes computers not work so good.
Right.
Well, hey, if we prove the existence of, of that, oh wait, they don't do the
million dollar challenge anymore.
Do they?
Didn't they retire that?
Yeah, I think so.
I don't know.
Somebody needs to pick that back up at one point.
They retired it and then reinstated it, but now I think I'm ever tired
it for good.
Oh, I'll have to double check.
I did just check a few weeks ago and Randy is still alive, which is great.
Cool.
Yeah.
The million dollar paranormal challenge is sort of what I was referring to,
which is if you can demonstrate supernatural paranormal or occult abilities
under controlled test conditions, which is basically just doing it in front
of somebody who's like a trained magician.
You can get a million dollars, you could get a million dollars from James Randy.
So, and discovering Si, you know, so the first person to do that, at least, you
know, while their startup might have failed, they can get a million dollars.
Um, I, I don't know.
Are we completely hopeless in the age of science and rationality to think of
ways where completely hopeless at all?
No, no, to, to, to, to think of like, okay, how could this go wrong?
Are we, are we unable to answer those questions?
You know, because we've always been done it this way.
Cause they've always done it that way for reasons that they didn't know about.
Now we know those reasons and we know a lot more about the world than we did before.
So like fucking with things is different now than it was like before it was just
pure fuckery and like, you know, we'll throw the dice and see what happens.
Now it's like, all right, we're going to, we, yes, we're, we're
spicing genes into our food, but we know, as to why things happen and we know
exactly what we're doing when we're doing it, right?
We test the shit out of things too.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, like there's, you're still going to get some unknown unknowns, which
uh, ties into our sequences, but FDA is pretty good at picking out which drugs
are just going to kill you.
Not perfect.
They're much better.
Yeah.
And I mean, I guess what we haven't done is like run the three generation
experiment of living on GMO food, um, or at least like in lab GMO food, you
know, scientific pedants like me will argue that from the second we started
domesticating plant life, we've been GMOing our food for thousands of years.
Yeah.
Um, but that's a natural dude that reminded me.
They're the most recent, very bad wizards episode that came out today was on
the big Lebowski.
Oh sweet.
So if the dude, yeah, I have not yet heard the, and well, I think
it's a, it was a two parter because the one that just came up before was on pulp.
They were going to compare Pulp Fiction and, uh, the big Lebowski.
They finally, the Pulp Fiction episode.
And so it was going to be, it was going to be a comparison.
And then they did, well, they were going to just talk about the two different
movies and how they, you know, how they relate, if they have anything in common.
I'm not sure the theme of the show is seem like very different movies.
They are.
They, they, I mean, it was fun there.
So there's two episodes is what I was getting at the two most recent, very
bad wizards episodes was on Pulp Fiction and the big Lebowski.
I think they both kind of, they both touch on nihilism.
Don't they?
How you can't make that much of a difference in, I should just listen to
the episode and just remembering the line, those fucking nihilists.
I just listened to the episode.
They probably already thought about this much more than I have and are more eloquent.
They just talked about it in their favorite scenes.
And I, I don't give it my full attention.
It's usually my commute podcast.
So like I, you know, I'm not, well, one of the big themes of the big Lebowski was
that like they didn't really change anything.
Nothing they did really mattered in that movie.
And in Pulp Fiction, like I just keep remembering that scene where
a Vincent Vega, he's just hanging out in the apartment.
And because he chose that time to go and take a shit.
And because Bruce Willis left his stupid watch behind managed to get Vega killed.
And then they talk a bit about, too, about how, um, how am I
blanking on his name?
Uh, the, the big guy who's like, why don't I want to give us a shit about
the goddamn rules?
Yeah, John Goodman.
Yeah, Walter.
How he's not quite a deontologist, but he's very much a rule-based
ethicist where it's like, they're bowling.
You don't need to whip out your fucking gun.
But, but he cares about the rules.
Yeah.
So, yeah, I have the rules of no one's going to follow them.
I found that Giff and posted it in Slack today at work, the one where
he's whipping is going to have my, the one he gives a damn up.
I got the goddamn rules.
Yeah.
So I will say that based on what you've been saying, um, I,
cheated a little by reading the, I don't know, it's cheating.
I, because I read all states are codex posts, but, uh, soon after this,
often after his really big in-depth posts, he'll have a best of comments
on my post posts, which is great because sometimes there's a lot of comments.
Yeah.
I, well, I just have a rule of not reading comments in general because in
most places they're bad toxic.
I usually do the ones on Slate Start codex are a bit better than average.
Yes, they are.
Most of the time, but I also don't have time to read 400 comments.
I'll be honest, the only comments I read reliably are the ones that you put
on, or that, that our listeners put on the BayesianConspiracy.com because
they, I get emails when they come in, the only reason I read them.
Well, to me, it's cause it matters to me.
It's my thing, you know, that's probably why Scott also reads his comments
cause it's his thing and it matters to him.
Yeah, totally.
And so I love that he pulls out the best ones.
Yeah.
So, um, one of them was a reasoner, uh, on Chester, Chesterton's meta-fence who
says, dammit, we come up with the nerdiest names in our current system of
democratic, democratic market economies with large governments.
The common practice of taking down Chester 10 fences is a process which seems
well-established and has a decent track record and should not be unduly
interfered with unless you fully understand it.
So to your point, we've, for the past few hundred years, been demolishing
traditions and replacing them with new things.
And we've got a pretty good track record doing that.
So we shouldn't fuck around with demolishing traditions if it's a good tradition.
That's where I respect my tradition of destroying traditions.
Exactly.
That's a great, uh, oh, that wasn't the username.
They defined a new, uh, a new term there.
I see reason there was their name.
So let's break down some of the terminology there.
Cause, um, there's a lot of, of jargon in there.
So, um,
It's a good idea to remember to do that.
Yeah.
Um,
So for starters, Chesterton's fence is the idea that, uh, first started by, I
forget his first name, but his last name is Chesterton, obviously.
Uh, he said that if you see a fence in the middle of a field and you are like,
this fence is stupid, it's just blocking traffic.
I'm going to take it down.
His principle is you never take down the fence unless you know why that fence was
put there in the first place.
Cause maybe it's stopping the barbarians from the other side coming over or,
you know, the monster that doesn't know how to jump fences or something.
Right.
The, uh, person was GK Chesterton, who also wrote books that talk about this same
kind of topic, which makes sense because it's named after him.
And that is often used by traditionalists and, uh, more conservative
leaning people to say, stop fucking with our traditions.
They might be here for a damn good reason.
Well, and that, that actually relates really well to the point I was trying to
articulate in my head that like the point, you don't tear down a, you don't
tear down a fence unless you know why it's there.
And in the days of listening to crows and doing what was written on ancient
tablets and whatever, um, you, you didn't know why these were rules.
So tearing down those fences could kill you.
Now we know why the fences are there.
Like we know why kings liked being kings and like why they claimed, you know,
that it was a divine thing.
It's cause being a king was fun and I'm not sure if it was fun very often.
Yeah, I watched back on that official to your, yeah.
I think I would not have wanted to be medieval king.
I seem to like die a lot.
That's the point out.
That's what I was going to say is they have like being, like being a dictator.
Literally half the emperors of Rome were assassinated.
Yeah.
So like being an emperor sounds like a very, like dangerous job.
Or let me rephrase that.
Vita died a violent death.
It wasn't always assassination.
Sometimes it was just on a battlefield.
And so sometimes they just mysteriously die.
Yeah.
So, um, yeah.
So Chesterton's meta-fence is that we currently have a tradition of
during breaking down traditions.
So don't try to take down that tradition until you know why it's a good tradition.
Oh, it's got reply to that one.
I don't know.
I don't think so.
You just pulled it out.
That would have been nice.
Yeah.
So I think the, the lesson that I'm taking from that is that, you know,
like it might, a good tradition might have been like, you know, don't, um, in
fact, this is, you know, this is in true parts of the world now.
Like don't stick yourself with it.
Don't, don't let someone stick you with a needle and inject stuff into you.
Like that.
Hey.
This went really bad for us 50 years ago.
Let's, and you know, being stabbed historically for our, for our species sucked.
So let's avoid that.
Now we know all the reasons why that was bad, or we know enough of them.
Maybe there's some mysterious magic reason still unknown to us about why
being stuck with a needle is bad.
But we know enough about the, all the variables involved about why getting
like a vaccine is a really good idea, right?
Yeah.
Even when we mess up, uh, we can generally figure out why we messed up and fix it.
Yeah.
A lot of this nonsense, it was pre science.
Like science is the solution to these, to this, this horror hellscape of doing
things for weird tradition reasons, right?
I mean, not always science sometimes fucks things up as much as it helps.
Like when, uh, it was scientifically a great idea to give your baby's formula
instead of breast milk, because it gives you the baby everything it needs.
And it turns out that is not the case at all.
In fact, it's the opposite of the case.
Science is, and I'm, I'm going to double down as an enterprise.
We learned from that and we've got better formula, right?
I have a much lower infant death rate than we ever had in the history of our
species.
Like, so we, you know, I think science has a really good track record.
Yeah.
In general, it does.
Compared to tradition, like we have like control groups, you know, we can look
at, I don't want to say the Amish because apparently they're more technologically
savvy than we give them credit for, but we can look at, um, modern day hunter
gatherer societies and compare how we're doing in modern societies versus these,
uh, basically ancestral environments.
Spoiler alert, lots better.
But we still can't do double blind studies on whether or not getting a
blood transfusion kills your soul or not.
So damn it.
Yeah.
Souls are so resistant to study.
Uh, citizen coke cane, citizen co cane, like citizen cane, but with a co in
there, uh, says adhering to ancient traditions when the context is rapidly
changing is a recipe for disaster.
No point in mastering seal hunting.
If there ain't no more seals, no point in mastering the manners of being a court
year, if there ain't no more royal court, et cetera.
Problem is that in the modern world, we can't simply all mutually agree to stop
changing our context so that our traditions will continue to function as
before because it is no longer our under our control.
Enlightenment ideas would not have been nearly so persuasive if they hadn't had
the prestige of giving countries like the Netherlands, England, France and
America and edge.
So yeah, uh, cause this was also in the context of a, uh, conversation about
how enlightenment ideals like do often break with tradition.
Like a big part of the enlightenment is have reasons for what you're doing,
apply reason and logic to these things invented, you know, the process of
science and, uh, yeah, since our, our environment is changing so rapidly, the
traditions don't help anymore.
It'd be like having a tradition of people that grew up in a very arid, uh,
area that didn't have a lot of water, couldn't really support, uh, farming and
then being transported to modern day New York or something.
It's like those traditions don't help you in any way anymore.
You need new ones and our society is changing so fast that there's not that
much to be lost in abandoning those old traditions and grabbing onto new ones.
Yeah.
I still think there's something to be said for examining them and trying to
figure out what purpose they were serving.
And he does point out that the enlightenment values really helped out the
countries that adopted them early, like made them take over the globe basically.
Yeah.
And I mean, you know, if there's a food taboo or something that, you know, one
successful group had for a thousand years, figuring out, you know, what was
wrong with that food and then like, Oh, you need to do this to it to make it safe
to eat.
Then it's like, cool, problem solved.
We need that now.
He did point out that, uh, at the time of the enlightenment, uh, China, their
Qing dynasty, I think that's what it was, uh, was in, you know, in a huge
empire, controlled half the world, really advanced civilization, whereas
opposed to these tiny little startup countries in Europe weren't jack shit.
And, uh, they stuck with their old traditions.
They did not adopt this new enlightenment stuff.
And, uh, they were in the process of a few hundred years, like basically
destroyed and taken over by the British and, uh, those other European countries.
So, you know, sometimes holding onto traditions can be just as bad, especially
when the environment is changing.
Yeah.
This, for some reason, I just, this popped into my head.
I was thinking about the revolutionary war and how American soldiers won because
they were disorganized.
The British would wear these bright red uniforms and they would line up and
shoot and then another one would line up and shoot.
And then the Americans would just shoot at random and they didn't have
uniforms, so they blended in.
Hey, yes, army.
Basically a guerrilla warfare.
Kind of cultural evolution there.
Yeah.
Uh, first lid, uh, continued this line of thinking, saying, this means we should
be more accepting of people tweaking the new culture.
We should also enforce it less strongly.
Enforce what?
The culture?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Feel free to tweak around, do whatever, but also don't, don't really enforce
it on people because you don't know if it's good yet, right?
That's a good articulation.
I was talking with Jess about this after we saw, uh, Spider-Man far from home.
That that's sort of been my, like approach to, I guess, my, my
modern cultural evolution for like the last five years, which is like, you know,
if I come across something that's unusual to me, like, I don't really get it,
but you do you, but then I guess it does make sense to like say, all right, cool,
because we don't really, you know, this is a new thing.
We don't know the factors.
Let's not like legislate this just yet, whatever, or, you know, mandate this in
the public sphere or something, right?
Well, I mean, you were just talking about sexism and that's a pretty new thing too,
right?
Yeah.
Sexism was invented in 2016.
No, no, no.
Well, I mean, the whole pushback against sexism and giving, like women only got
the right to vote in what, the 1940s?
No, it's 1910s, I think.
1910s.
In any case, too recent to be.
Okay.
Yeah.
It's, it's like maybe a century now.
So this is still a fairly new thing.
1920.
1920.
Okay.
I was closer.
Yes, you were.
Gold star to, gold star to me.
Yeah, yeah, good job.
But I mean, the point being that should we also enforce this, uh,
equality between the sexes less, since it's still sort of a new thing that's
being developed, like if, if subcultures within the U S people living in rural
Alabama or people in strong Catholic areas want to keep their sexism, should,
should we bludgeon them with joining our society as, as much as we would like.
That's interesting.
Yeah.
Or like mandating, desegregating of schools.
Right.
Like I think desegregating is a great idea.
I'm not sure how I feel about forcing people to be bussed to different schools.
That is much more controversial.
I mean, that's, that's almost like a, that's a whole other side thing.
But the, the, I think the short version is that like that, that has other
effects, like it's that, that's a consequence of like making that happen
rather than just like making the idea necessary.
Right.
Yeah.
Um, the anti, I don't know.
I guess women's suffrage isn't that new.
So I guess I don't know how old does something have to be before we're like,
all right, cool.
This works.
Let's, let's keep going.
Well, I mean, desegregation is only the last few decades, at least 70s.
Voting rights were given to racial minorities in 65.
And so there's still plenty of people alive.
Even there might even still be people in 1965.
Yeah.
Holy shit.
Yeah.
I mean, so if there's anyone who's 11, 19, 20, how old would you be?
There are people who are barely, yeah, not very many 99 at this point.
If you were born in 1920.
If you like, actually remember the 1920s.
Yeah, then you'd be real old.
Yeah.
Um, yeah.
I mean, the, what am I trying to say?
Or what was I going to say?
I think the, um, I mean, on the plus side, if it turned out like, so we, let's say we,
we haven't been doing this in a scientifically controlled manner, but we can look at the
areas that are like more desegregated or less sexist now than they were a hundred years
ago and see which areas are doing better.
And like, that's our experimental results.
Right.
Now we can't run the clock for another hundred years and see maybe the desegregated,
desegregated, less sexist areas are going to be worse off in another century.
But it seems like we're on the right track.
And that's, that's all we can do, right?
Unless we're, unless we somehow discover some new hidden variable.
I think the policy of enforcing it less strongly would have advised against forced
busing, but that's in the past now.
So I don't know what to do in a case where the traditional way is causing people harm.
Like that, the reason that, you know, you would want to give women the right to vote
and to desegregate schools is that this is, that seems to be causing people to
suffer and fewer people will suffer.
And, but it seems like you can't, you can't really do a system, which I think would
be ideal of let the individuals decide whether they want to live in segregation
land or desegregation land.
Some people don't have the money to move across the country and, you know, like
families splitting up and.
I think desegregation, or I think segregation land though, would over the
course of a few decades suffer a serious brain drain where the people who are
smart enough to do have the ability to move, will move, and eventually they'll
just collapse under the fact that all the talent has left.
I mean, the kind is happening to various parts anyway.
Yeah.
And I think Jesse, you made a really good point.
Like, like forcing legislating changes and mandating them when they're
solving a suffering problem makes more sense than like, like it would be, it
might be weird to say pass a law where everybody has to eat exclusively GMO food.
So like that's, like right now the status quo is like, you can eat whatever you
can buy at the store.
And if you want to buy the non GMOs, go for it.
So like, but if, but if you're solving a suffering problem, then it makes more
sense to say, look, now we need to actually, we're going to, we're going to put
the hammer down.
We need to fix this.
I don't know that there's various things that come up with that.
Like we wouldn't actually be able to feed the world without GMO food techniques
and, you know, factory farming.
Arguably there'd be much less suffering if we did force everyone to be vegan.
That's true.
So I guess kind of by extension, what if I'm saying that sounds like that, that
would be a move that would piss off a lot of people, but it might not be
necessarily a bad move unless, you know, I think, and I know vegans will correct
me, but I think living on a vegan diet is more challenging to, it's more
challenging to maintain a nutritionally balanced life as a vegan than it is
as an omnivore.
One vitamin is specific.
I forget which one, but it's one of the bees is extremely hard to get in a
vegan diet.
And like, I have a, I have a coworker.
He's, he's, I would love to talk about how he's raising his daughter for half
an hour because he's, it's amazing.
It's really cool.
Like I can't get into all this stuff, but one short thing is that he and his
wife are both quasi vegans and they, they try to be as not just vegan friendly,
but as like environmentally friendly with all their food purchases and like
clothing purchases and stuff.
Um, and so I was talking with them, yes, on Monday when we went out to lunch and
I was like, so how did you raise your daughter?
And I like Sam Harris put it this way.
Like he's, he's like vegetarianism is the ethically correct choice.
And he says like for him, for, for Harris himself, that he tried a couple of
times and both times he's gotten anemic and he just can't find the balance.
And so he has two young daughters that he doesn't want to like raise on the
science experiment of, I think this is the way to do it.
Right.
Um, so like, but if we knew the way to do it, he already knows it doesn't
work for him and they share his genes.
Right.
Um, yeah, the veganism, that is a tough one.
I wonder, I mean, hmm.
And then like the maniac, what if, uh, if you were to look at that society and
say, these people are wasting so much time doing this complex processing
technique, we should mandate that everybody just chops it and cooks it.
Right.
Then you end up killing off the society.
The idea of suffering is definitely a reason to change a system from the top
down if you have the ability, but not always a good idea.
Damn.
Thought I'd found the solution and I haven't.
No, that's a good point.
I'm kind of wondering about maybe just popularity.
Like it seems like making everyone go vegan just wouldn't work now because
it's too unpopular.
People would rebel.
It would never fly, but I didn't literally have a war.
People try the United States.
They're coming for our bacon.
I think popularity is a good metric.
Like electric cars used to be the things that the, the busy bodies, the
prudes that would like always scold you for using plastic bags or something.
They would drive it and you'd be like, God, those people again.
And, uh, and I mean, I bought a hybrid as soon as I could, but, uh, I didn't
mind being associated with those people, but then Elon Musk came around and he
made the Tesla fucking cool.
And like now a zero emissions vehicle is like a huge status symbol that people chase.
Put one in, orbiting, orbiting the earth.
Like, I literally can't think of a cooler thing he could do with one.
And I mean, people could and probably did complain.
Look, he's making a high end luxury vehicle that only the richest people can buy.
What the fuck good does this do for the planet at all?
This is a waste of time.
And yet he managed to make electric cars move into the popular imagination as
something that you, everyone can drive and many people aspire to drive.
You know,
that's the whole prestige thing again.
Yeah.
I think he did more by making that luxury high end electric car than all the
previous electrics and hybrids did combine.
The downsiders, they're still like three times the price.
Right.
I mean, I would, I would get, well, I don't know.
I think over time, they're going to become more readily available.
Totally.
And also now if you just buy straight electric car, people don't look at you
like you're some kind of, you know, snot.
That's true.
If anything, I mean, I don't know how, I mean, I live in a not well, like a not
very nice area, not a bad area of Denver, but not like the posh area.
And I see five Teslas a week.
And I don't even drive that much.
There's a lot of Teslas here.
There's also like two or three Tesla dealerships all over here.
So maybe that's why maybe five is high, but I definitely see several a month.
I definitely see a lot more of them than I did in the East coast.
It might just be, you know, someone with a Tesla lives near you.
So you drive past them a lot.
I have, I was at a stoplight not more than two weeks ago where I saw two Teslas.
So there's at least two.
Cool.
Oh, before we go on with user comments, there was something that I wanted to add,
which I'm pretty sure was in the book and not in Scott's post.
So I wanted to bring that up now as well.
Um, an interesting, um, consequence of this sort of cultural evolution and cultural
intelligence thing is that larger cultures, well, there's two interesting consequences.
One of them is that larger cultures are better because you can only one individual
human can only do so much and can only learn so much and can only become so
specialized.
Uh, once you have a group of a hundred thousand humans, you can specialize a lot
more, you can learn and implement a lot more refined interesting techniques.
And this just keeps scaling up at a population of the US is like, what,
over 300 million right now.
There's a lot of things you can do to the point where, I mean, there's
sometimes disaster scenarios of, of zombie movies, like what would happen if, if
90% of the people died due to the zombie ism or whatever.
I mean, the first thing that would happen is that our entire society would collapse
because at this point, literally, I know this is a common thing from econ, what
econ 101 classrooms, there is no person in the world that knows or has the
capability of making a pencil.
The various parts come from so many different areas and the knowledge to get
these things, transport them and combine them is so diffuse among the human
species, there's literally no human alive that could make a pencil by
themselves.
They don't have the knowledge.
They don't have the ability.
That's so cool.
Yeah.
Right.
And like a pencil is super simple.
Right.
Yeah.
And that's our entire society.
Yeah.
So, I mean, one of those things is, how do we feel about the more people we have,
the better the culture is, the smarter it is.
Can I interject with one quick joke?
Sure.
Oh, wait, it's a, it's a end game spoiler.
So, I don't, it's, it's not on Blu-ray yet.
I'm going to hold off on that.
Well, actually, no, it's, it's fine.
There's a point where, because if you saw Infinity War Thanos killed.
And half the population goes away.
Right.
Instant chaos across the entire world.
I mean, like, power plants, you know, we go, the lights are on in your, in your
house right now, we go to the faucet, the water comes out.
Like that's just shit that happens, right?
It's not just that we would revert to the world as it was when the population
was half what it is.
We would fall so much far.
Right.
There's a subreddit that I really like.
So I follow two subreddits that are related in title and one's called movie
details where it's like these cool little like, Oh, did you notice this little
thing?
How fun.
And that one's called shitty movie details where it's like made up jokes
about, you know, like this little thing.
So there's, there's a scene in Endgame where our Natasha is eating a peanut
butter sandwich and in the shitty movie details, it's like, Oh, that symbolizes
because then I was knocked half the things out of existence.
There's no jelly and jelly sandwich.
But the, the actual point I was going to make was I am actually a huge fan of that
specialization, like in, in a hunter gatherer society, we would be spending 14
hours a day tracking down lunch and dinner, right?
Like we'd be chasing and killing our food.
Like that sounds, that's exhausting.
Now that I don't have to do that.
And my, my closest grocery store is a five minute walk away.
And I was just talking with somebody today.
And I mean, I've said this before, maybe on the show, but like, we all do this.
I offload a lot of my cognition onto my phone.
And so I'm, I'm, I'm even like specializing myself away from having
to remember to remember, remember to do things.
I have a calendar that sets like reminding me to come to the podcast today.
Being, being able to offload as many things as possible leaves you free to
do more things that you want to do.
It makes us more vulnerable.
If I dropped my phone, I'd forget what date I'm doing stuff.
Sure.
But I'm less happy about specialization because it's kind of soul numbing.
Um, in the fact that we take a lot of the meaning in our lives by what we do,
right?
Like how we can be useful to those around us, those we love, uh, and society at
large.
And when you're spending 40 hours a week doing a super specialized task, like
before you would make a shirt and you made a shirt with your hands.
You wear the shirt you made, or you give it to someone you love.
Now you, one person spends eight hours a day sewing the right hem on a shirt.
Someone else spends eight hours a day sewing the sleeve hams on a shirt.
Someone else like wove the cotton together by manning this giant machine for
eight hours a day.
It's yeah, it makes everything so much better, but it is soulless and deadening.
And you feel like this tiny, cognitive, huge machine and nothing matters.
And like, no one cares that you sewed the hem on the right side of their shirt.
You know, they would, if you didn't, is he sure, but it no longer feels
meaningful to have a life.
Jess tiebreaker.
Oh, I don't know.
I was just, uh, when you were talking earlier, Stephen, I was going to make a
joke about how now you can be a brand ambassador for a shirt company as a viable
career that there's like niches of specialization that just weren't possible
before. And I see all these funny articles now about like, here's the job titles
that Gen Z is going to have.
And they're these ridiculous specialized things.
Like, uh, oh, I'm a advisor to tour guides to, you know, like, I can't even
think of some of the funny ones right now, but hyper hyper specialized.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But like, um, I went camping a little while ago and I felt really satisfied
doing like kind of a hunter-gatherer lifestyle type thing, like cooking over a
fire.
And it's like, this is like, you know, what we humans kind of evolved to do.
And you can really feel it when you're out there doing it.
It's like, this feels so satisfying versus, yeah, if you're sitting there for eight
hours a day, sewing a left hand, it's like, this is not what I evolved to do.
This does not feel quite like as fulfilling as being out in nature and hunting
for food and gathering water, not to say that I was doing those things.
I was doing like a vague approximation of those things.
We're simulating it enough to make your a brain happy.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Like sure you brought the food with you.
You didn't have to like, you know, catch a rabbit and skin it and cook it.
But like, you know, you, yeah, cooking over, I mean, I've, the most, I mean, I've
never done anything like that in a way that would simulate the intentional
environment.
That sounds like it could be fun.
I mean, have you played Breath of the Wild?
Oh, never, never heard of it.
The entire appeal of that game is just that you get to like simulate being a hunter-gatherer.
It's great.
So the other implication that also is a bit worrisome, like first of all, the whole
needing more population just leads to the repugnant conclusion, in my opinion.
More is better, but more is also more meaningless and et cetera.
The, and you matter much less as one out of 300 million than one out of 150.
But also the, the idea that transmission of culture is very key to have a
high fidelity cultural transmission.
And that is usually easiest done by people who are similar to each other and who
don't have communication barriers, like having different accents or different languages.
It seems to almost argue in favor of homogenization of culture because that
makes the culture easier to pass down.
It makes the culture easier to pass down, but harder to evolve or slower to evolve.
That's true.
And fast evolution is important nowadays.
I feel like I'm less pessimistic about these ideas.
As far as like homogenization and things losing meaning, the more people you get,
like I'm against the population expanding past the point where it can support itself.
But assuming that we reach the grand transhumanist future and we're generating
solar energy and there's enough food for everybody.
Yeah, I think it would be great, you know, if culture got larger.
I also kind of am in favor of cultural homogenization to a point.
It's already happening.
A lot of cultures are quote unquote westernized.
I've been saying quote unquote too much.
I hate when I do that.
And it seems to be working out.
I mean, like there's some sadness and I see a lot of people of it's so sad that
people are losing their traditional cultures and they're thinking of the really
cool things about those cultures, like elaborate garments and like exotic
seeming traditions.
And it's like, yeah, but then like you're missing out on like foot binding and
wearing like very uncomfortable garments instead of like t-shirts and jeans.
Like there's a reason that culture gets passed down and propagates.
And some of it is that this is a better thing.
T-shirts and jeans are pretty superior clothing to most other types of clothing
throughout history.
And that's a nice like, although I think it was Matt Freeman.
I haven't heard his actual like thesis on this, but he says that pants are like
some of the worst, like is like the worst garments.
I'm not sure why.
Oh, maybe I should we'll have to ask him as opposed to shorts.
I'm not really sure.
I can't remember.
I mean, skirts have like the advantage of being cooler, but they're just much
more impractical.
I think this was a throwaway line on the doof cast or something that I'm
a desk about and I forgot to.
But so, I mean, you picked a nice example with like clothing and stuff.
But I mean, you look at some of the, the awesome things that we're doing away
with, with Westernizing countries or with Westernizing cultures, like getting
rid of slavery and female dental mediation and, I don't know, stoning gay
people to death, like, you know, all these things that, yes, when you Westernize,
you lose those things, but it's like, do we miss them?
I mean, will we miss them when they're, when they're all, when it's just history?
I certainly don't think so.
It's hard.
I mean, again, it's hard to think of an unintended bad consequence that, you know,
if we, if the world stops stoning gay people to death, what, what terrible fate
could befall humanity after that?
I'm not worried about tearing down that shelling fence.
Yeah.
And like, I'm also not convinced that we're going to become completely
homogenized ever because people form their own subcultures within cultures.
Like this one.
This one.
I mean, even, even when we get to the fun transhumanist future, I mean, if you're
a 10 year flight from the nearest human, uh, or from the nearest other culture of
humans, they're gonna be doing their own stuff.
Yeah.
You know, there'll still be.
And then I think this will, this will continue to be a thing going forward.
I haven't had a fun, like transhumanism inspiring thought, like feeling like this
and a long time.
That was nice.
It's pat, it's passing, but that was a good feeling.
All right.
Cool.
So I want to end with some pushback against this book, which again, comes from
the best of comments section.
Uh, first of all, there was the, the wish we already mentioned checking in with a
few people with two year olds and, uh, they said that they put random plants in
their mouths all the time.
Uh, I'm going to have to ask my sister, but Steven, apparently you had that
basal thing, which was interesting.
And that, that baby is being raised near two dogs.
So that doesn't validate my public or that is, that is unlikely that people
would evolve to mimic dogs as well as other humans.
Well, but I, I, that, that, that's definitely probably true.
I'm just thinking that like my sister probably treats the dogs because
they're about baby sized, like she treats the baby.
And if like the baby sees like, Oh, they're doing that.
It's okay.
I also think that it would probably be much more common knowledge.
Like everyone knows that babies like to put everything in their mouths and that
like they have a suckling instinct, but like no one mentions the whole thing.
But yeah, babies are weird around plants, right?
Like everyone knows that cats are weird around pickles and cucumbers that they
freak the fuck out cause they think they're snakes.
There'd be hilarious YouTube videos if this were a thing.
Yeah.
I think, I think that would be more well known.
Um, but more to the point.
Well, then we'll have to do, well, everyone who can do their part for
science and scare or don't scare a toddler with plants and report back.
There's a huge untapped market of hilarious baby videos on YouTube.
I'm straight.
Um, more to the point though, and Kurz says, let's concentrate on the
seal hunting description.
It's clear that Heinrich's goal is to make the process sound as difficult as
to achieve as possible, which yeah, obviously.
The Explorer isn't going to be using caribou antler probes or polar bear harpoon
tips.
They're going to use some modern wood or metal that they stripped from their
ice bound ship.
Then we hit, now you have a seal, but you have to cook it.
What?
The Inuit, the Inuit didn't cook their seal meat using a soapstone lamp
fueled with whale oil.
They ate it raw.
I'm surprised that many people seem to have the instinct to continue to
trust the parts of a story that they cannot confirm even after they
discover some parts are false.
Which, uh, yeah.
Roy Stinger adds, Wikipedia seems to suggest that they ate freshly killed
meat raw, but cooked some of the meat brought back to camp using a
cuddlic, a so, a soapstone lamp fueled with seal oil or whale blubber.
Is that not correct?
That would still flatly contradict, but you have to cook it, but it's close
enough that the mistake doesn't reach making it up as he goes along levels
of falsehood.
Um, I personally do consider that sort of error a, uh, a lie.
Like I grew up in the Jehovah's Witness society where they like to prove
that the religion is the right one.
Cause they actually were really big on enlightenment values.
That's part of their downfall with, you know, training me on their religion.
Cause I absorbed the enlightenment values part and then applied them to the
religion itself.
But yeah, they, they often try to convince people with things, but they
would leave out things that were inconvenient.
Like he just left out the fact that the meat is often eaten raw to make it
sound as difficult as possible to exist in the, in the Arctic.
And that strikes me as like just inherently dishonest.
And once someone's being dishonest like that.
I kind of, like I said, maybe, maybe don't trust the rest that how do I know
that everything else he wrote wasn't also tilted and slightly dishonest in that way.
There's a lesser on post about mistra like once you've learned that a, an
authority, whether it be a book or a person has been dishonest, then it
throws everything else into doubt.
And then of course the obvious example is the Bible being wrong about
pie or, you know, whatever, um, the number, not the delicious dessert.
Um, no one could be wrong about that.
Um, that's, I mean, and I'm assuming that how they consumed, like if, if, uh,
if, uh, God, Royce, I don't know how to say their name, Royce, Dar, but with
a G instead of an A.
Um, and another letter, forget it.
Um, if, if they found that thing about dragging it back and cooking it with,
with, uh, you know, whatever oil, fire, like he said, if, but if they found that
on Wikipedia, I'm assuming the part of eating them raw was also on Wikipedia,
which suggests that the author of this book didn't do due diligence or was
deliberately misrepresenting stuff.
He absolutely had to know that.
Yeah.
There's no way he could have missed that considering how much else he knew.
That sucks.
And it totally points out, uh, the quote on quadruped running seems
inaccurate in several important ways compared to the primary references.
Henrik Sitz, which are short and very interesting in their own.
In particular, humans still typically lock their breathing rate with their strides.
It's just that animals nearly always lock them one to one while humans are
able to switch to other ratios.
So yeah, for that reason, humans are a lot better at, uh, at long persistence
hunting, but, uh, because we can regulate our breathing much easier.
Yeah, we can do it with different ratios, ratios based on different running
speeds, whereas animals are, I guess it's always nearly one to one.
One to one, what?
Sorry.
One to one, uh, a gate to breath.
Every time you get one stride, you take one breath.
Oh, that would be exhausting.
If you were sprinting, like panting, yeah, the humans managed to make them
often have to go at a speed where it's not quite, you know, they can't quite
do it right and they, uh, they run a diet of exhaustion or at least lie down
due to unable ability to keep running.
And then humans just walk up and hack their heads off.
Can I jump in there really quick with like just, eh, how much would
suck to be that animal that's being chased?
And that reminds me, it was another planet earth thing where it was some sort
of wild dogs, dingos or coyotes or something had cornered an antelope.
And like they set up like a, like a, a pincer move where they, they, they
lured it into a trap and then had some come in from this way and come in
from that way.
Like they coordinated this attack and this gazelle or antelope or whatever
it was, ran into a lake and it was just out there swimming and they're
just pacing the edge of the lake, waiting for it to like either like give up
and drown, which it's not going to do.
It's going to walk back to shore, get killed.
And it was like the saddest thing to watch.
And I'm just, I remember that was less cute than the monkey.
Yeah.
But yeah, that's, I mean, I considered that less of a sin because saying
that it's completely adaptable and that they can switch to a lot of ratios
isn't as big of a misconstruction, in my opinion, but it's again, indicative
of a, this book has some worries, some things about it.
Interesting.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think I forget if this was one of the comments that was pulled out.
Somebody had mentioned though that this book wasn't supposed to be like a
scientifically rigorous journal.
This is supposed to be persuasive writing.
So I don't think that any of these were lies.
These are actual stuff that this guy pulled out, maybe the plants thing.
I don't know about that one, but like it seems more like he was just picking
the most extreme examples to make a point, which isn't, I don't think a sin.
But I do think like, yeah, like I'm squinting at some of this stuff.
Yeah, that's a good point.
Like this, this wasn't a scientific treatise on like, here's how things went down.
This was, this was examples of extreme scenarios where most of it's more or less
accurate, where it's like, you know, it is a fact that, you know, the conquistadors
died of mountain nutrition while consuming all the corn they could eat.
Right.
So it, like parts of that are true enough for the point, for the thrust of the
book to make sense.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I just, I am much less worried about the horror epistemic hellscape now that I am
less convinced of the book.
Now that you can reason, now that you can reason to yourself that maybe the book's
bullshit, now you can be less worried.
Or maybe the book is like 20% bullshit, so I can be 20% less worried.
There you go.
Yeah.
Alrighty, so we've been at this for a while and we should move on, but this was
a fun post, like many of Scott's posts are and really interesting book.
Yeah, I, I really enjoyed the conversation about it.
So shall we move on to the less wrong posts?
Yes.
Okay.
Yeah.
Let's do this fast ish because we've been at this for a while already.
Yes.
Cool.
All right.
Um, the first one is risk-free bonds aren't this whole thing is about hell.
Eleazar's annoyed by the phrase risk-free bonds.
Um, he says America's a young country.
Um, he compares it to the lifespan of the Ottoman empire, Austria, Hungary.
And.
Be, before we get to this, uh, the thing he was particularly annoyed about is that
the, I think this is actually true.
The most secure bonds in the world or what's considered the most secure bonds
in the world are us treasury bonds that those are the least likely to default.
Uh, the least likely to lose value.
If you want to put your money in some place, that's safe.
The very best you can do is buy us treasury bonds.
And for that reason, people sometimes refer to them as risk-free because the
US has never defaulted on its detonates it.
Yeah.
And like, we don't have very long history until I remember presidential candidate,
like three years ago was saying, what if we just defaulted on our debt and
try to get a better deal?
Right.
Yeah.
Not realizing the massive impacts that would have on the world.
Well, it's worked so well for him so far.
Yeah.
So examples of things that could make these bonds risky.
Um, the US is a democracy quote, if enough people vote for representatives who
decide not to pay off their bonds, they won't get paid.
Um, Eleazar mentions a scenario where a populist leader could get voted in who
could destroy the economy and cause China to stop buying our bonds.
And then also there could be terrorists and then a global pandemic could hit.
And yeah.
He also points out that citing the good track record of the US alone and not all
governments across government histories, the histories of governments existing, uh,
is, uh, pure survivorship bias, even not even pointing out the, the, um, lifespan
of all governments that have existed since the US government started, right?
Just in those 300 years should at least compare it to other governments that have
come and gone in that time period.
So you're looking at the one that has survived this whole time and saying, you
know, look, that's sort of soldier survived the war.
Obviously surviving wars is easy.
It's the same kind of thing.
Yeah.
I mean, I don't know enough about economies or money or investing to answer this,
but like if the, if the US defaulted on, if, if treasury bonds defaulted and
they were suddenly worth nothing, would a dollar still be worth anything?
Like at that, at that stage, isn't all your money Fox, basically, no matter what,
unless you invested out of country?
No, not, not necessarily.
Cause I mean a dollar at this point is worth whatever people think it's worth.
It's just people would think it's worth less once the treasury defaults on, on its
debt, but it's not necessarily entirely worthless right away.
Okay.
Like if I was still willing to give you a cup of coffee for five bucks, then it's
still worth a cup of, a cup of coffee or one fifth of a cup of coffee.
Right on.
Um, Eleazar references than the same Talib book, Black Swan.
I brought that up a little bit earlier, which is about the impact of unknown unknowns.
Specifically, this book warns against the dangers of induction, the ludic fallacy,
hindsight, and survivorship bias.
Um, he pulled out this Talib quote, instead of putting your money in medium risk
investments, you need to put a portion, say 85 to 90% in extremely safe investments
like treasury bills, as a safe class of instruments, as you can manage to find on
the planet, the remaining 10 to 15% you put in extremely speculative bets as
leveraged as possible, preferably venture capital style portfolios.
That way you don't depend on the errors of risk management.
No black swan can hurt you at all beyond your floor, the nest egg that you have in
a maximally safe investment.
And then after this, he wonders, did Talib forget to apply his own principles?
And he says, I think if you advise your readers to invest 90% of their money in
extremely safe instruments, you should certainly also warn that it better not all
go into the same instrument.
There was a line there, um, like maybe Talib knows something that I don't, but
it seems like he forgot to apply his own tools, the point that he's making to this
thing.
And I wrote something, but I guess it didn't save when I was doing it late
earlier, but, um, I couldn't find the exact passage in methods of rationality, but
where Harry's thinking, it's sadly when we most need our tools that we forget them.
And it's, you know, this isn't exactly like when you most need it, but it, the,
the tone of his response to Talib's quote there felt so resonant that it, it
immediately brought that to mind.
But yeah, yeah, the end was, uh,
Can I jump in with a,
Oh, go ahead.
Uh, he said, um, Eliezer said, I anticipate particular black swans, such as AI
and nanotech biotech, that I see us having a high chance of striking over the lifetime
of a 30 year treasury bond.
But even if you don't share those particular assumptions, do you expect the
United States to still be around in 300 years?
If not, do you know exactly when it will go bust?
Then why isn't the risk of losing your capital on a 30 year treasury bond at
least 10% and, uh, you know, I thought that was both interesting and again, an
insight on his particular worries and the time scale that he's thinking in.
I get to avoid a lot of problems by just not having an investment portfolio.
Actually, I do have a small one, um, with, uh, well, small with Kansas city life.
Um, and they are, uh, Rudy Hoffman, again, the cryonics guy that I mentioned before.
Um, he sold me just on how awesome Kansas city life is as an insurance company.
They apparently debt free.
They own all of their properties, even though their office is in stuff.
And he's like, so even barring like a zombie apocalypse, like they're
going to be like the last one to go under because they're not going to default on
loans.
Um, so my, my investment is now I pay a higher insurance premium.
But when I get to be a certain age, there's like a cash bonus that I get on top.
Like not, it doesn't increase my death payout, but it's money that I just
can just take whenever I want.
So, um, it's very little right up until like, I get into my 80s, but if I look
to be like in my 90s, it's in the hundreds of thousands.
Yeah.
And he says, and I think one of the near the end, he says, the safest
instruments you can find on this planet aren't very safe, which is just, you
know, a thing that I consider in my life often.
I wonder where he has to invest his money.
Like if it is, they're safer things than bonds.
Like I get like to call them risk free.
He made the very good point that they're not, but like the Vanguard stock index
fund is pretty good too.
That's another very solid one and is also tied to the US economy.
But again, that has the problem that it's kind of tied to it's not just the US
economy, but much of it is based in the US economy.
I mean, part of the problem here is if the US economy goes down, the whole
world is going to be seriously fucked.
That quote that you just said, um, started with, there's always risk
management and you're always exposed to error and both of those always is where
it links to previous sequences.
One was the proper use of humility and then the other was Suyoku Nari Tai.
So yeah, he's saying we need to get better at and be braver about applying
our rationalist principles to real life scenarios like investing.
And, um, a couple of the comments had, there's some caveats.
TC doesn't think investors literally mean risk free.
It's just an expression of high confidence.
Um, Peter McCluskey says, his descriptions of treasury bills as extremely
safe seems accurate enough for practical purposes.
He also doesn't think that typical investors should follow Talib's advice,
but it seems plausible that some should.
And also good investing is mostly about avoiding big mistakes, not about
perfectly avoiding all errors, which I think are good points.
Yeah.
Um, Michael Sullivan said, Talib's advice is extremely faulty, at least
for long run investing.
The black swan event that makes you, that makes a more fully diversified
debt equity portfolio fail disastrously in the long term, uh, 20 plus years.
This has a fairly high likelihood of taking out a short term US treasury
portfolio as well.
So I've got nothing to add since I don't know anything about investing.
Never even heard of the Vanguard thing you mentioned.
It's basically just a distributed, um, diversified mutual that buys the
500, uh, biggest companies in the stock market and keeps all their money in them.
I definitely like probably seen the logo, but yeah, the main difference is
that most investment funds are quote unquote managed by someone, which means
that there's someone like looking at stocks and reading companies histories
and what they're planning to do.
And he's like, okay, we should invest in East Asia now.
Okay.
Now we should pull out of East Asia and invest in gold.
And now, you know, we should pull up our money out of gold and invest in
stocks instead.
So they have, uh, and I mean, sometimes they do really well when they
guess correctly, but it's basically guessing.
Uh, and they have high management fees because you know, you're paying
someone to actually do this thinking and managing of the money.
Yeah, you're paying some expert.
Yeah, paying some divination expert.
Whereas the index fund is literally just trying to get, um, a representative
sample of the entire stock market.
And so if over the course of set of 30 years, the stock market increases
2% per year, every year, the funds should do more or less the same.
It has rock bottom management fees because you're literally doing nothing
except for trying to get, you know, one of each of the 500 biggest eight.
I think it's, that's why they call the Vanguard 500.
I could be wrong about that, but it's basically trying to get a representative
sample of the entire stock market.
And, uh, you know, you're never going to beat the market.
You're never going to manage to invest in like a ton of money in Google
before it goes big or Walmart before it goes big and get these 10,000 percent
returns, but you will steadily follow the market.
And over the long run, uh, no one does better than the market on average.
Except for those people that investors in crypto.
That's exactly what I was going to say on average was, was your nice caveat
that cut me off there.
But yeah, um, some people scored big, which was dope.
Bitcoin is was up to 12,000 recently.
I think it's up over 10,000 again right now.
God damn it.
I sold all my stuff like two months ago because I got sick of looking at it.
It was coming back up finally.
And I was like, all right, now I'm only down 600 bucks.
Like, because I've been down like 1800 bucks for like a year and a half.
I'm sick of looking at this five times a day.
I'm going to just, I'm going to just cut my losses.
I'm not going to look at what my, what, what my losses or what my potential
gains would have been if you're investing in something, even Bitcoin, you
should never look at it more than like once a month.
If you look at it five times a day, you're just setting yourself up for this
kind of thing.
This was in, uh, not shitty movie details.
The subreddit in movie details, um, there's a headline banner coming in.
Like there's a big TV in time square and like a little like news feed along
the bottom of news shows.
One of like little spikes was Bitcoin, Bitcoin at all time high.
And the very next one was Bitcoin at all time low.
So if you're investing in Bitcoin, you should be checking it five times a day.
What good will that help you?
Because then you'll see the five hours or, you know, the five minute window
where it's up, uh, where it's at 12,000 instead of 8,000.
Only if you've pre-committed to sell it when it gets to 12,000.
Well, right.
Most people when it gets to 12,000 over the course of an hour will be like,
it's going to keep going.
I'm going to hold on.
That's the mistake I made.
What I should have done is listen, I asked my investor, my financial planner friend
what I should do.
And he's like, here's what you do.
Commit to a number when it hits that sell.
And when, and if it goes below that sell, and I didn't do that and I lost money.
So Justin, you were right in the past couple of days.
It's now down to 9,700, which, you know, like literally, uh, a week and a half ago,
it was at over 12,000.
Yeah.
So, I mean, but, you know, it, it crypto's weird as that's not, that's not, I feel
like there's, I'm sure there is a special word for that kind of investing.
Volatile.
Volatile.
Oh, well, that kind of investing.
Well, risky gambling.
Yeah.
It's straight up gambling.
Yeah.
All right.
That's what you put 10% of your money to.
Oh, good.
I'm actually, so I had Litecoin in Ethereum and those are actually down
because substantially from when I sold.
So if I held on, I probably would watch them go up for that week and then like,
oh, my, my number's finally coming in and then I would have lost it all again.
So I'm, I'm, I can rest easy.
All right.
Next post.
Yes.
We got correspondence bias, which starts with this quote.
The correspondence bias is the tendency to draw inferences about a person's unique
and enduring disposition from behaviors that can be entirely explained by the
situations in which they occur, which was a Gilbert Malone.
When I learned about this phenomenon was, it was in the context of psychotic
it was in the context of psychology where they call it the fundamental attribution error.
Yeah, what I pulled out was pretty much right after that when you yourself
kicked the vending machine, it's because the bus was late, train was early,
reports overdue.
Now the damned vending machine ate your lunch money for the second day in a row.
We attribute our own actions to our situations, seeing our behaviors as
perfectly normal responses to experiences.
But when someone else kicks a vending machine, we don't see their past history
trailing behind them in the air.
We just see the kick for no reason we know about.
And we must think that they're a naturally angry person.
Since they lashed out without provocation.
And I think that was almost verbatim rewritten in methods of rationality.
So hence it's doubly stuck in my head.
Yeah, they called it the fundamental attribution error in methods of rationality.
Good.
So that's how I remember it, even though it's a much longer title.
Right on.
Yeah.
And I mean, it's one of those things that like, I think makes it really easy to in a
moment, if you have a second to, you know, be reflective and mindful to like not judge
people, if you can, if you see consistent bad behavior, then fine.
And like there are some things where like it's hard not to assume they're an asshole.
Like if I see somebody throw like a cup of like, you know, like a soda can out the
window while driving, it's hard for me to paint a backstory for them.
That doesn't make them a jerk.
But, you know, you see somebody, I don't know, whatever, be grumpy or something.
Where was this very recently?
It might have been, oh, it was on Sam Harris's most recent podcast with Ricky
Gervais, which was a lot of fun.
But he had talked about, I can't remember the specifics, but I had the same thing
like 10 years ago, I was getting glasses and the woman helping us was being a
complete jerk.
I can't remember what the specifics were, but she was being so bad that my mom was
there helping me buy glasses.
This one might have been 15 years ago as a teenager.
And she was like, then when that woman left, my mom was telling like the other
person that was helping us, how much the other person was being so unhelpful and
mean.
And when my mom was telling me that she was going to go tell, like what,
that she was going to talk about this with the manager or whoever we were
talking to next, I was like, you really don't have to.
We don't know if they're having like a really bad day or something.
And I use the example, like maybe their dad just died or something.
Like we don't know.
And my mom, I think I didn't do a good job of explaining where I was coming from,
but it was more just like, I wasn't prepared enough to like give this person a
hard time because like, I'm never going to see them again.
So like whatever.
But, you know, if someone's being a dick or, you know, being rude or being short
or blunt or not responding, you know, to a text or something, like, you don't
know what's going on.
And it doesn't, it's not, it's not necessarily indicative of their
underlying personality and hence not a reason to judge them as a person.
Yeah.
As the quote says, there's more late buses in the world than mutants born with
unnaturally high anger levels.
Yeah.
And most people's dispositions aren't going to be that far from average.
Yeah.
Um, so why do we, why do we do this thing?
Eleazar says it seems quite intuitive to explain rain by water spirits, explain
fire by fire stuff like floggestone, explain the soporific effect of medication
by saying it contains a dormant of potency.
Or in other words, people seem to assume that things have these innate
traits as another kind of mental shortcut.
Reality usually involves more complicated mechanisms and evaporation and
condensation cycle underlying rain, but mechanisms sound more complicated than
essences they are harder to think of and less available.
That reminds me of what Dan Dennett talked about in breaking the spell.
It was the hyperactive agency attribution error or something.
Or no, it was hyperactive agency attribution, something.
So is that like just assuming people have more agency than they might?
So he was talking about it in the context of like assuming agency behind
random stuff, like, you know, Thor making rain or like when snow falls, the
example I remember from the book was like when snow falls off the roof during
the winter and the dog gets up and like, who's that barking?
Well, and it's like, it's nobody.
It's, it's no, maybe we also attribute too much agency to people from seeing
the actions of it.
Right.
Um, he didn't, he didn't use it that way in the book.
And I don't know, uh, not going to speculate on whether or not he would
agree with that assessment, but that seems like the kind of same kind of
mistake, right?
Yeah, that matches like my anecdotal experience where you'll like see
somebody do something and they're like, Oh, they deliberately did that in
order to make me feel like that.
And like the person didn't even know you were in the room or.
He also brings up the false consensus effect where people think that others
are more likely to respond the same way that they do to things.
For example, uh, at a university drinking students considerably overestimated
the fraction of fellow students who drink, but non-drinkers considerably
underestimated the fraction.
So, uh, yeah, most people thought that everyone else was like them, which, uh,
I think explains a lot with the people who say, I do not understand how we, I
know we've talked about this before.
I do not understand how opposite group could possibly think X, you know,
that everyone thinks, you know, most people are much like them, which is not
the case.
Yeah, that's, I'm just randomly thinking now, I didn't drink in high
school in college, uh, at least not until later in college, but I, all my
friends did, so I don't know what my estimate would have been.
I probably would have overestimated because my sample size was, you know,
mostly drinkers.
Yeah.
Eleazar at the end says, suppose I gave you control with two buttons, a red
button and a green button, the red button destroys the world and the green
button stops the red button from being pressed.
Which button would you press?
The green one.
Anyone who gives a different answer is probably over complicating the question.
And yet people sometimes ask me why I want to save the world.
And I just thought that was interesting because when you see someone trying
to save the world, that is often the thing you think of first, right?
Well, apparently he's run into that.
Like, why are you trying to save the world?
What's the thing that we think of first?
Why is someone trying to save the world?
Yeah.
I mean, I guess to me that's like kind of a no-brainer, but I mean, one of our
first 10 episodes was with somebody who wanted to destroy the world.
So, uh, I don't know what to do about, I mean, I almost said I don't know what
he's, or I don't know how he thinks or how he thinks that, but, um,
we did talk about it for an hour and a half and I get where they're
coming from, but I just completely disagree on all accounts.
So.
But you do understand why he thinks it.
So.
I understand why he says he thinks it.
Right.
I'm not convinced.
I mean, and I think, I can't remember if I said this back then or not.
I'm not convinced that if they were put in front of this button that they'd
press it, cause like, assuming they have friends and loved ones, they would all
die too.
Like this isn't just like an altruistic good I'm doing for the universe.
It's like you're killing everyone you know and love.
It, it's for, it's for the best.
In college, I was in that same mind space and I, at least I said I would do the
same thing.
I now I don't want to stick to that.
Maybe I would have at the moment, like back down and been like, no, I can't do
this, but I often wonder about like the trolley problem.
Like, would I be able to push the fat man to like save the three people?
Like you want to say the correct utilitarian answer, which is yes, one life for
three, but like, I, I don't know.
Like Stephen, what if you see someone like was just fatally injured is in
horrible, crippling agony on the street.
You know, they're going to bleed out in about an hour and a half and it is
impossible to save their lives.
Like literally impossible, they're going to die.
Is it a better thing to just end them quickly and mercifully now so they don't
have that hour and a half of agony first?
I still wouldn't post the red button.
No, no, no, but would you, with that one person, would you do that?
I know, but I'm, I'm, I'm challenging the analogy you're making.
Well, no, it's, it's a very simple analogy when you think that everyone in
the world is in that position and that, that position is inevitable consequence
of being alive and conscious, but most of us are enjoying the ride most of the
time, right?
But, but, but, you don't understand that when you're in that nine space.
But yes, there's a run at the point totally, you know, if I was in the
battlefield and my, my comrade had just been shot and, you know, or baynetted
and like, yep, we're never going to be able to get you, you know, I would like
to think I could mercy kill them.
Um, so, or at least I would think it's the right thing to do.
I wouldn't stop somebody else from doing it.
Let's put it that way.
Yeah.
So.
Um, I like to focus on the part of that question about the button, which was
saying that, uh, you're just oversimplifying the problem or the question.
I forget over complicating, over complicating.
Yeah.
Um, I think this is probably true of a lot of these cases where we are kind of
looking at someone and trying to figure out what's going through their mind, why
they did that thing.
And, um, I'm thinking about a landed proton who is, uh, he's got like some books
and Ted talks and he's the founder of something called the school of life,
which is this cool, uh, school designed to teach people like the stuff they
don't teach you in school.
One of the things that he had talked about on a interview that I was
listening to with him was the idea that often like somebody's in a really bad
mood and we're like, oh, they, maybe they have clinical depression and they need
anti-depressants or, oh, it might be because this thing happened earlier that
day or, and then like, it's like, but like, did you ask him if they're hungry?
Like, and he says, when you think of a child who's having a tantrum, like you
wouldn't be like, did something really bad happen to this child early this day?
And it's still on his mind.
And then also this other thing.
And then maybe as clinical to felt like you'd be like, is this kid hungry?
Does he need a nap?
Kind of interesting that we don't do that with adults, even though very often
like the reason that someone's in a bad mood might be because they need a
nap or because it's like usually maybe he's just a much more simple explanation.
I like that.
And, and this actually relates to the same coworker who's raising his daughter
in that really cool way.
He mentioned that like, so usually if we go out to like the, the office
caters lunch on Wednesdays and so, or pays for it, we go get it ourselves.
But he'll usually save a portion to eat right before he's like his train slash
bike ride home.
Cause he says, I realized like a few, a couple, I don't know, when some time
ago that if I just didn't eat like from lunch to like when I got home, I'd come
home hangry and I wouldn't notice like, and eventually noticed like, I, I'm just
pissed until I sat down and had something to eat.
So he's like, now I just take care of it before I leave for work or leave,
leave for home.
And so it is a super mundane explanation.
Um, and it's, you know, could have been a fine day or whatever.
So, um, I like that.
Yeah.
You could be painting some elaborate backstory, but that's a really good
way to think about it.
It's like, are they, are they hungry?
You know, maybe a headache, like just, you know, some, some super mundane
thing.
I like that a lot.
And it kind of helps as a strategy to try to knock out some of the low
hanging fruit too.
Um, in the comments, Robin Hansen said, the less you know about someone's
personality, the more you shouldn't fear about their personality from their
behavior.
So it's reasonable to infer more from their behavior, from the behavior of
others than yourself.
The problem instead seems to be overconfidence.
We infer far more than is reasonable, given only a small behavior sample.
And then the rest of the comments section devolves into pro singularity
versus anti-singularitarian arguments because of the, I would you push the
button thing, which I don't want to get into.
No.
So that's there.
If you want to read that.
So, so Hansen's point is that, I mean, yeah, it's Bayesian evidence of their
personality, but it's weak Bayesian evidence.
Yeah, that's fine.
And that's a good, that's not a, so much of a disagreement as it is.
Yeah.
Like you said, caveat, technically the point.
Yeah.
I mean, if someone's doing Dick things, it is more likely that they're a Dick
than they're, than that they're not assuming you know, nothing else about them.
Right.
Right.
But remember that it's weak evidence because you only have this one
data point.
Exactly.
Neat.
Leave to Robin Hansen always.
Yeah.
Add some, add some subtlety.
I was, I mean, this is not, this is sort of related just to personality stuff.
I never watched, uh, Mr.
Rogers as a kid, somehow I missed it.
I was aware that it existed, but I watched pointless TV and not wholesome television.
And I, over the last couple of weeks, I've just been like, maybe I should watch
that movie that, uh, Tom Hanks did, um, no, I'm sure it'd make me cry and be amazing.
I won't try to be my neighbor.
Yeah.
Is that what it's called?
I think so.
Okay.
Um, but the person of Mr.
Rogers from my model of him is, and like I've read anecdotes on Reddit and, you
know, short, short snippets, he just seemed like the embodiment of wholesomeness.
And it's, it's like knowing that a person like that existed means that it's
possible to be that kind of, that it's possible to be that kind of person.
And I find that really attractive, like just in a, in an inspiring sort of way.
And I'm not, I'm currently in the process of working out, like how to integrate
not going full Rogers, cause I don't know how I would do that.
But you need a sweater vest.
And then I'll never make it.
It's, it's 90 something degrees out today.
But I don't know.
I, I think in, this is totally unrelated to the podcast in general, but just for me,
I'm trying to find ways in my life to be like just more genuinely wholesome.
Like when I interact with other people and like, you know, unless it's like good
natured counter signaling, like with friends or something, like jokes like that.
Like just little things, like never giving people a hard time or making them feel bad
or like being, I don't know, like bizarrely compassionate.
There was like an anecdote I read where somebody came, like they were on the show
and their little sister came with, but they were like too young to go on stage or something.
And she was like on the stage, like on the side of the lines, like crying.
And not because she was sad, like cause she wasn't on the show.
She was just overwhelmed.
She was a big fan and stuff.
And apparently this person's recollection was like, he like knelt down, put his
hand on her shoulder and he's like, what's wrong?
Like, let's talk.
You know, why are you feeling this way?
And like that level of approach is just so inspiring.
I mean, I, I can imagine I'm looking forward to being around my niece when she's
throwing a tantrum and it'd be much easier for me to do the Roger's thing
because she's not constantly doing it to me.
And you want to sleep deprived.
Yeah.
So I mean, when you're, when you're the parents and they're exhausting you all
the time, it's different, but I'm, I'm looking, I'm going to try something like
that when this, when this happens in my life and see how it works.
Like, you know, again, they're probably just hungry or something, right?
It's probably some bullshit thing where, you know, the kid doesn't know that
they're, they're upset because they, you know, they miss lunch or something, right?
That's why cool uncles increase the survival odds of a tribe.
Parents wouldn't murder their own children out of frustration as much.
Really good.
Evo's like theory, actually.
There we go.
I love it.
And that means I'm still contributing to the gene, to the, to the, to the
success of my species, even if I don't have kids.
Absolutely.
Just be nice to kids.
Yeah.
All right.
So.
So for next time.
Yep.
For next time, we will be reading the posts.
Are your enemies innately evil?
Question mark.
And also two more things to unlearn from school.
So we'll have those.
And, um, we've been going at this for a while.
Do we want to skip the side topics and the, uh, listener feedback and get to those later?
There's no time for feedback for sure.
Yeah.
I was actually thinking since we've skipped feedback twice now and someone's been piling
up, do you want to make our next episode, one of those get through the back lock feedback
episodes?
We could catch this in feedback.
Yeah.
I'm flexible.
We'll get, we'll get into them.
You know, either piece by piece or wholesale.
We'll, we'll do feedback sections.
Maybe we'll just do a shorter episode at some point.
Like we'll, we'll, we'll time block a short topic.
Yeah.
All right.
We'll figure it out.
Um, that said, we are never out of time to think our
awesome patrons who make the show possible and allow us to, you know, buy
equipment, keep the lights on, pay the hosting bills and all that stuff.
So this week's, uh, patron that we're over eager to think is Matthew Cutler.
Thank you so much, Matthew.
This is, uh, all thanks to you.
No, no, no other patrons this week.
It's, you're the one today, keeping the show alive.
So thank you.
And can I just say how happy I am that at one point we were getting close to the
bottom of our list of patrons.
I was like, man, what's going to happen when, did I mention this before?
I think so, but it keeps happening.
It, yeah.
And like, and then more people jump in and it just, it makes me feel so good to
like see that we have a, a nice comfortable buffer of people to think still that like
people like us and, and we are doing something of value for our society and
helping our culture, fiddlesly transmit its cultural thingies.
That's right.
That said, that doesn't mean that we don't want, you know, if you feel like
supporting the show, you can find us at, you know, on Patreon, um, you can rate
and review and iTunes, all the podcast, all the podcast things.
I always feel weird saying those because everyone knows all that stuff.
Yeah.
This isn't, this isn't your first rodeo.
If you're listening to this podcast, you've heard other podcasts.
And just sharing it like with your friends and family can also help too.
If you think they would be receptive to this kind of thing, obviously don't
share it to people who you don't think would be a good match.
Like, like don't force things on them because the culture is still new and
being experimented with, right?
To tie it back to what we were saying or do, because what could go wrong?
It's not like they'll develop cyanide poisoning.
I didn't mention it to my doctor and I think she's listening to it now.
Really?
So.
But, uh, yeah.
Yeah.
So thank you again, Matthew Cutler.
That's awesome.
And, uh, thank all of you guys for listening and for being such awesome listeners.
Yeah.
Thanks for doing what you do.
We super appreciate you.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think, uh, oh, last thing, because we usually have the last few seconds for
out for music, so this will all be drowned out.
Uh, Taika Wattiti is directing Thor 4.
So there's two, two bits of good news there.
One, Thor 4 is happening.
And two, Taika Wattiti who directed Thor Ragnarok.
And, uh, it's like, I mentioned what we do in the shadows.
Have you seen that in Yash?
Uh, I haven't seen it.
I've heard many things about it.
I think you'd like it.
It's a vampire mockumentary.
It's a complete joke of a movie, it's hilarious.
And this is the guy that they said, Hey, here's, you know, hundreds of
millions of dollars, go make a Thor movie.
And he fucking crushed him.
So I'm looking forward to seeing him do more, uh, MCU stuff.
The first Thor movie, like it was, I was like, how are they going to make Thor cool?
They made it a comedy.
I was like, perfect.
He's a ridiculous character.
And then like, oh, now we'll do Dark World and we'll try to make this a serious
thing. God, it was bad.
And never saw it based on everyone's recommendations to not see it.
Except mine, which was, it was fine.
So it was fine is not high praise for Steven.
It was fine as like Steven saying that was a two out of 10.
For a more, I mean,
you're, you're excited about things often, especially MCU things.
Yeah, yeah, it's so great.
I liked it.
Like hearing it was fine is like, oh, I mean, I, I liked it.
I, I, I've never, I've never made the point of ranking them in my head, but I
mean, like Thor one was about like Thor self actualizing as a hero.
Thor two is like what badass hero stuff does Thor do when he's got, you know,
on his, in his free time.
And, and Ragnarok was like, let's go balls to the wall.
And, uh, you know, have a, basically, I think Taika Waititi knew that Chris
Hemsworth was a really funny person and said, let's, let's utilize that more.
So yeah.
Excellent.
All right.
MCU stuff is happening.
Yeah.
Oh, all right.
Last thing.
My stuff.
I saw Stuber, which was the movie with, uh, Camilla Nonjani and, uh, uh, Dave
Batista, who we saw in that wrestling thing that we went to a few months ago.
Um, it had a lot of fun hype.
I love both those people.
They both seem very wholesome.
I've liked, uh, Batista was, um, Drax and Guardians of the Galaxy and Camilla
Nonjani's, I've listened to his podcast back when he did one.
He's been a comedian for ages.
He's really fun.
The movie was like kind of fine.
It was a bummer.
Like I was looking forward to it being amazing and it was a solid like six out of 10.
The look on Steven's face right now says that he's being very generous by saying
six and his, his face is saying three.
It wasn't bad.
I don't regret seeing it.
Okay.
So, yeah.
I like that the Steven scale of movies goes from kind of fine to like fucking awesome.
It's like fine is like a two and kind of fine.
Maybe he's a one.
Next time I see a really shitty movie, I'll reel about it for two minutes.
Okay.
All right.
All right.
Thank you everyone.
See you later.
Thanks.
