Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Amy Ashbrodsky. I'm Steven Zuber. I'm Jay Sticky.
And today we are going to be talking about a late-star codex post, as we sometimes do,
because they're awesome. But before we do that, we're going to do our less wrong posts,
because we do those at the top of the show now.
Yes, we do. So, first one is guessing the teacher's password, right?
No, fake explanations. Damn it.
Although the two of them are so, like, I almost feel like they should be one post because
they're so reliant on each other. When I read fake explanations, I was like, isn't this
guessing the teacher's password? But then I read guessing teacher's password, and I was like,
oh, no, okay, it's just, it's the lead into it.
Yeah, I think that on occasion, maybe he had, like, posts drafted, and he's like,
I don't feel like I'm going to have time tomorrow. I can split this into two.
Yeah. That's one of the nice things about blogging.
And it's also a nice thing about writing serial fiction. I noticed, I was talking about this
with Brian. I don't know if it was on the air or not, so I don't mind repeating it,
and I know we're already off topic. But I didn't know their podcast called We Want More,
which is like a, we've got Ward rip off where my co-host Brian hasn't read the book and I have,
so we're going through it section, you know, a couple chapters at a time. And if you look at
the release dates for chapters, there are several where like, he released three in one day, and then,
you know, five in a week, and then a couple months off, and then like a fucking year off.
And I wonder if he had just staggered his releases and say, I'm going to do two a week.
Or even one a week.
Or even one a week.
A little smoother. Yeah, or just one a week. I mean, one a week, we'd still be,
they'd still be coming out, right?
No, there's, there were only like 132. That's two years. Two and a half.
Yeah, I guess you're right. In any case, it may, yeah, maybe it might have even taken less time
than it took, but it still would have left some more buffer. But I think probably the reason is
that like his writing process is more of, I'm doing this to jumpstart my writing, not as
like projects to release a, you know, a story. So.
Oh, he also apparently ran into a hard problem of how to advance to the next
plot point that he wanted to do after Ask-a-Ban. And like, pretty much the entire spew arc was him
trying to get to a point where Hermione would attack Draco and have that be believable.
And then like, as he was finishing up the spew arc, he was like, oh,
I can do the Mr. Hatton Cloak, uh, Groundhog Day attack and like fix that in a single scene.
And he did and it was wonderful. And I'm not, I'm not sad that he did the spew arc because I
love the spew arc and I think it's a lot of fun, but it's very incogruous with the rest of the,
the fic. It doesn't quite fit, you know?
It fits more of the earlier theme of the fic where it was kind of slapstick and,
but uh, the thing I liked about it was that it addressed the weird thing that a lot of fiction
does now where it's got like, we're going to pretend that like sexism and racism doesn't exist
in this world. But like, you'll notice that like there's still more male teachers than female
teachers at Hogwarts. And like, so Hermione notices this, at first is trying to like bring on the full
feminist, uh, movement in the wizarding world. Yeah. And then they kind of
are like protesting and start talking to some of the kids and it's like, oh, wait, like you mean
actually people are pretty equal in the wizarding world. Yeah. Wait, like you muggles discriminate
against each other based on skin color. Yes. Skin color. That was a cool scene. It's, yeah.
Speaking of digression. Oh, go ahead. No, actually, I was going to do more digression,
so you should do your digression because I did my digression. Well, I was because Steven basically
let us off with that digression. Uh, are you guys familiar with time to crate? Uh, time to what?
Crate? Uh, like a crate, like a box. Yeah. No, I don't, I've never heard of this. It used to be
a metric for first person shooters after a doom and quake were big things and everybody and their
brother was making their own first person shooter. Uh, a popular metric, this is kind of like the
Bechtel test and that it was, you know, like basically a joke, uh, is that you can tell how
bad a first person shooter is by how long it takes you to get to your first crate because the crate
is just a standard cube with a skin thrown on it. It is where the level designer has completely run
out of ideas and motivation and it's just being like, Hey, I'm lazy. There's an object here in
your way. It's a crate. And so time to create was supposed to be, you know, sort of a proxy for how
bad something is. And famously, there is a game with a negative time to create because you see one
in the intro cutscene before you even get to be, uh, control the character. But, uh, I was just
thinking we should start having a time to digression metric for our episodes. And this one will
probably have the shortest one yet. Yeah, I'll take full ownership of that. Is the crate like a
loot, like a crate with like a new weapon in it or something you have to break to get past or what?
Literally any crate at all, but usually they were just objects that you could like hide behind and
move around and, you know, block line of sight, that kind of thing. It's just a square. It's just a
square. Well, cute. It's the easiest thing to make in a 30 modeling. Yeah. I guess I can say that
being a joke as a thing is like, especially in first person shooters, those serve a lot of purpose.
And you're like, here's how the, here's how the cover system works. Like that, that should happen
in the tutorial. Yes, but you're also supposed to, you know, put some effort into things. So
instead of just like dropping a crate into a play in front of a player, make it something atmospheric
in your level, you know? Okay, I was mainly rationalizing because I felt like the crates that
are in the opening chamber of breath of the wild were aptly placed and it didn't bring the game
down. But because they're atmospheric, they were dusty and they were old. It fits perfectly. So
my game is preserved. All right. Breath of the Wild had a lot of good crates, actually.
It did. They textured squares really well. I mean, then they just, real good squares. Then they just
completely jumped the shark with Minecraft where literally everything is a cube. Yeah, I wonder
what the time to create would be for Minecraft. Don't you have to create your own crate though?
Like that's been actual crate crate. I don't know. I have not actually played Minecraft.
I played it for about five minutes now. I was like, yeah, this isn't the game for me.
I put several, maybe several hours or some small tens of hours into it. I had a good time with it.
Never got full-fledged. But let's reduce the time to get to fake explanations.
Yeah. So yeah, let's jump right in here.
Once upon a time, there was an instructor who taught physics students.
One day, the instructor called them into the classroom, showed them a wide square plate of
metal next to a hot radiator. Students each put their hands on a plate and found the side
next to the radiator to be cool. The distant side was warm. And the instructor said, why do you
think that happens? Some students guessed convection of air currents. Others guessed strange metals
in the plate. They devised many creative explanations. None stooping so low as to say,
I don't know, or this seems impossible. And the answer was, maybe, what were you gonna say, Anash?
Oh, well, go ahead and give the answer spoiler. And the answer was, before the students entered
the room, the instructor turned the plate around. Yeah. And this is kind of like famous in
Rationalist circles now. First of all, because it's sort of like a great gotcha, right?
But I feel kind of go on. But well, I feel like it's a little unfair that that he says,
none stooped so low as to say, I don't know, or this seems impossible. Because like that might
be something you would say in a more normal setting. But like when the teacher has presented you
with this challenge, you assume, first of all, that there is an answer. And that it is an answer
you can deduce, because the teacher has given you this challenge, right? It's like, here is an
exercise for the student, please figure it out. So they were like, guessing and trying to, well,
that's the thing they were guessing, as opposed to trying to figure it out, which is why
this is so closely linked to guessing the teacher's password, which is the next post. But
but so like, I felt like it was a little unfair, but it really, he makes a damn good point about
about how much guessing there was being done and how schools are being, you know what, I'm going
to stop right there before before I spoil the next one. Go ahead, Steven.
Oh, sorry, I was just going to say that if like, to be pedantic, you know, the teacher in the real
world could be could be nature. And in this particular case, there was an answer and they
could have guessed it. They could have said, okay, I feel like I was asked the wrong question. Now,
granted, that's not how things work in school. They usually ask you questions with straightforward
answers based on what you've learned. I don't know if this actually this might be like, is this
an apocryphal story or does it have a citation? It doesn't actually matter, but it was once upon
a time, dude. So once upon a time, like it so it could be the sort of thing I try to think of a
of an example like that could have come up in any formal education I had since I didn't take
high level physics courses. It's it seems like a good way to get like to train the student to say
yes, sometimes things are confusing. And it is okay to say I don't know. Yeah, right? Yeah, I think
that's the exact point that Elias is trying to make is that, like, I was actually going to
basically say what both of you had said. Any as you're talking about how you don't think it's fair
to the student. And I agree because you are not like that's not the way schools work. You're not
actually being asked to think you're being asked to like memorize stuff for the test.
Not always, but just like, there's so much. What is the word accountability? I guess that teachers
are held to that they don't have a lot of time to develop good curricula and they spend all their
time, you know, attending meetings, grading tests, and then like having to be evaluated
forever. And like teaching it like they're evaluated on like passing scores of their students
to test so they didn't get to write more often than not, right? So the state or the district
writes these tests. And it's like, okay, well, I feel like this is the worst way and worst order in
which to teach college algebra. But that's the way I was told to do it. So good luck, kids. I got
that. Sorry, what? Oh, I got to say that this is a this mythical teacher is a darn good teacher,
though, because he is probably for the first time in these students lives exposing them to the idea
that like, hey, you shouldn't just be trying to figure out the correct answer for that test. Maybe
you should actually think about things like your teacher's a dick and flipped it before you came in
here. Or your teachers trying to make you think, which might be a dick move. Some of my teachers
were trying to make me think it was I had some pretty decent teachers, not all of them, but a few.
Yeah, I had a real mix of good and bad ones. So Eliezer says that to consider the answer
the student gave of maybe because of heat conduction, he says, I ask, is this answer a
proper belief? Do the words actually control anticipation? If if you say heat conduction,
what experience does that lead you to anticipate? Under normal circumstances, it leads you to
anticipate that if you put your hand on the side of the plate near the radiator, that side will
feel warmer than the opposite side. So he points out that that you in terms of that phrase, you
should ponder the little innocent phrase because of which comes before heat conduction, ponder some
of the other things we could put after it. We could say, for example, because of flogiston or
because of magic. Because of heat conduction is used in such fashion, it's like saying magic.
It feels like an explanation, but it's not. It's big explanations. Yeah.
And I like that a lot. I think it's a really succinct and awesome and super memorable lesson.
Like I've never forgotten this parable since the first time I read it. Yeah. I've not only not
never forgotten it, but I catch myself doing this and I try to stop and be aware of the fact
that like, it's like, wait a minute. I actually don't assign very high confidence to that thing I
just said. Do I actually know this or did I just hear this somewhere? And like, it's just
kind of been accepted because I heard it from maybe an authority figure or it was a maybe it was a
scientific journal, but maybe it was a shitty one. You know,
yeah, I have a similar thing like that with my autobiographical memory. And so,
like when I think I remember something, I like will immediately be like, you know what, I don't know
how strongly I remember that. And even if I did remember it strongly, it doesn't mean it really
happened. And I think because of that accidentally like ingrained thought pattern, a lot of my
actual memories get thrown into the junk bucket in my brain. And thus my autobiographical memory
is terrible. Eh, I thought I missed anything important. I'm sure it was important to remember
it. The less tired you are to your specific memories, the less you need them to be intact when
you're unfrozen. Right. And also, I said that last one with a nod and a wink, but no one could hear
that. So. Yeah, we need to like start being like, I don't know, describing our facial expressions
and stuff. Wink, wink, that's a joke. Exactly. Brace eyebrow. Magic you cry. That's not a scientific
explanation. Indeed, the phrase is because of heat conduction and because magic are readily
recognized as belonging to different literary genres. Heat conduction is something that Spock
might say on Star Trek, whereas magic would be said by Giles and Buffy the Vampire Slayer.
However, as Bayseans, we take no notice of literary genres. It's really funny because I think a lot
of methods of rationality was Harry kind of pattern matching everything to fantasy novels
that he had read. Yeah, absolutely. Especially the explicitly in a lot of cases. Yeah, well,
I mean, the arc that we just started, the Azkaban arc, he explicitly thinks of it in the beginning
as like, okay, I am finally getting my intro quest from my wise mentor, and soon I will be,
you know, harrowed and have this experience, but it will make me stronger for the future and I can
finally step into my destiny. Yeah, he literally thinks of it in terms of like leveling up. Yeah.
And and completing this narrative arc that all heroes have to complete. I think I remember a
scene where he received something and he's like, aha, my first quest item. Oh, God, I remember
when Dumbledore gave him the father's rock, and he tried to leave and the door was locked and Dumbledore
was like, you didn't take your father's rock. He's like, oh, yeah, of course, you can't leave
the area without taking the quest item. Yeah, that's what I was going to mention is that, oh,
yeah, if you foolish me to think the door would open before I put the quest items in my inventory.
I feel like the bag of holding was a great little literary trick to like,
let him, you know, play into that perfect fantasy of his where it's like, yep, this is my inventory,
everything in this bag and my pockets. I want one so bad. Yeah. I just want hammer space to be real.
Hammer space. It's a TV tropes thing, you know, like in cartoons where a character will pull a
very large hammer out of their pocket. Okay. It's just nonsensically big. Yeah. Did you see
into the spider verse? Yeah, I was actually just thinking about scene. Yeah. Inuyash, have you seen
it? Yeah, it's wonderful. Yeah, it's gonna say if you haven't, it's treat. At the end, John Malini,
the pig, gives him his hammer. That was John Blaney. Yeah. And so he's like, here, take this hammer
and it's like huge. It's like, it could fit in your pocket. And he said it was carrying because
like they were all leaving. It was perfect. All right, on to guessing the teacher's password.
Yes. Yeah, trying to see if there's anything else that we missed. I guess the one thing
from the very end that I would like to point out before we go is that he says the deeper or the
students is not simply that they fail to constrain their anticipation. The deeper error is that they
thought they were doing physics, even though they were simply just moving their magic from
one genre to another. Love it. Yeah. The thing that, go ahead, student. It's gonna say really
quick, I can see how this post flows into the next one. I think that might have been actually how
this worked in reality rather than my initial guess of like, just like kind of separating them
I think often, like he'll make a couple of points in a post and then there'll be a discussion and
he's like, okay, yeah, I can further elaborate on this point. And that's what this next one is.
But what were you gonna say, Jace? I was gonna say, oh, did I just forget it? Oh, no, that's on me.
Oh, right. I think at least you could imagine that this somewhat corrects itself later on when
you say like, graduate from physics school and start working in a physics lab.
And now you have to care about what reality is or isn't doing.
Yeah, but like, almost every student in high school went through a physics class,
where they had to repeat these words and a minuscule fraction of them will actually go to a physics
lab. So most people learn the wrong lesson. What's the wrong lesson that they could learn?
The wrong lesson is that the thing that you do is not try to constrain anticipation.
The thing you do is try to guess the teacher's password.
Oh, sure. I think even for the non-physicists to come out of this lesson, they're gonna say,
oh, yeah, sometimes they'll be confronted with a problem that I was trying to answer incorrectly.
Oh, you mean this specific lesson? Yeah, I think everyone would get the right
lesson from this one. But I mean, from physics classes in general that do not have this specific
trickery in them. Oh, yeah, absolutely. That's unfortunately school in a nutshell.
For most people, my physics class was amazing because my physics teacher really cared about
physics. Yeah, I mean, I don't mean to generalize over much, but if it wasn't physics,
it might have been biology, it might have been one chemistry teacher you had or something.
But I think it's even just math where it's not supposed to be password guessing,
but often you're just trying different things. I remember that on multiple choice math questions,
where it'd be, okay, let me try this function. I remember them showing us at some point.
Okay, the answer I got isn't any one of these four. Let me try this other one,
because I just didn't understand what I was doing. Yeah, they taught the teacher math terribly. They
have you just, like, the thing that always bugs me is that when students, like I hear this story
from so many people, when a student has figured out a way to solve a problem that's not the official
algorithm, then they will get yelled at and told to do it the correct way. We're learning this one,
and I'm just, it's like they don't actually want kids to understand how math works.
Yeah, that stupid, like, multiplying thing where, like, they're drawing lines between
the numbers or something, I've seen. You're talking about Common Core?
Must be. I think so. Yeah, that rings a bell. That would drive me insane.
That would not help me multiply in my head. I had to, I was helping kids with homework when
I worked at the library. There's a school across the street, and kids would all come over.
And I had to use YouTube videos to teach myself how to do the Common Core version
they were expected to do. And actually, I think that it makes sense as an introductory
long, what was it, like, long multiplication. Yeah, it's just a different algorithm to get
the same answers. Yeah, my problem is that if they make you do it that way, and if you just do it
another way, they're like, no, sorry, you didn't, you didn't draw the lines and fill in the little,
you know, partial numbers above the lines. I feel like if you get the right answer,
that should be the right answer, and they shouldn't care how you get there, which all the good teachers
did. I don't know if they're allowed to do that now or how that works, but luckily I'm not in school,
so yeah, those poor fuckers. It's good to see the teacher's password. Okay, yeah.
This one's a lot of fun. I don't have to take charge on it. I'll just say that this is another one
that I never forgot. And I think that it's, oh, yeah, dive into it, Inyash. Okay, it starts off
with EY relating how he thought that he knew what light was at nine years old because he read up on
it, and he read that light is made of waves. And then later on, when he actually did a lot more
reading on physics and contemplating and realizing how light worked, he realized that when he was
nine, he didn't know shit. He just knew the phrase light is made of waves and believed that. And he
says that there's this instinctive tendency to think that if a physicist says light is made of
waves, and the teacher says what is light made of, and the student says waves, then the student has
made a true statement. But he says that this is just a sequence of syllables. The sequence of syllables
made of waves, or because of heat conduction, it's not a hypothesis. It's just a pattern
of vibrations traveling through the air. And in school, a teacher hands you a gold star,
or an A or whatever, for saying made of waves, which must be the correct answer because the
teacher heard a physicist emit the same sound vibrations. And since verbal behavior is what
gets the gold star, students think that verbal behavior has a truth value. After all, either
light is made of waves or it isn't, right? And then he says, you know, ties it right back into the
last password, into the last post. If a teacher asks you why the far side of a metal plate feels
warmer than the side near the radiator, if you say, I don't know, you have no chance of getting a
gold star, you don't even get credit for class participation, if you say I don't know. So all
the incentives are aligned for you to make some sort of guess, no matter how bad that guess is.
And if you've heard phrases that the teacher have said in that semester, that are like because of
heat convection, or because of heat conduction, then maybe one of those is what the teacher wants.
So you say maybe because of heat conduction, but that's not a hypothesis about the metal plate.
It's not even a proper belief. It's just an attempt to guess the teacher's password.
Yeah. So I remember being in classes where the students were actually encouraged to
make as many random guesses, like, I don't know, as like class participation. And yeah,
there's no wrong answers or like, I don't know, but like, just shouting whatever random thing you
can think of is, yeah, very much an example of this thing. Yeah. And that's not even,
it's not even like trying to generate a bunch of hypotheses. No, like, that's really what you
should be doing. You should be maybe actually, yeah, like, guessing a bunch of random things,
but then maybe you make like, a word cloud, and start making correlations or start testing some
of the things. But he said, like, if you actually believe that, you know, because of heat diffusion,
maybe you would start measuring a few different points with a thermometer at a few different
times and trying to predict what it would say on the next measurement, you know,
because then that's something connected to an experience, rather than just a verbal behavior.
I remember, and it's really, I, it's hard to say, like, at least for me to briefly articulate what
the difference is between like, knowing something and knowing the password. But I remember when I
was reading the Feynman lectures, there was a part where, and like, I'd known all these bits before,
but he brought it home with one perfect example about how, you know, like, how to put this
succinctly without taking three minutes. Like, you've got a vessel of hot liquid. And why is it
hot? Because all the atoms are in there are moving on average pretty fast. And why does it get colder?
Because the fast ones escape. And they occasionally slow down inside. But the really fast ones get
escape velocity from the surface. And that's why like, a flatter, wider vessel will cool faster
than a smaller one. And the, so like, as the fast ones escape, the average velocity of all the
molecules in the vessel goes down to the temperature goes down. And this is why a spoonful of soup
gets cooler when you blow on it. And I'm just like, that's perfect. Like, like, I already knew that,
you know, I could blow on a spoonful of soup and it would cool down. And I knew all the other parts
involved. But tying up, I think that was one of Feynman's just true gifts that he could, he could
illustrate things in a way that sound kind of granted. A lot of his stuff is sort of like esoteric
by, you know, everyone's day to day standards. But tie it down to something as mundane as like,
you know, how you like blow on soup, right? Well, here's what's going on. I thought that was just
outstanding. Yeah. Yeah. You were asking, or you were saying that you didn't really understand the
difference between knowing a thing and then knowing the password. I think I said I couldn't,
I couldn't quickly articulate it. Yeah, I think I would quickly articulate it as a difference in
having good or bad thinking habits. There's this automatic reaction that's kind of working on muscle
memory or instinct, but actually taking the time to have epistemic humility and, first of all,
admit that you don't know to yourself or to other people and then try to figure out what to do from
there. I think that's also an uncomfortable step for a lot of people to take. People seem to be
just making up a, like I've ever seen this kind of interaction between people where they see
something weird. I don't know, like, they see a bug doing something weird and they're like,
oh man, what's that bug doing? And people will just be like, oh, maybe it's doing that thing. Yeah, okay.
Like, I think they like pulls their phone out to Google it or something. Yeah, I think a lot of the,
I know what specifically in the discord has a problem with ephocyc. And I think a lot of it
is because ephocyc is more about guessing passwords than actually trying to create explanations.
Yeah, it's just his issue is that it's largely non-testable, which I think he takes too much
issue with it. Yeah, I think some of it is obviously correct. But
those inferences you can draw from comparing our behaviors to other animals to looking at
hunter-gatherers that are still living that way in modern day.
But I do think he has a point that it is sometimes overused, especially in pop culture.
It very much is. And a lot of it is, well, like some of it is the social psychologists, but some of
it's, and yeah, maybe more of it is like psychology today or, you know, like whatever pop science outlet
is interpreting whatever study just came out. Yeah, I mean, I think all pop sciences is guilty
of being abusable and like misinterpreted by the masses, right? Well, they actually actively will
change the meaning of something in order to make it more clickable. I remember distinctly,
there was this article that was published in some journal, I don't remember, but
whatever site, whatever like wired or whatever had, I shouldn't diswire it actually like wired,
whatever bad psychology publication had ended up writing an article about it for the masses,
had titled it. What was it? It was autism or autistic children are shown to have more masculine
faces than average, lending some credibility to the belief that autism means like an extreme male
brain. And I was like, that doesn't seem right. And that I read the article and the article said that
actually, the children had more androgynous faces. Like, and it didn't, I don't think it mentioned
anything about the extreme male brain theory. It was literally like, yeah, they're trying to find
something sensationalist and controversial. Yeah, yeah, I just saw one on, I mean, this is a bit
of an aside, but since I don't follow any of that stuff, because mainly like those resources,
they always, you know, I read once a month, or I hear secondhand once a month, and then I'm
shown an article about how we're going to be destroyed by meteorite or something. And it's
like, Oh, no, it's passing within, you know, 1000 kilometers of us will be fine. Like, I remember
at some point, someone last year asked me like, Hey, is this is third? Like, are we gonna get hit
by a meteorite next year? Is this cross your radar yet? And I was like, no, and I'm pretty sure
like it was going to happen. I would have heard about it. Right. So I didn't, I didn't, you know,
even feel the need to look into it. I did remember that at some point, Stephen Colbert had on Neil
deGrasse Tyson and asked him about it. And he shut it down. But what was I going to say? It was like
vapors, people who use nicotine, or who vape to get nicotine have like the same cardiovascular
issues, or can have the same cardiovascular issues as people who smoke. And then the sample size
consisted 100% of people who use to smoke. There's so much data manipulation going on in vaping
studies. And I think I'd, I think some of it is the tobacco companies trying to
bad mouth vaping, because they're taking their business away. And then a lot of it is just
people that want to demonize whatever is like the popular thing. I remember
Is that is that what it is? Just people hating things being popular?
That's it. This is a trend that I see all the time. Remember, like people are eating
tide pods. And then suddenly it was like, all teenagers are now eating tide pods through
reservation. And I was looking for just the president. Oh, here's it. Here's it. Yeah,
here's the thing. I was looking for engagement rings, because Phoenix and I might do that.
And I came across a photo of someone who had these transdermal implants of like three diamonds
in their finger. And it was I suddenly remembered this article. It came out like a few years ago,
but it was like, millennials are ditching the traditional wedding ring in favor of implantable
like pierce. It was like one person had done this. Somebody had seen the photos of it and
just made the next logical leap, which is like this entire generation is going to stop buying
wedding rings and get transdermal implants instead, which I think I saw it on Tumblr originally,
which was they had just kind of taken this whoever posted it, taken a screenshot of
mainly centered on the title and you could see some of the article and they just wrote in all
caps. No, they're fucking not. Yeah, millennials are killing the diamond industry and just I work
at a grocery store. Yeah, we didn't do diamonds for ours. Like you can make a perfect diamond so
cheaply. Yeah, we that's that's mainly why I wasn't into it. And then I yeah diamonds aside,
we can wrap up the password guessing, which is I think yeah, he relates back to the school system
and he says in the school system, it's all about verbal behavior, whether written on paper or spoken
aloud. Verbal behavior gets you a gold star or a failing grade. Part of unlearning this bad habit
is becoming consciously aware of the difference between an explanation and a password. It happened
to me when I was nine years old, not because I was stupid, but because this is what happens by
default. This is how human beings think unless they are trained not to not to fall into this trap.
Humanity stayed stuck in holes like this for thousands of years. And I think this is another
good time to reiterate like how useful it is to read up on the history of science. I think part
part of the reason that science seems so like boring and opaque and just mundane to people is
that you know, people look at whatever interesting thing like I can flip a switch on my wall and
the light comes out on the ceiling. And I have a vague ish idea of why that happens. But like most
people aren't inclined to like take it as like holy shit, you can just create light like that.
It's not a miracle to them because they assume that the explanation is mundane because they
know it's understood. But like there's such a difference between, well, I guess to put it
in historical context, like basically everything we know is not stuff that was like always understood
essentially everything we know. And so there's just this tendency to us, like especially when
learning chemistry, you know, you start with like the Bohr model or something, right? And it's like,
okay, yeah, this is 200 years old. For the rest of human history, we had no idea what the fuck was
going on. But we're going to start with the thing 200 years ago, because this is where we start
chemistry. Well, not it's not just that we didn't know what was going on. It's that we thought we
did know because we had a password that was, you know, fulfilling someone's requirements. Yeah,
exactly. Or not necessarily always God, but yeah, something like that, like this, this is the case
because of this belief that we have. But it feels like you know something and you have an explanation,
but you really don't because you can't use that to constrain what you believe in any way. And
so for thousands of years, you think you have an explanation and you don't look deeper.
Yeah, if you're wondering why lightning destroyed your neighbor's house, Thor did it,
isn't an explanation. Like, because then you won't be able to predict whose house is going to get
struck next. And maybe it's the guy that was pissing on Thor. So I mean, you know, that's one
way you could test it, you could see if the person was a blasphemer and so was the next five, or you
could see, Oh, that person had on a very decorative, you know, aluminum or metal pipe sticking out of
their house. Or they had a very, very large tree that's the tallest tree in the neighborhood,
like, that was actually sitting too close to the house and some metal shutters. Yeah, to be a little
specific. Oh, is that what happened to your house? That's my working hypothesis. Okay.
Have you rolled out the possibility that Thor just hates you? Um, I actually am more convinced
that Thor, I'm more convinced that Thor was trying to help because that actually worked out pretty
well for me. I was trying to sell this house. It wasn't that the market was terrible. I wanted to
get out. So I got insurance money, which ended up being like, more than I would have gotten for
trying to sell the house. I got out quickly. All worked out. Praise be to Thor. Yeah.
Well, our next two episodes or our next two less wrong posts will be science as attire and fake
causality. Awesome. Those are also both really good memorable posts. What is the sequence these
are all a part of? I don't know. There was like no sequence breakdowns back in the day. There was
just, you know, a sequence of posts that were put out every day. I feel like this is probably
map and territory, which that makes sense. Yeah. And for me, I think those are the ones,
yeah, a lot of those just stuck out really well for me. And so I remember both these next ones as
well. And I can also like recall time as I'm like, Oh my God, that's what's happening right here in my
life. Anyway, so, but we're not talking about those right now. We're talking about those next
time. Right now we're going to talk about a post on Slate Star Codex called Socratic Grilling,
which, hey, kind of ties into all this stuff about password guessing and all that fun business.
That only does it tie into it. He literally links to the guessing the teacher's password
post from here. So that was kind of cool. But it starts out with a fun dialogue between a teacher
and a student that can be done as an audio drama. Oh, I'll be the student. Excellent. In that case,
is it okay from the teacher? You want to be the teacher, Steven? No, I'll be the other student
who's not talking. Do your professor querel voice. Oh, really? Do it. Yes. Okay. Hold on a second.
Mr. Potter. Okay, there we go. I would say Mr. Potter to get in the mood.
Mr. Potter, many diseases like the common cold are spread by germs when one infected person
contacts another. But I got a cold a few weeks ago, and I never touched anyone except my family
members. And none of them were sick. You don't need to actually touch someone. Sometimes it can
spread through mucus droplets in the air. And one time I was camping in the woods for a month,
and then I got a cold, even though I hadn't been around anybody.
If it was spring, you might have gotten allergies. Allergies can feel a lot like a cold,
but they aren't spread by germs. It was fall? Then maybe it was an unusual allergy,
or some other condition. Hey, wait. If germs are spread from person to person on touch, then
why isn't the government just mandate one week when nobody's allowed to touch anybody else?
Then all the germs will die and we'll never have to worry about germs again.
That's a good question. A lot of germs have what's called reservoirs in the environment
where they live when they're not infecting humans. Even if the government tried your plan,
probably most sicknesses would come back from their reservoirs.
I've never seen a germ reservoir. Where are they?
They're not literal reservoirs like a water reservoir. That's just what we call it when
germs live in bats or raccoons or something. That was kind of weird. I haven't been cruel
in a long time. That was amazing. That was wonderful to listen to though.
I just want to make your quarrel voice into a text to speech,
and have professor quarrel read me fan fiction or something.
That would be awesome.
Anyway, notice a few things about this conversation.
First, it's really good that it happened.
Yeah, the student was confused at many points and knows that they were confused,
and it raised that confusion immediately, which is a great habit to be in.
And the teacher took the student seriously and answered him and addressed all his concerns.
Yeah, I liked that actually Scott said, surprisingly, teachers actually do a pretty
good job of this in real life, which maybe just means he had better teachers than me,
but I did have, I had some very good teachers.
I had some that would take it the exact opposite way, and some that would indulge me to the point
where they'd say, I want to keep talking about this. Let's come back after class or after school
if you want and we can keep going. The bad teachers would shut you down and say you
couldn't talk for the rest of the week because they thought you were trying to make them look
stupid. Oh, what a bunch of assholes. Well, that's the, well, we're getting a bit ahead,
but that's kind of the point of the article. Yeah, I think this is the main reason why a lot of
people advocate for smaller class sizes, because you can't have too many students
if you're going around and like actually making sure each one really understands what you're
saying and letting them grill you until it clarifies the thing in their head, right?
Like if you had to do this with 30 students one after the other, I mean, there'd definitely be,
there'd probably be a lot of overlap where one person asking would help
clarify it for a bunch of people, but it just, it could be a bit much if you have like 100 students.
It might take forever. So I think that's, you know, in an ideal world, you would have like
one mentor and one student, right? And they would take responsibility for that student and
just keep going with them and help them get everything until they actually understood it.
You know, I think it was a book I recommended a couple episodes ago to David and Goliath,
which was by Malcolm Gladwell, where they did, they looked at the question of whether
smaller class sizes are better than larger class sizes. And
like the answer is kind of, it depends, but not always. Okay. I'm gonna recommend that book again.
Nice. So I'm gonna write it down in the notes. Yeah, I mean, so like the, the exchange here
goes about as pleasantly as possible for the student who's asking questions. And like I
alluded to, I had teachers in elementary school that were the exact opposite of this, and they
took it as like a hostile, like you're trying to look dumb, then shut the fuck up. I have the power
here. And this is actually great. Right. But this is great. So they, they're able to say, hold on,
I've got like this, if what you're saying is true, then I've got like this really obvious way that
I can, we can end all illness forever. And like, that's actually a good question. And so, and the
teacher says, that's a good question. So it's great. I love that. There's the, I'm jumping ahead
a little bit. I was going to bring an example in from another thing. So we'll just keep running with
the post. Go ahead. Okay. So the second thing that he says about this is that to a hostile observer,
it would sound like the student was challenging the teacher, the Snape interpretation, basically.
Every time the teacher tried to explain the germ theory, the student pounced on a supposed inconsistency
with pounced in quotes. When the teacher tried to explain the consistency that student challenged
her explanations. And yeah, and I was going to say that in the first part, I forgot to mention this
where you plugged guessing the teacher's password that the kids doing the opposite of that. Yeah.
But they're not writing down a note that says, you know, okay, diseases caused by germs, right.
Yeah, they're trying to actually understand. Yeah, exactly. And I love the line. And the thesis of
this post is you must never ever say that saying that is so bad. Smackdown once say, I think I
know more about germ theory than you do. Make him feel like you challenged your authority and that's
bad. And the best case scenario is I'll never ask questions to resolve this confusion again.
The worst case scenario is he stops feeling the confusion entirely, or stops thinking of forcing
things to fit together and make sense as a desirable goal to have. Yeah, that's how you got
teachers passwords. Exactly. The VAT to never ever say is the VAT that student is being a brat
and challenging the teacher, right? Yeah, I think that's one of the reasons I really love methods
of rationality and Harry and that because he is always trying to find the answers. And I think
that's one of the reason people some people hate methods of rationality because they're like,
Harry's just being a brat who thinks he knows everything. And yes, sometimes he is, but
it's that's not like his intention. He isn't there to undermine people. He's just trying to find the
truth. I think a lot of I read somewhere that a lot of parents, in particular, disliked the
Harry character. And that was my observation. Okay, that was yeah, I was trying to remember if
that was this podcast actually, before I was on it. Yeah, it's very much the idea of children
need to be subordinate to adults, kind of taking precedence over, like caring about this child,
knowing things, being curious. If you see that, that exchange that we acted out, which was very fun.
Hmm. Now, now you're learning a bunch of things you probably might or you might not have learned
in the lecture if the student had or had not interrupted. Yeah, I think that in cases like
that this is called Socratic Grilling, because this is supposedly how Socrates taught his students
would have to kind of figure out their own shit. He would kind of guide them along occasionally,
but like, he wouldn't give them answers, he would be like, I don't know, what do you think?
A lot of the times in the Socratic Dialogues, he would have a point, but he would never actually
say his point. He would just keep asking questions that, as his interlocutor answered them, would
bring them closer and closer to the point that he was making. And then they find out the truth
in a way that is going to, first of all, make them feel good about the fact that they figured it
out. Secondly, they're going to remember it, it's going to be a lot more important. And third,
now they have a more solid model because they've explored the edges of it and they didn't just
get a single word answer. I mean, sometimes lots of times they ended with like Socrates,
you're a dick and walking off. Yeah, let's not forget that the the character of Socrates was
eventually killed because he was so annoying. It's one and the other thing that it didn't always
lead to like a nice resolution of like, great, now we know it's more like great, I knew that you
didn't actually know. So I've now proven that you don't know either or that you now you believe
you don't know either because I've grilled you down enough to where you realized that you were
holding onto nothing. It's interesting. What was I going to say about? Well, I think that's why this
is called Socratic grilling rather than Socratic questioning, because with Socratic grilling,
it's it's a bit more directed than questioning, but it's also like the kid is trying to find out
the answer, as opposed to just leading someone to the conclusion that they don't know stuff, right?
Yeah, the article says you need to think of it as Socratic grilling, like Socratic questioning,
but a bit harsher and more confrontational in order to get to the point more quickly.
And he adds tolerating this is harder than it sounds. Most people can stay helpful for one or
two iterations. But most people are bad at explaining things. So one or two iterations
isn't always enough. I've had times where I need five or 10 question answer rounds of a teacher
in order to understand what they're telling me. This process sounds a lot like the thing you just
said is obviously wrong. No, that doesn't make any sense. Keep saying it over and over. No,
that's irrelevant. You're bothering me. Keep saying an obviously wrong thing. Oh, that word
means something totally different. What I thought it meant. Now your statement makes total sense.
That sounds like half our discussions on the discord. Yeah, like this is often
this is often why people have conflicts. I think it's the
people are having they think they're having a fight about one thing. And it turns out that
like they both have the both actually fighting about a different thing. Yeah. Or the thing that
they like care about or trying to optimize isn't the thing the other person thinks that is. It's
so common. So I wanted to bring up a quick thing to backtrack just a little bit. You said that you
quoted him saying that the thesis of the post is you should never ever say that to a student
because the best cases he'll never ask questions again. And the worst case is that
he stops trying to force things to fit together and stops thinking of
things making sense as a desirable goal. I was like, I think there's other I mean,
I guess there's a whole spectrum between best case and worst case. But I ran into this quite a
few times like in me personally that not not it isn't always just giving up like sometimes
there's flat out rebellion. There's like, Oh, yeah, well, maybe you don't know shit, sir. You're
trying to shut me down. And I think it's because you don't know anything. And I usually wouldn't
say that like in class or anything. But I think this way, I may be in my head. But I think this
is the sort of thing which will often motivate people to try to find answers on their own.
But even more so, I think it will often motivate people to simply distrust authority,
because they're like, this person couldn't answer my questions. And when I ask some,
they try to shut me down. So I don't think they know what they're talking about. And therefore,
I don't believe the earth is actually round. And, you know, they start not believing anything
said by authority and wanting to verify everything themselves, and can embrace things like, you
know, sometimes it leads to good outcomes, but sometimes it can lead to things like vaccine
denial or flat earth orism. I've definitely run across teachers who I was pretty convinced
didn't actually understand the subject that they were teaching, like they have been taught it in
this way. And then they were just repeating it. And it's like, I guess it's handed all the way
down from whoever actually is the expert on the thing and helped write the textbook. But I think
in that case, if you ask a question, the teacher doesn't know, it's too embarrassing for like,
social status reasons to say, Oh, actually, I don't know.
That is a really hard thing to do. Like, I've had that situation come up a few times with like,
my little brothers, when I was trying to teach them stuff, and they asked me questions, and I was
like, Oh, shit, I don't know. Maybe I'm wrong, right? And it's really easy to say that to your
little brother, you're like, I don't know, let's find out together. But much harder. Yeah, exactly.
Or if you're trying to teach a kid a group of kids in a school and half of them,
don't respect you anyway, I would be, I could see that being a much tougher thing to be like,
you got me. I'm not sure. Let's get back to this next week.
I had a couple of awesome teachers who and it would be seldom where I would distract the
conversation enough to where either A, they couldn't answer it or B, they'd be allowed to go on that
long because they do have to get through their lesson plan. But they would come back the next day.
And I remember at least two or three different teachers in high school, I had such a good high
school overall teaching experience. I had one teacher come back with a lot of times they'd come
back with answers like the next day, because they went home when they were curious too,
because they actually liked the subjects they were teaching. I had one come back to some printed
paperwork and they're like, Hey, I found that thing we were talking about the other day.
Oh, cool.
I thought that was like the coolest thing ever. And I'm like, Fuck yeah. Now we both get to know.
I thought like, Oh, you weren't done. Go ahead.
No, please.
I was just going to say I've had similar experiences. And those are my favorite teachers,
like this person cares about knowledge and learning. Imagine.
And they want to know more about their subject too.
They realized that they had an exposed ignorance and they're like, Oh, you know what,
I should know that. And I'm curious because I actually like this subject.
Yeah, this sort of thing, this whole, you know, don't question me when you think you know everything
is what directly one of the things that led directly to my deconversion from religion.
Because I was like, Well, I don't think you know, if you can't answer me,
I'm not just going to take your word for it. And I'm going to go look some more for myself.
And so, you know, the whole rebellion in that case was a very good thing.
It isn't always necessarily, but, you know, I think it can have good effects as well.
But I in general, I completely agree that the you must never ever say this is a something that
should be drilled into all teachers and maybe they should be taught how to accept that sometimes
they won't know things and they should not shut people down if they're asking.
Yeah. I mean, there are many ways that the school system should be reformed.
So this actually connected to something kind of upsetting that happened to me recently.
Oh, real quick before we go that, can I say one final thing on the post?
Yeah.
Okay. Scott says near the end that one of the most important is rational skills is noticing
your confusion, which was, you know, and he linked back to that lesson post again.
But that depends on an even more important proto skill of wanting things to make sense.
And I agree that that is one of the things I most want to instill in all humans the desire
for things to make sense, and that this sort of smacking people down when they're trying
to make things make sense is horrible for society. And I agree absolutely with this post.
And one of the reasons we're boosting it because yeah, that's that's a major issue.
Yeah.
Yeah, I totally agree. I got one quick side note. Did anyone hear the cat meowing?
I did.
I hope. Oh, good. I hope that that picked up for the audience. That was my cat Zelda making a cameo.
She doesn't usually come in and say hi when I'm in the office.
That was really cute.
Mine does not let me pick her up. So anyway, yeah, the the thing about the inside about
like people not needing things to make sense, I think that actually is a bit of an insight.
I didn't like strike me as this this, you know, hammer blow to my brain, but it did articulate
something because like it's often so often, especially back when I was having more discussions
about, I don't know, confusing subjects of people, and they'd be fine with bad answers.
I'm like, how could you not want to know the truth? And they're just like, I just don't care.
Um, that that sort of mindset is so alien to me that like it's it's like I can't even really model
it. But this is a nice succinct way of explaining a how that might have come about. But be just
it was just another reiteration of like, yeah, some people just don't have that built in as a thing
to desire. I'm like, okay, yeah, so that's the problem we should be solving, not make them
understand stuff, make them want things to make sense. Then they'll want to understand stuff
themselves. Yeah. So you had a bad thing that happened in your life recently, Jace?
Yeah, actually, this is even more relevant now that we had that little outro. I was,
I think last episode talking about a discord group that I'm a member of that's some local Denver,
like 2030 somethings with a lot of like cool interests. And they were sharing,
like, for example, they were doing this kind of special interest webcam thing where people would
make a presentation about something that they thought was cool, or that they're an expert in
that they wanted to teach to someone else. So it's just it was a little bit shocking when
one of my rationalist friends who I added to the discord, I think, linked a post from Slate
Start Codex in response to something that somebody was asking about. And yeah, I know where this is
going. Yeah, you know, because you were, it's really funny that before we were recording,
Eneesh just texted, man, like, do you guys know about what did you say? Like, do you know what
sea lioning is? And like, I was like, I got this like, chilled on my spine, because I was like,
wait, did you read my mind? No, it's just that I've hated the sea lioning comic for a long time,
and this immediately brought it to mind. Yeah, so hang on, holding my thoughts back together,
time stamping. So it turns out that a bunch of people in this group are part of the social
justice movement. And they don't like Scott Alexander. He's a Nazi, don't you know? Yes,
he's a Nazi. He wants like eugenics to be a thing. He hates feminism. And I forget what else
he was accused of. But um, yeah, a bunch of people just kept dogpiling on the person who
had posted the thing and going, Oh, haven't you heard that like this, this bad thing? I don't
know where they were going. They probably like some social justice receipts website, but they
managed to find like the they managed to find a post that Scott had actually titled or wrote
as a caveat in the beginning. I think this is probably the most controversial post I've made.
And like, I really hope that this doesn't get taken out of context or something, sure enough.
Like, this person's like, Oh man, he said like this. What was it? Oh, I know what it was. It was
the the one where he was talking about Scott Aronson, who was often confused for Scott Alexander
due to their similar names. And it was it was the untitled, right? Yeah, the one about feminism,
is that untitled? Untitled was also about feminism. He's done more than one post on it,
but I think untitled is the famous one. But well, famous for being quote unquote controversial.
Yeah, so listeners haven't like read untitled, I want to explain what it is after I described
this interaction. A person found this post pulled out a bunch of quotes out of context that said
things about feminism being bad. And said, Oh yeah, like this guy is the worst, he hates women,
he, you know, blah, blah, blah. And I think in particular, they somebody else jumped in and said,
Oh yeah, I've like always hated that author. You know, he only hates feminism because
some feminists were mean to him in college. And the person who had posted the original
article said, I don't think he ever said that. Like, no, no, definitely. He said that.
Well, where did you see it? Oh, I don't know. But I definitely said it. Well, could you provide
any evidence of this? Because I maybe like read the whole post that you're linking from. So like,
the discussion was the, the rationalist person was doing Socratic Girling. And I read back through,
thankfully, was not a part of this conversation. I got dragged in after the fact,
after things had kind of cooled down, and they closed the thread and everything.
And the rationalist got kicked out of the group. Surprise. And yeah, I read through the
conversation. The way I was reading the tone was very much like the same tone that the kid
in this article was using like, where did you hear that? Like, how do you know that that's true?
Um, are you, are you sure about that? Like, because I have this other evidence that says this
other thing. And people got very upset because they thought that he was being hostile and fighting
with them by asking questions like, can you show me some evidence for that thing? Because that seems
completely incorrect. I love that the rest of you tried to understand. Yeah, I love that the
rationalist community has this norm of it is never bad to ask for sources. Like people may not give
you sources, they may not have them on hand or may not have the time, but no one's ever going
to get mad at you for asking for a source. Yeah, like, I love hanging out with rationalists because
I've had the experience so many times of just somebody, I don't know, talking about a thing,
you ask like, Oh, how does that work? Oh, I don't know, actually. And then both of you pull out
your phones and look it up, or you go ask another person at the right, you know, like who's the
expert and whatever, and it becomes a discussion. Normal people don't do that. And it's baffling
to me. Actually, one of my earliest experiences with Phoenix was we were driving around probably
going to Chipotle. And we're talking about livers for some reason, liver transplants,
in particular. And so livers can be cut up. Like you don't have to, first of all, I was like,
wait, liver transplant, you only have one liver? Like, are they from cadavers? And Phoenix was
like, no, I'm pretty sure that you can get them from, you can be a liver donor.
Livers apparently have Wolverine's mutant healing factor. Yeah.
So we can also donate lobes of your liver. Because yeah, they regenerate like we'll
survive that. Yeah, if only. But basically. But then we were like, but then like, how does,
I don't know, like how does certain medications poison your liver? If it can grow back?
So well, and we start like, we're just still driving to Chipotle, but Phoenix was on their
phone looking up these answers. And then we were like having this whole discussion about it. And
I was just like, awesome. This is this is a very refreshing conversation that we have. And like,
finally. So back to the original conflict, I guess I'll call it. Maybe I could use the less
like charged word interaction. I was definitely conflict people were upset. After the rationalist
had had posted the thing, a bunch of people got upset. The person who was moderating the channel
that the discord, the server, yeah, the server, private message him and said,
you need to either apologize to the people that you harmed or I'm going to have to ask you to
leave this group. And the rationalist was like, nah, left. Yeah. It's like, no, I've fallen prey
to this particular, actually like specifically, he's like, I've fallen prey to this particular
trap before. So like, no, thanks. And I asked him about that after the fact. And he said that
actually he had been in a group that did this exact same sort of thing. And after he came out
and apologized. It was like now like he was the lowest person on the totem pole. So it was like
everybody's still like, oh, that's the bad guy. Like, and also I guess he like, lowered himself
in status by apologizing. And therefore that they were like continuing to make him like prove
that he was sorry about that thing he said that one time.
Well, now everyone knows he might be a Nazi.
Yeah, fuck all that. I think the the misappropriation of the word harm over the last like decade has
driven me a little insane about it. That was gone. Well, I'm just saying like, you didn't harm anybody
by asking questions. It like, it's not impossible to imagine that you could cause someone stress
by asking them questions. If you're causing people to stress by asking for sources, then they're
stupid people who should be stressed, and they need to work out what's stressing them out about
that. But, and I realized that's a pretty, pretty sweeping statement. But what can I say,
that rustles my jimmies. Like, I the idea that like, Oh, no, this person says something offensive,
I've been harmed. I don't know. Whatever reason, that's one of my berserk buttons. I feel harmed
hearing people use the word harmed the wrong way. That was a joke. So I just needed to interject
there. But what was the, you said that this hide into well, sea lining? Yes.
Yeah, so after the rationalist was kicked out of the group, which I'm still going to call it kicked
out because like, you know, being forced to like prostrate yourself and apologize for something
that you that that's totally bogus in my opinion. It's clearly just a social power play. And
that was just a trap. Yeah. Yeah, I agree. It was bullshit.
I mean, technically, they elected to leave by not submitting beneath the authority that
said you have to apologize for doing the right thing. But yeah, I mean, that's as much as being
kicked out as, you know, just getting a quick ban. Yeah, so I'll post a link to this comic.
There's this comic somebody wrote called sea lining where
Hmm. Can I describe it? Oh, yeah. Okay, because I personally kind of hate it. And it is like
famous now in a number of internet circles. But basically, it starts out with a racist saying,
man, I really hate people of this race. And they're out in public and a person of this race over
here is like, Hey, why do you hate people of my race? And she's like, I don't want to talk to you.
It's like, come on, what's what's the deal? And basically, the the the
comic is about how annoying it is when people who are discriminated against are want to know
why you hate their their people so much. And that's not how it is ever pitched when you see it online.
Because when you see it online, people are like, Oh, you're coming in here. And you're just like
asking all of us to prove these things. And we don't have to prove anything to you.
But like, when you look at it, it's about a racist being challenged on her casual public racism.
Yeah. Um,
yeah, so I think off air, you know, I had a articulation for myself of what sea lining is.
And so like, there's the deliberate version where you can go. So you're right. That is
different from how I ever see it used. Yeah, I usually see it used as blaming somebody for
saying, Oh, you're sea lining by by which they mean, you're coming in here and asking
questions in bad faith to spark stupid conversations. Yeah. And so it could be used as a charge against
somebody, like, accurately or inaccurately, or it can be used, like, if you're going to say,
this is really funny, I'm going to go in and see line r slash conservative.
Um, and it's called and it's called, what? I was going to say, it's called sea lining in
specific because if anyone hasn't seen the comment yet, the racist is racist against sea lions.
And they're like, I don't mind most sea mammals, but I could do without sea lions.
And then the sea lion is like, pardon me, I couldn't help but over here, I would like to have a
civil conversation about your statement. Would you mind showing me any evidence of any negative
thing any sea lion has ever done to you? And the lady's like, go away. And she's like, there's no
need to raise your voice. I'm right here. I'm just curious if you have any sources. And the lady's
like, you're in my house. And now the next panel is like, several hours later, she's trying to go
to bed, the sea lion is there in your bedroom. It's like, you've made a statement in public for
all to hear. Are you unable to defend the statements you make? Are you simply unwilling to have a
reason to discussion? And then it's the next morning at their breakfast table and sea lion is
still there. And he's like, I have been unfailingly polite and you two have done nothing but be rude.
She's like, I'm trying to eat my breakfast. So he says, very well, we shall resume in an hour,
which is admittedly a great punchline. And you've done a great job conveying the annoyance of the
sea lion in your rendition of their voice. And like, they're, I thought that was hilarious. I
immediately hated the sea lion, even though that they're tactically in the right. Yeah, they're
asking a fair question, but they're being super annoying about it. And it's, it's usually used
by social justice types who, you know, say something about like, man, these Nazis suck. And then
someone is like, Hey, I just want the right to own guns as defended in the Constitution. Why does
that make me, you know, the equivalent of someone who murdered Jews? And they're like, stop, go away,
you stupid Nazi, we know that you're not really here to have a civil conversation. You're just
trying to troll us and degrade the community and all that. And the Nazis like, no, no, really,
I just, you know, I'm all for states rights. I don't have anything against black people. And
they're like, get lost. We've had this conversation before we know where it's going. And so, you know,
in one sense, some people are correct when accusing people of bad faith for those questions,
because there are a lot of people who do that in bad faith. But more often than not, I've seen the
term a sea lining in practice, use just to not ever have to make any sort of defense of your
assertions. Like, if someone asks, why do you think that Scott Alexander's a Nazi? And they're
like, Oh, what, you guys see lining me now? Everyone knows Scott Alexander's a Nazi, just
read his blog. Just read my collection of out of context quotes. Yeah, his blog.
This was right around when I left Facebook forever, somebody was, they brought me in because I met
them at a party. And they were in an argument with somebody that they knew who was like a master's
biology student or something. And she had the person that was posting was like, Oh, Richard
Dawkins is this terrible misogynist pig or whatever racist or something. I forget what it was. And
my friend chimes in and she's like, Hey, can you like, like help back me up here? And I come in
and I'm asking like, So where does he say this? And she's like, Oh, you know, it's complicated.
You need, you know, I'm a master's in biology, you would need a maybe a doctorate or you need,
you need a professional understanding. I'm like, I need a professional understanding to
follow a link to a post or to a page source. Like, what the hell are you talking about? And it was
just, I guess I'm not sure which one's in that situation is the sea lion, I guess me because
I'm asking for sources. But I was doing it in a good natured way. Like, I mean, I was, I was
shutting down who I thought was an idiot, but I was doing, I wasn't doing it rashly. I'm starting
to see why you hate the word sea lining. Yeah. Well, that's, that's when I read this post, I
immediately thought of sea lining because what's called Alexander is saying in his post is that,
you know, asking questions is a good thing. It helps people get to the truth and you shouldn't
slap down people who are trying to get the truth, especially if they're students in the classroom.
But in general, if someone's like trying to explore a subject, that's a good thing. Don't,
don't try to stop that. And sea lining is literally the or accusations of sea lining is
literally the exact opposite of that. It's, if someone comes in asking questions,
it means they're trying to destroy your community and disrupt things. And you should immediately
shame them and or kick them out of the group, instead of engaging them, because there is no
good faith to be had here at all. And it's like the stark contrast between the two, like jump to
my mind immediately as I was reading it. And is again, why I love Scott Alexander and dislike
people who bring up sea lining as a defense for their stupid shit. So I can kind of steelman
sea lining. I have been in conversations where like say that you're in a forum talking about
some specific programming language, and somebody comes in there and is is clearly like asking
questions in bad faith. This is, I feel like it needs to be a more like charged thing. Like say
that you're in a geology forum and you're a geologist and some like flat earth here comes in.
And just incessantly, like every single thread of the forum is now like full of this person.
And they've got their armed with their many questions that like they pulled from a bunch
of websites for Oh, yeah, well, what about dating works? Yeah. So, and I've even seen on feminist
blogs, you'll get some guy that's just there to fight. And they'll be like, well, did you know that
I don't know like stuff about the thing is, like I see that too. And I think the best way to
to combat people who are arguing in bad faith is just to say, hey, you're not engaging anything
directly. I think you're arguing in bad faith. And I'm not going to continue doing this. It's not
this whole ha ha, you're a sea lion ignore the troll thing because that's yeah, that's what I was
going to say. The, the example that I kind of steelman is really more of a description of a
description of a troll, though. Maybe there's like some slight differences there. So I could
see why you'd want a different word for it. But like, I'm looking at the comic now. And
I remember the main thing that like pissed me off about this comic when I first saw it is
it starts out with, it's actually got this like steampunk aesthetic, which is kind of funny,
but like, there's a man and a woman in some kind of like steam powered cart.
And the sea lion pops up next to them. And then it's like, following them down the street,
and then it's in front of their house, then it's in the kitchen, then it's in her bedroom,
and then it's the next morning. But this is stuff that happens on the internet.
Yeah, you can't, I guess people can think of their forum as their house. But the thing is,
a forum is a public space, unless, I don't know. A lot of people, yeah, I feel like a lot of people
don't treat their online places that way. They're like, get off my blog. And it's like, you could
just ban me. Or, I don't know, like if they post on Facebook, something that people then are like,
well, hold on, I don't know if I'd necessarily agree with that. And they're like, leave me alone.
I wouldn't post this to be engaged on it. It's like, you posted it on Facebook.
It's like a platform meant for social engagement. Yeah, like, they're not in your house,
they're not following you around. If you're continuing to engage in the conversation and
they're continuing to engage back, that means you're having a conversation. You could tell them,
like, honestly, I am really exhausted and kind of depressed today. And I just don't have
the spins to have this conversation with you right now. But here's some helpful links
or something like that. Or you can do what I do and just ignore them. Because you don't have to
literally in your house. Yeah. Or you can block them. I mean, like, yeah. So like that,
there's like this weird kind of, like, somebody trying to play victim, when I don't think they
have a case for that. I've literally been on a panel with someone at a writer's con. And someone,
I don't, I forget exactly what the topic was. It was some sort of cultural warfare topic.
But someone on the panel, like, got all indignant was like, you come into my house and you tell me
XX to my face. And I'm like, okay, I am also indignant with you because you are in the right
on this topic. But this public gathering is not your house. No one came into your house and said
anything to your face. We are at a panel in a hotel where people have been invited to come. Like,
no one came to your house, bitch. I know. Yeah, I guess to bring it back though.
So I forget if I actually said that the rationalist you got kicked out of that group was a later
accused of sea lioning. I mean, I knew it was going there. It became pretty obvious. Yeah. But
so looking at that conversation, though, it really seems to me to be a failure of,
well, first of all, kind of the thing we were talking about before, of understanding where
both people are coming from. This is why I think people should do double crux. Double crux is,
or there's like, Gottman, Gottman Rappaport. All right. Unpause. So it's kind of like the
Gottman Rappaport intervention, which is actually like a couples therapy technique that I think
I have mentioned before. I'll put a link to it though. Both of these conversation styles are
based on one person talks while the other person is silent and listens and maybe takes notes.
When the first person is done, the second person has to
reiterate what they said in their own words. So my understanding of how you're feeling is
like, these things, you think that this is true and you're worried that this is going to happen.
Is that right? And then you say, yes or no. And if it's no, then they have to
keep explaining it to you in different ways and you keep rephrasing it until you feel like you
both understand the person's position. And then you switch speaker and listener. And this kind of,
that this really should be normed for conflicts because like most of the time, or at least
in a lot of conflicts that I've witnessed lately, it tends to be about people arguing about
different things or misunderstanding each other's positions, not even about the subject at hand.
And it's so frustrating watching that happen. And that was very much what happened in this case.
There was a culture clash. There's the social justice people and there's
the Socratic Girling people. So the social justice people care about
not having people's feelings hurt, not making people uncomfortable and protecting people they
perceive to be disadvantaged minorities from people of a different group. And yeah,
the other rationalist that was posting the article was a cis white guy. So points against.
How dare he be cis and white? Oh, racism is tight.
Yeah. So the other thing that made it awkward is that the rationalist is autistic. A bunch of
people in this group are also autistic. So like it's weird because it's like people have empathy
for other people until they think that they're on the enemy's side and then suddenly like the
empathy turns off. And they're like, where before they're like, oh, this person just
sometimes freezes things strangely because they struggle with understanding
like the way people, I don't know, express their feelings.
But when they're in the conflict, that's just like, oh, you're just willfully
misunderstanding me. And it's like, no, I literally want to know like, what does that mean?
Yeah. The rationalist cares about having correct models. And so
like that I was I was reading, yeah, the conversation and I know where did I see anywhere
where the rationalist seemed to get mad to say like anything that just was meant as a retaliation.
They just kept asking, like, I don't look, I don't know where you got this from. Like,
can you please explain why this is why your models are like this and like, and yeah,
it's all perfectly hilarious from no, yeah, it's all perfectly hilarious from inside our own
little sanity bubble. But like, it's just exasperating when, you know, you're either thinking of
times this has happened in your life or you've seen it happen. And it's just I just don't have
any patience for it. That's why I'm just a big fan of I never have any trouble. Again, maybe
I haven't been on Facebook since like 2016. I have an account to coordinate social events.
And I updated my status when I got married. But like, I don't think I posted anything in
three or four or five years. And it's like, I think I remember I was running some arguments
at some point, I know I was, you know, in the early 2000s. But like, I have no trouble now just
like leaving conversation, like if they're left hanging, like, cool, fuck them. Like, and it's
not always a bad faith argument either. It's like sometimes I just don't have the time or patience
for it, even if it's a, you know, conversation that might be worth having, I just I'm not the
one to have it with. And I guess that's one of the main perks of discord is that other people
can kind of pick things up, where if it's like, if it's a direct message, then like, okay, well,
I have to reply to this, which I like getting direct messages on discord, all those are great.
And if I got one, I hate it, I'd ignore it. There's, yeah, there could be situations where
like, if someone is finding the time to just find you directly and bug you with stuff, then it's
like, all right, cool. Well, I can reply or I can not. But I'm over the point now. And I guess I
don't know quite what it's like to say now I have to reply to this. And it's like, no, you really,
really don't. You can, you can go, you can just go about your day and just let this person be wrong.
Someone's wrong on the internet.
I know if there's relevant xkcd and it came to mind immediately after I said it. But
yes, somehow that is annoying. But maybe it's just a general level of apathy that I have where I'm
just okay saying, yeah, fuck it. I think but I think that might be actionable advice. That's
why that's the reason I'm going on about it. Yeah, now it's a reasonable response. I mean,
you're just going to end up making yourself and other people upset and not really advancing either
of your goals. I try to do a like tip for two tats strategy, kind of where I default to assuming
good faith. I'll try to let steel man someone's position and then like talk to them about it.
If they just keep not engaging in the conversation in a way that feels productive.
Then I walk away after a few iterations of that, like, I've sometimes been able to have really
great conversations with people where they do actually come away at least like a little bit
more humble about their idea. Most often, that's not the case. Okay, so we real quick,
don't shame and slap down people for asking questions to try to get out of the truth.
That's terrible and really hurts everything about society. Okay, onto listener feedback, Steven.
No, that's good. I think that's the ultimate takeaway. Yeah, I guess there's a quick one
here from supreme switch on one of our Reddit threads from one of our episodes. And I just
thought I'd give a quick, my own quick answer on it. And oh, yeah, this is my way. Yeah, so I
wanted to grab it because I felt like it was a quick one. We don't have a lot of time for a large
section here. But basically, they had said, I have to pause the episode a bit where you realize
the intuition pump of how much debt would I be willing to take on to be in universe where I
have left where I have the thing I want. And so the thing I want is to work a job with to work
a non labor job. So what in your opinions, what trades slash field, you know, get a degree,
there's sorry, slashes, what trade fields that go in slash get a degree, if I'm willing to take
out a student loan. And I my own quick answer for that is like, I'm for for non labor jobs,
it depends on what you like, I didn't know I'd like programming, I enjoyed it, I recommend
automate the boring stuff to anybody who wants to give it a shot. You can Google Google that it's
a free book for Python introduction. There's w three schools that just shows basically a good
crash course for several programming languages and tools. If you like that sort of thing, and you
find fun with it, it's the kind of thing you can get a job in in six months if you go to boot camp
and get hired. Not non programming jobs, I mean, or excuse me, yeah, non programming, non labor
jobs. I mean, there's there's the zillion, right? There's there's anything business related, if you
want to be a manager of literally anything. I guess I don't have very specific advice outside of
programming other than it's easy to get into. But it's not for everybody, I totally acknowledge
that. Yeah, a lot of people when that came up, I think a lot of people did mention programming
boot camps. It depends. First of all, I'm assuming by non labor, he means, or they mean non physical
labor. Because, you know, pretty much everything is labor if you're working for someone else.
But like, I don't know what working at a Starbucks campus physical labor probably because
they're standing and manipulating objects. I'm assuming this is like, you know, sitting at a
desk type job. And how much debt you have to get into to get into one of those really depends on
how much you want to make. Because you can get into a lot of entry level jobs with no degree at all.
Like, I know this is what almost 20 years ago that this happened to me, but I dropped out of
college and then became basically an office assistant. And it paid shit like 950 an hour.
But it was sitting at a desk, sometimes like getting up to file things and run copies and
stuff. But it's not what one thinks of as a manual labor job. And from there, I worked my way up
into accounting, which actually plays pretty darn decently. But if you're willing to take
shit wages, there's a lot of things you can do being a receptionist, a receptionist at a front
desk, being an office assistant, doing data entry, a lot of things like that. Some low level
accounting work like accounts payable stuff generally doesn't require schooling. So the
amount of debt you have to take on could be very minimal to nothing. But yeah, the more debt you
take on, the more likely it is that you can jump right into something that pays better and is more
fulfilling. And it depends on your proclivities too. Like, I mean, I did a boot camp that cost
$16,000. You know, but if you like people and you think you'd hate working behind a computer by
yourself all day, you know, I mean, and you want to eventually make money, but you're patient,
that's another reason that I did a boot camp is that I have no fucking patience.
Like, you know, be a teller at a bank, work your way up to management, work your way up to branch
or to a regional management, then you can, you know, do whatever you want. But I think it's,
I guess the question might be too big, but yeah, Supreme Switch, feel free to hit,
you can hit me up on Reddit if you want, or, you know, join the discord and tag me there.
Career advice is not something I have a lot of comfort giving just in broad strokes, just because
I don't know you or your situation, but, you know, like, if you're, if you're patient and you like
working with people, there's a zillion options. And if you're impatient and don't like working
with people, there are still lots of options. I have a lot of comfort with giving people career
advice and have had many jobs and changed careers a lot. And actually, I really wanted to do an
episode of career hacking at some point. As far as what job you should have,
well, it really depends on your definition of labor. I wasn't sure if you just mean like,
you don't want to work at FedEx, stacking boxes, or at Amazon. But what about working for
DoorDash or UberEats? Does that count as labor? There's all kinds of side gigs that you could
grab in the meantime, or even like build into a career. Stuff you could do from home, like a
transcription, you need like a little bit of startup equipment for that, like a foot pedal,
to start and stop audio, so you can type maximally fast. If you can learn something like
medical transcription or legal transcription, then you can make more money. There's Amazon
Mechanical Turk also has like little mini, they call them hits, it's like a human something task.
Things that still require humans that aren't fully automated yet, but they only take
a few minutes. And you make like a few cents per, but you can just keep doing that.
You could, you know, go on Fiverr and do like, I don't know, whatever skill you might have,
like say, you can do graphics design, even if you can only do one specific thing.
I was trying to do it silently, but I realized I should have just said something.
That pen clicking is insanely loud. It's way louder than your voice.
Are you clicking a pen like this next to the microphone?
I'm clicking a pen, it's not near the microphone, but I guess the microphone loves that sound.
I'm gonna just put the pen down, so I don't just do that by impulse. Should I just repeat the
things I said? I think it is totally audible. I just figured that going forward it would have,
I was trying, I don't know what I was thinking with waving my hand, like that would be distracting.
Sorry, now you're gonna have to cut this out. No, it's okay. It's totally, I wouldn't encourage
anybody to pause at any point and like gather their thoughts or look something up or whatever.
We have a better podcast that way once it's edited. Right on. There's, the website 80,000 hours is
effective altruist specific, but they have a lot of career advice. There's people that'll coach you.
There's also the less wrong article, which I believe is called Optimal Income. It's old now.
It still works. It's about, if you're under 30, you can get a working visa to Australia.
You can get a lot of basic jobs that pay quite well.
I think the one that they like recommended in particular was working at a hotel,
where I imagine you could probably work at a hotel and just be the person at the front desk.
It's not labor, but they give you, I think about 30, 40k annual income, and they also give you
food and a place to live because you could just stay in a hotel room and like that they actually
have these packages for their employees. And then it's not taxable. So you can send all of your money
back to the US. So it's a way that you could just like, you know, if you want to fuck off for a year
and go bartend in Australia. Phoenix's brother did that.
Teaching languages in other countries is another option too.
Yeah, that's a good one. There's also boot camps. So if you're just concerned about,
if you're concerned about the money of going back and how much it would cost to go back and get
another degree, first of all, I'd say if you have your heart set on something, if I can do it,
we can get scholarships, there's grants out there. Even if you do end up going into debt,
if you end up in a career that you love, you can pay it off, especially if you're smart.
I went to a boot camp that was quite inexpensive. I managed to get a scholarship by just writing
an essay about why I thought I would be good at the job. Luckily, my house had recently burned
down and was struck by lightning. So I got noticed by the scholarship people. But yeah, that's
how I got into doing cancer research and I didn't have to go to med school.
Yeah, I want to do a whole episode on how you can do that. I have a lot of things to say about it
and this is going on for a bit. No, that's great. There's a lot of training to cover there. I think
that that's a good jumping off point for when we get around to an episode like that. Yeah.
This isn't quite specific, but I had to just throw out there that Rudy Hoffman emailed me after
our last episode aired like a week later and he said that he had had a handful of inquiries to
get started with chronic paperwork and somebody emailed us at the Bayesian Conspiracy and said
that they had at least submitted the inquiry for it. That made my day. I hope none of us have to
get frozen, but if we do, there's a non-zero chance that we'll get to reunite in the future and I
think that's just amazing. I don't know, even saying it puts a smile on my face. I don't do
a lot of stuff with positive externalities, so that made my day, so I had to share that right
moment. Yeah, that's awesome. Yeah. There was this. No, go ahead. I was going to go on to the next
feedback, but did you want to say another thing about that one? No, I'm good. Should I read this
one from The Great Nick? Yeah, did we want to cover that one? Yeah, if we can do so in somewhat
shorter time. Yeah, I think I can cover this quickly because it was just some advice. The Great
Nick was just writing to say that they heard the brief discussion at the end of our podcast about
how rationality is too white. Slate Star Codex, of course, has a great discussion of this and
there's a link to Black People Are Less Likely, which I'll stick in our notes as well. That sounds
like a truncated title, but it's not, which is kind of funny. Yeah, I mean, that's kind of the
point, though, because it could be the title of many articles. They pulled out the most relevant
paragraph. For the record, here's a small sample of other communities where Black people are strongly
underrepresented runners. Oh, and before you start, I looked it up just before we started this,
Black people are either 12% of the US population or 14%, depending on if you count mixed racial or
not. Runners, 3%. Bikers, 6%. Furries, 2%. Wall Street senior management, 2%. Occupy Wall Street
protesters, unknown but low. One source says 1.6%, but likely an underestimate. BDSM,
unknown but low. Tea party members, 1%. Tea party. American Buddhist, about 2%. Birdwatchers,
4%. Environmentalists, Wikipedia contributors, atheists, vegetarian activists,
yoga enthusiasts, college baseball players, swimmers, fan fiction readers, unitarian,
universalists. They're all in the low single digit percentages. And then they finished it by
saying you're probably aware of it, but it's something I also quote from when people complain
about how white something is, which I was aware of it and I guess... I thought of it explicitly.
This is not an answer to the problem of why Black people are underrepresented,
it just shows that they tend to be universally underrepresented.
Go ahead, Anish. Oh, no, go ahead. You go. Sorry. Okay. I pretty much finished my thought. Just...
Oh, okay. Yeah, I also thought of this when we mentioned that. I didn't say anything because
we had covered this before, I believe, and there just isn't too much for me to add. Yes,
Black people are less likely to get involved in just about every sort of special interest thing
that there is in the US, and that's just a thing, and I'm not going to blame Black people for that,
nor am I going to blame white people for it. And if people bring up, well, your group is, you know,
far more white than the US average, I'm like, okay, I'm sorry for being born white. I wish
I could help that, but I'm not going to go through all the effort that it takes to be transracial
just to please you, you know? I don't think that's what they're suggesting, but that's fine.
Okay. I wonder, like, so the second highest, the highest one on here is 6% bikers,
which we'd expect 14%, 13%-ish, if it's going to be evenly distributed. The second highest is
birdwatchers, which I wonder if it's overrepresented because, like, I wonder if that,
like, does that mean that... I wonder what percentage of birdwatchers are any given group,
but I think that 4%, I don't know, anyone who watches birds. I mean, I watch birds at the window,
but you know what I mean. But just, like, not professionally. Just casually.
Yeah, I'm a casual birdwatcher. I look at a bird occasionally.
I can recognize a Robin in a, what's the one, the national bird called Eagle.
So by bird, we mean the 60s English slang for chick, right?
Was it the 60s? I just remember Austin Powers says it,
and he was from the 60s in that movie, right? Oh, yeah, that was in the UK, maybe the...
Anyway, this is a digression. No, but the point stands, and I think that makes a good point. So,
like, certainly, it sounds like I don't have to take the criticism, well, rationality is disproportionately
black, and that's a problem with rationality, because it seems to be a problem, if it's a problem,
I mean, people can do whatever they want. But if there is something keeping people,
keeping black people from being involved in whatever community they want, it doesn't seem like it's
unique or even unusually prevalent in the rationalist community.
I think, yeah, a lot of activities, I don't even know, like, yeah, religions they have in here,
whatever, a lot of stuff does tend to be overwhelmingly white and male, and there's
probably a lot of really complicated factors that do have to do with having social privilege,
probably like being wealthier, having more free time to pursue these activities,
discrimination, whether intentional or kind of unintentional, keeping people out.
But that's a big problem to solve, and we had mentioned in the show, where we talked about
this, that you can kind of do outreach, but that's really what you can do. I mean, you
can't just go kidnap a bunch of racially diverse people off the street and force them to join your
cult. I guess you can, but you shouldn't, probably.
Some of that is probably the privilege or resources you're saying, but there is no cost
to getting into running, or fan fiction reading, or being a Unitarian Universalist.
The cost is time. I guess, I don't know.
I mean, if you're forward, you're working two jobs and raising kids,
you probably don't have time to pick up a new hobby, like bird watching,
or reading fan fiction. My general answer for this is that I think white people,
and maybe white males more than white females, I don't know, but white people in general are just
weird, and so they find all these weird esoteric things that are like, oh, that's super interesting.
I'm going to go do this thing for a next year or two, and I don't have a problem with that.
I think that's awesome, and I specifically have some weird things that I'm into,
but I don't think there's anything wrong with other people not being into that kind of thing.
I see organizations sometimes really going very far to try to get their racial or whatever
makeup closer to representing the average of a nation, and it seems to distort things a lot
more than they necessarily need to be distorted. Sometimes people just aren't interested in your
thing. Or they've never heard of it. I mean, bikers specifically. Bikers is the highest one on here,
and bikers is the most expensive one on here to do, well, except for Wall Street Senior Management,
Depends if they're talking about, I don't know if they mean bicycles or motorcycles.
I assume they mean like, you know, bikers like Harley's, Gaines, that kind of thing,
because no one says bikers for bicycles, they say cyclists.
Oh, yeah, I'm glad to clarify. I assume cycling, but yeah, that is called cycling.
They can both be expensive and time-consuming hobbies. Someone who currently has an electric bike,
fixed gear bike, and a motorcycle that I'm repairing.
Yeah. But bikers is the highest percentage on there, and bikers is also the one that's going
to cost you at minimum thousands of dollars to get into. Yeah. Unless you find a really cheap
motorcycle that your friends ex abandoned, and you know somebody who's really good at fixing
motorcycles for cheap, haha. But I have, yeah, no, I have, I have networks, though, like that, so
it's hard to, yeah. Nice. Speaking of time constraints. I kind of like talking about the
the dynamics of this, because it's interesting, but I think that, yeah, maybe we should wrap up.
That's what I was going to get at, is speaking of time-consuming, this has been going on for a
bit, and I've been at my desk for 12 hours and 30 minutes today, because I didn't really take a
lunch. So, um, no, I mean, it's, yeah, it's part of the deal, but that's all right. Well, you should
go stretch and eat some food. I'm gonna. I've been, I didn't mention this is pre-gaming, but
I was talking with Inesh. I've been doing yoga the last few days. It's tight. I know what you're
doing. Oh, yeah. So, everyone try yoga. You know, if it hurts, don't do it as hard, like all the
ones that bend over, grab your feet. I just lean over, but I keep my back straight and stuff. It's
great. Try yoga. Don't try yoga if you're a wide oppressor, though, because there's too many white
people in it already. Right. Yeah, this isn't talking to most of our listeners, probably.
I'm kidding. Everyone should do it. Who cares? I've been doing yoga, too.
Great. Yeah, we'll have to compare notes. I could recommend a really easy, like, relaxing one.
I'll put it in the show notes, so they'll send it to you. Awesome. Sounds good. And I, I think it's
been a while since I think to Patreon. I think it's probably been more than, we don't really keep
track, but I'm thinking this one. And I get, I decided before we recorded, I was going to rethink
them. And I saw the name and I'm stoked. I get to thank Sandcat, who's been a supporter for a long
time. And I see them on the Discord once in a while. And every interaction I've had with them is awesome.
So shout out to Sandcat. Thank you so much for your generous support of our podcast. And really,
I can, since I interact with this person indirectly via the internet, I can say you're awesome, too.
Yeah. Thank you, Sandcat. You help make this thing happen.
Yes. And, and Sandcat actually can make it happen in a more literal sense because
they're donating at the tier that says they can co-host. So Sandcat, if you want to co-host and,
you know, talk about something you want to talk about or tell us how we're wrong about things or
anything at all, like, you know, let us know because you have earned the privilege.
I reached out to them about that and they're busy, but I think it, yeah, this is a friendly
ping. Keep this on your back burner. You're, you're invited, so. Should we see-line them until they
get on the show? So I hear you can co-host. Why haven't you done that yet? Can you give me any
good reason why you haven't co-hosted yet? Good idea. Let's make it, let's make them hate us.
That's how we get more. That's what you get for donating to our Patreon.
All right. Well, on the note where I've clearly lost my mind and can no longer form articulate
sentences, I think we should cross it off here. So, um, I think with that, that's going to be our
episode. And, uh, did we ever not let them post for next episode? Yes, we mentioned them. Cool.
Do you want to mention them again? Yeah, sure. I can do that. Let me scroll back. The next ones
are Science as a Tire and Fake Causality. Too good ones. All right, people. Well, we'll see you
again in a couple of weeks and everyone have fun and stay safe out there all the time.
Stay healthy. Drink lots of water. Wash your hands. Yeah.
All right. Watch all the good TV. See ya. Bye.
