Alright, welcome back to the Evasion of Conspiracy. I am Steven Zuber, and we are minus one in
yesterday because of house renovations. So, with us today is, let's start with Jace, because
we're all remote and pointing is hard. Hi, I'm Jace Dickie, and we have with us also...
Hi, it's Wes Fenza. We did like dramatic hand gestures, but no one can see him.
Oh, the joys of remote recording. Imagine us doing hand gestures a lot.
Yes, just picture them in your mind. We have to do like an old-fashioned radio recording,
describing what people are doing. Steven, what are we talking about today?
Good question. So today, I think we're going to do a couple of things. I think that it would be...
We've definitely got the bandwidth to talk a bit about the protests and all of the
awesome and not-so-awesome stuff that hopefully will come out of this.
I wanted to do... Mainly, we wanted Wes on because, you know, A, you're fucking awesome, and B,
I think you had some valuable feedback for the last episode that we did. So,
I wanted to talk a bit about that and some of the work you did representing Camden
whenever we get a chance to shoehorn that in. So...
Yeah, I'm especially interested in hearing about that because I only heard about that second hand.
All right. Well, let's do it. Okay.
All right. Well, I guess I... Let's see how we want to get started here.
Do we want to just jump into... Let's start off easy, since I think we're all still kind of
waking up. Let's do... By easy, I guess we'll make you do the work. Since you're in the East
Time Zone, you woke up earlier. That's true. It's 12.30 here.
That's right. So, let's talk about the work you did representing Camden and what...
I mean, I guess bird's-eye view and then we'll deep dive with whatever we want to ask about.
Sure. So, I was employed by a law firm that was like overflow for the city of Camden. So,
they had their own... On payroll attorney and he had an office. But when they got extra work that
their office couldn't handle or something was going to trial and they didn't want to do it,
they would give the cases to our firm. So, I worked on a number of cases, including...
There were a couple police-excessive force ones. And one of the most interesting ones I worked on
was a... There's been a lot in the news recently about how Camden a few years ago disbanded its
police force and reconstituted it under the county instead of the city. And I did some work
making sure that didn't get overturned in the courts. There was a group of supposedly concerned
citizens and actuality police union stooges trying to put forth an initiative petition
to let the voters vote on whether to do this. And it was going to be a whole thing, but they managed
to... I mean, it's a lot of like kind of boring legal stuff, but essentially the case went to
the state supreme court and we got it, so they weren't allowed to place that on the ballot for
a lot of actually very good reasons. So, having the police under the representation of the county
other than the city, what impact would that really have? So, it's funny because I see all the press
around this and it's like, oh, Camden, you know, they can serve as a model for other jurisdictions
who want to improve their policing. And really, the point of it at the time that I was aware of,
and I wasn't involved in any of the political discussions or anything, but my impression
of this was it was basically just union busting. The police union in Camden had too much power
and there was no way to implement things like, you know, they wanted more officers. They wanted
to do something about police absenteeism. You know, at the time it was done, police,
about 25% of police were just absent from their jabs every day. But mostly it was about money. The
police, through their pay structure, especially their pensions, it was just costing the city so
much. And they were basically able to hire about twice as many officers after this for almost the
same amount of money. So, that's rather dramatic. I can't imagine that kind of turnaround or like
that turnaround in expenses being just overlooked as, I don't know, anything other than flagrant issues
of funds. Like, hey, look, we now have twice the officers for the same amount of money. I can't
imagine any other business where that wouldn't be looked upon and be like, what the fuck were we
doing before? Well, it wasn't, I wouldn't call it misuse of funds, but it was definitely police
union contracts that were just way too favorable to the officers. And so, like the part that jumped
out at me, absenteeism and police are salaried, right? Yes. Or no, it's it. Okay, yes. So,
they just they're just not up to work. Well, they get overtime. Yeah. That's true on any salary job
if you put if it's the right setup. But yeah, my salary job previously. Yeah, plenty of salary
jobs don't get overtime. But the police did. Yeah. And I guess when I say any, I mean that it can
happen in any other industry. It just often doesn't. Yeah. So that's wild. Yeah, I don't know. It's
almost the opposite problem of like a police being overly policy. They're just not showing up.
Yeah. Well, yeah. And it's it was the exact opposite of defunding the police
that people are talking about. Because instead what they did was they hired twice as many officers.
And so they really expanded the police force. And it just this was just a cost saving
way of doing that. Was there like an exciting incident that kicked this off?
No, I think I don't know what it was. It was never really made public. There was no big incident.
I think it was just police union negotiations with the city just were not going well. And they were
like, Well, then the if the police union won't agree, then we have to just get rid of the police
department. I mean, as an amateur and not lawyer, that makes sense to me. I want to keep asking a
couple more questions specifically related to this, but then I want to dive into that broader
subject a bit more. Like you said the people opposing the initiative aside from the police
were just kind of like Stooges. Yeah, not Stooges, but you know. No, I said Stooges. Oh, yeah.
Yeah, no, they were they were they were union affiliated people who were doing this because
the police union had asked them to almost certainly. And what what sort of what what kind of case did
they make? Like what was their what was their? What did they bring to the table in their favor?
Well, so Camden under the the laws of how it's incorporated has something called an initiative
petition, which allows citizens to place a question on the ballot. And you see this a lot
in California state politics, which is probably where you're familiar, most familiar with it.
There's a lot. There's always propositions over there. In every major election, there's usually
one that gets a lot of publicity. But basically, they wanted just to put this question on the ballot,
like should the city of Camden be allowed to disband their police department? And normally,
you can do that. But the way they worded it was so confusing and weird. And it was they always word
them like, I hate those profits. Yeah, I'm always like, yes or no, I don't know which answer is yes
or no. Yeah, and and they were it was really silly, because the way we won in the state Supreme Court
was by the time it got there, this had already happened. And the wording of their petition was
like, should this be allowed to happen? And I'm like, how are you gonna how are people gonna
understand what this is? If the thing that they're voting on already happened, you'd have to and they
could have just started over with a different position and said, okay, well, once that once it
happened, we're gonna we're gonna put a different petition, or for real this time, or do a or do
a referendum, which is where the city passes a law. And then they can basically recall that law.
They say the city passed this law, we don't like it, we're going to put on the next ballot to say
we're overturning that law and putting it back to where it was. And they could have done either of
those routes, but for some reason shows not to. And I guess for the deliberate obfuscation, I
in would have been 2018, I think, maybe maybe 2016 here, all the years have blended together.
There was a thing in Colorado where, hey, this, you know, it was like, hey, if if you're if the
value of your property goes down, you get to see the state and get that proper you get that get the
value of that property back. And I'm like, hey, that sounds great, I just bought a home, you know,
if they put a landfill next door, and my place gets less valuable, that sounds super awesome.
And only to come to learn after election day, or after voting day, whatever, that this was put
there by big oil, because there was also a fracking bill on the on the ballot saying it
have to be some hundreds of meters away from a populated area or something to frack. And what
they wanted was like, hey, if we lose the ability to frack in people's backyard to be able to sue
the state, and get the get the fracking money back, even without having to frack there. And
that seemed pretty fracking stupid to me, that I only discovered that after the fact. And
this other proposition put there is like, red herring or
I think it was theirs that if they couldn't frack in your backyard, they want to be able to sue the
state and get that money anyway. But it was put to the put the voters was put to the idiot voters
like me as, hey, if your property value goes down, not just, you know, the people who bought,
you know, lands to frack on, but if your value goes down, then you get the benefit of being able to
to sue them or rather to sue the state and get some of your property value back.
And so having just acquired my first property, I thought that sounded like it made sense.
And like I said, in the after aftermath, it came out that it was less to do with,
you know, of course, and it less to do with the average person than it did with the average,
or you know, with the giant corporation funding the bills. So
see, I was hoping that was going in a better way, where they wanted
everyone was no one was letting them frack in their backyard. So they wanted to pass a bill
where people who allowed that fracking would get paid for, you know, the value of their
their their property going down. That'd be nice. Yeah. I don't know that might have actually worked
out in that favor, as it was the ability to sue the state for loss of value to your property
due to a state decision to allow weird shit to happen, like putting a dump or a fracking site
in your yard. That didn't end up passing. But the one that said they can frack in your backyard
did pass. So, or rather, I think, I think of what it was, it wasn't say can they frack in your yard,
it was, is the distance going to be increased from, I think it like I said, it was a hundred
mandatory distance they have to keep. Yeah, I think it was like 100 meters to 250 meters or
something. All right, well, and it was hilarious because I was talking with people like family
members who are like, Oh, no, this, you know, everyone in my neighborhood, they have, you know,
jobs in that industry, and they need that to keep their, you know, to keep their places. And if they
all lose their houses, then my property value goes down anyway. And I'm like, that's the dumbest
thing I've ever heard just because there's a big field next to your daughter's will be
elementary school in a couple years. And you're going to really enjoy driving past 70 semi trucks
coming in and out of there every day, while you're dropping her off to and from school,
everything else aside, like it's going to be super annoying for you. But people I think are,
are weirdly short sighted. I'm also not very well informed on anything. So I sound like an
idiot on basically every subject when it comes to voting and, and policy. But let's see if I
know other stuff about the Camden business, I'm kind of working as a surrogate for Inyash, who is
busy working on his new house. So what were you gonna say, Jace? I was gonna actually ask Wes
real quick if you could kind of give us or give the listeners some background on Camden, New Jersey.
I have a certain perspective on Camden having been from originally the shore. I'm curious since I
think you forget if you were born in the area you're in now. I grew up about an hour and a
half away from here in southeastern Pennsylvania. Camden for a long time was the murder capital
of the United States. Consistently, you know. So we have about this impression of Camden.
Yeah, it was lots of murders. And I actually live right now about, you know, a mile from Camden.
And in, ever since they did this, the murder rates gone way down, the violent crime rates
gone way down. So it's just, you know, bad, not the absolute worst. I mean, it sounds better if you,
you know, if you're odds of getting killed in your way to work are lower, that sounds like a
big boon. But of course, that's, you know, since your odds of being killed in any case are probably
very small, even in the murder capital of the US, I imagine the other deficits probably weigh in
still. Yeah. And the way murders tend to happen is they're concentrated by neighborhood. So there's
just, you know, certain places you don't go to after dark. Right. Yeah. I like, there's also this
amazing aquarium, which is the main reason I've ever been to Camden. The Camden aquariums are very
nice. They're well, they're waterfront areas pretty nice. I remember going there with my grandmother.
A few years back when I was still living in New Jersey, and I was using, I don't know, I was
using a garden instead of my Google Maps, and it was taking me some back road and I was like, oh,
no. Oh, yeah. That's bad. You can, you can like feel it. There's just a different vibe when you've
gone off like the touristy. Yeah. Yeah, I once biked over the, the bridge to Philly that's in
there. And it had me bike through Camden. And it was, it was a little, it was a little scary.
Yeah. Although the impression I get is that it tends to be more like, I don't know if gang
violence is correct, but kind of just like interpersonal people killing people they know
generally. Yeah, I don't know. Not just randomly killing tourists, although
maybe, I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. But I mean, you know, people, I would, my guess is the,
the improvements in the violent crime rate and everything are because there's twice as many
cops now. I wonder also if maybe, you know, oh my God, Stephen's head just disappeared.
Whoops. Let's ignore that. Okay.
For context, we're on Skype and Skype has this feature where you can have like a
AR background inserted behind you. Stephen's doing it. It's been pretty good so far, but there was
this point early on in the podcast where I was just trying to keep a straight face,
but you apparently have a mug that says don't be a dick. Oh yeah. You like lifted it to drink it at
one point, but I just saw the words don't be a dick kind of appear from the clouds behind you.
Okay. Yep. All right. Well, we'll push past all the fun stuff that people can't see.
That mug will be relevant for our conversation later.
I got very distracted by your headlessness. Let me bring it back. I was trying to ask,
Wes, do you have any insight on whether the number of cops increasing had to do with
the drop in the crime rates or did the quality of the policing actually go up once they
disbanded the union? Like what was the hiring process like? I have very little insight into that.
My understanding is that both happened. Because when they made the new police
force, I believe it was the same chief of police, but everyone had to reapply for their jobs and
not everyone got them. Okay. Good. And that was the whole process. The Camden County Metro police,
which is the new police force, apparently also has one of the best use of force policies in
the country. They worked with the New Jersey ACLU to put it together. Yeah. And that actually can be
a model for other police departments. And I've been looking into, I actually just got a hold
of the use of force policy for my town's local police. Because I know some local activists
here and we're going to look and see if there's improvements to be made. It's actually quite
good. I think it has almost everything on the eight can't wait campaigns demands already.
Except for the one about not far, except for the one about firing warning shots. But I actually
hear that that's not a very good idea. I mean, I warning shots of actual bullets or those pepper
spray ones from what I could tell they're saying before you shoot someone with a gun, you'd fire
a warning shot. And I mean, in principle, that sounds great. If you're shooting if they're standing
nicely in an empty field. I, you know, I think that the this gets us closer to the, you know,
nationwide police stuff. But like there's nowhere to safely shoot a warning shot anymore. Even if
you shoot directly overhead, you're going to hit like an airplane. I mean, or bullets going to
fall down somewhere. Yeah, I think, you know, an arcing bullet can hit can land pretty hard. I
think straight up they tend to fall out about, you know, their terminal velocity, which isn't
really hard enough to hurt people. But like, you know, if someone was causing shit in my town
home community or something, and they fired a warning shot over the person's head, they would
just hit another person's window. And so if they, in the rare, rare circumstance where someone had
to be put down by the police in my parking lot, I'd rather them fire every bullet into the crazy
person that is barely to go up and at them or something. Again, there isn't the number of
people I think that are actually shot don't. I mean, this is so trivial, it's not be worth
saying, but the number of people who are who like, yes, I agree with that use of force,
the number of people who fall in that category are so small that I think the the odds of that
ever happening near me are vanishingly small. But the the idea of like, oh no, we got a fire
warning shot over their head or something. That would just that would hit somebody else's house.
Yeah, and our our policy actually specifically forbids warning shots.
Probably for good reason. Yeah. I mean, another thing about
New Jersey in general, maybe candid specifically is the population density is just
ridiculous. Yeah. I forget what the numbers are, but it's very dense out here.
It's very dense. Let's see if so, you know, when I hear, oh yeah, we double the size of our police
force that sounds like almost a bad thing, especially given today's climate, but it sounds
like it's actually worked out really well. Yeah. So like the problem isn't the number of police,
it's the but the funding sounds like and the unchecked for the unchecked everything, you know,
if I mean, imagine any other line of work where you fuck up, and you get to do a self
investigation into whether or not you fucked up, and no one else gets to look at your internal
investigation. Of course, if especially if you're tight with all your with all your co workers,
you're always going to turn out to a not fucked up. Yeah, right. I think that's the other big
weakness that comes out of having these really tight unions. Yeah, we talked about this on the
mind killer. But the main problem is qualified immunity is police. It's really hard to hold
them accountable, both because of their union contracts often include a lot of protections
that normal suspects don't get. And also the courts will give them what's called qualified immunity,
which means that for them to be held accountable for violating someone's civil rights,
there has to be generally some court case on point about that specific thing that they did.
So they know that it was actually a violation of your rights. And when they say specific,
they mean damage specific. I forget if it was whatever late show either John Oliver or,
or Seth Meyers or one of those. But the example they use is like, Oh, yeah, being shot in a in a
low creek is different than being shot in like a riverbed in the woods or something, even though
they're both in the woods. And it's like, Oh, yeah, no, those weren't the exact same geological
surrounding features. So they're different enough you have qualified immunity because the situation
has never happened. Yeah, I don't think it's not quite as extreme as people make it out to be.
But it's, it's hard to convict an officer. And I think that sounds like it's probably part of
the problem. And I'm not sure if this is a question that any of us are quick to solve or to answer.
But I, you know, like, I, one solution I heard that I liked would be, again, at face value without
understanding everything involved was, all right, well, let's, let's make every, whether it be
precinct or, or individual union or whatever it is, if you're going to stick around, or maybe every
city's police force, all carry like a packet of insurance for the officers. So that when you,
when you sue an off, when you sue for wrongful, whatever, you're suing that officer, you're not
suing the city. And then it comes out of their insurance premiums, just like it comes out of
doctor's malpractice. But the difference of making it a group policy rather than individual policy
is that then they would then other officers would be incentivized to kick bad officers out,
rather than protect them and shelter them like, you know, moving a diddling priest from one church
to the next. They would be like, no, no, you keep hitting people. And it's causing costing me more
money. And if it costs someone, you know, to put it cynically, like Professor Quirrell, it, you know,
I'm not so much annoyed that you keep pulling people out of their cars and hitting them. I'm
more annoyed that it's costing me 50 bucks a month that you keep doing that. So that, that sort of
motivation might actually get people to act. Yeah, it would be, I think it would probably be
helpful to require officers individually to carry their own insurance. You know, the way plumbers
do the way other trades people do. Yeah, I think that probably be a good idea. If a little politically
infeasible. Yeah, I mean, that's the thing is a lot of these are politically infeasible. This one
was different than just individual insurance. And it was a group policy. And so then that way,
like, if, you know, the three of us had insurance for us, you know, for our, for our little trio,
and we were out doing whatever. And, you know, I kept going out and hitting people, your guys's
premiums would go up too. And then that way you'd be really inclined to say, let's get Stephen the
fuck out of here, which at least, you know, so for whatever reason, some officer was totally fine
paying higher premiums because he liked hitting people enough to do it. Then that wouldn't solve
the problem for him, but it would solve the problem for a lot of other people. You know,
most people don't want to spend increased amounts on their premiums. I'm not sure how much it would
go up after a successful lawsuit, but probably some. And I think the thing that probably would
make that feasible is how heavily unionized the police departments are. Because normally, you
can't tell someone, you know, to work here, you have to have insurance. Although, like, like,
I'm a lawyer. When I worked for a law firm, I didn't have my own malpractice insurance. The law firm
had malpractice insurance that that I was covered under. Now that I'm solo, I have my own. I think
doctors, though, do tend to have their own malpractice insurance. Yeah, I was going to ask
about you mentioned tradespeople like plumbers. Like, I know that there's they do have like plumbers.
Yeah, well, tradespeople generally generally are not employees of anyone. So they have to
ensure themselves and usually do it through their unions. And the police could do something similar.
That would be an interesting experiment. I actually wonder if anywhere currently uses that model.
Because then you get and that would have the added incentive of getting the union incentivized to
reduce excessive force complaints. That's always my thing is that like, it, it'd be one thing,
I forget where I saw this analogy, but I just loved it, you know, it's the difference in
behavior you seen, or you see between like your average school district, a public school district
that discovers, you know, a pedophile assaulting children. And then, you know, the character,
the caricature of a parish that finds one of its priests assaulting children. And the, you know,
and not in every case, obviously, but in enough to hit the news every year, you know, the parish will
just move the the offending priests to a different location. And they get to keep their job, they
get to keep doing the thing and they get to keep assaulting kids. Whereas like in public school,
they keep their reputation as well. Like, right. They are incentivized to also hush it up.
Well, but the thing is, like, if a school discovers it, they say, Holy shit,
we can't believe this was happening. This guy, he's getting the fuck out of here. And they're in
there. And it's, you know, more of a public thing. And it's handled because they, there's less of a,
like, I don't know, us of them mentality, maybe, like, they also just don't want that shit in their
house. So they get these people out. And that, like, the use of force and the abuse of force in
cases of police violence seem to fall closer to like the church model than to the school model,
where, you know, somebody is doing some egregious shit. And, you know, like,
oh, geez, I'm blinking on your last name, Brianna Johnson, Brianna Taylor.
Brianna Taylor.
Thank you. I don't know why I was thanking Johnson. Her police report just came out
earlier this week. And it's like blank. She apparently had no injuries. There was no forced entry,
according to the official sheet, but according to the reports of like what we did when we got there.
And of course, the surviving victims report, none of it's true. And so, like, the just the
bullshit kind of involvement of like, oh, yeah, let's just hush this and try and, you know, again,
if this is our own internal investigation, all it takes is me to push this up to my senior officer
and be like, this look good. And they say that looks good. Cool. Investigation complete. But
because this case has a spotlight on it, that's not going to fly. Although, of course, I think her
murderers are still employed. So that's rather discouraging. Yeah, moving internal affairs
out of the police department would almost certainly be a good idea. It should be
a completely civilian thing. And I don't know how they've gotten away with having that as part of
the police department for this long. Yeah, it seems like fucking madness. I kind of want to
go back and highlight something Stephen was talking about, where you were saying like,
you don't understand why there's different procedures with churches and pedophilia versus
schools. And I was kind of, I think it has to do with authority. And possibly that's what's
going on with the police too. There's like just a weird kind of social interactions people have
with authority figures and what things are, what institutions are considered to be authority
figures versus not like a school can be folded around by the parents of children. Whereas like
churches, depending on the church, but like, they are pretty powerful.
Yeah, that's definitely not run by. There's not a church board, like there's a school board.
Yeah, that's a good point. They're tax exempt, like they're not, you know,
funded the same way public schools are, they're not held accountable that way.
So there's not as many parallels with police, but I don't know, I'm just kind of spitballing an idea here.
I think that, I mean, that definitely sounds like a part of it. I think it's just also the
internal attitude of like, we're going to protect our own no matter what, I just don't think that
exists among teachers. Like it, you know, I wouldn't want to work down the hall.
I can easily imagine it though. Like it seems like the kind of institution where that, like
there is like things like tenure and there's, there gets to be weirdness around
nepotism or there's a word for nepotism that blanking on, but like maybe it is just nepotism,
I don't know, where you promote or protect friends, family members, etc.
Chronism, yeah, I think that's a better word. Definitely that happens more so at colleges though.
Yeah, but I think there is a huge difference between just the culture of teachers and the
culture of police. Like my mom was a teacher and if she knew of another teacher that was
endangering their students, she definitely would have said something. There's no question.
Which is weird because you think cops would also have that kind of honor and duty and whatever
they, well they don't. Yeah, it just, it just turns out that they don't. That's, that's,
that's the disappointing and interesting factor. Like there was a period of a few years when I
was a kid that I wanted to be a police officer because I grew up watching superhero shows and
that was the closest thing we had. It was like, oh my god, this is, this is the protector class
of the citizen. I think this sounds great. I went through like the youth police academy
and all the cops there I met seemed chill. It was. Was this in Denver? No, this is in Fort Collins.
Or Colorado. It was in Colorado, but it was, it was not a major city. It was a, I mean,
they have a university population hundred and twenty thousand, but not a population of a million.
Like seriously, I'm like shockingly demilitarized compared to my experiences with police on the
East Coast. Thank goodness for that. And also just like cool. Like I've spoken to police officers
and they were just like, hello citizen. I was just, but you're not trying to like intimidate me.
And I mean, that's, that's the thing that, you know, I think many people have had encounters
with the police that the cop was chill as fuck. And, you know, I think there's, there's different
kinds of cops. And that, and I, this is where I was on the fence for a couple of years about
like, you know, no, this is a problem with a few bad eggs. And the other, the opposition argument
being, no, no, this is a, this is a systemic problem with all of them. And I was finally
sold over to the systemic problem with the argument that, look, if this wasn't a systemic issue,
then the, the bad cops would be forced out by the good cops, but that's just never what happens.
As it is, you know, the good cops actually ended up getting fired or getting being forced
into apologies. There was that woman last week, a police officer that stops another officer
from a chokehold and she got fired. The couple of officers who were kneeling with protesters
had to issue public apologies for, for, for kneeling, not for anything that, you know,
the police force did that the people were protesting against the, you know, like there's,
there's handful of cops that are like, I think the mentality is like, well, it pays $10 more
than the post office and I get a gun. Like this is, you know, this is just a chill job and it
costs benefits. And I think that there's, there's certainly that kind of cop. And then of course,
at least as early back as like 2005, the FBI was issuing warnings that like, oh yeah,
this is a concerted effort among white nationalists and neo-nazis to infiltrate the police force
that apparently no one listened to. So like the way that I was trying to phrase it to a
skeptic about this issue was because they were, they are now where I was a few years ago of saying
it's just a few bad cops. And I'm like, well, I think that as a whole, there's a, to put it mildly,
a bullying problem within the police force. And that isn't a norm that the rest of the force
shits down or, you know, tries to shoot down. And that, that's the real problem.
Bullying seems really accurate, actually, because you can think of the social dynamics of bullies
in schools. And I almost feel like the kinds of like mitigation tactics that you can employ.
I don't know. I'm thinking about schools right now. I'm thinking about the bullshit,
like anti-bullying stuff that schools tried when I was a kid that was just completely like,
you know, having assemblies where like, they get the whole school together and they have some,
like Wes is laughing. You remember this, some public speaker talk about like, how bad bullying
is that like they had, um, performing arts students get like, do a skit about bullying. And it was
just, it like made you want to go. Like the same thing with like the dare to resist drugs and
violence. Like I swear to God, I like left those assemblies wanting to do. Yeah. Nothing, nothing
made me want to do things more than authority figures telling me not to. Yeah. Especially
than telling you in a way that just didn't sell it at all. Yeah. It's like a person in a dog
suit skateboarding in and being like, Hey kids, you know, going home early and doing your homework
is cool. Don't do drugs. There's a free ruler. Always do what adults tell you. Um, oh, I guess
it's related back to transparent. Yeah. Oh no, no, you're good. It is funny. And it's my main thing
with the school assembly thing was that like just the level of dishonesty, you know, if they,
they come out and they'll say things like, Oh yes, all drugs are the same and they all
are the worst. And here's, you know, your brain on pot and it looks like a fried egg or whatever.
And it's like, then somebody tries pot because it's super available. And they're like, Oh,
it wasn't really as bad as the authority figures told me to be. I bet that cocaine and heroin
aren't really as bad as they told me to, that it would be either because they all said it was the
same. Um, when in fact there, there is a difference between some of the more intense drugs and some
of the less intense drugs, but because they're all sold to you from your, you know, your dare
program as being the same level of bad, then the second you falsify that, that broad claim,
your skeptical of the rest of it. Um, I don't want to ask us, if you know what happened, you said
there were some problem police officers that kind of were involved with the, the Camden case. Do you
know if anything happened to them? You said some people like reapplied it and didn't get their job.
Yeah, I don't know any specifics. Um, I just know that like, not everyone who was a Camden
cop became a Camden County cop. Uh, and I think some of that was probably done intentionally
to get rid of some problem people, but that's just really just speculation. Do you know,
without, uh, unless you actually have numbers, but do you know of incidences of like police
brutality and overuse of force went down after the size of the police force doubled and the
union was disbanded? I believe so. Um, not from any insider information, but I think I read that
recently. That's pretty cool. I mean, do you have, uh, I mean, there's probably not much that any
individual one of us can do, but any, any way that this could be sort of generalized for any
other city or any other group that wants to try and get this sort of thing through, like
my recommendation is to look at the Camden police use of force policy and design a similar one.
It's very, it's very, um, de-escalation heavy. Well, that sounds, uh, I mean,
God, it sounds so mind-bendingly obvious that I'm putting a hand to my face.
Also, no warrior training. Do not allow cops to be trained by these assholes who tell them
that they're soldiers on a hostile battlefield. Right. You need to be prepared to take a life.
And this and that. It's like, I, yeah, if you train cops to de-escalate, they de-escalate. If you
train cops to shoot people, they'll shoot people. So who'd have thought the training actually matters
in rights? Yeah, well, even I was going to say also just like, uh, norms and they have kind of a
apprenticeship sort of system, right? Like it's not the way they pair cops up with partners or the
way that they kind of, uh, escalate the career path. I guess what I'm trying to say is that there's
like a role model cops who are the older, superior ones that you look up to, right? And if there's
this norm of we are like people that protect the peace and de-escalate fights and whatnot, then
newer younger people joining the police force kind of get on board with that.
I mean, I don't know how, how that works, but I'm, I'm certain that the new hires respond to the
existing culture. So if the existing culture is, you know, has this warrior mentality, then
they're going to adopt it. If it has a, um, you know, a less aggressive mentality, then they'll
adopt that too. Yeah. Yeah. Replacing all of the previous culture seems like a good way to
maybe remove bad norms and insert some better ones. Yeah. Well, you got, you have, I mean,
you have to start with the, the written policies. Um, if you're, that makes sense. Yeah. If your
written policy is like, if you feel threatened, shoot, then you can't, there's no way to change
the, the more subtle things. Do you have any more to like talk about your personal role in those
cases? Or I guess, are you able to talk? Um, well, so one of the things, yeah. So one of the things
that I think people don't realize, um, when it comes to police complaints of police brutality
is that, um, it's not just the cops who lie. Um, people are completely full of shit
all the time about complaints of police brutality. Um, and just from like the small
handful of cases I was involved in, there was so many obvious lies told. Um,
How much of your job is just that? Oh, not much. I really only had like a, uh,
well, I, a lot of it was for Kandyn, but a small amount was for police brutality complaints. I
think I only had two or three in your career as a lawyer. Oh, even how much of it is kind of just
everybody's lying right now and you're just sitting there kind of with your head in your hands. Like
well, so I do mostly family law now, which is less lying and more just everyone's sort of exaggerating
and, uh, focusing on their emotional pain over the actual facts of what happened.
Man, I don't know if I'd want to do police brutality cases or family law cases if I was a
lawyer, just because they both sound like they'd be equally shitty from different directions.
Well, family's way better. I remember reading, well, that's good. And I, I imagined that it,
I mean, I was being somewhat tongue in cheek, but I remember reading a case, uh, someone on Reddit
was like a family or a divorce attorney, which is different than family law, but it was adjacent.
Not different for family law. Oh, okay. Good. Um, I didn't know if family law was more broad or
something than just, but I mean, people divorce attorneys almost always do. Oh, you know, that's
sort of family law stuff, ancillary to divorce. Okay. Yeah. It was just like they were talking
about how they had this couple and they spent $16,000 in lawyer fees arguing about who gets
ownership of this turkey baster. And it's like, and both of the lawyers even offered to buy
their clients new turkey basters, you know, for $15 bucks or whatever this thing cost.
And they're like, no, I want this one. And like that, that's sort of the question is,
what were they doing with that turkey baster?
One can hope a basting turkeys, but one, one is now forced to think of all the alternative
uses of it. So thank you. I mean, if you were to pay $16,000 to have it, that's, uh,
feel like you're doing more than basting turkeys with it. It could be. Or you're just being crazy
petty. Um, you can buy sex toys for really nice ones or like a few hundred bucks. Just saying.
Did they make them like that? Oh, I don't know about turkey baster ones, but I'm just thinking of
like fun factory, like high quality German. Oh, sure. I'm sure there's a Tiffany brand
turkey baster out there that's sort of the diamonds and shit. So I want to look up. No,
do I want to look up German? I think I do. All right. More peculiarity.
We'll hold off and that can be our, our extracurricular stuff for the episode. I think that
we're getting tied in, uh, you know, this has been sort of a smaller case of the broader things
going on in the last couple of weeks in the U S, um, it kind of to, to paint the scene. I was,
I was telling a family member that we had a listener from my other podcast that we want more
one right in from Australia. And it opened with like this, this nice sentiment of like,
Hey, hope you guys are doing well. You know, uh, we're, uh, just saw that you guys passed Americans.
Are you okay? And it was, it was nicely put. It was just like, you know, I, I, I saw that you
guys just passed a hundred thousand deaths and from COVID. And now we're seeing all the stuff
in the news from all the police brutality. Uh, certainly hope you and Brian are staying safe.
And, um, luckily the solution to both of those is like, yeah, we both stay home all the time. But,
it was like the, the image from the outside is like, Oh yeah, shits, it's terrible here.
And it, and the image from the insiders that shits pretty terrible here. I've got a co-worker
who's going to a lot of protests in Detroit and, uh, getting, you know, pepper sprayed and getting
her ass whooped a couple of times a week, which I don't quite, uh, like, I don't know on the,
I don't know if I haven't said this on a podcast yet, but I've been thinking, I've had this in a
couple of private conversations. Like I'm not doing anything like actively in the protests,
even though I support them. And part of it is because like, I feel like if I, like one good
shoved at the ground would have me limping for two years and like, I don't want to, you know,
risk my physical safety, um, that could be interpreted as, as a, uh, Oh, well, Stephen
doesn't really care. That's why he's not acting on it. Um, and it's, it's not really that it's
just that I guess I am, uh, I don't think unreasonably selfishly putting my own safety
above, uh, you know, the, my, my solidarity with my fellow man and my fellow, my fellow human. And,
uh, yeah, there's many ways to support protests too. We're currently like on air, I guess.
Uh, and the kind of people that I don't know, I, uh, I also like really admire and like for a
while aspired to be the kind of person that would show up to a protest and willingly be
beat up or maced or thrown in jail to support a cause. And maybe I will do that someday,
but it's just like, you have to be a special kind of person to be able to do that shit. And like,
I feel like it's the same kind of person that would like throw themselves in front of a bus
to save a child or like, I don't even know. Like those people are awesome. And also they're like,
not the norm. And there's good reason for that because if everybody did those kinds of things,
people would just be dying left and right all the time. We have a self-protection and survival
instinct for a reason as a species. Uh, I don't know. I guess that gets into deeper questions
about ethics and morality that are beyond the scope of this podcast. Or are they? Well, they can be.
Or this episode of the podcast. That works. Yeah. I think my only other real thought on it was,
you know, because Wes is on, I have to think something somewhat mind-killery and my, uh,
my, my hot take, if you can call it that was, I, there's, there's a, at least a handful of people,
one I'm thinking of in particular, whom, you know, I hold in some esteem and respect and
they were talking about how, you know, as a white man, I could never understand what it's like to
be. And of course this part's true. I can never understand what it's like to be a black person,
you know, constantly on guard from the police. But they'd said something to the effect of like,
police brutality isn't a problem I face as a white guy. And I, my only hot take on that is like,
I think you're might be in for a rude awakening. Like, yes, the police brutality is disproportionately
targeted at black people, but it's not exclusively targeted towards black people. And if you think
that you're immune from being attacked by the police, uh, just because you're white, I think you,
you might be in for a terribly rude awakening. Um, it's this, this isn't just a problem that,
uh, only some, only the minority of people face. This is a problem that everybody faces.
And again, yes, it's targeted towards disproportionately towards minorities,
but it's, it's not like, I guess you're not safe just because you're white. And if, if so,
like if someone's saying, well, it's not my problem, well, it kind of is. And this person wasn't
saying it wasn't their problem. They, they had the solidarity attitude, which I agree with, which is
none of this is everyone's problem, but it's not one that I'm dealing with. And it's like, well,
you, I guess some, my hot take on a nutshell is like, this is sort of a problem that you could
deal with if you bumped into the wrong cop. Um, you know, what was it? Just a few couple of years,
I had all blends together and I forget the guy's name, but you know,
you just Google all the high profile people who got killed by the police in the last couple of
years. And there was that guy, um, oh no, I'm blanking on the details and thinking of another one.
Uh, anyway, there was, there was, there was one of those many black guys that got killed by cops.
Actually, no, that these are both white people can remember all of them. Okay. Yeah. So like,
but this guy had the name, had a name and it hit national news, but it wasn't as big of an incident.
And I'll see if I can dig up the name later, maybe, but another case I'm thinking of, and this
just is more about training. Um, it was somebody who like, it was, it was somebody with mental, uh,
like a developmental disorder and they went and saw, uh, shoot, it was one of those space
movies that came out like the last five years. Um, I forget what it was. Uh, anyway, so they,
they enjoyed the movie. They thought of the movie theater and they just stayed in their seat
because they wanted to watch it again. And, uh, three cops show up and they choked the kid out
and he dies in the movie theater. And his last words were like, mom, it hurts. And it's devastating.
And, uh, this was a, a white person with, with developmental disorder or developmental problems.
And so like, so yes, they, they also fit into a minority group where the police aren't able,
apparently to talk to somebody who can't, uh, perfectly reason back with them, but they also
can. Um, uh, you know, it, excuse me. No, they can try. No, no. Well, they can, I have a chip on
my shoulder about this because when I worked at the library in New Jersey, um, before I moved here,
libraries are one of the places that homeless people and people with developmental disabilities
and physical disabilities and elderly people with dementia. Like, uh, it's a place where you can go
for free that has bathrooms and wifi and air conditioning slash heating. You know,
we see this in Denver a lot too, where a lot of homeless people hang out by the library. Uh,
and I had so many incidences of people that I knew from the library and I was just like,
I don't know, fucking John, John, who comes into the library every day to like download anime and
just the sweetest person and just, I don't know, 30 something year old. I'm blending together a
few identities and changing names, but like, like maybe 30 something year old dude who just comes
into the library chats with people, watches anime and has autism and sometimes just like
has sensory processing things and freaks out. And by freaks out, I mean, like,
yells loudly, waves arms, does weird things. So like, run into John, for example, in like
shop right or whatever. And if people don't know John, then like immediately they'll call the cops
and they're like, Oh man, there's a, there's 30 something bit scary male in here waving their
arms around yelling and the cops will show up. They're like ready to go. And it's just like,
you have to like, I've actually confronted the cops and been like, no, I know this person,
this is John from the library. And he's just very upset because he touched ice. And if you talk to
him for two seconds, he will tell you, I don't like the ice, it feels bad. That's why I'm upset.
And then he'll like calm down once he feels understood and like safe. You know? Yeah. Sorry
that I'm kind of going on our rant about this. It's just like a issue.
No, no, no. I totally understand. And I think I misspoke when I said that they can talk, you
know, the people can reason back. I think I hadn't quite finished my thought on it was like
that even if they say, you know, the police are often, oh, no, you're good. I wasn't making my
point very succinctly that like, there's, there's too many cases where, and the person I'm thinking
of, it might jog someone's memory if they could remember the name. Like I seem to remember,
he was like on the ground with guns pointed at him from multiple officers as being
shouted in inconsistent commands, you know, get on your knees, put your hands behind your head or
something. And like you shot a twister commands. What was that? Like the instructions for the game
twister. Yeah, basically, except for trying to do two things that you physically can't do. So
it just went, you know, kind of back and forth on that. So I don't know. It's,
it's wild. And I can't find I was digging around a little bit for the source of the thing I was
thinking of, and it's not coming to mind. So anyway, I don't have much else to add other than
kind of raising the subject of what's currently going on in our
cultures, climate regarding that issue. I don't know, I guess to ping the Paul out to you guys,
there's nothing you wanted to talk about. But I figured we couldn't talk about an isolated
incident of like police stuff and not talk about the broader stuff. So
yeah, no, I'm good. My
as another plug, you know, listen to the mind killer, if you want to hear my full thoughts on
the the broader issue. Do you want to hear about that? Good, good culture war slash political slash
economics. Yeah, that sounds good to me. Alright, yeah, do check out the mind. I don't know if
anyone's unaware of the mind killer that they are, you guys shouldn't be and go check it out.
The first two episodes are on this feed. And the rest you can find by going to your favorite
podcast app and typing into mind killer. So let's see what else we want to talk about then guys.
I guess we were talking a bit about the different kind of ways to approach
community building and cultures are among communities that we've developed ourselves.
Yeah. So like, so yeah, the nice topic, you mean? Yeah, yeah, we're wrapped up with this one.
Let's let's all be nice to people all the time. Yeah, no, I had some some feedback from from the
last episode, which, you know, I saying saying everyone be nice is certainly a good starting
point. But I think it is not it is, I don't I don't like telling everyone to be nice,
because I don't think you can, if everyone's nice, I don't think it creates the kind of community
that I like. And I, I don't think it creates the kind of community that you guys want really.
I think if you, in order to have a community that's having vibrant discussions and
specific, especially having a community where people get called on their bullshit,
you can't you can't just have everyone be nice all the time. So I agree with you there. I think
we should we should get away with any ambiguity with the word nice. I mean, so like I we mentioned
before my mug of don't be a dick is what it says on it. So presumably, when you say not, you know,
not everyone be nice all the time, you don't mean everyone should be dicks all the time,
which is the other end of this. Everyone should not be doing away with the word.
Exactly. So I think doing away with the word nice. Like, yeah, let's let's try and try and
hash out what if any I suspect there's very little daylight between our actual positions here.
Because I think like, because any ash is not here. Well, I think even if even if he was,
I, I would be surprised if if he would push back too much on saying no, no, we should,
I guess. So when you say, when you hear, what was that? Sorry, I'm being a troll. I said he would
be too nice to do that. When you hear, we should all be nice all the time. What are you hearing
without using the word nice? So did you guys read the unit of caring back when she was posting
regularly on her tumblr? I know you know, should I have so I believe I was gonna say I've read
some of it. And I know that it was like any ashes favorite. Yeah, Kelsey Piper wrote a tumblr called
the unit of caring still does every once in a while. But when she used to post a big theme
of her tumblr was that when you have conflicts about social norms,
it's it's best to look at it in a competing needs framework, which is that like this,
different people have different needs from a social space. And that those needs are often
in tension with each other. And that's when you ask like, what should the social norms here be?
You should be asking yourself like, okay, who needs what here, and which norms serve those needs?
And which yeah, what norms serve what needs and okay, and like the sense of a small community
like ours having kind of the founder effects ability to create norms, as opposed to having them kind
of right, I guess, right? Well, I think, you know, you're talking about the discord server,
the norms there have evolved pretty naturally. And one of the things that made me nervous about
last episode was it sounded like there may be some effort to consciously change what the norms are.
I think we agreed not to do that, mostly because we didn't think that it was possible.
And I think also I was the one suggesting that and that again, I was mostly kind of just
throwing ideas out there for, I like to, I like to, I don't know, pick an extreme position,
see what how people respond to it, kind of, and then pull back from it until, uh,
Gotcha. Well, when I so when I hear people try angulate. So when I hear people talk about being
nice, what I'm picturing is being the perfect internet citizen. And the perfect internet
citizen is always civil, always polite, never takes anything personally, never insults anyone
else, and never says anything that another person would be offended by. So that's a lot of
questions. And that last one's sorry, Jason, what did you say? The talking about the,
is this a TV tropes thing? Or was this from the atheist movement? There was this
discussion about rationality being like, there's this caricature of a Spock figure,
who just is all logic. No, I'm not really talking about that. I'm talking more about
a very empathic person who is always like, when I say never says anything that some would offend
somebody else, I feel like the straw Vulcan says those kinds of things all the time.
With the perfect internet, the perfect internet citizen says is, you know,
always very polite and very warm and empathetic. And never, never angry, never upset,
gets emotional, you know, about injustice, but never about anything that someone said to them.
And so the perfect internet citizen, I think, is something we all, most of us, know how to do.
Like, we can play that role. And we sort of have to in most spaces online. There are, you know,
I'm a member of tons of Facebook groups, a number of other Discord servers, and just a whole bunch
of other places around the internet that I feel very strong pressure to be the perfect internet
citizen and never say anything too controversial, never take anything personally, never, never get,
you know, never fight with anybody, never react when I feel offended, that sort of thing. And one
of the things I like about the Bayesian conspiracy Discord is it's a place where I don't feel like
I have to do that. It's a place where I feel like I can be an actual person and express my,
my actual thoughts and my actual feelings without having to be constantly glancing over my shoulder
for the, you know, the internet police or what, what did Enish called them, the local scold
to come and be like, hey, you're not being nice enough. Like, and I think it's really hard to
talk about these things in the abstract. Because my, you know, so I'm, I'm autistic. So like,
a lot of how I interact with people is I have like the rules for like, this is how
social interaction goes best. And a lot of those do it on manual. Yeah. And a lot of those are
very fact specific. So like, but like the last fight I was in on the Discord was because someone
called me a liar. And I was offended. And I, I reacted angrily. And, you know, the perfect
internet citizen never would have done that the perfect internet citizen of them like, ah,
I understand what you are saying here. Let me calmly explain to you my thought process here.
And that would have certainly would have gone better. That's the thing about being the perfect
internet citizen. It's actually good to do. But it is also means you can't be a person and you
can't have emotions and you can't express those emotions. Yeah. And that's like exhausting. I
actually am impressed by your ability. I know we've had a lot of like off air conversations
about introversion versus extroversion. But I just don't exist on the internet. Mostly I lurk in
communities or like, even in our Discord, I've mentioned a few times, I lurk in our Discord.
I'm watching all y'all. I rarely interact. Mostly because of the thing you're talking about.
I just don't want to have to worry about my internet reputation. I'm stressed out enough
about my real life reputation, like my in person social interactions. And it's hard. Yeah, as a
fellow autistic person, I mean, I am also doing all this on manual and I have my lists of rules
that I'm checking internally, externally sometimes. It's too much to really keep track of. And if it's
if I don't have that ability to have that, the sort of radical honesty thing that I prefer where
it's, I make it sound like it's like an ethical choice of mine or something. But honestly, like,
honestly, I do radical honesty because I can't do the other thing. I suck at lying and keeping
secrets. I just I know this. Since I was a little kid, it would be like, like little Jace,
did you take the $5 from my purse? And I'd be like, haha, no. Oh my God, punish me. I'm bad.
Like, it's just I can't. I can't lie. I feel horrible. And it's just it will be in the back
of my mind, like the little voice screaming at you, like, no, things are wrong. You must fix this.
Yeah. And then like, keeping secrets as well, which is just kind of tell people, you know,
when I meet them, I'm like, hey, like, if you ever have something that you want me to keep a
secret from someone, probably just like, don't tell it to me because I will just flirt it out
without realizing it until it's too late. And sorry, I just don't check those things good.
Well, so, and I think that that part's like, I, I'm trying to just trying to order my thoughts
here. Your your list of all the things of a perfect internet citizen sounds like it sounds
like it'd be great if everyone was doing that all the time. If you're the only person doing that,
and you're in a room of 30 other people, you're going to be the, you know, you're going to be
pushed around, you're going to be the only one having to bottle up your feelings because everyone
else is freely expressing themselves. That all sounds fucking terrible. And I think it's worth
I'm totally fine going on the record is saying that I'm on a number of discord servers. And
among my favorites is the Bayesian conspiracy one, I have seen how arguments can
their self contained people and as rare to, you know, being called a liar is about the
closest I've seen to like a personal attack. And that that is well, and that is a personal
attack, but that's like the the only variety of it. I've been on other ones where even just this
week I've seen people, you know, within, I don't know, nine or 10 messages run straight to Godwin's
law and start looking Hitler and Nazis. And it's, I don't think I've ever seen an an unapped analogy
involving Nazis come up on the Bayesian conspiracy discord. And in the event that it ever comes up,
which I can't even think of an example, I think that it was a good example of, you know, an actually
decent parallel or something. I so to be clear, I think that our our community has
by our community, I mean, the Bayesian conspiracy discord, not the rationalist community as a whole.
I think it has tons of strengths. And I what I what I really like about it is that it is it is
self policing and that it doesn't need moderation. You know, the closest I've ever had to come to
do moderation is saying, you know, someone posted a spoiler in the non spoiler, we want more channel.
And I'd be like, can you move that to the spoiler one? And like, that's the level of moderation
that, you know, I want to do. But then again, you gave everyone the ability to delete those. So it
really is self policing. Exactly. And no, and no one's abused that. If someone, if some asshole
wanted to, they could run through and delete the whole thing. And they haven't yet. So and
maybe the benefit of the benefit of me doing it that well, it David would be right if we were all
playing with the same, you know, norms and approaches, but society at large isn't. Society
at large need to get David on. Well, yeah, we will at some point, but I think society at large
would have the issue of, you know, somebody would have no trouble just running in and wrecking
shit because everyone's got a key, right? The I, I'm like, I think that getting being able to
respond emotionally to something that charges you emotionally is super valuable. And is what I
would do. I've responded emotionally. And there are times where I haven't, you know, most of the
the negative feedback that comes my way or negative stuff that comes my way is people shitting on
one or one or more of my podcasts. And like, I think maybe once have I said like, you know what,
go make your own fun. Oh, no, this actually wasn't even on the discord. It was on, it was on comment
on the website, actually. And they just sat there and like, ripped apart the thing. And I'm like,
you know what, like, if you hate it so much, why are you listening to this? And why don't you go
make your own podcast? It sounds like a great idea. I'll listen to that one. As far as if I'm
making shit, constructive feedback, welcome on constructive feedback, go fuck yourself. And
that that's so I mean, if I wouldn't want to coordinate in a society, or in a community,
like our discord, where I'm feeling like I can't say, you know, hey, why don't you,
with all politeness, go fuck off. I don't think I have to pull that out all that often,
because for the most part, everyone's super chill. I think I missed, like, one of the
inciting incidences, incidents that was the kind of crux of one of Inash's arguments on the last
episode. It was where somebody came on and then left because they were in a disagreement with
we don't even have formal mod roles, but we have a couple of majorly active community members like
yourself. And so as such, you've been given discord powers because you're doing more for
that community than I am, or than the conspirators in general. So like, you know, if the community
is a garden, you're spending more time in it than we are, and it's like, well, I mean, hell,
if you're here and you have the time and energy to do it, by all means, gonna be great if you
could help out. And so I missed the whole thing where this went down, but apparently someone came
in, and they were in an argument with somebody who was in one of these pseudo mod roles. And
like, I guess felt like they should be like they got pushed out kind of quickly, and that kind of
bums me out. I don't want that to be the situation where somebody comes in and gets into a disagreement,
and it turns surprisingly hostile surprisingly quickly. And again, having not been there,
I can't say how hostile it was. Yeah, I was going to say that's not my impression of how it went
down. Okay, good. So you were there, then you can correct any all of my mistakes. I wasn't there,
I was licking. But I missed it completely. So so my take was that this person came in expressing
a lot of ideas. I think David was kind of hostile to those ideas and made that clear. And he,
um, the other the other party had switched to a different channel and was like,
so David just level with me. Do you not want me in this server? And he was like, honestly,
I don't I don't like you very much. And so he left. And I'm like, and I get I get really
worried when that gets brought up as a thing we want to avoid because I mean, it there was the
thing where he thought David was like an owner, or like ran the server or something. So correcting
that misconception is good. And now we have a welcome page that should make make it clear
what people's roles are. But the fact that like he left because David was honest with him about
his feelings, like I am 100% on David's side in that one and would not want any kind of unwritten
or written rules or anything that would discourage people from answering questions like that,
honestly. I am in the University of Bays, which is the split off server that they ended up making.
It's a good server. It's just, I mean, this is a different person who made the University of Bays,
right? Or was that around that? Okay, maybe I'm, uh, yeah, because, because what was that like
Zorander is still active in both communities. But yeah, actually, maybe I'm misunderstanding
how that went down because I was under the impression that somebody was trying to add.
Yeah, that was Zorander wanted to add a mental health channel and talked about it for like two
weeks. And we wouldn't add one because we're like, well, just start talking about mental health. And
if lots of people talk about mental health, we'll add a channel for it. And he was like, no, add it
now. Because because that will that people won't feel comfortable talking about mental health.
There's not a specific channel for it. And we're like, oh, that's look, we don't. And also he was
like kind of new. And I personally was uncomfortable people coming in and being like, we need this
channel. Let's make this channel. Cause I'm like, oh, then we'll just get, we have a lot of channels
and we'll just get endless channel clutter. A lot of channels. Yeah. I think it worked out for the
best that University of Bays is something because it is different. I mean, I don't know, really,
if there's a unifying topic of basic literacy as a whole, but like kind of the subjects that we
talk about on the podcast and then the stuff that you're guys separate podcasts have brought up as
well, mind killers, methods of rationality. So there's like, kind of already built in topics and
listener group that has a certain set of interests. And this was kind of it turned out to be like,
here's a place for, I guess, yeah, we can talk about mental health and self health and growth.
And that's cool too. I just like it kind of being its own thing because that's like for audiences.
Totally. And I, on that one, so that was different than the other incident where somebody came on
and was got the impression that they were being told, like, that I don't want you here by somebody
that they thought ran the place. Oh, it was an authority figure. Yeah. So this one was different.
Like I totally get the, the, um, the inclination to not have someone jump in as a new person and
said, Hey, you know what we need is these new channels and trying to, you know, get that channel
bloat going. I'm sympathetic to that. I was, I was surprised at the pushback. Um, and I, you know,
I didn't just jump in and do stuff just because I figured I'd let it sort itself out. And it did.
And frankly, if I had just made a mental health channel, Zarendra may not have broken off and
done the University of Bays, which is super awesome. They have like, it seems like daily
recorded lectures on various subjects and it's like, we can link to it. It's actually a really
cool place. It's just, it's a different like subject matter, but for people that are interested in
and I am in self-help growth, learning anything. Yeah. It's more of a coordinated effort to do
a couple of things than it is just like a place to hang out. And I think I'm fine with the basic
experience of this court being just a place to hang out. Um, so like I said, the only part that
is sympathetic to was the fact that a new person wanted to jump on and make new and ask for new
channels. That said, I was surprised at the pushback because, you know, mental health is,
is a, is a, uh, a topic that is often discussed in the rationalist community and that we have a lot
of insight and, uh, you know, practiced, um, techniques for and the idea of like,
So if you look at the Slate Star codex, uh, user polls, there's a lot of overlap between specific
mental illnesses in the rationalist community. Exactly. So we're disproportionately represented
in the, uh, the mental health, uh, category. And so the idea that like people didn't want that,
I found surprising. And I'm sympathetic to the argument of like, well, I don't want to start
spewing stuff and clogging up the general chat because then things get lost in general too.
Yeah. Um, you know, part of general wants to talk about last night's episode of whatever,
another part is trying to talk about, uh, depression or something. Then it gets, then it
gets kind of clogged up and confused in there and having a space for that, I think made a lot of
sense. But you know, that seems like, I think that one mostly went down fine. It was, it was
mainly, I was just surprised to sort of like the, the vitriol maybe of like the intense pushback
of like, I don't want this. I thought that was, I think that was mostly in response to the way
it was being requested. Uh, not what it was, but more of the like insistence that they were talking
about it. Yeah. I only caught the tail end of it. So I, I wasn't there for the whole thing.
So I, I can't really comment to the rest of the whole incident. Yeah.
I just, I just lurk and skim. I don't know what the hell's going on. I mean, like,
actually, um, Steven, when you were saying I didn't want to just jump in and make that channel
because someone requested it, like, I feel like because I am quote unquote an authority figure
or like as like one of the co-hosts of the podcast, I almost don't want to touch the
discord. Like I'm, I'm worried about abusing power or being seen as like, I don't know,
I get very uncomfortable when, if anyone ever kind of like tries to treat me as an authority figure.
Uh, I don't like attention. I don't like people looking at me as like a role model because no.
You've got to just relish in your power. I think I had a, and you know, I like it being a,
like I said, a fairly mod free zone or moderation free zone. Like I had, I had one,
this is probably six months ago. It was also just like a bad week for me. And then there's some,
something stupid kicked it off. And I had like one half hour of like, I think this is right around
when I, maybe I added it right after this, the old man yells at clouds emoji. And there were like,
there were like four meme channels. There were like five other ones. And there were like two
not safe for work meme channels. And I was like, I know we have minors on this channel on this
discord. Like this is fucking stupid. What the hell is this? It's like, I left for like two days
and I come back and everything's all, you know, I'm like, I could just, you know, using the garden
analogy. I just came in after like a weekend off and like, I see a bunch of shit. And like,
without even talking to people, I'd start ripping things up. And I didn't, I didn't rampage too
hard. I think I deleted like three channels and then added one of them back or something.
Right. Yeah. Old man yells at clouds. Yeah. Get off my lawn. But this isn't my lawn. This is
everybody's and I, you know, I think to bring it back more to the, like the, the broad, like how
does one conduct oneself? I think we do it just about perfectly, like, or just about ideally
for my taste, which is all that really matters because it's the community that, you know, is for
this show. I don't have a lot of patience. And luckily my patience has never tested on this in
this discord of like, Oh my God, I just feel unsafe whenever this subject comes up or like,
I hate, you know, if somebody I'm trying to think of whatever it is, we can insert whatever harsh
topic that that's something that I really like about our community is that like, there are,
there are many, I'm prepared to say basically all corners of the internet or most whatever,
where like, Oh no, that stuff, that conversation's off the table. We don't talk about that.
Or an example I've seen a lot in real life that I don't think is that controversial though.
Oh, that might be. Well, so sometimes a vegan will come on and say,
nobody posts pictures of meat. I'm deeply offended by the idea of other people eating meat. I don't
want to see meat. Don't talk about meat. And then depending on what your community is, how like,
top down or like self policing strictness, it is either people will enforce that and be like,
Oh my God, you posted a thing about meat, you got to delete it immediately because
Kevin is bed as a vegetarian and we'll get very offended or Kevin like, you can go to
And Steven, this relates to something that you said that actually wanted to disagree with.
You know, you said that an entire community of people behaving like the perfect internet
citizen sounded good. I think that sounds bad. I think that sounds very, I think that sounds boring.
Because no one will be talking about anything interesting because anything interesting could
offend somebody. And I think it relates to what, I think it relates to what Jason was saying where
that was the last somebody comes in and says, Hey guys, I am triggered by meat or discussions of
meter or pictures of meat. Then the perfect internet citizen is going to say, Oh, well,
of course, we won't talk about that. You know, and I don't think that's always the correct answer.
But people have triggers about everything. Yeah. So yeah. And I think I was part of that polyamory
group that you were talking about last episode, entire essay. Oh, I left that one. I was never
active on it. It was like, I can't, I can't do this. Yeah. Oh, I never posted anything. I mean,
I lurk anyway. But the thing was, yeah, like there's, I was just about to talk about like
certain tumblers that have this, but this community had that too. There's like an entire thesis
statement that you have to read and like sign your name and blood in before you're allowed to
join. And then they have to evaluate you. And like, yeah, you're not allowed to use the word
poly because Polynesians had it first and that's racist appropriation. And you're not allowed to
post pictures without describing the picture or emojis, because some people might not have
the ability to see images on their phone, or they might be hearing impaired.
Yeah, just like last time I wrote this up, I found myself getting angry just hearing about that.
And I think I concede your point 100% was that with your with your model of the perfect internet
citizen, that does sound terrible. I think and never tries or and never offends anybody or makes
never not to ever offend anybody was the last and on the list of like what makes perfect internet
citizen. And that's the only one I would draw contention with I think that you can have totally
healthy and adult disagreements that are 100% capable of being discussed by adults who are
capable of having conversations that might be challenging. And so I would, if we chop that
off the list of the perfect internet citizen, I think I'd be totally on board with it. I'm
picturing just more like, you know, like a disagreement. I think I brought this up with
on last one, Sam Harris and Dan Dennett disagreeing on free will, like their disagreements barely got
personal. It got surprisingly, you know, rude from Dennett, which was surprising. But like,
that's the kind of just that's the kind of discourse that I like where, you know, oh,
you think that well, I think that's wrong. And here's why. And of course, that's offensive to the
person hearing it if they hear that you disagree. So you chop off the offensive bit. I think the
rest of the perfect internet citizen sounds close to good. You know, like the the meat example,
I can't imagine. I mean, I don't know if I would do this personally, I would like to think that
if someone jumped into general chat on the Bayesian conspiracy discord, and said, Oh, by the way,
I'm new, could we stop talking about meat here? Because it triggers me, I don't like it. I kind
of would like to think that we would have a handful of people respond with pictures of their
friend of the last meal they made that, you know, was meat heavy, or with with pictures of
see, I turkey legs, I don't think people would do that. And don't get wrong, I think, I think that
the vegan is on the right side of the argument. I happen to not be a vegan, because I'm lazy and
a hypocrite. But I think that I think that's the ethical way to go. But to say I can't handle this,
can you guys all accommodate me? You know, I don't have anybody came in and said that David would
would just comment and say no. And then the conversation would move on. And that would just
kind of be the end of it. I would like him to I'd like to think that he'd do it while, you know,
biting into like a piece of bacon or something and just like, no.
Here's a live feed of me eating bacon. Right. Because yeah, I that's what I would want to happen.
I can't imagine trying to make this, you know, a safe place for everybody. What do you want to
have happen? The people being tricks about it or that like just sit David saying no. I think I'm
more in favor of David saying no in the conversation moving on. Like, I think the other thing is
actually people being dicks about it. I think if someone did come in and they said like,
hey, I actually like am triggered by pictures of meat to the point that I have such empathy for
animals that I'll have a panic attack. Like I've I have a friend who is like this. They are a
VSP, probably a very sensitive person, which is a real psychiatric thing. I think we have one or
two of those on the discord sensitivity that they're kind of born with. Yeah, probably would not
be stressed. And the thing is that as that person, you can be self aware of the fact that I'm
triggered by this thing. And if this is going to be a regular thing here, I realize maybe this is
not the place for me, or maybe I can use one of my like block features, just discolors, I don't
think so, but a sensor feature or something about. Well, and so I'm sympathetic to somebody's
sensitivity there. I think that I think I think entering a room of 100 people and saying everyone
stop talking about this. And I think it's totally okay. I do I agree that the polite and probably
preferable way to do it would be to say, no, we're gonna keep talking about that. You don't have to
hang out though. I think that that would be fine. You know, maybe just avoid the general chat or
whatever this if you know, or the one food channel that we now have, like if you can't handle meat,
then like, then just avoid those areas. That's something that I think makes our community
different from others that I'm involved in, which is like, I've never seen and I'm not I'm not 100%
up to date on everything that happens in ours. But I've never seen an example of somebody
complain about how they can't handle whatever subject or whatever this is, and then stick around
and keep being freaked out by it. If they really are freaked out by it, then I don't want you to be
here. That and that's my thing 100%. You know, like I've seen other other communities where
conversations go fucking wild. And you know, somebody would be talking about the legitimate,
you know, to choose a politically charged example, or an emotionally charged example,
or rather, you know, the, the primary allegation of sexual misconduct against Joe Biden,
discussing its legitimacy can, you know, there's all kinds of worms involved in that can where,
you know, if we don't, if we put this claim to doubt, then we might be doubting the rest of
you know, the legitimacy of most claims or this or that. If we point out that, you know,
some of these seem like it's definitely possible that they're like to even admit the possibility
of a manufactured assault claim. Then you know, suddenly you're this horrible rape apologist,
and I'm going to make it my life's work on this discord to sit here and fight you on it because
I simply can't handle that talk. And it's like, if you can't handle it, then get the fuck out.
I think that we have a great way of just as a community. And this is probably rationalist
of, you know, in the broader rationalist community of a, having fewer of those things that quote,
I just can't handle and be of, look, if you, if you are in that group of people who can't handle
something, then you can, you are welcome to leave. And it doesn't mean that you have to leave the
discord doesn't mean you have to leave the rationalist community. It just means that you
don't hang out in the mind killer channel where we're discussing whether or not this sounds like
bullshit. You know, like I even forget the name of the person, but it was like, oh yeah, when,
when I was 14, Biden diddled me at some, at the, you know, congressional dinner or something.
And then it immediately came out. It's like, actually, he was in another state.
He wasn't at that dinner. So that's impossible. And, you know, and this is the kind of thing
that would get me shat on in some communities too, just pointing out that like, you know,
Biden, the second he got the democratic, well, you know, the second he became the democratic
front runner, I predicted, I should have done this on the air, but it wasn't, you know, it's not a
very out there prediction. There are going to be tons of allegations of misconduct coming out
against Joe Biden that have never happened, you know, that have never surfaced in the past,
because of the exact same machines that made shit up for Trump, right? This is going to,
or not, not, not, not, not made shit up about him, but the same machine that got him elected.
I am 100% convinced that we are going to see a ton of manufactured claims against Biden that
otherwise would never have surfaced because there was not a political machine trying to discredit
him before. Now, that does, does that mean that he's a perfect dude? Hell no, he seems kind of
weird. I've seen, you know, we've all seen the videos. But I, I would bet $1,000 that they're,
in fact, I would already won $1,000. Does this one claim seem to have been made up?
Then they said, Oh, you know what, maybe it was the year before. But it was definitely when, you
know, the thing is, like, no, you said it was when this person was 14 years old. She wasn't
14 years old at the previous congressional dinner. So if you got the year wrong, you got your age
wrong too. And so whether or not this particular case is true or not, you know, my thing is, like,
I am, I am willing to stake literal money that we can't really prove because you can't, you know,
falsify an allegation from 30 years ago. But like, there are going to be made up things about Biden,
simply because the global political machine wants to keep, wants to reelect Trump, right?
The global one being like the Russian bots and all that bullshit. And there's, well,
there's this mind killer territory. Yeah, we, I think we did.
But there is, there, I mean, what you're talking about, there was like, these clowns did get caught
trying to pay some woman to say she was sexually assaulted by Robert Mueller. So like, that's
definitely happened. Yes, thank you. That was another great example. Trying to make up false
claims to, to, you know, own the libs. But like, I think, I feel like the, the
point you were making about this was that it's, you know, something that we're able to discuss
on the discord without it flying off in wild directions. And I completely agree that there's,
there's, I think two places on the internet that I would be comfortable talking about that. And the
Bayesian conspiracy discord is one of them. And the other one is like a Facebook group that I
created specifically to talk about stuff that will get you yelled at.
Yeah. And when you've made your own Walden area, then it's easy enough to curtail it as you want.
And that's the kind of place I want the Bayesian discord server to be, not a place where we
all stood around questioning, you know, sexual assault allegations, but places where we are comfortable
like actually having conversations. And
Yeah, that's Gina. Can you give me peas?
The jealous
Oh my God, that's so many people from the farmers market.
Oh my God, I got so many more than that from my garden. It's insane.
Anyway, Steven, what were you talking about?
That's awesome.
Well, thank you for bringing me home on my on the point I was trying to make because I got kind
of carried away with it. But yes, I mean, so that that's what I want the community to be where,
you know, hey, is this a legit thing? And, you know, the response is an, Oh my God,
you terrible person for asking that question. Whatever question it is,
you know, like, I mean, I try to think of something that isn't so,
you know, horrible as an assault allegation. But, you know, like the, I'm trying to think,
you know, other things we've got, we've got a COVID channel that I think there's a lot of
value in talking about because there's a lot of I think it's, you'd be able to talk about
on the server would be able to talk about in other places the question of like, what are these,
you know, the George Floyd protests worth it in terms of COVID infection? You know, like,
what's the cost benefit? Yeah. And I mean, it's so whichever way you come down on that question.
The the person who asks it isn't going to be crucified. And that that's what I like is that
this is a community where people are capable of bringing up things that are politically salient
or emotionally salient. And everyone can have a conversation about it. I wouldn't want it any
other way. I think that I think it really, oh, you weren't finished. Oh, I was just going to say
that I think that, you know, the only, well, I go ahead. I was just going to say, I think this
comes back to the essay about politics being the mind killer in the sense that my last experience
on a non rationalist discord was somebody mentioning a little that reminds me of the
Slate Sturko to exposed and then suddenly everyone just dog piling and
getting kicked out accused of sea lioning. And it was just, you see these kinds of reactions
when somebody does outgroup signal. And then, oh, no, we got to reinforce the in group, like,
hive mind. And regardless of what people's political opinions are, because like, it's
rationality doesn't have really a political leaning. Like, I think we're more libertarian
than average, based on again, the Slate Sturko, the community polls, which might be
selecting for a slightly different audience anyway. But other than that, I mean, there was
quite a spread, if I recall. Yeah, I almost even David's converted everyone on the discord to
anarcho capitalism now. I'm talking about Slate Sturko. Although that would be fun. Oh,
we could do our own polls. Yeah, we could do polls. I mean, the cool thing is that it doesn't
really matter because if we're left leaning or right leaning or upside down leaning,
people are capable of entertaining the other person's position and engaging with it in a real
way. I just I still don't quite get like, what exactly is happening in the failure mode where
people just freak out and are incapable of having a conversation like uncharitably.
Politics is a mind killer, arguments are soldiers. So you must support all arguments on your side.
And if you don't, it's like you're shooting your own soldiers in the back.
Yeah, but I mean, so we all we all we've all heard that it doesn't like
well, I'd also just wonder, I don't know if is it as simple as the fact that we've all read the
mind killer sequence or many of us have that makes us capable of doing this. I don't think
that that's it. I think it takes more. If somebody says something, we immediately are like maybe
maybe. What's the other side of this? Now, I remember having read the sequences like a few years
before I was in an argument with a co worker where I was like noticing myself
doing bad arguments. I guess like, it did seek seek it did seep into my consciousness enough
where I was hanging out in the rationalist online community, and then hanging out in social justice
communities. And that was kind of before social justice turned into what it is now but it was
around I can never remember her name, but the woman who like got Rachel dollars on
texture hair and then was a that's it. How do you forget?
Anyway, there was some co worker that I was arguing with and I just noticed myself
wishing that I was like, Oh man, I wish that I could like go on my social justice website so I
could find what the correct arguments are. And then I was like, wait a minute. But like,
yeah, I remember having sacred cows. And then it was a really painful process getting rid of them,
killing them. I guess your sacred cows. This is still an open offer for people to find my
sacred cows so I can try and drag them out for slaughter. I think part of my problem is I just
don't care about enough stuff heavily enough to have them. But like if someone's like Steven,
you're obviously super attached to this. There are things I care about and passionate about.
And I'm prepared to argue about but I don't think that I have anything on like this sacred cow
pedestal. Of course, no one does until I pointed out that's why it's an open invitation for people
to find them for me. I think it's an incredibly human thing to have those. But yeah, we can.
Now, I mean, just if this is open invitation to you guys and to the listeners, if anyone
on the discord is like Steven, you seem sacred cowy about this, I'd be interested in talking about
it. You know what? I can't think of anything, which is hilarious. Steven, you're just too chill.
I think we're trying to... Yeah, that's my thing. I'm too... And then of course,
how am I going to argue that I'm not right? I think I'd be like, yeah, you're right. Actually,
that is something that came up actually in my company Slack we were talking about. I forget
how it came up. Someone was talking about how they were stressed out about something. And since I
don't want to use the word not give a fuck, I said give a hoot. And I was like, I ran out of hoots
to give in like 2015. And they're like, yeah, but then the downside of that is that you don't
have a response emotionally to whatever thing. I'm like, oh, yeah, it's not a perfect solution.
It's not even a solution that I chose. I ran out of them. And so this isn't like a sacred
cow thing, but it's just a funny way of how I interact with stuff. It's like, I really just
for most things just don't care. If I do care, this is where it becomes a problem. It's like
too distant for me to connect with emotionally. But this is, you know, more
further abroad than what we were talking about a moment ago.
Yeah. And we've also been going for an hour and 40.
Yeah, I mean, we probably start to wrap up.
Yeah, just about. I felt like there was more ground to cover here that I'm going to regret
not getting to. But you know what, that's how we come back.
We talked about the niceness. We talked about police. I think we were going to talk about
rationalist life hacks or whatever, but we could say that there's individual topics that I wanted
to do whole episodes on like career hacks, for example. Yeah, that sounds valuable. And the
kind of thing that we won't be able to shove in the last 10 minutes here. There was a thing,
and I think this is what you know, I was just talking about because he sent us some notes
since he couldn't make it today. One of the, it was a comment on one of the discord norms that
tone matters because someone's tone is a signal of how willing they are to engage
or to respond to arguments. And so this was something that I wasn't very helpful in.
I think it might have been in the We Want More channel where I, and I forget who it was,
I'm sorry, but they were, they were bracketing their, their like statements in brackets of like
sincere question, confusion, etc. And I responded with like question, why are you putting those
things there? And they're like, well, because it indicates like where I'm coming from. And I'm
like, I could tell it was a question from the question mark in the sentence. And yet I do think
there's value in doing that. But I wonder, like, I think that would only be necessary to an audience
that is completely tone deaf. And it's not just a place that I appreciate that sort of thing. And
also I don't expect people to norm it. Well, I think for me, like, if, if somebody isn't coming
to the tape, coming to the conversation with a mentality of like, I'm willing to engage this
or something, like no one's going to use the bracket sacred cow and then say something,
or like, I will yell at you if you disagree with me and then make their statement.
So like, I feel like they're almost in our small community.
Just gonna bracket my comment totally unreasonable. But I'm curious.
No, the idea, the idea of them was they were supposed to be like the L core from Mass Effect,
who don't have any way who kind of speak in a monotone. So they don't have any way of expressing
emotion. So they're supposed to be emotional. They were supposed to be like, happy or like confused.
Or, um, you know, you could put something like good nature joke or something like that. So I think
they have value there. They're definitely not something you could norm because it makes the
conversation way too burdensome. You have to type like twice as much. I said we should use emojis
for that. And everyone was like, no, but emojis can be misinterpreted. I'm like, yeah, but they're
way easier. I also use my emoji shortcuts heavily. I would be willing to stake without counting that
more than two thirds of my comments on discord have an emoji attached to them.
There was a this late star code expose friendship is counter signaling,
where some people will just like make fun of each other and tease each other
as a way of expressing affection. And emojis are very helpful with that. You know, you call
someone an asshole, but put a heart at the end of it. You can tell with what they're saying.
And I did that with somebody. I didn't use the word asshole, but they had said,
like, I think I'm being uncharitable to this piece of media. And I said, I pulled out the quote
and I said, being uncharitable to this piece of media, isn't that on brand for you? Oh, here's
something that we can talk about that's mind killer that I just noticed. Oh, wait, no, yours
is different. Sorry. You've got the no snitch tattoo. Correct. And from methods of rationality.
I thought this was related because I saw a I'm not on Twitter. Thank God. Well, really thank me
for the foresight of knowing that that's not good for me. Or Facebook, by the way, I saw a Facebook
post because I have an account, but I haven't opened it since we closed, you know, the lesser
on meetups because that was the only reason I got on for five minutes a month was to set up the
monthly meetup. But someone showed me a thread on a friend's account that went fucking hog wild
with people like this. This is exactly what I don't want it to turn into. They posted a the
response from like JK Rowling about their perceived transphobia. And let's be fair,
probably partially legitimate claims of, you know, look, I feel like you're not being
fully woke on this JK Rowling, what the hell. And so she apparently wrote some apology that I
didn't read in all of its essence, because I don't really care. And the comments in there,
those went like, I think within five or six minutes, five or six posts went straight to Nazis,
and, you know, all that bullshit. The so anyway, the reason I brought that up with your snitch
tattoo was I saw somewhere on Reddit, apparently some tattoo artists are willing to like over
whatever you call it, over tattoo Harry Potter tattoos for free. Because now people now people
don't like the Harry Potter tattoos because, you know, just get a big red X that's right.
Just don't get a Nazi tattoo with a big red X there. That was a reference to the person that
got stabbed. Yeah, in Washington. Yeah, wasn't he campaigning? Oh, a Nazi. Yeah, I had like a no
Nazis tattoo. And they're like, yeah, I think like his, what was it like his very short sleeves
shirt partially covered or they just miss on there were just like, no, they stabbed him, right?
Yeah. And that's why I'm a big fan of not being violent towards people you disagree with, because
sometimes people you disagree with, aren't people people, sometimes people you are violent towards
aren't people you actually disagree with. And more importantly, you know, and more generally,
and this is the kind of thing that, again, this community fosters, like, and the kind of question
that if I were to raise in other places would just get you screamed at and called a Nazi,
like, it's unlikely that I'm right about everything. Right. And so there's it's unlikely
that I'm wrong about my stance on Nazis or something. But to not be willing to entertain
disagreement, I think is just like a failure mode of a community that is at all trying to
quote be less wrong. You know, if it's a discord about movies or something, then whatever,
look, you know, leave leave your politics out of it. Let's talk about how weird colors from the
sky was that Nick Cage movie. Oh, was that before we started recording? I watched a movie last night
called colors from the sky. It came out in 2019 with Nicholas Cage. It's based on HP Lovecraft
story. And I don't think I've seen a Lovecraft movie. The closest I've come to Lovecraft is playing
Bloodborne. And this movie is fucking weird. I it wasn't wholly unpleasant because it was so unique.
Um, but it was a strange movie. And so if anyone wants a weird hour and 50 minutes,
check this movie out. I love surreal shit. That sounds like well, first of all, Nick Cage is in
it. That was that was made a tractor. I heard the category was like sci fi horror, and it had Nick
Cage in it and like sold. I don't need to know anything else. Um, yeah, I don't know if we have
much else to go on about. Do you guys have anything else to know? I think I'm good wanted to discuss.
Um, yes, but like not on topic. And uh, yeah, we should wrap up sequence posts. I think maybe
we should just save for next time. Yeah. And all that. Well, that sounds good. And, uh,
any ash sorry for probably butchering the conversation that you wanted to make here
by trying to summarize your points for you. So we will no doubt touch on, you know, I think
having conversation, you know, community related conversation, you know, throughout
everything sounds like super relevant because this is a small community that we try to foster and
keep things running awesomely. So, um, yeah, I, I see us coming back to these points anyways. So
there'll be room for you to make your case better. Um, I don't know if we have time,
we might have a minute. I'm curious, was there anything else I said, Wes, that you drew
contention with? Because I'd be happy to clear up anything. Um, actually one of the things that
both of you had said, um, no, Steven was that you didn't like the idea that people should have
thicker skin. Uh, and I feel like I do like that idea. Like I, and I think what we were
talking about earlier is, um, recognizing that like some people get offended by things easily
and not every community is for them. So it's, it's not like, you know, you should go get thicker
skin, but it's like your skin must be, you know, this thick to have fun in this community. You
know, and I, and I support the idea of there being separate spaces for different skin thickness
and not every space needs to, um, accommodate the most fragile person. I think I, I think I
agree there. I think the, the distinction that I had was like, and I can't remember exactly
what the context was that brought this up. Um, it was, I think somebody saying like,
grow a thicker skin. No, I think what Enya said was it was when, when one of the people had left
the server, he was like, well, you know, I think in some sense I'm sad they left, but in the other
sense, like maybe, you know, they, they need to have a thicker skin to have a good time here,
something like that. I think it's a skin thickness, you know, again, maybe tabooing that word to make
it easier. What I meant was more like, this shouldn't be the kind of place where like you
should expect to get, uh, you know, that you need, you need a jumping in sort of ceremony, like being
jumped into a gang. Um, I wanted this to be fun, but, but if you are the kind of person who can't
come in and have a, uh, an opinion challenged, then yeah, frankly, this isn't the space for you.
Like you need to be, it needs to be possible that you're wrong and need to be willing to
entertain that idea seriously. And if you, if you find that too emotionally painful,
this just isn't the space for you. I'm on board with that. Um, I, maybe I'm walking back on
everything I said too easily. Maybe I just didn't phrase it clearly enough the first time, but what
was your take, Jace? Yeah, I like, let's see, talking about Tumblr earlier and the community norm
of like a straight W spaces, having these essays that you have to sign in blood and so forth.
I swear to God. No, I know you're talking. Maybe not the blood, but yeah, I think people
have probably seen these. Um, I saw like a counter movement that was around for a bit until like,
uh, basically, I think Yahoo bought Tumblr and then all other things went to shit and they started
just banning people for no reason. Before that happened though, um, there was kind of a counter
movement where people were explicitly stating in their blog, uh, this is not a safe space. I do
not tag triggers. This is my blog. Uh, and I'm going to run it the way I see fit and you have the
choice to leave or to block me if I fendu. Uh, and then they were still getting people that were
like, excuse me, uh, this is a fat phobic comment and I take this, like, I take offense to this or,
you know, uh, this seems really ableist. You can't say stupid because that, you know, denigrates
people with low IQ, uh, and the person will have to just kind of point to the top of their blog
and be like, sorry, I'm not your safe space. There are other places that are your safe space
that you can go hang out in. Yeah, there are other blogs that are perfectly willing to like
be told what triggers they need to tag by their viewers. This is not one of those places. I just
don't have the emotional bandwidth to do this. I'm not being paid to run this blog, et cetera, et
cetera. Um, and I think, uh, it's my very long winded way of saying, I think I agree. Uh, after
kind of, I mean, I think, like I said, picked a, picked a position, like stuck my stick in the
sand and then like people respond to it. You know, this isn't your safe space. We're not
giving trigger warnings. Um, we're not necessarily using all the current, uh, you know, social justice
approved wording for everything and being like, oh, we're also, we're going to express bigotry on
this in this piece, you know? So like, if somebody, yeah, yeah, I like the don't be a dick as a
general rule. Yeah. And like, you know, that, that's the, the, I think actually my wife got
the mug from somewhere and it's just perfect because don't be a dick is a phrase I like a lot.
Um, I saw Phil plate give his talk at one of the, uh, James Randy amazing meetings in like
2011 or 12. I remember that the title of the talk was don't be a dick. And it was surprisingly
controversial for some reason. And, uh, I think three speech. Well, I think, I think skeptics
also enjoy the fight of like, no, you're being a fucking idiot. And, uh, what, what they don't
realize. And that's the point he was making was like, that's not how you win hearts and minds.
Um, so like, if you, if you want this message to spread, you don't do it by getting in someone's
face and calling them an idiot. Um, and anyone who wants to confine that.
Don't be a dick phrase makes me nervous for something you guys mentioned in the last episode,
which is that if, if the norm is don't be a dick, then dick, the word dick becomes defined as
whatever somebody doesn't like. Um, in the same way that, that, you know, we can be violent towards
Nazis ended up with everyone being Nazis. I'm saying don't be a dick just winds up with everyone
being a dick that you don't like. Um, yeah, but I think that when I said a general rule, maybe
what I meant was more of like the guidelines, uh, where like being a dick is not going to be
a banable offense. It's just somebody posts a picture of meat in response to the person saying
like, Hey, I don't like meat. Instead of just saying like, no, we don't do that here. They're
just spamming pictures of bacon or whatever. Then like, I think that the community could kind of
be like, Hey, you're being kind of a dick. Yeah, I would say like, don't intentionally cause people
distress. Yeah, that's what I mean by it, I guess. Yeah. And that sounds close. I mean, the other
cool thing about, you know, worrying about sliding to the bottom of a slippery slope is like, I feel
like our community is capable of not doing that. And so, you know, when I say don't be a dick, it
means like, if someone says something that is wrong, you know, like, I, if, if David was on and I
said something wrong, exactly, or, you know, at least very likely to be wrong, you know, because
David's knowledgeable about a lot of things that I have no fucking clue in. So I'll come in and say
something and he'd be like, actually, that's 100% wrong. And here's why that's not being a dick. If
you said, see, but that distinction, I think is not conveyed when you just say, don't be a dick,
because in a lot of places saying, well, that's 100% wrong, right, that is being a dick. Yeah.
And luckily, I think that we have the, the shared norm of like, we all want to be less wrong
trademark. That like, so if someone says that to me, I don't, I'm not offended. I'm not even
actually the least bit like, put on my, you know, my back step, I'm like, Oh, really? Like,
Wow, sounds like you have adequately figured this out. And, and I think I'm trying to find
wanting to make transgender jokes about this, because my God, really, one of the effects of
testosterone is your skin thickens. And the opposite on estrogen. Yeah, there's a gender
or sexually dimorphic skin thickness thing. And like, I think that's totally irrelevant to the
conversation, but I keep kind of giggling about it in the back of my head. So now, now, now,
now I'm probably gonna look this up and it's hilarious. The metaphor of skin thickness is
actually a super sexist thing. Like that's where that came from. So I'm sure
I think we're ruined forever. I think for me, it's, I'm trying to put myself in the place
in my memory where I was when I talked about skin thickness, I can't remember what it was. I
think having explained what we're both talking about, I think we agree, which is kind of what
exactly where I expect this conversation to end up. I think that that's going to be the case with,
you know, any, not any, with probably 85% of disagreements on the discord about this sort of
thing. I think there'll be more agreement than disagreement when any confusions are resolved.
And I think that's where this kind of wound up. So I think often, generally, in life,
when people disagree about something, it turns out to be the case that they're just misunderstanding
each other. Or like, not like maybe 100%, but I think people can find common ground like way more
often than they seem to think they can about even very like politically charged or emotionally
charged topics. And it depends on the norm too. I don't mean to cut you off, but like that the,
you wouldn't have the room to even find where the disagreement lies in that dystopian server you
were talking about, right? Because by then I used to be like social justice aligned. And
I was going to actually use an abortion example, but I have an even more relevant one. David,
other David and I, just the other day, were just randomly talking about shit. And we got on the
topic of pickup artists. And me of five years ago, or however long ago, wouldn't have even like,
I would have been like, no, pickup artists are bad and evil, and they should all die,
probably nothing that extreme. But like, I was able to now have a conversation of, yeah, there's
a lot of like, bad shit in the pickup community and pretty toxic. And yet also there's areas of
the pickup community that are kind of just like, sneakily teaching people social skills and
self confidence. And like, actually, a lot of people seem to come out of the pickup community
like, better than they started it, depending on where they are, like who they talk to,
what lessons they take, what their goals are, not a position that I would have been willing
to even consider five or six or however many years ago. Well, and that's the cool thing about
different, you know, societal and community norms is that you're more primed now than you were before
to entertain an argument. I see what you did there. You're willing to pick up, right? Yeah.
But I, oh man, I'll pretend that was on purpose. I am happy that I managed to drag on the conversation
for like 20 minutes, but I am mindful that everyone has schedules. So thanks for letting me
keep this going for a little bit longer. Yeah, I need to eat food. I've not eaten any food yet.
It's too late in the day for that to be the case. So let's resolve that. And we can call it a day
here. Yeah, we will save the, sorry, what was I saying? The, I'm trying to open up my notes tab
here. There it is. We'll save the sequences for next episode. But we never don't have time to
thank our patron. So thank you for this week. Our patron that we are giving a special shout out
today is Luke Hanks, who is a financial supporter of the podcast, which we really appreciate.
What a good name. Luke Hanks. Sounds like Tom Hanks. So I know that Luke Hanks is a good dude.
Yeah, it does. And Luke Skywalker. It's just a good name. And a good person. Exactly. So thanks for
your support. You can find us on Patreon. Should you have the bandwidth to support us? And if you
don't, that is totally fine, especially during the financial hardships that the world is going
through. This is, this should be one of the first things you cut. And not to feel bad about cutting
it. So, but if you have spare cash around and you want to throw us a buck or two, we're super on
board with that. And yeah, and there's all the other things you can do. Yep. Reviews on iTunes
are free. I just cut you off and you were about to say. Oh, no, no, you're good. Because yeah,
reviews on iTunes are free and take only a second. All that stuff, everyone knows how to
podcast and what to do to spread things. And come join the Discord. I want to talk to you guys
zero off with it. I think we can wrap this up here. Oh, yeah, there's been someone asked once,
I think we've got someone to write in. How do I join the Discord? There's a link to the Discord
in every episode's show notes. So if you want to know what we're talking about and what makes
our community super awesome, and that sounded sarcastic, but it wasn't. If I had emojis,
you would have seen that. Then yeah, do come by and see what all the hubbub is about. And
the link for that is in the show notes for the episode description. West, don't forget,
also co-hosts the MindKillers. I think that was it. Come listen to MindKiller. We talk about
politics and get mindkilled. It's surprisingly tame for what I was hoping for with that name,
but maybe I'm just predisposed to not be too freaked out by it. So yeah,
I'm curious what your thoughts would be. The one I made is like...
Let's talk about that. I just have all these images of the people that they put on bathroom
stalls, the generic person, but I'm starting to tank. No worries, we'll call it here.
And thanks for listening. I have a mental image. Yeah, we love you guys. Stay healthy.
Try to not get maced, unless you're trying to for political reasons.
And then if you do get maced for political reasons on purpose, try not to cough in anybody
or get coughed on. Yes. Bye.
All right, everyone. Have fun. We'll see you next fortnight. Thanks again.
Okay, bye-bye.
