Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy. I'm Manny Ashbrotsky. I'm Stephen Zuber and today we
have a guest. You want to introduce yourself? I'm Shelly. Hello there, Shelly. Shelly is
here with us because she thinks that everyone should lie all the time. Not a fair characterization
and I think I probably disagree with Shelly more than you do. What are we actually talking
about? Do you want to introduce it with your... We're going to talk about the topic of lying
in general, I think. Yeah, and I guess it's relevant to the rationalist community in that
I think there's maybe slightly stronger norms against lying among rationalists supposed
to general society. There definitely seems to be at least the ideal that we tell the
truth as much as possible, even to the point of making people uncomfortable, which I don't
think that everyone holds to that, but it's nice to have that as an ideal, right?
Well not that everyone would be uncomfortable. I think the idea is that once... So people
are uncomfortable with honesty, right? So the idea is, I think in my mind, to overcome
that and to make it to where you can actually engage with somebody directly and honestly
save yourselves a bunch of time and drama, right? Or even, I guess if you're going to say in
rationalist terms, minimize communication time and minimize message length by just getting
straight to the point, right? But a lot of people seem to need that, like it's a lubricant.
Because otherwise, if you're just being all honest at each other, there's friction out
in the real world, it seems. By the real world, I mean the crazy world where all the insane people
are. Yeah, avoiding just straight to the point, honesty does have some perks.
So what are these perks? Just in general, like if you want to
to get someone to do things that are benefit you, that don't necessarily benefit them.
That seems like a bad thing to do, like in just... I mean, I'm using bad in like the moral sense
here that I would feel bad trying to get someone to do things to benefit me that hurts them.
I agree. I'm wondering, is there a defensible example of that? Or are you just okay saying?
Do you want to keep the money that you have right now? Because that would benefit you, but
if you give it to me, that would benefit me. So the cases really are just like sociopathic
self-interest. No, I thought that would be a straw man, but like is that really what you're
like defending here? No, no. Okay, good. Yeah, so what's the
sociopathic version of defending this? Obviously, like people's interests don't always completely
align. And sometimes someone may, for instance, you know, want to kill your friend and they ask
you, where's your friend hiding? And instead of saying the truth will answer, friends in the
basement, you say, she's somewhere, she's in the next town over. I'm totally ripping off Slaystar
Codex's example right now. Oh, damn, if there's a Slaystar example, he's probably thought of my
comeback, which is I tell the killer, fuck you. That's what my friend is, right? Well, I mean,
but maybe he has an axe and he looks very ready to use it on you. That's why I'm sort of a fan of
like home defense, but just for the occasional axe wielding psychopath. Yeah. I mean, I guess,
so this is that is one of like the standard examples. In fact, I think we talked about this
when we talked about cons way back when. Yeah. And that the post is actually about that. Oh,
you can't reason with deontology or something. Yeah. No, no, no. You can't dismiss universal
universality. Yeah. I like the idea of general rules in some contexts. But like, this is one
of those things where, you know, cons does just bite the bullet and say, yep, you just tell them
the truth. I've got him here rather than. So for me, the comeback is if you're not comfortable,
just telling them to fuck off. And if you don't want to lie, your alternative is to engage with
them. If they're an axe wielding psychopath, they're not the kind of they've kind of given up
there. And this could be a circumstance where I advocate lying. I guess I wouldn't advocate lying
up until you've reached the point where the potential for honest communication is broken down.
Right. So if you're dealing with a psycho who's there to kill you or your friends,
that might be a point, right? But at some point, that person's going to get somewhere where someone's
going to shut them down physically, you know, the police are going to show up and arrest them or
whatever it is, right? Or the town people get together and strip that axe away from them or
something. I think that once you have that much of a fundamental conflict of values,
then there's going to be, yeah, you're going to have to resort to violence in some sort. And
I guess verbal violence in that case would be better than physical violence, at least until
you can get someone who's better at physical violence to come, like the cops. But I still,
in general, think it is a thing that would be good to avoid. Like, I don't like that example
specifically because everyone can agree, yes, in that case, you do lie to people,
because this is a case where you're going to come into violent conflict anyway. And
if you know you're going to be fighting someone, you might as well go ahead and lie to them.
But I meant more like in like general life situations. I, so I find myself, I have sort of
a avoidance of conflict thing going where I will occasionally not lie per se, but hold back
the truth. Fine, fuck it. I lie sometimes to avoid conflict with other people because I'm like,
I just, I'd rather not argue with you. We can just let this go. And I mean, that has led to
a few unfortunate circumstances in my life where afterwards I was like, I really wish I just would
have been honest up front. Yeah. My position, despite being on a podcast talking about defending
lying, is that lying is usually not a good idea. And for the obvious reasons that children are
taught why not to lie, that people won't believe you anymore. And it's really difficult to keep
track of all the web of other lies that will depend on your first lie. And it's,
it's effortful to lie. And like, as, as you just described, you end up regretting lies when you
may be caught. For such a good purpose, though. I just want to not fight, man.
So Shelley, those are kind of my exact thoughts too. And the one thing I don't like about,
the other thing I don't like about the, the axe wielding example is that people are way too quick
to generalize from that and say, aha, so you admit it's okay to lie. So like,
therefore it's okay to like lie to your friend about why you're breaking plans or, you know,
lie to your spouse where you were all night or something like that, right? And there's,
I guess that I think once you've reached the point where you're prepared to engage in violence,
then then lying to them, you're past the point of ever trying to have an honest relationship
with the person. But that doesn't apply to the overwhelming majority of lies people tell,
you know, we're not often lying to axe wielding murders, we're lying to our friends and family
for like stupid and what we'll often acknowledge ourselves are stupid reasons.
Well, I did look up some research online and unfortunately it was a survey where people
self report. So I'd, you know, take that with a grain of salt. But the surveys seem to show that
when people self report how much they lie, about 60% of people say that they don't really lie very
much at all. And then people are liars that perhaps so. And the people who did report lying
reported several lies, I guess. So it's like a few people are big liars. And while most people
don't lie that much, I think was the results of the survey. And I wonder what like that much meant
in that context. I mean, so there's all kinds of cool stuff about, again, you have to go by
self report, unless you're going to just stalk people and, you know, fact check everything
they say or something. But
Well, no, there are other studies that try to determine lying in other methods.
Oh, well, I'd be curious to learn about those too. I guess I was going to say that there are
things where apparently people who write them, I guess maybe these are the same people who would
say I'm dishonest, you know, would check, you know, I'm dishonest sometimes on whatever these
surveys are people in similar circumstances, not knowing exactly what you're talking about.
But those similar people will assume that other people are dishonest with them as well.
Oh my God. And so I have noticed the hell out of that. I have noticed that if someone believes
the world is out to get them, and basically everyone is evil and trying to screw over everyone
else and take it all the advantage they can for themselves. Those are the exact same people that
do that sort of thing all the time. It seems to me they're basically just generalizing from
their own experience in life. And so I no longer trust people who don't trust others.
Because it means you're probably a lying douchebag,
which is unfortunate because you can't trust people all the time either, you know. So it makes
me feel like I am punishing people for being realistic about the fact that you can't always
trust everyone. But whenever I see someone just every single thing out, yep, that's how they get
you. So I'm like, oh God. Well, it may be the kind of heuristic that applies more to extremes,
right? Like people who, as you say, are always thinking that way are probably more,
probably more conformed to that rule. People who can't even get to free guacamole at a restaurant
without saying, ah, there's a scam involved. So Shelley, what, what, uh, the agreement,
or at least the implicit agreement was that you're going to defend lying for us? Or are we all on
the same page? So, so getting back to the defending lying, I guess the thing that I wanted Shelley
on is because in the Russians community is often sort of a norm to go to the extreme of being
always honest to the point of like, painful, uh, transparency, honesty all the time. And you think
that that is not necessarily a good thing all the time. Yeah. First of all, I guess maybe we
should break down like all the different categories and complexities of deception
because there is explicit lying and then there is not technically lying.
Not technically lying is the one that annoys me the most because Harry did that a lot from,
from the Harry Potter methods of rationality where he would say things that were technically true,
but in a way where he knew the person was drawing the false conclusion. And I'm like,
if you're saying, you know, something in a way that makes someone get wrong information about the
world, you're lying to them. Even if, you know, a genie would say, yes, those words are technically
the truth. That's the definition I like to sort of when you're, when you're intentionally trying
to communicate something to get your recipients to have a belief that you know isn't true. Yeah.
So like technically true, there's the fun example, like I go take a tour at the White House and I
call Cory Gardner, our, our state representative. And I say, this is Steven Zuber. I'm calling from
the White House. I'd like to talk to the Cory Gardner. So what does that communicate? That
sounds like I'm calling from the White House and I'm an important person, but I'm just calling
from proximity to the White House. So like I'm, but that, that statement is calculated to deliver
that obviously false message, right? Where like, I know they're going to believe the wrong thing.
So that, that to me is, that's a lie, right? But I don't feel like if some, you know, so like,
what's the standard thing that people don't like talking about? Like how much money they have?
So someone asked me, Steven, how much money do you have? I can say, I don't want to tell you.
Yeah. That's the honest answer. Not, here's my exact bank balance, right?
It is really weird dodging around those sorts of things because I don't really care if people
know how much money I have or how much I make. I don't consider money a very good indication
of moral worth, but in society, there's this very strict, in our society anyway,
there's this, this norm. There's this norm of not telling anyone how much you make or how much
you have. And so as oftentimes I'm like dancing around saying these numbers when I'm like,
God, I really wish I could just blurt this out because who gives a fuck, you know,
but you don't want to be seen as the asshole who has no idea about social conventions.
I share that belief with you about money. I've chose that because it's a topical example.
I mean, what's another one that people find, you know, uncomfortable to talk about?
That was the first thing that came to mind, but the money thing's pretty ubiquitous,
but I'm in your boat there.
I believe you were just earlier talking about whenever someone says, how are you,
you're just supposed to say fine.
Yeah, I think that might be a mistake on my part because when people say, how are you,
I almost always answer honestly just on reflex. And I mean, I don't go into the too much information
zone like, oh man, this morning I woke up with just diarrhea coming out of my ass.
But I'll be like, eh, you know, I've been better.
Yeah, I think I kind of do that as well. Because my tendency is to try and be at least
technically honest when speaking to people, especially when answering your direct question.
Especially if it's something as low stakes as how are you? Like, I don't know why I would lie about
that. And to be clear, I don't think I would lie about that either. I think what I was getting at
there's a difference between...
Well, the socially accepted answer is fine.
Well, I mean, there's also like the question, this involves a level of mind dream that I don't
usually like to get into. But often, like if your boss comes around your desk and says,
hey, how are you doing today? You don't say, oh man, trouble, trouble at home.
Here's all my list of problems. You don't list why everything isn't great.
You and I might say, eh, it's okay, pretty okay day.
But there are people who would say, Ross isn't really asking, how are you?
They're asking, they're saying hello, right? So I mean, if you really believe that,
you can reply with whatever you want. And you know, you just, if you actually think,
yes, they're not asking about me, they're asking, they're saying hi or whatever,
then you can give whatever the, you know, return greeting is. But you can also give a,
you can use a statement that expresses greeting, but it's also in its explicit content,
accurate as well. I always say not too bad. I mean, because that's technically true.
You don't have leprosy. So I mean, yeah, other than like I said,
other examples of lying than like sociopathic self-interest, you know, well, you have money
that would like, so I'm going to convince you of things in order to give, you know,
to let you give you, or to convince you to give you, give you, give me your money.
Man, I struggled with that sentence. Or, you know, I'm going to lie about a bunch of things to
get you to sleep with me or something. Those typically I think are not regarded as favorable
by anybody, you know, other than psychopaths or, you know, the people who are, who are like that.
So I mean, is there, is there a level of lying that anyone here is okay with? Or are we all
just going to sit here and- I mean, other than the extreme examples that you agreed were okay?
Well, what did I agree to exactly? I think you talked about like if physical violence is-
Oh, yeah, yeah. Once, once the possibility for like amicable communication is gone, then yeah.
If you're in a position where you're ready to hurt or kill somebody, you're in a position
where it's okay to lie to them too. Right. So I think one level of lying that I
engage in myself and I think is probably acceptable is when someone puts you in a position
where you basically have to lie to them. And I think we were just talking about this a little
earlier. What was the question you got asked when you go into a job interview?
Like why do you want to work here or something? Oh, yeah, exactly. Like what made you pick us?
The answer is always because you're going to give me money. Right.
Yeah. Or because, you know, out of the 250 places I applied to, you're one of the three
places to call me back. Right. So like- But, but they, how do they not know? They obviously know
that the correct answer is because you need to pay your fucking rent and they're there
willing to give you money for it. And yet they still ask the damn question anyway. So they deserve
to get a stupid lie back because what are you going to do? Be the one guy who, who tells them the
truth? God, I think that you might have caught me in a corner there because well, so this might
be an example of one of those circumstances where you're, it's not actually an engaged,
like an honest engagement of, of communication. There was really, it's just like a personality
test. We want to ask you a generic question, see if you can answer in a roughly human fashion.
Stephen, did you lie to that question? So I told Inyash. So I interviewed at a company that's
like eight people last week and they asked me, you know, what attracted you to this company? And
what attracted me? You guys wanted to interview with me. That's what attracted me the most.
But so obviously I can't say that. So what I did say is like, well, I love the idea of, you know,
being responsible for a product that I actually built, not being one of like 40 other developers
who worked on something. I like being able to take ownership of my stuff. And, you know,
I find that level of direct involvement with, with the product, you know, desirable or something,
something like that. Beautiful answer. And I, well, I told Inyash, like, I don't even know if
that's true. I, and looking at myself, I have no idea if I believe that or not. But I, what I did
there was I looked for an answer. What do they want to hear? And so I don't know, I guess that
counts as a lie. But I don't, again, I'm not sure if that they, but they know what the truth is.
So like, they're not looking for the truth. They're looking for, and I'm not sure if I'm
trying to bullshit myself to make myself okay with this lie. I'm not convinced that they would have
been happy with, I'm ready to do pretty much anything you guys are willing to pay me for.
Like that's, that's what made me interested. Right?
I sometimes kind of wonder what would happen if you were to answer truthfully on those sorts
of things. You wouldn't get called back. You don't think?
I think the key is they want you to be professional enough to do your job and human enough to work
with, right? Okay. And if you're, if you're that level of radical honest, you're not human enough
to let them think you'll be comfortable enough working in that environment.
I think there are other motivations behind asking that question, which could also help you to craft
an answer that is less of a lie. For instance, if I was going to ask that question to someone that
I wanted to hire, I would want to know if they had researched like my company and what they
actually thought, like what's their opinion about the way we do things or do you even know
the way we do things?
Yeah, you bet. And those are other good answers too. And I think the thing is about the answer
that I gave in this example, in this example, I think I actually do believe that I happen to
also like other things about like working like as a cog in a machine where like I'm one of like
40 people. I think I actually honestly like that too. So they're not asking me, why would you pick
us over everybody else? They're asking me, why would you pick us in general? I'm like, oh,
these are the reasons. I'm not going to list all the reasons why I wouldn't pick you guys.
I'll list all the reasons why I would. I think that's an honest answer.
I prefer working for a large company because you can kind of blend in in the background and
get lost in the machine, right? That may not be the best answer.
I am not passionate about accounting and I'm here to collect my paycheck and I hope I don't
draw attention. No one will notice if I spend 10 hours a week on Reddit.
But I mean, I mean, the real answer, you know, I guess this is sort of a field, but the general
thing is that you can give answers that are honest, but not like the, you know, the complete
package, right? Like you said, you know, your boss comes around and asks how you are. You don't
describe your morning bowel movement and, you know, your gastrointestinal distress on the
drive to work or something, right? Well, you don't.
So you give them an answer that's, you know, some of it. But so I think one of the kickbacks I get,
which I am surprised that there's a lot of kickback. There's not a lot, but there's some
kickback to like talking about, yes, I'm a big fan of honesty. I think that people lie way more
often than they should. And the average person could go their entire life without lying and
their lives would be better. And so the people that they live with and interact with,
but people, you know, like, that's not true. What about all these? They'll say, well, you know,
by, they'll think that the commitment to honesty means that you have to like be
always forthcoming with everything. And that's not true either. Like I said,
with the, with the X, X murder example, you know, where's your friend, you don't have to answer.
The answer isn't there in the basement. There, the answer is screw off or screw you, right? Or
fuck off, whatever it is. Or, you know, whatever personal information someone asks you, I can't
think of a good question. You know, your boss, your boss asks you, or your, if you're interviewing
again, I'm thinking interviews on my mind, you know, how much did you make at your last job? Oh,
I'm not really, you know, I guess I'm not really comfortable saying it's the same thing as saying,
I don't want this job. So I'm not really sure what you're supposed to do there. But, you know,
so like, because if you say too little, they're going to offer you whatever you made at your last
job and you want to make more. So what is, what is the question? All my personal interactions,
I've never, so I felt really weird doing this before when people would ask me probing questions.
I felt like I always had to answer. And if it was something I wasn't comfortable telling the
true answer about, I would just kind of not say the truth. But I'm not saying the truth. I mean,
I would lie. This was back in the day. But I have found that every single time nowadays, when I
just say, you know, I'm not really comfortable with that, people are like, Oh, okay. And they just
don't care. It seems like after a day, they don't even remember that they asked that. I'm like,
this is awesome. Right. And that's awkward, your first couple of times. And then you get,
you realize that like, oh, and people aren't going to lose their mind if, you know, if you
tell them, I don't want to answer that, or I'm not comfortable.
No, although I understand how there might be internal resistance to saying that kind of thing,
because there are all these signaling implications of, you know, saying, I don't want to tell you.
Yeah. It feels a lot like defecting in the conversation game.
You know, but I mean, you're also implicitly saying like, we're not close enough for me
to tell you that or something, or that there's a really huge secret which I'm not going to tell you.
Right. So I may have killed one man.
Secret is another thing that comes up in my life. So I've kind of made like the commitment
to honesty, I don't know, a few years ago, and everyone's like committed to being honest, but
like really about, you know, trying to never lie. Yeah. So whatever family drama or friendship
drama where they're like, Oh, you can't tell so and so, but this and then so people know me enough
by now for the most part that they, they can't say they won't try and tell me something and be
like, Oh, you have to lie if you're asked about this because they know I won't. There are times
where, you know, if someone says, I can't think of an example, you know, don't tell this person
that I can't think of a good example, whatever, quit my job or something for whatever reason,
I don't want them to know. And then that person asks me, I can just say, I guess what would I
say in that situation if I'm asked to like, for the most part, these things don't come up. So
like, you're not really called upon to like lie. But if you are, you can just say, you know what,
because in a question that's like binary like that, you're basically giving them the answer
by not answering it. So I think in that situation, in those situations, people that I know by now,
for the most part, don't really want me to keep those kinds of secrets. And it's not like, again,
I'll go tell people, but I would say maybe like, I was asked not to tell you, okay, you know, so
well, how about the not technically a lie option, which is to say, I couldn't say,
I couldn't say sounds like I don't know, but I do know. That's one of those things where it's like,
you could say, but you won't. So like you are lying. But I guess I'm bad at generating
examples as if anyone has one, I could be happy to play along. But I'm struggling to think of a
good example myself. Or you could sometimes you can just distract people in a way you can say,
like, you know, this is the kind of question that you ought to ask a person personally. And maybe
you're out of line for asking, you kind of turn it back on them. Yeah, I found that before too.
I don't think there's even where I do this in situations where I'm not even privy to like
special information. But they could be like, Oh, my God, what do you think about like this relationship
drama? I'm like, you know, if you're a great person, ask about that, your relationship partner.
Even if I knew what they would say, like say, if we had even talked about it, I will say, you
know, who's the best person, the person that you're talking about, that's who you should be talking
to. And that's that's, that's also that's also the truth, right? Yeah, that is the best person
to be talking to not me. So all right, sorry, I got distracted again. Shelly, what are non psychopath
examples of defensible? Well, I kind of want to go back to what you said about the possibility of
violence. Like, I think that there are more situations where violence is a threat than you
may consider. It's not just where you're talking to an individual and that individual is going to be
you up. For instance, there are situations in which if you admitted that you had suicidal thoughts,
you would be put on a cycle or police would come and take you away for your own good.
And I think that it may be reasonable for a person to even if asked directly, like,
do you have any suicidal thoughts to say no? Because there are a number of people who constantly
have suicidal thoughts, but at the same time, we're not suicidal. Yeah, I guess to find suicidal
thoughts. But I mean, so and I'm not I'm not being flippant. Not at immediate risk. Anyway, so I
mean, that's that's what I'd say to my psychiatrist or my psychologist. If I was talking with one,
I would say, by my own honest best appraisal, I'm not an immediate risk for self harm. And even
even if I'm having and if that person would be trusted to accept that, then I would hope
that I would trust my but that's true. If you feel like you can't trust the person you're talking
with or like. Yeah, and that happens with a lot in a lot of situations, especially I don't know
teenagers living at home with parents who would send them off to something that the parents think
is good for them, but would could be devastating to those ex gay camps. Yeah, exactly. That's true.
And I do want to emphasize that I don't think these cover the vast majority of lies that people
tell. I think for the most most part, people are telling what they consider to be like little
white lies. You know, oh, yeah, I can't make it to dinner party because I'm stuck in, you know,
I'm stuck 60 miles away in traffic when in fact they're at home and they just don't want to go.
I guess what you're saying, it's kind of a privilege to be able to tell the truth sometimes.
And it is. Well, if you're living in a situation where someone has a lot of control over your life,
over what resources you have access to, even if you do hold certain opinions or values, you may
have to lie about what they actually are, they'll take those away. And the one thing that these
all have in common and the third one that I just thought of, and the fourth one I thought of,
it's like other people you might lie to in similar examples are like the police or your
boss about something or other, right? But the thing that these all have in common is that the
person you're lying to has a disproportionate compared to your power over them, they have
more power over you than you do over them. And so if the police pulls you over and asks, you know,
do you have any drugs in the car? And if you think they'll believe me if I say no, but if I say yes,
I'm definitely going to jail, you'll say no. But I mean, that's just one of the bummers of having
bad laws, right? That it puts otherwise good people, it forces otherwise good people to be dishonest.
And the example of talking to, like, if you're talking to your parents and you're afraid that
they're going to do bad things to you, that's almost, you're right, that is a little dialed down
from like, being at risk of, you know, literally getting killed with an axe or something. But
that's at the risk of coming to self, or coming to living their life with us.
What if they were just withdraw college funding from you? Because that's certainly not violent
necessarily, it's not life threatening, it's people could argue, well, it's their money,
they don't want to give you their money to send you off to college, then they don't have to, right?
And I mean, I basically kind of agree with that. But on the other hand, that's, that's,
so it feels like there's almost a social contract that if you have kids and you have enough money
to send them to college, and they can do well in college that you should, right?
So the distinction here, we're running with the example of like, where you have parents who are
okay with a child being gay. And so if they ask you for whatever reason, blank, are you gay?
And because if you say, yes, I'm not going to pay for your college, then you'll say, well,
of course not then. So like, I don't even necessarily gay if you have really, really just
parents, they're like, are you an aspiring rationalist? And you're like, no man, I believe in the big
GZ. That's right. So I think, I mean, in those circumstances, you're kind of saying, well,
what I want to, all right, so I've got a few thoughts, if you don't mind me rambling for a
second, go for it. So one, you're okay throwing an honest relationship out the window for whatever
payoff you're going to get for lying to them. In this case, you're like, you know what,
I'm okay not being open with my parents if it means getting free college.
Right. Basically using them for their college money.
And but at the same time, you're like, well, I don't want to have a relationship with people who,
you know, don't like non believers or gay people or whatever my parents don't like, right?
And so if you're okay with like, if it's okay to take advantage of bad people,
then then you can just do whatever you want to them. So like that's, or at least in the context of,
you know, manipulating them through deceit, I don't know if I'd necessarily buy that whole
chain. There's also the possibility to I mean, it's necessarily okay to take advantage of bad
people. I don't think so either. But that might be what some want to think if they're okay lying
to them in order to keep their college tuition, right? But I mean, then consider too that there's
a breakdown of what could be a very fruitful and important development in the conversation, right?
Like you might just believe your parents would, you know, disown you if they learned you were gay,
when in fact they might, they might have known all along, they might have known all along that
it'd be super supportive. Now granted, you might have a really good idea and you're not going to
take a 5% chance that, you know, somehow they've been hiding their, their super niceness about
this subject their entire lives. But I guess it depends what kind of relationship you want to
have with them. And again, if your parents are close minded bigots against whatever you are
hypothetically, they might not be the kind of people they've known all along, but they are just
okay with keeping everything hidden. And as soon as you come out, they're like, well, fuck you,
you broke the contract. And I mean, so like that's, that depends, like if they're, if they're those
kind of people, there might be the kind of people you're okay not having a real relationship with.
Yeah. But I think mainly I'm against lying when there's a chance for a real relationship.
It feels like a shitty thing to tell someone that you should throw away your future for honesty,
but it feels shitty to tell someone that you should take money from people you don't like,
just because you have moral disagreements with them, right? If it's their money, then it's their
choice whether they spend it on sending you to college or not. But that's also easy for me to
say seeing as I am, you know, not in the college going to age range. This is not a concern for me,
I guess. Yeah, but I mean, like lying to your boss about something that they might find objectionable.
I'm not really sure when like, laws are pretty good in the United States anyway about keeping
those kind of conversations illegal. You know, so like, I do occasionally see job listings where
they're like, and we want, you know, we want applicants with good Christian values and even
straight up ones like we want Christians. I think this must be for private organizations,
not for, you know, public companies, because you're not supposed to be able to do that. So if your
employer asks, in fact, there's actually a reputable, I'm not sure if this is a chain or if it's one
place, but there's a nursing home in my hometown that has some like, they're very good place,
well funded, nicely staffed and well equipped. One of the things they care about is they want
to make sure that you, you know, in their list of like value statements, they have like good
Christian values, just something like that. And it's like the only off-putting thing about them
is that like, oh, they kind of want you to be religious, but they might be able to ask you,
in fact, I know somebody did, did interview with them, they had asked, you know, do you feel like
you personally line up with our value statements? And in that implicitly is, are you a good Christian
person? But it's not explicit. And so you could say, yeah, I feel like I agree.
I have an interesting personal thing that is exactly that.
Well, so there's a lot of markets out there for publishing genre fiction. And for the most part,
they don't care who you are. They're like, send us the story. If it's a good story,
we'll pay you money and we'll publish it. But there's a few that are like, and check this box
if you are one of these minorities. And I check the box for sexual minority and for religious
minority, because I am one of the most hated religious minorities in the country, according to
every survey, at least up to a few years ago, we're more hated than Muslims, atheists. And
under sexual minority, yes, I would say that the polyamory people generally get a lot of flak
from the monogamous out there, like, oh, you're living this immoral lifestyle and how could you?
And so yeah, I always check those. But I know what they're actually asking is, are you Muslim or gay?
And I'm like, no, I'm not those things, but screw you.
By the word of your question, I'm answering honestly.
Yeah. And if you are part, I feel like I am being honest, because if you are part of a
minority that gets a lot of shit from the massive, the majority of the culture,
I think it counts, right? Am I wrong about that?
Well, I guess it depends on the exact wording of the question, though. But religious minority,
I think atheism is completely in that category. I don't think that you're really fudging on that
I think a lot of people would draw attention with you calling it a religious anything,
but for the intents and purposes of like getting all the legal benefits,
sure, or the legal benefits, sure. I always consider atheism to be basically a religion.
I mean, it is a religious alignment, I guess. Yeah, religious alignment, I think.
I always use it's a religion in the same way that not collecting stamps is a hobby,
or that baldness is a hairstyle. Yeah, but it's not really because
it's not a religion, but it's a religious alignment. Yeah, yeah, it's not a religion.
There's no strictures or anything, but there is, you've considered these things and you've come
to the conclusion that it's bullshit and that the world is materialistic, which is
still a philosophy that generally is confined to the religious domain, right?
I like Shelley's version of religious alignment more.
Did you use alignment? I did.
Oh, I heard you repeat it, sorry. So I think alignment is different than like a religion,
right? This is sort of an aside.
But no, the questions are extremely loosely worded to the point where
they could mean almost anything. I do not feel bad checking those because
if they actually were to ask something like, have you slept with a man, then I would be no.
But they're like, are you under this entire spectrum of deviant, different, not deviant,
but altered sexualities. I'm like, yes, I actually fall under several categories there.
So that's actually a good distinction. I know when I give blood, they'll ask specifically
because in some places it might still be the case. It's been a few years,
but they care if you're a gay male, they want to know if you've had sex with a man.
Yeah, yeah.
And they ask you explicitly.
Right. And I'm like, there's some men I'm attracted to. I've never had sex with any of them.
Well, no, Chris Hemsworth won't return my calls.
I just have to become more popular.
There's, at that point, you'd be lying to say yes. Right. So I guess there's a difference.
I feel like we're getting a little sidetracked.
Right.
Sorry. Shelly, you want to bring us back on?
Oh, well, I did bring a few links and notes about the topic. So maybe I can bring those up.
The revelation principle has to do with game theory and economics, I suppose.
Tell us about the revelation principle.
So first I have to tell you what mechanism design is, which is even more complicated to talk about.
People have described mechanism design as reverse game theory in that you start with
the outcome you want as a function of the elements that come into play.
So you figure out what you want to do. For instance, an outcome might be
you want the person who needs the resource more to get it or something to get more of it.
Or so whatever outcome it is, so then you design a mechanism whereby the players can,
within these restrictions of the mechanism, act in such a way that you'll get your outcome.
And so the revelation principle is a fundamental principle in mechanism design.
It says that if it is possible to create some mechanism, according to certain restrictions,
I guess, I don't know the exact thing. But anyway, you can, in theory, implement that same function
in a mechanism where the players do not have to lie.
Okay. I wasn't sure I understood exactly what all this is.
Can you summarize what this means?
Maybe I should just read the Wikipedia.
Or if you can bring it home with an example, that works too.
Are we talking about when you're going to a car dealership and you're trying to negotiate with
someone? That could be an example.
That's always one of the things I hate about those sorts of interactions that you both know
that you're lying. He's giving you an artificially high price because he knows you're going to
trot him down. You're giving him an artificially low price because he's giving you a high price.
And it's like, why do we have to go through these hours of bullshitting each other when
we could both just start with very reasonable actual prices?
Last time I went to a dealership, the guy came up to me,
hey, how much do you like to spend on a car today? And I said, I would like to spend zero.
And I gave him a nudge, nudge, wink, wink. I'm obviously kind of playing along,
but I'm not going to play. I'm looking to spend somewhere in the neighborhood of 15 grand.
It's like, no, I'm not good. If I can get what I want for 10, I want it for 10,
or if I can get it for five, that's what I want. But he asked how much I want.
I'd like to get a free car. That's the honest answer.
And that makes things tough because if everyone could just say exactly what they wanted and be
honest about it, you could much more easily allocate the resources or do what needs to be
done efficiently. But since everyone thinks that the other people, and that matter knows that the
other people are going to be inflating theirs, you got to do it as well.
Sort of. It depends. Isn't that what we got with our politics lately, it feels like?
Do we want to go there? No, okay, fine. It just seems like people are like, oh, we got it.
I'll try and use this example from Wikipedia. The utilitarian function is roughly that whoever
values it more gets the prize. And it talks about auctions and how people are incentivized to
bid lower than they really would value it so that they possibly can get the item for a lower price.
But second price auction is a different strategy than your typical auction.
It's a sealed bid auction, and the highest bidder wins, but the price they have to pay
is the second highest price that was bid. That is really cool. Yeah. So people are less
incentivized to be deceptive about how much they really would pay. Well, hold on. Wouldn't it be
really easy then to just put down a billion dollars and then whoever made the most reasonable offer,
you'd actually just pay whatever they were going to pay? Yeah. So you can guarantee that you would
win for whatever a reasonable price would be. But if someone put down a billion minus one dollars,
that's true. Then you have to pay a billion minus one. Indeed. I guess if you're the only person
that you knew who was going to be a dick and not play by the spirit of the game.
No. So yeah, you can't just maximize it because everyone's going to maximize it,
but there's always a chance that your bid is actually going to be the second highest,
and then that's going to actually be the price. Right. Well, then if your bid is the second
highest, then you won't get what you want, but some other idiot is stuck paying a billion dollars
for whatever thing you bid it on, right? I hadn't heard it called that before,
but I heard it. That being proposed is one of the ways to solve the government contractor problem
where since in a lot of areas, the governments are required to take the lowest bidder,
companies will just give fake low bids. And then, you know, oops, we ran over on cost.
Oops, this take a month longer than we thought. And this is why everything goes over budget now,
because you lie to get the contract. And someone proposed that the rule be changed to you have
to take the second lowest bid, which, you know, punishes the people who go artificially low.
Well, that's slightly different from it is, but it reminded me of that. It was a very cool concept.
So the revelation principle says that for any mechanism that, that actually accomplishes
something there, if that mechanism involves deception, there's a different one that could
also accomplish it that does not involve deception. Okay. Does it, does it say how to do that? No.
No. Okay. So in some cases, like even if there's theoretically this other game you could be playing
in which you don't have to lie, are you really going to be able to convince everyone to play
that game instead of the game that we are playing? So yeah, I guess maybe the difference just running
with the example given is like where you're doing the second bid auction, but you're not telling
anybody until the end versus one where you tell them at the beginning. Is that?
Yeah. Well, that's a totally different game there.
Yeah. So I guess I'm not really sure. Let me, let me ask this a different way. When you and I talked
about this once, we talked about like just lying in general and you were like, no, I think I can
find some defensible cases for that. Or you came off speaking more in favor of it to the level where
I was surprised. Was this miscommunication between us or?
It may have just been a reaction against the extreme honesty idea of rationality. I saw someone
recently, I showed this to you earlier, I saw someone recently on a post from a kind of rationalist
memer person, Rob Wiblin. Everyone here knows Rob Wiblin, right? No. Okay. Anyway, he posted
something and a commenter replied that she was really annoyed by the fact that everyone has
to pretend that honesty is this most important thing ever and everyone has to be honest all the
time because of her commitment to honesty, because that means people are lying about the fact that
sometimes lying is the best thing to do in consequentialist terms. I read what you're
talking about and she conflated honesty with free speech. I don't think the original post was about
free speech. I know, but I think she even said that for her, the two are the same. Okay. And I
think that they're different. That honesty and free speech are different? Yes. One is the protection
to say whatever you want without fear of getting thrown in jail or killed or hurt. The other one
is being able to or I guess being encouraged to or whatever is not deceiving somebody, right? So
there's a difference. Yeah, but I think she was annoyed that everyone is always saying you have
to always tell the truth. There's no reason ever to lie. And she's saying that in itself is a lie.
Is she lying about that? What's that? I had to have that joke at least once.
Like, so I mean, that's always my joke about somebody who defends lying. I'm like, are you
lying right now? I think it is actually fairly rare, even among rationalists to say that there's
absolutely no cases where it's, it's good utility to lie. I mean, there was the you can't dismiss
universal ality, was it? Universal bull eyes and allow it? Right. And even in that post, I think
the ultimate conclusion that Scott ends up drawing is rather not like don't ever lie, but
don't make decisions where you erase the possibility of positive some deals.
His example is really fascinating. Have you read the post?
I'm sure I have, but I can't remember the example.
It's the one where he says a soldier is captured by the enemy and the enemy asks,
where is your headquarters located? And he can either tell them the truth or lie.
And if he tells them the truth, they bomb the headquarters, they take out his leadership,
or he can lie. They bomb an empty warehouse. And then after that, they don't trust him anymore.
They don't ask him. So instead of bombing just the headquarters, they're like, well,
shit, we know that the headquarters is somewhere in the city. They just nuke the city to get rid
of it. And then the person of war is like, well, shit, I would have much rather that they just
take out the HQ with the leadership than nuking the entire city. And Scott pointed out that
if they assumed that the guy was just going to lie to them, they wouldn't have wasted their time
or their resources. The fact that he might held them the truth is why they asked. And if you commit
to, you know, I will lie when it is in my advantage, then they no longer, there's no longer that
possibility for trade of information that even though I don't want my HQ to die, I want my whole
city to exist much more. So I am willing to make that trade, even though it's kind of a shitty
trade. And he's saying if you are committed to lie about that to protect your own side, then
you're just going to get your city nuked instead. Well, that's, that's just a bigger version of the
Kant dilemma, right? So I mean, I could see what they're saying. It could just as well be where
they just have one bomb or some other ridiculous constraint on the, on the problem where they
only have one bomb and they're going to send it wherever you tell them to because they're idiots
or, you know, whatever it is, right? I mean, that's, that's worth considering. But that's,
that's just, you know, what are the fallouts of lies? And then you're kind of responsible for those
too. You're also responsible for the truth. So I mean, one thing that you might say in the situation
is fuck off, right? I'm not going to tell you where they are because they're going to nuke the
city. Oh, are they threatening you to, are they making that explicit? That's basically their
choice. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Well, in that case, yeah, then you just do the math and, you know,
do I want my squadron and my, my commander's dead or do I want everybody I know and love dead?
I mean, that's not hard either. I mean, that's obviously a hard decision to make, but that's
not hard to sit here and make from armchairs. Maybe I'm missing something.
Maybe you're hoping that if they hit the empty warehouse, that'll give your side a little bit
more time to make a counter attack and take them out before they can go ahead and take out the
city. That's a fair point. I mean, certainly once you start like picking up too many details,
then you can find some way around it, right? The scenario kind of implies that lying is a last
resort weapon that you should only use if, you know, you're never going to be able to use that
again. No one's going to ever going to trust you again. So save your lie up till the
until it really matters. Yeah. I mean, that's, that's what I'm working on. That's my long con,
right? Five years is then when it does 10 years from now, you're going to rip off your face.
I'm like, I'm an alien motherfucker. Well, I mean, then I'm the feast. And then when someone asks,
you know, when the, when, you know, so like, I mean, that, that is one of the things I guess,
man, to make this just super sound super, we talked about sociopathic self-interest before,
it could be in your long-term sociopathic best interests to be radically honest for the next
few years to have a really big lie to tell than I want to believe it because he has this good
reputation of being so honest. Oh my God. That's not what I'd advocate. I would advocate for doing
it for, for other reasons, but I never tell you what happened to me as a teenager. It was basically
this. Oh my God. Although I kind of wasted it, I guess, although not really. So, okay, I, I'm
generally pretty shitty at lying. I just, I'm, I'm not good at it. And basically everyone
knows this about me. My parents know I'm crappy at lying. And so I don't try to do it very often.
When I do, I'm usually caught and it sucks. But one time I called my sister a bitch.
And that is a big deal in my house. And my sister went and told my parents,
I think I was like 14 at this time. And my parents came up to me and were like,
did you call your sister a bitch? And I was like, I'm going to die. I will not see the son ever
again. And I said, no, I wouldn't do that. That's horrible. With totally straight face. Like this
was the one time in my life I needed to lie. And having that reputation for being really shitty
at lying saved me because I pulled it off entirely. It was crazy. And, uh, yeah. And looking back on
it, that was a terrible time to waste it. But on the other hand, it, they believed me. So I guess
I didn't actually waste it. That was the beginning of your deceptive period in your life. Yes, I
suppose so. And it also feels weird because now I'm telling everybody, Hey, even though I'm generally
really shitty at lying, if it's really important to me, I can pull one over on you. If you're a
terrified 14 year old, maybe there was a great Lucy K joke along the same lines, uh, where he's
talking about when his, he had like two daughters, like nine and seven years old and how the older
ones just figuring out lying is a thing. And how it's like, how can I tell them not to do that
when it's only a perfect solution to every problem they have right now? You know, so it's like,
all right, so they're terrified and they can, they can be, they can tell the truth and get in
trouble or they can just lie and I'll believe them and it'll be fine. So anyway, it, it, that
brought mind, that brought that to mind. And if they started practicing lying young, maybe they'd
get better at it. Oh God. That is not something you want. But there's also, I think in a post by
Eleazar on less wrong comment, I think, he suggested that maybe lying to other people
makes you better lying to yourself. And then, then you're really screwed.
I just recently read an article, uh, that said, God, what was it? I don't remember the details
because I didn't really read it. I skimmed it, but it was along the lines of talking and
euphemisms, like, uh, like you see in a Godfather movies, like, oh, it'd be terrible if an accident
were to happen to your place of business. Maybe I can help protect it for $100. Talking and
euphemisms rather than being direct, uh, makes it much easier for people to not only be dishonest
and do morally bad things, but to not feel bad about it. Like just using those words, even though
you know what you're doing, you'll feel less bad by dancing around it. So another good reason to
just be direct and honest about things. I can see that.
Or really don't trust anyone who starts using euphemistic language for bad behavior.
I mean, just don't trust anyone who uses euphemistic language in general, I guess.
I could think of a couple of examples. I'm sorry, go ahead.
It's hard to see how using euphemisms for things that aren't bad is going to have that effect.
Like you don't always want to say penis every now and then you can say shlong.
No, I'm not called upon to talk about penises a lot in my daily life, so.
You have the wrong job, sir.
I think I can think of a couple of anecdotes where that support Eleizer's
post that people who practice lying can be better dishonesty. And then the kind of reverse of that
is that if you're committed to being honest, not just with other people, but with yourself,
why is being dishonest to yourself bad? So if you acknowledge that it is bad and you'd rather
not be dishonest to yourself, well, you can face that and you can solve it. You can approach that
a lot quicker if you commit to being honest with yourself and with other people.
All right, so there was a book that Sam Harris wrote that was really short, like 50 pages on
lying. And he gave this anecdote where he was valedictorian of I think either his,
I think it was a college or a high school or college that he went to, and they wanted him
to give the commencement speech or something. And he was like, oh no, I think somebody who's
been to the school the full years, you know, I think he transferred in should do the speech
instead when really he was just terrified of public speaking. And so being called upon to
face that for himself would have been an avenue to addressing that problem earlier in his life,
right? Right. My own example was also academic, but it was like sixth grade. I went through an
elementary school that was K through six and in sixth grade, I was going to the junior high
school for math and I ended up dropping out because what I told, I don't remember now looking back,
if I actually believe this myself or if I knew that I was lying, I think I must have known on
some level that I wasn't being honest because I remember that it wasn't true, that I told people,
no, I miss being back at my school with my friends and stuff when really it was like,
I'm struggling too much and this is stressful. And if I had said, you know, no, look, I'm struggling
this is stressful, I might have been able to get like more assistance or something and, you know,
kept up with that math program. But really, it was, I just told people, no, no, I had this other
reason. It's not because it's too hard. It's I just don't want to anymore. And that, that let
sixth grade Steven back out of this, this math program. So I think those lies both came from
the Harris's example in mind came from being able to lie to other people about what I was actually
thinking led me, let me make it made it easier to lie to myself, which was Eleazar's point.
And I think that there's, I guess in my experience, there's, there's good reason to believe that.
There's a really good reason to try to not lie to yourself as much as possible.
That's where you really screw your life over.
Well, I mean, like even think of like a really hard question, you know, you see your friend and
ask her, how'd you get that bruise on your face? And she, you know, it and the actual answers that
her spouse or her partner's hitting her, but she gives you some answer, you know, that's, that's
obviously a lie. Well, the longer she can entertain that, the longer she doesn't have to face the
reality that she's an abusive relationship, right? So I mean, it's there. I mean, she knows she's
an abusive relationship. The more insidious ones are the ones like you were saying, where you were
just, you didn't realize that, I mean, I guess you kind of at some level realized that you were
struggling, but I was able to not make that my central focus. Yeah. This example is more just
like being able to face a hard truth, right? And that if you're, if you commit it to honesty,
you're going to face it right now and right away. There's no putting it off. So yeah,
that, I mean, that's, that's a different. It's really hard to unflinchingly look at
things that are difficult like that. Yeah, for sure. On the other hand, if you really
unflinchingly look at the fact that you're willing to lie to other people, then you can also
maybe tell the truth to yourself by recognizing that what you said to the other person is a lie,
right? Well, not being taken in by your own lies, but admitting to yourself that you were lying.
So if you're being honest with yourself, that you're being dishonest to other people, you're
like, okay, well, I know when I'm being dishonest, I'm being dishonest now. I'll be honest to myself
when I want. That could be true. It requires more mental energy though.
Yeah. And I mean, I don't know of any. And you may have the stress of knowing that you're lying.
So yeah, I think generally my thing about lying is that for the most part, it's unnecessary and
you're causing unneeded stress. And, you know, so the examples that people run to aren't really
examples that people use in day to day life. And that's, so that's what I thought you were
defending when we were talking about lying a few months ago. Well, I think what, as I recall that
conversation, you were suggesting some kind of radical change in reality that might improve
things. And one of the things you suggested was, what if people were just incapable of lying?
And that seems to me like something terrible. Terrible. Like, first of all, you're unable to
speak the words that you want to speak, even just because they're false.
Yeah, I remember the conversation now, or at least I remember that prompt. And that's right. I did
say, so I can't remember what the specific prompt was, but I think we're talking about
like what's one small change you could make that you think would make the world a better place.
And I do think that there will be some awkwardness to overcome in the first few days or first few
weeks. And as we kind of discussed, those high stakes situations where violence could happen are
not that uncommon. They are definitely threats in people's lives.
But do you think if no one could lie, then there would be less of those threats? If
someone asked a guy, how's your relationship doing? And his answer would have to be like,
hey, not that good. I beat my wife every week. Probably wouldn't happen as much with the beating
of the wife, right? That could be one way to kind of beat this scenario. So yeah,
the ex-wielding psychopath might come to your house less often if that person was compelled
to honesty for the entirety of his life, because what are the odds he would still be out on the
street? If that was his first break or whatever, and that's the first time he's going to do something
crazy. But if he's been violent his whole life, and he's incapable of hiding that fact, I don't
know, this is actually something that I would, this isn't a flushed out enough idea for me to get
behind and defend all the way. I can't think of the benefits of lying that are so great that I
wouldn't gladly make the world lie free. I admit there's definitely some benefits to it, but I
think the costs of it are great enough that they really overwhelm it. And just imagine how much more
relaxed everyone can be if they weren't having to read into everything everyone said. And the fact
that, oh, our government officials lie to us was a fact of life, right? That just mentioned politics
earlier. Or like, again, our employers, our family or whatever. Well, people still have the ability
to withhold information, and particularly people who are more powerful would have more ability to
withhold information. And it would be the people with less power who would be put on the spot and be
forced to answer direct questions more often. More often. But like, you could still get like a
government official, you know, under, if they're testifying, and you ask them direct questions.
If they say, I'd rather not answer that, you can just phrase the question and say, look, whatever
government person, I'm going to ask you, you know, have you been embezzling money? If you try
and, if a dodge is yes, yes or no, you know, so like... That's not a fair question. You can always,
you can't tell someone refusing to answer is admitting guilt. I mean, I guess I'm thinking
specifically like in a court, but I didn't mean to interrupt your analogy. Look, in a court, don't
don't we have the Fifth Amendment? I think we wouldn't need that. I mean, that's, we do, but
I've never been a constitution worshipper. So... In a court, all of a sudden, these questions become
even more likely to self incriminate you, right? Yeah. I mean, so again, this sounds like it's
way more distant from what we're talking about, like actually, you know, real life on the ground,
how to live our lives, but in a world where people didn't lie. And you're asking, you know,
the president, you know, did you, again, embezzle whatever it is. And if they say, I'm not going
to answer that, then you're like, oh, well, they would answer if the answer was no. And so I get
like why you're not supposed to self incriminate, but if, I guess, if it's impossible to not get
called out by being dishonest, you know, you could make a career out of dishonesty.
You probably just implement a blanket policy of never answering questions.
Right. Then you're answered to how's your days? Like, I don't want to tell you.
That would just be your answer to everything. Well, I mean, you could answer very simple ones
like that, but anything dealing with anything legally, you'd be like, I don't answer questions
about legalities. Sorry. Like a lot of people have the rule that I do not answer questions about
what I make, or I do not answer questions about my sexuality. If a boss asks you, so are you gay,
you're like, that's not an appropriate question for you to ask. In this situation, I'm picturing
if I could limit the power to lie, you know, like so maybe if we want to maintain lying for our
personal lives or whatever reason, it would be kind of cool if it was like impossible to lie
on the floor of the Senate, right? You know, like where, where our representatives couldn't get up
there and intentionally deceive each other or us, right? And I get why, how that has all kinds of
implications that like, oh, you're saying they can't actually say what they want to say. Like,
you're compelling them to do things like, yeah, kind of. But I mean, these aren't
average people with average powers, right? These are the last people on earth that you want
deceiving people. Does that make sense? Yeah, I just feel like the people, these, these people
with greater power than average would be the least likely to ever be put on the spot in that
situation. Like, if lying does not exist, maybe democracy would, would explode the next day.
Maybe. Yeah. Although I think in the examples that I'm running out, like these are the people
that exactly would be called out. You know, so like, if you ask them, I can't really think of any
non, you know, are these, are these sexual assault allegations? Do they have merit? And you can't
lie about it. You want to know if your, if your congressperson is a rapist. And, you know, like,
so like they, they, I can see where like a power imbalance might make things tough
when dealing with- I think we probably end up with a lot more Trumps.
Like one of the weird things about Trump is that he's post-truth. No matter what he says,
it doesn't matter. You're like, hey, he could be telling the truth. He could be lying. He doesn't
even know. So- I disagree. I feel like it would be impossible for us to have gotten Trump if, if
it was, if a candidate or- Well, cause I don't- I don't think- Imagine like, you know, like when you,
when you're in court and you're like, I swear on the Bible or, you know, you make a swear, you make
an oath of truth. Imagine if it became impossible for you to lie for the next hour. Right. But I don't
think Trump even lies all that much. He just randomly blurts out things that come into his head
without evaluating their truth function at all or their truth value at all. Given the definition
that we used of trying to communicate a belief that you know to be false to somebody, it's true
that it's entirely possible that if the, if the messenger of this is completely devoid of an
internal monologue or there's- Who knows if he even believes in the concept of truth? I was sort
of making a joke. Like if the lights aren't on, then there's nothing like, they're not convincing
anything. You know, like if I, if I have my computer print out random statements about different
colors of the sky, it's not lying. It's just, it's just saying stuff. In fact, you really
strongly incentivize to lie to yourself under this scheme. Yeah, it's true. Yeah. To deceive yourself
so that you could never have to be lying to other people. Maybe if you knew that's what you're doing.
And again, this, this is not something that I want to spend a lot of time defending because it's not
really a solid idea. I think we were entertaining it as a thought experiment, but it was, I don't
think, I certainly don't have a developed enough opinion on that to like sit here and talk about
it or to, I guess, what I'm getting at is don't write in and how dumb that is because I get,
I get that it's not the best idea, but I was, it is fun to think about. I mean, yeah, if you could
deceive yourself, I don't know, I don't, I guess it depends. You know, I couldn't convince myself
if I wanted to that the sky was red, right? But that's sort of an aside. So I won't go back to-
Well, I did want to briefly go back to the discussion of not technically lying.
And you mentioned how in Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality, Harry does this
a lot. Yeah. It should have been one of my early clues that he's evil.
That he's the true villain of the piece. Well, or at least partly. Yeah.
So actually this comment back from 2009 by Eleazar seems to imply that he maybe is not as much of a
not technical liar as Harry, but he has some, some leanings towards that. It seems he said,
he writes that one of the primary motivations against lying is losing your reputation, like
getting a reputation for lying. And then he says, at least if you get a reputation for
not technically lying, your words still mean things, right? It's not like people are just
going to completely discount everything you say because you lie a lot. Your words actually do
still mean things if you technically don't lie. They just have to be carefully double-checked.
Yeah. That's not, that's not, someone with that reputation is not someone that I would
find worthy of engaging in a conversation because I don't want to have to sit there
and analyze every single sentence for hours to see how it could have possibly been, you know,
twisted. Well, on the other hand, if someone is writing to you and you have time to go over
their words that- It's still not worth it. No. I can see how it could be a reputation. It could
be a cool reputation to have as in like, oh, that guy's really smart. That is some clever,
witty things he did with his lying, but still not someone I would want to engage with if I knew
that was a thing they did often. I mean, I assume everyone lies from time to time and I have not
cut off all communication with the outside world. So I accept some level of lying from people, but
if it was a constant thing, it would be like talking to, you know, Loki or one of the trickster gods.
But there's also- You can't trust anything what they say.
There's a spectrum between explicit lying and complete non-deception and in between that,
like the level of not technically lying, right? There are ways where you can sort of mislead
people, but not that much or not that egregiously.
I'm not the only person right now thinking of the magic users from the Wheel of Time book series.
Never read it.
The Isidae, that's the name of the magic users. And when they attain the position of, you know,
being formal, whatever, they just call them whatever. It's this whole thing. But they take three O's
that they're bound to, like an unbreakable vow in methods of rationality. They're incapable
of not doing it. So one of them is to never speak a word that isn't true.
And so they're famously annoying to deal with and everybody hates talking to them because
they know that there's going to be this Isidae trickery in their statements that they're going
to make me think something, but it's not really true, but it's technically true.
But, and they all know that, the magic users, they know that there's this reputation and that
they can, you know, they have this loki, this forked loki tongue. But what it does do is maintains
like you're saying that if they say, if they say something direct, then you know it's true
because you know they can't lie. So like there's a difference obviously in that humans can.
But it is nice to have that ability to be taken completely seriously if you say something direct
and unambiguous. But having the general reputation of being incapable of having an honest conversation
and dealing with, you know, fairly isn't really worth it. Like it's better to kind of have both,
right? To not be dishonest for all intents and purposes and to be able to be trusted when you
give a direct statement. But yeah, if you have to pick one, or if you, if you, if you can have one,
then go for it. Is that sort of what he's saying and what, what you would get behind? Or I feel
like I'm talking the way I've got my microphone is I'm facing towards Yashmore. So I'm not looking
at, so I've tried to adjust because I'm not looking at Shelley that much. And I feel like I'm not
engaging you enough. No, that's cool. I think he's just saying like generally try to not lie.
But if you have to be deceptive, try to maybe not technically lie and downgrade your deception.
Try to be clever about it. Yeah. And, and that the cost of one is definitely less than the cost
of the other. Because one is, is like almost a nuclear option. If you're going to get a reputation
for lying. Right. But also I want to talk about two other posts by Eliezer. Ends don't justify
means among humans and protected for myself, which I think it's maybe right next to it in the sequence.
So the first one talks about how as humans we are running on corrupted hardware. And so our
judgments can't really be trusted. And in the most high stakes and fuzzy hard to judge situations,
you want to have some kind of hard rule that you always follow, even if it seems to you like
it's the wrong rule in that case, because you're running on corrupted hardware, you're probably
going to get it wrong. Should we quickly define corrupted hardware? What is meant by that?
All right, personally. All right. The, the concept that so it kind of draws a distinction between
the mind as being more like software and the body is like the computer, the hardware that our
mind is run on. And if you know, you are dealing with a computer that has been the hardware itself
has been corrupted, someone hostile to you has access to it. You can't really trust any software
that runs on it because no matter how good the software is and how well you've checked it,
there could be something in the hardware where whenever you add these two bits together,
it'll spit out a three instead of a two. There's just no way to get around it. And so you, if you
have to make allowances for knowing that you are dealing with a piece of hardware that has been
corrupted, that it can be wrong in ways that it is impossible to tell what those ways are. And
that's kind of what he means that your body can hijack your thought process in ways that
are invisible to you. And that will look like you are running correctly, even though you are not.
And there's no way for you to tell. And the only way to avoid this is by having some very hard rules
that you will never, ever break, even when it is obvious that you have to break the rule right
now. I think this is kind of where Kant comes, Kant comes from, that he has this rule never,
ever lie, even if it looks like in this one case, I should lie because really there's no reason to
let an axe murderer know that my friend is in the basement. That's the, his argument would be like,
that is your hardware, it has been corrupted, it is lying to you, stick with the rule. I would,
I would assume is what Kant would say if he was around nowadays and a computer programmer.
Well, certainly you can, you can maybe see the seeds of that kind of thinking
in Kant. His, Eliezer's example was that it always feels like you need to overthrow the
current leadership of the tribe for the good of the tribe, because you will all be wiped out if
you keep going down this ruinous path. And then somehow once you're the leader, once you're the
leader, it seems like, why shouldn't I give, you know, special favors to my friends? They supported
me in this fight and it's, it's okay for me to take a few extra riches from the pool because
look at how much I have sacrificed for the good. And, and so he's saying that is your hardware,
basically saying you are not in the most advantageous position in society, kill the people who are,
take their stuff and now spread your genes. So that's the rule, never, ever kill the leadership
and take control of the tribe, even for the good of the tribe. Yeah, because you will trick
yourself into thinking you're being altruistic when probably you're, you're programming evolution
programmed you to have other true motivations. Which is one of the reasons that we say do not
punch fascists if they're just talking to a reporter on the street, right? Small nitpick
with the example, yeah, never kill the, the tribe leader and take the tribe, take ownership of the
tribe yourself because you know, you're unless he's Hitler. Well, I'm wondering what if you're,
what if you're just killing the tribe leader because you think that the tribe leader is
going to ruin the ruin your civilization and you're not saying I'm literally what he's saying is
he's saying don't make a power grab for yourself afterwards as well because that has all those
obviously evolutionary once you're the leader, you get all sorts of evolutionary advantages.
Well, no, I'm saying don't be a leader. If you're just saying, look, I don't even want the leader
and then leave. Well, or like just so this doesn't make it sound like we're talking about contemporary
politics. Harry in method of rationality talks about putting Hermione in charge of the government
that he overthrows because he doesn't want to do it because he doesn't trust himself,
but I'll put Hermione in charge because she's like the most good person out there.
So that's not the same thing. That seems like you're taking cover for the idea that yes,
I know that I'm not equipped that if I want over there, the government, I probably shouldn't be
running it, but I'll put this really nice person in charge. Yeah, that's that may be a good compromise.
Just checking to see if there's any wiggle room there. Yeah, just out of curiosity. There's some
wiggle, especially since like the injection isn't really don't kill the leader. It's don't kill people.
Yes. I'm on board with that, by the way. I realized that I made it sound like I was talking
about politics and I was really just looking to nitpick that example. So we're all on board with
not killing people. Definitely. I guarantee you'll both survive this podcast. Now I'm actually worried.
Now I never want to stop recording.
Because everything I say is a lie.
Well, no, I was going to say we're guaranteed to survive the podcast. And then I'm like, oh,
well, no, we're not, but we're guaranteed to have some evidence left over if we keep recording.
Very well. There was another thing that I looked up some... Oh, did you want to,
what was the second one protected from myself? Oh, or was that the same?
It was kind of along the same lines, but Eleazar did talk about three
reasons why his injection against lying has protected him from himself.
Number one, the honest way often has a simplicity that transgressions lack.
I think that's one of the ones that we teach to children about why they shouldn't lie.
Two, he was stricter with himself and held himself to a higher standard
when he was doing various things that he considered himself ethically obligated to do.
So just the feeling of obligation and of ethical rightness was maybe held him to
a higher standard than the idea that this is going to be practical. And three, the wisdom of history
suggests that the constraints that help you to avoid hurting other people may also stop you from
hurting yourself. So that's just kind of like a general trend, I guess he's noticing in history,
that people do certain things to be nice to others and it ends up working out well for
themselves in general. Seems like a rule about human life in general. Maybe I'm coming from a
very privileged position, but it seems to me that people who are nicer to other people tend to have
better lives. Well, I think that our society has evolved in such a way as to make altruism
beneficial, like we treat people who seem altruistic better. Yeah, I also sort of just
wonder about some people who are dishonest and overly self-interested. There's the real question
asked like, are they as happy as people who aren't like that? And there's all kinds of different
ways to ask that question and to analyze different answers. But it's at least conceivable
that people, I guess to just say bad people, they might have all the money and all the nice
cars or whatever, but are they really as happy as other people? Especially like if you're a
reputation as a liar and everybody around that knows that you're a liar and it's convenient for
you, you can never really forge a real relationship with somebody because they'll never be able to
be reasonably confident that you're being honest with them. And I don't think it's just the
reputation thing. I, having met a couple of people like this in my life, it seems like
they're unhappy and it's their own damn fault and there's no way they can be happy because
they think that everyone else is like this too. There is no one they can trust and it's kind of
sad. Agreed. I don't know, I'm not even sure if you'd have to go as far as a typical mind,
your own dishonesty to be unhappy, but certainly that would lead to unhappiness. Not only if
everyone knows that they can't trust you to be honest with them, but if you don't believe
that they'll be honest with you, then yeah, that makes the very valuable part of human life
of having connections with people impossible. I agree with that. I would also emphasize the fact
that it is specific to human psychology. You can imagine some non-human mind that wouldn't
have this problem. Oh sure. I am talking about us. Yeah. I did want to talk about animals also.
Animals do engage in deceptive behavior. Both deceiving and detecting deception
are things that have evolved kind of in a sort of an arms race against each other.
And this particular study from 2001 gave a bunch of anecdotes about animals doing things that seem
to be designed to deceive. Well, you can't just say that and not give us an anecdote.
There's one about hyenas. These were captive hyenas, I believe, or at least in such a situation
where the researchers could introduce stimuli and see how they're going to respond. So the
researchers put a piece of meat in a particular place before the hyenas got there.
And I guess the hyenas probably expected this kind of thing to happen for now and then.
So the first, only one of them arrived on the scene initially, saw the meat, took it over to the pond,
and dunked it under the water and sat on it. And then the other ones came along.
So this initial guy, he's acting like, well, there's never any meat. And probably you would
think that was a deliberate deception, right? He doesn't want them to know. He's trying to make
them think that there is no meat. What a jerk. I wonder how hyenas get such a bad reputation.
But the other hyenas seem to expect that there should have been something. Maybe they smelled it
or they just are used to the researchers putting stuff out there for them or for some reason. So
they go on a search and they find it under the water. And they take it away from him and
make sure to punish him by not letting him eat any of it at all while the rest of them got to eat it.
So even ethically questionable hyenas have a standard to punish defectors when they're being
dishonest. I couldn't cite this, but I did hear on a podcast recently that apparently,
like a lot of the birds that we think mate for life, you can test the DNA of the offspring and
turns out there's tons of infidelity. But it's great for your genetic fitness for you to find a
better mate, but that mate won't roost with you. You find one that will and this sounds like a
metaphor for life. But that seems like another example where, I mean, with birds, I'm less
convinced that there's something that it's like they're planning this out in the way that hyena
did. But there might be something, I'm wondering what's going through their heads, but there
doesn't have to be anything going through their heads to make this happen. But with the hyena with
that level of deception, it sounds like they definitely were thinking those ones are on their
way. I need to do something about this. It sounds like, oh, there's a body of water nearby. It
sounds like there was something that went into that. Do you have any other examples that sounds
like fun? Well, there are some examples with chimps, but you kind of would expect chimps to be
closer to humans in their ability to model other people's minds and stuff, right? That's not that
surprising. Well, I mean, I guess not. It's still interesting, though. I don't think of animals
as deceptive at all. Are you with me on this? No, I mean, it depends. If you ever, you know,
my parents have two dogs, and I guess they both, they kind of do regular dog stuff, but one blames
the other for making a mess. And you can tell, you might have been with the other one the whole
time, but you've seen gifts online or something of the ruined trash cans all knocked over, and then
a dog just laying, making deliberate rigidness not to make eye contact with you because it knows
that it's in trouble, but you can see other ones where they all seem to implicate the other animal
or something. I'm sure I've seen one where a cat blamed a dog for something. I'll see if I can pull
up a gift. How does one animal blame another animal? I feel like maybe it dragged something into another
room or something. I might have to wait for one of these to come up organic. I don't even know what
to search for. But yeah, I think that they can, they can like, nope, he did it. Maybe I just have
a naive idyllic view of nature because I'm like, animals are wonderful. Why would they lie to
anything, anyone? I wish I could think of a specific example, but I'm pretty sure I've seen
them. I'll see if I can find one. But yeah, so if these abilities evolved, they certainly do have
some kind of perhaps limited usefulness. I mean, I think there's a difference between useful and
commendable though. Like it can be useful to beat someone to death, but I don't think it's a good
thing to do. Yeah, I agree. Like there's, there's, it's begging like a naturalistic fallacy. I mean,
I bet deceivers and perfect psychopaths were did very well evolutionarily, right? Like if you got
away your entire life and had this web of lies crafted to where, you know, you'd, you'd die to
a hero, but in reality, you were some monster that, you know, that, that could work out well for,
for you and, and for your evolutionary fitness. But that's certainly not the kind of thing we
would want to foster right now, right? Maybe it's worth mentioning that when you're closer to someone,
you're actually less able to tell when they're lying than when you're not close to them. Yeah.
That is very worth mentioning. And very disheartening. Yeah. I was lying to me this whole time.
When you were beginning that sentence, I'm like, I'm, I could feel my heart warming. I'm like,
oh, you're going to say the closer you are, the harder it is for someone to lie to you. But no,
the harder it is for you to detect dishonesty. Is it because they know you better so they can
lie to you better or what? Maybe I'm not sure. And it's only one study that I read about. And so
whether it's good study or not, whether it's replicates or not, I don't know. That's a bummer.
That is a bummer. So the, the, the lesson is do not trust the ones you love. The more you love,
the more you love someone, the less you can trust them. The real lesson is don't take life lessons
from Inyash. It's probably, probably halo effect. Maybe I would, I would guess that something like
that is going on. Sure. You could be blinded by how much you love them. Yeah. I wouldn't love them
this much if they were liars. And, you know, therefore, you know, the kind of, you just get
that reverse causality in your brain. Do you practice any general lying that, you know, you
do now? I mean, you don't have to like, obviously, I guess. So what is it that you've never told?
I'm always completely honest. Hold on. So like, I mean, I will, I can't, I don't think I've been
pulled over in the last few years, but like, I use that example, like if I did have drugs in the car,
and they asked me, I would, I would say no. Well, that's just common sense. Well, but I mean, I'm,
it is common sense, but I'm coming from a position of advocating radical honesty, right? So,
I mean, it's tough when you, in that circumstance, it's tough when you have moral objections to the
laws. There, I got pulled into a poll thing where I thought this law is bullshit. So fine, whatever.
I don't, I don't care. I can lie about it. And, and it still kind of sucks. But what are you supposed
to do? Help enforce a law that you have moral objections to?
Right. Or, you know, go to jail for, for decades or something that you believe you didn't do anything
wrong. Yeah. So I mean, all right, let me think of a different example, just to end this on a fun
day, you know, day to day life. Your partner asks, does this outfit make me look fat or
doesn't, you know, whatever. Do you say, of course not, like you're supposed to, or are you honest
with them? Every now and then you get asked questions like, how do you like my new haircut?
And I, I, this has happened to me not too long ago. And I'm like, you know what,
the haircut's not my favorite, but I still like you. So it doesn't matter what your haircut is,
you can shave yourself bald, I still like you. Perhaps not quite as much physically, but still,
you know, I'm not going to dump you or anything. I guess I don't get asked that that often, but
usually I will just say what I think. What do you do? I'm, I mean, I don't get asked that real
question that often. I think honestly, so one thing- You must have been asked a question
not too long ago by someone you really liked that you were reluctant to answer because you thought
it would hurt them. I must have been. Sure. Everyone has to get that at least once a year,
right? And also a pro-socializer, the most common lies that people report on surveys.
Yeah, where like your white, like happy white lies, like I love the gift you got me.
Yeah, sure. And I, I mean, so those are kind of the ones I wish you spent more time talking about.
Like everyone knows somebody who has a bunch of horse stuff, right? Like horse bedsheets,
horse posters, horse figurines, because their family members at some point heard that they
hate that they like horses. And then then they get them that all the time. And because you have
to be like, Oh, I love it. You can't, you can't say, apparently to many people feel like they
can't say, I'm getting sick of horse stuff. I'd love anything else. And so they end up with all,
you know, they end up with tons of horse crap, right? Calendars, whatever. And so I think being
able to face a pro-social lie, again, you don't have to be a dick. But you can say, you know,
Hey, do you like this, this thing? Oh, you know, I don't think it's for me. You know, if you have,
I mean, depending on your relationship with the person, you could say, if you have a gift receipt,
you should definitely return this. If you don't, maybe you'd like it back to give it to somebody
who might like it more, you know, or whatever. But I mean, there are circumstances, you know,
whatever, those are so hard to do. They are. But I do find, so you mentioned, what do I get?
What do I say when someone asks me if they look fat in this dress? I don't get asked that particular
question a lot, but I do have people reach out to me once in a while and say, look, I'm calling you
because I know that you'll be honest with me. And they'll start the conversation like that.
And I find that rewarding. And then so then they know that I have a reputation at least with them
for not telling them just what they want to hear. Did you ever watch American Idol? No.
Okay. American Idol had like three judges, people would come in and sing,
and then the judges would rate them on the singing, basically. Eventually, later on,
it was like voting for across America. But the interesting part was with the judges.
I feel like with the premise, I did live in the United States. Okay, great. And there would always
be, the three judges, I, for the first few seasons were Simon Cowell, Paula Abdul, and
God, what was the other guy, Randy? And the person you, whose opinion you respect is Simon.
Because you know, when you go up there and sing, Paula will always say, that was fantastic. You
were great. I loved it. And Randy will always be like, yeah, you know, at worst you'll say like,
that was all right. Could use some work. But he, and sometimes you'll say that's great.
But he'll never say that was bad. Simon will be like, fuck you. That was awful. You hurt my
ears. Get out of this room. And he will do that all the time. And so whenever like, I would
seek approval from someone, it would always be the Simon Cowell types. Like, I know you're going
to tell me it's good, whether it's good or not. So I don't care about your opinion. The guy who
tells you you suck, he's the person that I actually want to hear that was fantastic from, because
that means he actually thought it was fantastic. Right. And so I bet when you're searching proof
readers for the stuff you write, you want somebody who has a reputation of being really critical.
Yeah, exactly. And that's because the words carry more weight. And I think that that's one
of the benefits of not. But also, I think Simon wasn't honest. He exaggerated his negativity.
He probably did. It was entertaining. Didn't he have like, I don't watch American Idol,
I don't watch singing shows, I don't watch cooking shows. Didn't he have that, although I don't
watch a lot of this guy, who's that mean chef Hell's Kitchen? I know who you're talking about.
Gordon Ramsay. Isn't he like the Gordon Ramsay of the music industry? Is he Simon?
I don't know. I've never seen any Gordon Ramsay, but he was famous for being an asshole.
Right. At some level, he flanderized himself and got caught up in it. But I think that, yeah,
the general point of what you're making, I think stands, right?
That if you're going to be dishonest, be dishonest in the negative direction.
Just have no friends at all.
Fair enough. Now, I think the real point is that when you have a reputation for honesty, people
can, your words carry more weight than they would otherwise. If you're going to say nice
things no matter what, then people who want the truth aren't going to bother asking you.
So, if I'm not sure if there's anybody, some people's parents will always praise their decisions
no matter what. I'm going to drop out of school and go be a drum circle hippie. Oh, that's great,
sweetheart. You don't want that person's feedback. You want your honest, smart friends feedback
about how dumb of an idea that is. Isn't that always the comedians joke? Whenever
comedian delivers a line that just bombs and one person in the audience laughs, he's like,
thanks, mom. Should we go real quick, hopefully real quick to listen to feedback?
Yeah, sure. Okay, great. All right. So, Matthew Cutler wrote us, ooh, okay, since this is not
public, we got an email from M. He says, they say in episode nine, you started going through the
arguments people use against polyamory. The first argument against polyamory that you brought up
was said to be an argument against polygamy rather than polyamory. To my mind, that and some of the
subsequent arguments were actually arguments against polygyny and by extension, polyandry,
rather than against polygamy or polyamory. I was surprised to hear those arguments used
against polygamy, which in my mind simply refers to a person being married to more than one person
regardless of the genders involved. The glossary on more than two backs up this
gender neutral definition. I'd previously been thinking that one of the goals of some polyamorous
people would probably be to legalize polyamorous marriages and that that would be referred to as
legalizing polygamy. I had expected that there would be a desire among some polyamorous people to
reclaim the term polygamy to simply hold the gender neutral definition despite historical misuse of
the term as a synonym for polygyny. A quick search did bring up a few apparent examples of such
suggestions. What do you think about the idea of reclaiming the term polygamy? And I want your
opinion on this as well. Would you like to start or should I start? Go ahead. Okay, well my personal
opinion is that the word polygamy is so loaded with that history that it's an unreclaimable.
And people think of polygamy, they think of people, old men marrying 14 year old girls and
arranged marriages and just all sorts of horrific abuses. And I do not want that
associated anyway with me. And yes, I mean, maybe technically, that's not necessarily what it entails.
But once you've loaded a word so much, you just, it's not worth the effort it would take to reclaim
it. I think singularity has had a similar sort of thing where it once meant something. And nowadays
just means this crazy thing that sometimes people talk about as a rapture of the nerd sort of thing.
And it's just, it's not worth going through the effort of trying to say, no, this is what we really
mean by it. It's like, okay, fine, use a different word. And I think we have a perfectly good word.
We have polyamorous, which is what everyone uses now. And it doesn't have all that baggage and kind
of has a whole core of good people fighting for it. And so calling it a polyamorous marriage,
I think would be great and doesn't come with all that weight of history on it.
Well, I think there's a way that that could be confusing, because I am in a polyamorous marriage,
but I'm not married to more than one person. Right, because you can't be legally.
Right. If you could be, though, the term polyamorous marriage would still not necessarily
imply that being married to more than one person.
Right. No, it's not supposed to imply being married to only one.
So that's why polygamy would be a different term than it would have a different meaning.
I see, because you're saying a polyamorous marriage could be right, a marriage that we have
nowadays between just two people where they're both polyamorous. Whereas an actual polygamous
marriage would be a legal marriage between three or more people. Or maybe not a legal
marriage, some kind of marriage. But yeah. So I'm just saying that the word polygamy does have
added meaning that is not encapsulated by polyamorous marriage.
I see what you're saying. In those cases, though, I would prefer a term like triad marriage. Those
are often used or anything really other than the word polygamy just because of the baggage that
comes with it. Do you disagree? I mean, I don't like the idea of coming up with more terms,
not the one you suggested, but yeah. As for whether word polygamy is reclaimable or not,
I'm not as sure as you are that it's not, but it might not be.
I mean, I guess any word is eventually possibly reclaimable, but it just seems
not worth the effort. Are we really gaining that much from having a technically correct
definition? Perhaps not. And my take on polygamy for polyamorous people is more that
at least when it comes to legal marriage, maybe abolishing it, it's a better choice than
creating polygamous options. I completely agree with you, but there's always going to be people
who want marriage, I guess. I mean, I am legally married and it does come with legal benefits,
and it also comes with privileges that in ways in which people who are not legally married
are unfairly discriminated against. So I think the ultimate ideal solution would be
if the government got out of the marriage business. So I personally have been wanting to
do a marriages are horrible and should not be a thing episode. Would you be interested in joining
me for this? Gosh. I'm not a lawyer, so I can't talk that much about... Not a lawyer either,
it doesn't stop me from running my mouth. And there are lots of aspects of marriage besides
the legal that I value. I don't know if you're against all of them. This is what we could have
a whole hour long episode about, right? I guess, yeah. I could do my best to defend marriage. I'm
not sure if I'm a defender of marriage or not, but I assume, guessing from how passionate you
sound against it, that I might be slightly... I guess maybe apathy is the right word, like me
with most things. I can weigh in as somebody who's not in the community of polyamory as far as
what I think. Uh-huh. Please do. My at-a-glance perception would be that reclaiming that word
would probably be more trouble, like probably be really difficult and that just from people who
don't run in these circles, polygamy has this, you imagine somebody married to a bunch of children
kind of thing, right? That's basically whenever you hear about it in the news, that's what you hear,
right? Right. So, I mean, trying to rebrand it sounds like trouble or sounds like at least a lot of
work and I wonder if it's worth it, given that there's another word for it. Like, there was,
I mean, it's interesting. I'm not sure if atheism or atheist is as scorned a word or position as it
used to be, but there was a time, I don't know, in the early 2000s, mid-2000s, to try and change the
word to brights. I remember that. Yes. And it never really took off. I think it's a stupid word.
Well, that might have been part of it, right? Because then it has implication that people who
aren't brights are dims and that's not very cool. But then it did just sort of work out where, you
know, it turns out that, at least in my perspective, my social circles, all of them, no one really
hates the word atheist. So, although, I don't know. People basically default to agnostic.
Agnostic is what you say when you're an atheist, but you don't want to... Use that word.
Yeah, exactly. You don't want the baggage that comes around with the atheist.
I actually had somebody for the first time in years ask me, like, are you an atheist?
And I didn't know them that well. That's the first time I've met this person. And I was like,
well, because I didn't want to go with all that baggage. So what I said was,
I remain unconvinced of the truth claims of religion. And that sounds like a fairly innocuous
way of putting it. Because it does have baggage, right? And so I don't know, I don't necessarily...
I'm kind of like in the Neil deGrasse Tyson camp on this. There's a great episode of rationally
speaking where that's Julia Galev's podcast back when she was still doing with Massimo P. Glucci,
where he came on, he actually requested to be on. And he's like, I never talk about religion stuff,
but you two are saying, I want to get your guys' feedback on this. And because he didn't like
the word atheist and he didn't like identifying as one. And I could sort of see where he's coming
from. Was it because of the cultural baggage that he wanted to avoid? Yeah, basically,
kind of like if somebody comes up to you and says, oh, I'm a feminist, I'm an atheist or whatever,
the implication is that someone will say, oh, you believe all these things. And it's like, oh,
no, I don't believe any of those things. This is what I believe. But by putting yourself under
an ist banner, you open the door kind of deliberately for people to assign beliefs to you.
If you open up identifying as a Democrat, people are going to think a whole bunch
of things about you, which may not necessarily be true, but that's what you get for using that
word, right? Yeah. So I think that's what you like to avoid. Yeah. And I sort of, I mean,
so again, having known this person for like two hours, I'm like, I had no idea whether
they were religious or not or where this was going turns out there, they would identify as
atheists as well. But I was like, I wonder why they're asking this. So I'm going to think about
my answer for a second because I mean, this is kind of an amicable evening. I don't want to get
into like an argument with somebody. But yeah, I don't know if if I dislike the word, I do like
the idea of, I mean, so Tyson, Neil deGrasse Tyson says, the only ist I am is a scientist.
And that's cute and quippy and it works for him. But I mean, I also like to say I'm an
aspiring rationalist and that ends an ist too. And that has some connotations. So like, I think
those are connotations you're mostly okay with embracing. And also, I think that's a little bit
not is a little bit dodging some things by saying that because there are other other
categories which don't have the letters, IST at the end, which I'm, I'm pretty sure he does
claim for himself, but he can get off the hook because it doesn't have ist.
Can you think of an example? Well, like, so I'm not not entirely sure about this one, but I
thought I saw I'm wearing a wedding ring. Yeah, he's married. And so that like, that's a social
category where that people wear as a like a badge on themselves. And almost call him a monogamous.
No, we don't know that he is monogamous just because he wears a wedding ring. That's true.
But he's one of those, right? And I'm, I could be thinking of someone else that I saw the ring
on. Like, I know he's married, but I don't know if he wears it the ring, but anyway, I think he does.
But yeah, I mean, that's, that's, that's fair. And I think I'm not sure what his position on that
would be, but I feel like there's probably less baggage associated with that that he'd be uncomfortable
identifying with, or at least the most people would be assuming that they're, you know, okay,
portraying themselves as a married person, but not necessarily. Right. So, so then like, he's okay
with the, the implications of certain things, but he's going to say like, the only one that I claim
is a scientist, but there are definitely other ones that he claims more, maybe more subtly or,
you know, maybe the one who wants explicitly like labeled to him. Yeah. And I don't know enough about
his position exactly to defend it, but I could imagine saying something like the only one, the
only one I'm going to call myself is this, you know, and the only one I'm going to answer to is
scientist. So I can see that. But what was I going to say? Oh yeah. But I also feel like maybe monogamist
for some hypothetical person, probably Neil deGrasse Tyson, probably is,
carries less distasteful baggage than atheist for him and for people that, you know, he interacts
with. So that, that might be something like that. So to bring this back to the, the, the
comic just question, I feel like trying to save polygamy sounds like a whole bag of worms that
are can of worms that distort worms and cans of bags, a whole Tupperware container full of worms.
And it almost seems like what's the point. And then to, since there are active polygamous of
the kind that no one likes, you, if you rescued the word for a, a position or a, what do you call
it, a societal standpoint that you favor, you would also be saving it for the people that you
don't like. So did they cover that at all? Cause that sounds like an obvious implication that
is worth considering. No, that was, that was, I didn't think of that either. So props to you,
man. That was an awesome point. Well, maybe that could be helpful because if you make that word,
strip the baggage and make it just purely, it's denotation and then the connotations,
then you are kind of incentivizing people, including yourself to come up with a word that is specific
to those people who like forced marriage people. Maybe I would say like people who,
who use marriage and forced marriage to gain, to oppress, repress young people. I don't know.
You would have to define it. It would be like, it'd be almost like rationalist taboo where you
would say like, you know, we're not going to use polygamy in, with all these connotations anymore.
So now we have to come up with the real word for what those people are doing.
Right. And I'd be more in favor of that, but that sounds like a different challenge than
trying to say the word polygamy, right? Cause yeah, then, then if, if say you wanted to say
polygamy for people who were in tight polyamorous relationships, however, if they wanted to define
themselves, you know, I was like, yes, I'm married to three people. Therefore, I'm polygamous. Well,
then to anybody who all they knew about you was that you're polygamous, they'd be like, oh my god,
you know, you had, you know, four 12 year olds married to you when you were 35 or whatever.
Right. So I mean, it would be funny if it wasn't so horrifying, but I really do wish people would
not do that with words, just assign all sorts of things to them that they don't necessarily mean,
and then use it as a catch all way to club someone.
You're describing the problem with words. Like, no, this is, this is the problem with words in
general, right? Like, and that's the whole point, like polygamy or polyamory are just a few syllables,
and it contains a very long message. But the point is, is like, Hey, when we get everyone to
agree on the message, then we can save ourselves, you know, 30 seconds every time we use the word.
So I mean, but then you end up fighting about word definitions, which is a pain in the ass,
like the fighting about the word feminist, which used to be only basically a good thing. And anyone
who was anti feminist was you could tell right away an asshole. And it has encompasses other
things than it used to now. And now it's a pain in the ass, you can't use the word feminist
necessarily as an unreserved good anymore. Well, that's why I use that example, like Scott Alexander
from Slate's Guard Codex. I'm not sure if this is still true, but I know as of a few years ago,
he didn't, he explicitly didn't identify as feminist. Yes. Because he'd had some very bad
experiences. Right. And some of the connotations. And he's like, No, of course, I'm for equality,
which some people would be like, Well, that's all feminism is. And he's like, Well, that's not my
experience. So they're arguing about, you know, what this is means. And that's exactly the conversation
that people like him and Neil deGrasse Tyson want to avoid. They're just like, You know what,
ask me, ask me what I believe. Don't, don't make me give you a few syllables, and then you give
me all my beliefs. But if you can load up a word with enough negative connotations,
you can then use that word to, to club people, even if it doesn't necessarily apply to them.
Yes. I guess that's one of the problems of identifying under a banner, right? Right. Right.
So I know that there's some, there's been some dragging of rationalist, the rationalist community
through the mud by some writers in the last few weeks. I don't have anything in front of me, but
I can find stuff pretty quick. Some tweets, some short articles about like, Oh, basically like
all the straw man. Okay. But they were like, That's all the shit that these crazy people are
all about. And, you know, look at how weird LA Iser is occasionally. So they're all like, they
all like think this is, you know, a great thing. So they're, they're doing kind of what people
will do be like, Oh, this person's atheist. Therefore, they're like an amoral baby eating
Satan worshiper. Right. Exactly. So I mean, you can drag stuff through the mud if you,
which is really annoying because you load up atheist with all the things immoral, doesn't
believe in laws, eats babies. And then you ask someone, do you believe in God? And they're
like, no. And they're like, see atheist, but, but there's nothing wrong with not believing in God.
And like, but a person who doesn't believe in God is an atheist, right? And you're like, yeah,
like, so you eat babies, kill him. And yeah, it gets, it gets weird pretty quick.
The worst argument in the world. Yes. That article. It basically is exactly that.
What is this, the worst argument in the world? I think I need to read this.
It's actually kind of basically what we just said, right? Yeah. Yeah. It's loading up a word
with a whole bunch of negative connotations and then using its strict technical definition to
tar a bunch of people. Oh, that's a slate star codex. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. I'm familiar. Okay.
I thought it was some like older philosophy thing that no camera. I feel like he originally
posted on less wrong is this art. I will be Google later. It sounds like fun. But yeah.
Yeah. Okay. So that is, that is our perspectives on your question.
Cool. Did anyone else have anything else to add about that?
I had one real quick one. We had somebody write in apparently in the digital rights
and privacy episode. I mentioned the ad blocker I use and I said it too fast,
which is completely reasonable because I talk really fast. I use you block origin,
which is an open source ad block software that I really like. I think apparently ad block
started letting ads in from people who paid them enough. I heard something about this.
Don't quote me on that. But I heard that. Well, I mean, that's the thing too,
is if it's not open source, you don't know exactly what they're doing. So you block,
you block origin is open source. It's for, I know at least Chrome, probably other browsers as well.
So one quick Google away. Do we have another feedback? I do not know.
I think that's it then. I mean, we've got some good conversations at the subreddit.
Nothing I really want to paraphrase. We will quickly say you can comment at our website,
TheBazingConspiracy.com or at the subreddit slash TheBazingConspiracy. Yes, you can write us an
email. We often appreciate if you give reviews on iTunes because that helps people know that we exist
and that makes us very happy. And it makes us even more happy if you support us on Patreon
for a dollar per episode or however much you want to give. And also while we're on the topic,
mad props to our sound engineer, Kyle Moore, who does a lot of work for us every week
and makes us sound good. We love him. I made a short list of all the things to say in the last
minute and you just hit all of them. Thank you for your support, everyone who's currently supporting
us on Patreon. You are the best. Like you just mentioned, don't hesitate to leave a review at
iTunes if you want. The last thing I will say as far as feedback, I think the last two sections have
been dominated by us responding to one person about sort of, maybe you guys not the last two,
some of them in the last couple of months because these episodes aren't coming out in order that
we're recording them in. How do we want to put this? We spend a lot of time engaging one person
who I think most of us find pretty objectionable. And I wanted to just kind of put out there that
won't become a long-term trend. It was basically, since this person's engaging good faith, I wanted
to respond in good faith, but it was sucking up a lot of airtime. And I think it's not really,
doesn't behoove us to really spend that much time on the air giving voice to some of these
opinions. So if you got sick of those, we did too. So don't worry, they're mostly gone.
Can't promise that we'll never ever talk to any of these people again, but we won't be spending
45 minutes dissecting some really nasty emails. So anyway, thanks, and I think that's our episode.
Yeah. Thank you, Steven. Thank you, Shelley. This was awesome.
Thanks.
All right, cool. Thanks. Bye.
Bye.
