Okay, do you want to, do you want to check into this?
My body is ready.
Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Meneesh Brotsky.
I'm Stephen Siburd.
And today we're addressing things that we've wanted to address for a while but haven't gotten around to just yet.
Such as?
Such as the fact that it is the two-week anniversary of Petrov Day.
Yay.
I feel like a complete idiot because we actually, we didn't realize when we were recording but our last episode came out on Petrov Day which would have been a fantastic time to like talk about Petrov Day.
So why don't you go over what Petrov Day is then I'll say my one disappointing thing about it.
Okay.
Or why don't I put that up first before I forget.
I heard the whole story is apocryphal.
It's not.
So it's a great like, you know, the Apple fell on Newton's head kind of story.
No, no, I mean, it may not be as dramatic as it was first portrayed to be but like that actually happened.
Oh that's, yeah, it must have because he was actually fired.
Yeah.
Okay, yeah.
So he's an actual dude who exists.
Something like that.
Yes.
I mean there was an actual false, false, what do you call it, false positive I guess of missiles being launched and he actually didn't retaliate as he was instructed.
I think what I read was that it's possible that this wouldn't have that retaliation wouldn't have occurred even if he had confirmed like if he had said go for it.
Yeah.
No, no, no.
That's certainly possible.
But the point is the box stopped with him and it might not have if he hadn't stopped it.
Exactly.
Okay.
There's another situation during the Cuban Missile Crisis where a submarine lieutenant, Arkapov refused to turn the key when his supervisor on the sub ordered him to launch the nuke.
And I mean that also might not have been a nuke launching because there were other people on the sub too and it may not have it may not have you know resulted in a launch and a nuclear war but it was good that he stopped it where he did.
Totally.
So let's let's go over the brief history of Petrov day.
Oh Petrov day is on this day, not actually this day, September 26 of two.
Oh God.
I don't I don't remember what year it was.
1883 or 1983.
Okay, on September 26 of 1983.
The Soviet Union was informed that the US had launched a first strike nuclear salvo at them.
And it turned out later to be the case that this was actually sunlight reflecting off clouds and digging the pinging the Russian satellites that were watching for this for a nuclear launch.
But it looked like a nuclear launch to them.
And there was chaos and alarms going off.
And this guy Stanislav Petrov was ordered to fire his nukes at the at the Americans, as is standard procedure for when you're under a massive nuclear attack.
And he did not do so.
He decided that all things considered he didn't want to destroy the human race.
And given various I'm not going to get into the whole details here because you know we want to we want to get into the rest of the episode.
But we will link to the entire story if anyone's interested.
There were other clues as well that when he saw them he was like this doesn't quite feel right to me.
I'm not sure this is actually a nuclear attack.
He didn't launch the missiles and as a result, the entire human race is saved.
And as Steven just said, it may not have resulted in a nuclear launch anyway.
There was like another layer of precaution, but the important part the important part is that he did stop the chain at him when he had the ability to do so.
And he eventually lost his he was fired he lost his military pension and all that.
And that's that's what he got for saving the human race.
And so we like to celebrate this day as a day when we all try not to destroy the human race and to think those of who are in a greater position to not do so.
And you know, remember how fragile life is and hope that someday he will be as well known as like, you know, a Kardashian or one of the other celebrities that everyone seems to know.
Yeah, because think of all everything the Kardashians have given us.
Right.
We want to at least put Stanislav Petrov up there.
Right.
At least as much as you know, really nice but pictures.
And I think instead of linking to the Wikipedia page on Petrov Day, I'm going to link to the XKCD that explains Petrov Day.
Okay, or I mean, we should also link to the original Less Wrong Post which started the Petrov Day tradition.
That works too.
Yeah, that might actually be linked in here somewhere because this is one of the explain ones like a few paragraphs underneath.
But the pictures funny as always.
Yeah.
And it's somebody reading their phone and she's like, hey, Wednesday was Stanislav Petrov Day.
We missed it.
And he says, ah, shoot, I've got a calendar alert for it, but I assumed it was a false alarm.
Very appropriate joke.
Totally.
And because we also missed it.
Yeah.
It's great.
It's true.
Couldn't be better.
And then the title text is, I was going to get you an alarm clock that occasionally goes off randomly in the middle of the night, but you can ignore it and go back to sleep and it's fine.
Okay.
So.
Did you hear about the Petrov Day celebration that went wrong?
I hope it didn't go as wrong as Petrov Day couldn't.
Well, I'm trying to make a pun here about Petrov Day not happening.
So, no, I didn't hear about it.
Okay.
So they, since there are, you know, a number of rationalists around the world at this point.
And this really doesn't have us.
Yes, literally dozens.
And this is a kind of our only holiday.
There's some people that, well, I guess there's also the solstice celebration, but this is one of the big ones.
There's a number of people that got together and have had Petrov Day parties.
And there is a game that some of the groups play where two parties will link to each other via server or some other method.
In this case, they use the server.
And in each party, there's a big red button.
And if someone in one party pushes the big red button, then the party that they're linked to across the nation or across, you know, wherever the other party is has to immediately shut down.
Douse the fire because there's a, you know, traditional fire going, throw away their cake and everyone goes home.
Like the party's over.
It's the equivalent of launching a party nuke, right?
And they both managed to not press the button at all for the required amount of time.
I think the game went on for like four hours or something.
That's nice.
Yeah.
Doesn't sound that hard.
Yeah.
It was Seattle and Oxford that were playing.
Then again, you know, war, not shooting, not launching nuke doesn't sound that hard either.
So.
Well, here's the funny thing.
There were a few times where they were false alarms launched, you know, to, to simulate the uncertainty of shit happening and like, oh no, they launched us and they didn't retaliate and everything was okay.
Once the game was over, one of the people in Seattle touched the button on the screen, just be like, haha, timer's over.
Let's just, you know, touch it, whatever.
Their computer and the server weren't synced completely.
Perfectly.
They touched it literally one second after the timer ended on their end, but for the server, it would still had a few seconds left.
And so Oxford was, um, was told that the nuke had been launched on the plus side.
Oxford did not retaliate.
That's nice.
Yeah.
So only half the world was destroyed.
That's about that.
That's about as wholesome of an example of like nuclear war that I can think of.
Yeah.
That's also kind of like appropriate in that it shows just how easy it is through technical glitches to accidentally destroy the world.
You know, I mean, it's not, it's not quite the same level of, of, of problems that we have.
But it was a great demonstration of exactly that problem.
Like these, there's lights shining off clouds or there's, there's a warning depth charges going off, which you don't realize are only warning depth charges or, or someone pushes a button one second after the game is over and things are out of sync.
Whomp.
Yeah.
Hey, that's cool though.
I love it.
Yeah.
And I'll post, we'll post a link to that as well.
Totally.
So I had a quick, um, we've had a little bit of, of feedback on the AMA thread that's sitting on Reddit.
If anyone ever wants to hit that, um, one here from a Chiba Tron, which is one that we need to do a whole episode on.
I just wanted to acknowledge that we've seen it because it came in 25 days ago and all I did was like it.
So, um, uh, basically, are there any guides or how tos for practicing rationality in everyday life?
So there's a, it goes on to give some examples and things that they're looking for.
Um, but basically we haven't done, I think we inject a little bits and pieces here.
They're like living like a rationalist ought to live or tries to live or something.
But that sounds like, that sounds like something we need to cover in depth at some point.
So we'll get some kick-ass rationalist on here to, uh, give us some example.
Of course.
Another kick-ass rationalist.
Right.
Right.
Of course.
And then Chlorine Crown and I are going to keep talking via, um, private message here on Reddit,
but I wanted to bring up the public one because there's a generalizable lesson in it.
So, um, and these were in three hours ago.
So I have a huge difference between, uh, Chlorine Crown and, uh, Chiba Tron here.
We didn't forget about you, Chiba Tron, but we, uh, well, we didn't forget forget, but it slipped our minds.
So, um, Chlorine Crown said, uh, I'm thinking I want to change jobs and become a coder.
And I remember you said you did it and it was easier than you expected.
What was your path like?
So I gave a quick response here because I did it via phone, but, um, I'll go over it really quick.
And then I'll, I'll talk about why it's generalizable.
So, you know, obviously advice is hard and your mileage may vary.
And just to calibrate expectations, when I said, I thought it would, I thought it would be like inventing calculus hard
and not just like tons of work hard.
Um, because I mean, before I got into anything computers, I assumed it was just some, you know, black box of arcane knowledge
that, you know, what you couldn't get into unless you were coding your own games while you're still in diapers and stuff.
And it turns out it's like, oh no, it's human readable.
And if, if I can do it, anybody can do it.
So it's a skill like any other.
Yeah, totally.
But I think, and this is actually, this is the second generalizable lesson that, and this is something that I had to learn over
and over getting into the field is that there's this sense, at least for me, and it was noncommon among other entry level people
of just like, holy shit, I can't do this.
This is too much.
You know, what do I do?
I've never seen a problem like this before.
Um, the key is to get over that, like everybody feels that way to start off and it's totally normal.
So you just need to find good strategies for getting over that, that challenge.
And I feel like that's true for a lot of things.
So anyway, if anyone wants to look at programming and never has before, there's a free book online called, uh, automate the boring stuff,
which is a Python tutorial.
Um, if you hate that, you'll hate coding.
And if you find it fun and interesting, you might like it.
So that's your, that's my first step.
I'd recommend it to somebody, which was recommended to me by one of our guests on the show, Zeke Aran, who, uh, really got me into all this stuff.
So thanks, buddy.
Cool.
And, uh, let's see.
So the other, the other lesson, or I guess the thing that related to it is like, I don't know any car stuff at all or really any repairs of anything.
But like me getting into coding was, I think my first example of, or my first real.
Yeah.
One of my first real serious attempts at, instead of the, the rationalist, um, uh, motto of like shut up and do the impossible.
Mine is just like shut up and actually try.
Okay.
Um, because almost nothing is as hard as it, as at least as I think it is.
Maybe, you know, I think some other people have anxiety about stuff too, but it's more just like, I'll look at some problem and just assume, oh, it must be really hard.
You know, otherwise I'd know how to do it, but why would that be the case?
Right.
So like, just try, figure it out, especially at the cost of entry is low.
So, you know, I'm going to go to work on my, I'm going to, my brother's going to help me.
Well, rather he's going to do all of it and he's going to, I'm going to get to help him, um, replace my pads and, uh, probably my rotors on my car.
Cool.
Um, cause I don't know how to do it.
Yeah.
And you know, if I, I'm kind of, he knows what he's doing.
So we're going to, we're going to do it.
And I'm going to get some practice, but it's just like a little thing of, you know, I was like, I could take it to a shop and get this taken care of.
He's like, nah, dude, screw that.
You know, it's 30 bucks for pads, you know, 25 bucks for rotors.
Like let's just, you know, let's save you $300.
So, um, yeah, it's great.
But I guess, you know, it's just a little thing of I have yet to come into something that I guess I haven't tried that, that many, very hard things, but most things that I've thought of, like, oh, that's too hard.
I'm not going to try.
They're not that hard.
And you should try.
And then if you can't do it, then it's like, all right, let's, let's outsource and get some help or something or whatever it is.
But I think things are doable.
Everyone's got this.
So I think before you shut up and do the impossible, you should shut up and actually try.
That's going to be my motto for the, for the episode.
It's good, good motto.
Yeah.
It still sounds a lot easier too.
I'm all about that easy path.
I got a quick feedback from Christopher James on our Patreon.
Cool.
He commented actually on the Patreon post, which was really neat.
I was like, Hey, awesome.
I don't think I've seen this before.
Chris James, Christopher James says, could the intellectual dark web be a good example of owning bad associations?
According to Eric Weinstein, the nature of the moniker is intentionally cringe worthy and jocular, so as to preemptively get the jeering out of the way, or at least put it on the table.
I don't know if you guys think this approach is any merit in the context of spreading rationality, but I couldn't help but notice the similarities during the episode when both came up.
And yeah, I was actually soilent.
I thought had the exact same thing because when it first, the guy was first talking about it on his blog and he was like, I would really like this.
This product where I just like dump nutrition and calories into my mouth and keep can continue going on my day.
You know, I don't want to waste time cooking.
I don't want to waste time cleaning.
I don't particularly care about food that much.
I just want fuel so I can focus on what I want to focus on.
And first of all, I thought that was fucking brilliant and I loved the entire concept of it.
But yeah, he, he knew that people were going to have the reaction that they often do and compare it immediately to soilent.
And he was like, you know what?
Fuck this.
I'm calling it soilent.
I'm going to lean real hard into it.
Yeah, exactly.
And now we all have soilent, which we love.
Yeah, I like that.
And I think to Christopher's point, I think, I think there could be, but luckily, maybe luckily, depends on the audience, rational rationality slash rationalists doesn't have the same immediate connotation that Intellectual Dark Web has.
I think it depends on if you've run into the term before.
It's definitely like anyone who's run into rationalist before has some kind of pre existing ideas.
Maybe.
Well, maybe not.
I don't know.
Well, I think, like I said, it's not, it's, it depends on the audience.
Some people definitely do.
And it's like, you know what?
Fine.
And you'll, you can run with it.
And I like it to that.
I think.
I think what he's saying is like Dark Web is, you know, the place where you go to get drugs and child porn and stuff, right?
And so Intellectual Dark Web is just putting it out there like, yeah, a lot of people hate us and think that we're spreading shitty things, but we're just talking about stuff.
We're just, we're just ones who are, who are going to not be afraid to tackle the hard subjects.
You know, and then there's that article that came out that was like, that really got this around.
And I'm not sure if Weinstein invented the term or made it up on Harris's podcast or if they discussed it shortly after and that's where it kicked off.
But he was on, he was doing a live event together.
Okay.
And, and for those who couldn't see, because that would be everyone except for me, Stephen was like making sarcastic hand gestures when he said, tackle the tough subjects.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
You guys can't see my gestures.
I hoped to convey air quotes.
I guess the other main difference is that rationality and rationalism didn't start as a joke.
Right.
And this didn't really, well, the name started as a joke.
Yeah.
But I do see where they're coming from.
And yeah, to lean into that doesn't sound, you know, I certainly don't think, if anything, this is definitely a case for not bothering to try and find a new name or something, which I can get behind.
So I like that.
Cool.
Yeah.
No, thanks for writing that.
Yeah.
I think I had one more listener feedback.
If we wanted to hit that before we jump into the rest of this show.
Yeah, totally.
Hanky USA says, I have ADHD, which requires me employed large amounts of productivity tricks.
This is a back to our productivity episode a little while ago.
And we will be having a part two at some point soon.
Hanky says, I easily feel overwhelmed by small tasks or big tasks that have a clear and easy to apply solution.
Pomodoro helps address this overwhelming feeling.
I tell myself I will work on it for X amount of time, and then I will take a break.
I focus on that block and forget everything else.
I just kind of sprint through the task without letting my emotional brain time to think about what an imposter I am, or I'm bound to fail.
This works for tasks that would be overwhelming.
If you find yourself saying I'll just do one self indulging distraction before I get to work on that thing that gives me anxiety to think about, then perhaps you should respond.
I'll just work on it some benign amount of time before I enjoy a short bit of self indulgence, which is where the timer helps.
And sometimes when the timer goes off, it's like, yeah, I'm indulging right now. This is awesome.
And other times just keeps going for a little bit longer anyway.
They do mention that another way to help deal with the feeling of overwhelmingness is to break projects down into smaller components.
Just keep getting the smaller and smaller components until you get to one you can do.
I actually heard that as a good way of dealing with depression too.
If you can't quite tackle the task of getting out and getting food or something, break it up into like, okay, I'm just going to get dressed.
And if that's too much, you're like, okay, I'm just going to get out of bed.
And if that's too much, you're like, okay, I'm just going to roll over onto my side and just keep going for the smallest possible task until you can actually accomplish that.
I think that's a good way to achieve really any goal. But certainly if you have a huge motivation problem.
I think I mentioned before, like one little thing I do is since now I have stairs in my place, if something belongs upstairs or downstairs and I see it on the floor, I'm on.
I never make a trip empty-handed.
Another thing is, you know, I'll try and tell myself like, all right, well, I need to get around to doing these dishes.
For now, I'll just do the one on the top of the pile.
I like doing the dishes. So I tend to just dive into it and finish them because it's one thing that I can get through and then see it clean and done five minutes later.
Whereas everything else, you know, a lot of other chores don't really work that way.
So I tend to do most of the dishes because I find it rewarding and I get to like clean myself as I'm doing it.
It's like garbage. I hate handling. So anyway, yeah, sorry, I didn't mean to derail too much there.
No, that was cool too. They also say time limits can also help with perfectionism and completionism.
I tell myself that I will do something for only so long and set the timer.
I don't feel a liberty to obsess or doing everything just right.
Once again, I'm sprinting, which is actually a really good point because lots of times I can get wrapped up like in perfectionism and I'm like,
okay, this thing is not quite right. I got to got to go back and adjust it a little and then keep going back and forth.
I lose a lot of time that way. So if you got just that sprint time that you have to work on, it can help quite a bit.
That's a good point. And you know, perfectionism where it's needed, but everywhere else, it's like, fuck it, good enough is good enough.
And then their final tip is separate planning and doing. It's hard to make the right decision in the heat of the moment.
Trying to decide what you should do now is the moment you are most likely to make the choice that you would otherwise recognize to be wrong.
Make plans for future you, make plans for future you to execute so future you won't have to think about it or decide in that moment.
When it's time to execute the plan past you made, just submit to their will. They know better than you.
I like that a lot and I've done that too where I make pre commitments to my future self in the conscientiously minded moment.
Also a lot of like these, you know, divide up your tasks plan ahead and that sort of thing that makes its way into like good,
like good lean development, whether you're working in software or like an assembly line, all that same sort of stuff of, you know,
get a small task, you know, get as perfect as possible plan ahead, that sort of stuff.
So if you find that interesting, there's a great book on the history of lean that I can't remember the name of so or who wrote it,
but you can probably go to the Wikipedia page for lean, I guess lean development and look at basically like Toyota and other car companies invented this sort of stuff as like their assembly line deal.
Okay. Oh, oh yeah, I remember hearing about that.
Yeah, it's dope.
Like this was coming out with the, the introduction of like industrial organizational psychology where instead of just like, well, this will probably work.
And that's just what people did since the Industrial Revolution.
It's like, wait, what if we actually check to see what would work?
And it turns out that when you do that, you can, you know, build what a bomber every 24 hours on a on a mile long assembly line during World War Two,
you know, cool stuff like that.
So well, it's cool as bombers are, but the feet is really cool.
Yeah, because yeah, bombers are not simple things.
No, totally.
Although I guess in World War Two, they were less complex than they are now.
But just think of the size of the finished products, but also the complexity of a mile long assembly line, keeping everything stocked along the way and having everyone doing their little part as it moves through is that's pretty cool.
Right. Yeah.
Do we want to hit our main topic?
So I don't have much else to go on before we dive into the main topic.
What I'm actually excited about, because you had me, you sent this over, what, like a week and a half ago?
Uh-huh.
And it's, it's long.
It is.
But it's not as long.
It doesn't feel as long as it is.
And I'm actually eager to go back and read it again.
But luckily we took great notes.
So we've got stuff to go into here that hopefully will give you enough of an insight to determine whether or not you want to read this.
Yeah.
I suspect many of you will.
So we'll link to memetic tribes and the culture war.
2.0.
2.0.
Yeah.
The culture war 2.0.
This was a, I don't even remember how I got linked to this article, but I find this a fantastic summary of everything that's happening right now and being able to put things in, in terms of actually looking at them and getting a handle on what's happening was really valuable to me.
Plus it uses all the nerdy lingo that we know and love.
Yes.
And it really, it really sings to that part of my, my spirit.
So.
The guys who wrote this are definitely rationalist adjacent in some way.
Yeah.
Peter Limburg and Connor Barnes are the, are the authors.
So it is as it sounds like an article examining the current culture war and trying to make some sense of it, give some history of what happened and maybe a few suggestions about what we can do going forward.
So we don't have the culture war defined in our notes here, but I'm going to just take a pot shot guess and that it's how fucked up everything is interacting with your fellow humans today.
Yeah.
Is that, is that a fair summary?
Well, I mean, there is actually a definition here, but yes, it's, it's basically everything we see around each other right now.
Yeah.
The reason that you can't chat with anyone about anything anymore.
Yeah.
Oh, and there is, there's definition here.
Yeah, I was just being kind of flippant because it doesn't take a sociologist or a, or a social psychologist to notice that things are not like they used to be.
And I'm not even that old.
So like, if I'm noticing it, it's, it's got to be something, right?
Right.
So you paint a really good history of where things got to this point just from like the last basically five year, well, I guess seven.
Ten?
Yeah, ten.
Ten years at this point.
Was it, wait, 2001 or 2011?
2008 is when the financial collapse happened.
But 2011 was their first big event when the Occupy thing fell through because the mission statement was we're unhappy.
Okay.
Not trying to be disingenuous, but, and well then again, I can't trust the Colbert report as like, you know, the best source of anything, but other than making me laugh.
Yeah.
But he had on two leaders from the movement on the show or he went and interviewed them or something.
You know, he was like, so what is it that you guys want?
And they didn't really have an answer.
And it's like, so what, what is, what's, what's the grievance?
They're just like rich people have too much money.
And don't get me wrong, that's true.
But that's not like, that doesn't have an attainable goal at the end of it other than like, can, you know, fuck you guys.
That's not really like an objective.
Right.
But anyway, I'm sure that there's much more to it, but that was my, all right, if I'm this tired early on, I got to get myself in gear.
I'm going to stand up and stretch really quick.
All right, no problem.
Yeah.
We're jumping ahead a little bit.
So stepping back just a bit.
The article is called memetic tribes and culture war.
And so they think it's probably important to define both memetic tribe and culture war near the top.
Anything that uses the word memetic almost always has me immediately hooked.
Nice.
So they define memetic tribe as a group of group, a group, a group of agents with a memeplex that directly or indirectly seeks to impose its distinct map of reality.
Along with its more imperatives upon other minds.
Memeplex is basically what it sounds like.
If you know what meme is, it's, it's the, it's an ideology.
Yeah.
Ideology is good for it.
Yeah.
That works.
So memeplex is more fun to say.
Yeah.
To put it in, yeah, it definitely is.
Well, I mean, and it, it, I think points more directly to what an ideology is.
It's a group of individual memes that are interwoven to be self perpetuating.
Right.
And self reinforcing.
I'm in the name of what they're talking about really paints the picture of this is, because they talk about, we talked about Tristan Harris and I'm jumping around, but we'll, we'll get in order.
They talk about Tristan Harris, his, you worked at the Google ethicist, the Google something ethicist.
Yeah.
About how our attention isn't really under our control that much anymore.
Our attention is the new scarce resource that everyone's fighting over.
And we're constantly being hijacked with, you know, memetic invasions or parasites, if you want to call them that, right?
So I'll stop derailing us.
And just in case there's a confusion here, we're using meme, not in the colloquial term of a funny image, but meme in the traditional definition of an idea that reproduces itself.
Yeah.
That's actually all right.
Last derail.
Well, who am I kidding?
My last year off for the next 90 seconds.
My first exposure to the word meme was like a couple of years before it got popular before the word meme was memified in common culture.
It was from Richard Dawkins.
I think he's one.
He didn't coin the word.
I believe he is the one who coined it.
He says he's not.
He popularized it in 1975 with his book, The Selfish Gene.
And he was looking for an example of something that could mutate and it was basically an allegory for evolutionary change.
But rather than then have its chain go down through generations, it goes across populations.
And he said, I could have done computer virus or those were around back then, but it happened to be memes and that took off.
And now memes is any picture with captions under it or whatever you want.
So yeah.
All right, ready to go.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So basically in easier terms, it's a group of people with an ideology that want to spread the ideology.
And I'm going to just, I got several quotes out of here that I just dropped in and I'm more or less going to read them exactly as they appear.
The new memetic tribes share to varying degrees, a few characteristics.
Most are unscrupulously optimistic in quotes, meaning they see social problems as soluble through large scale adjustment.
They see themselves as spokespeople for larger groups, whether that be regular folk or the marginalized.
At the same time, they see their existence or their prime value as under threat.
They do battle both online and off.
And crucially, their memetic warfare is just as much about firing up members and creating conflicts out of noncombatants as it is about winning particular battles.
And they did a great job putting this line near the top because this summarizes exactly what we were trying to, you know, when I was throwing out a bullshit definition of culture war, right?
Yeah.
This is exactly what's happening.
And then I was, because we were both adding those to this throughout the day and I was going to add that exact quote and then I saw that you already did.
So I added the next short paragraph, which I thought was just as good when it was part of what I was going to add.
So I'll try and read that one.
Well, everyone vote who likes who's reading voice more.
I already know who's going to win.
So the next line.
From the perspective of the tribal memeplex, the ideal host exists in a state of permanent agitation and interprets all phenomena through the memeplex's filter.
In short, a paranoid ideologue.
Memeplexes that have not agitated their hosts into reproducing them will lose out to those who do.
Only some of the room inside your head in ideology expands to fill the available space.
Yeah.
That was also a damn good quote.
Yeah, it was great.
They then define culture war as the memetic war to determine what the social facts are at the core of a given society or to determine society's boundaries of the sacred and the profane.
And since social fact was not a term familiar to me, I looked at it or I looked it up rather a social fact as a way of acting, whether fixed or not capable of exerting over the individual and external constraint.
Luckily, they linked the Wikipedia definition of that word in the article because I had to click it too.
And it's things like the concepts of marriage or of kinship or honor or things that, you know, things that are not physical facts about the world, but they are social realities which constrain how you can behave.
I saw this as a probably weak example, but it's appropriate.
There was a change my view thread on Reddit in the last day or two.
Someone is complaining about tipping.
This comes up like once a month.
Yeah.
Tipping shouldn't be a thing.
Tipping's a good one.
It's not obligatory.
The poster is like, but it kind of is.
Yeah, totally.
And it's like, yeah, exactly.
It is.
You're an asshole if you don't.
That's the social truth.
Yeah.
So yes, it's not required.
They will, in theory, be paid minimum wage.
So if you know any service workers who may live on tips, they definitely almost never paid out minimum wage if they don't make enough.
So it's one of those things like, I was going to make an example from a movie, but it's not important.
So moving on.
And yeah, you do see them changing quite a lot too.
Just a few years ago, I was reading a book which came out not too long ago, where the word retarded is used quite a bit because back then it was still okay to say.
It was like, yeah, how do you refer to something that's really lame or stupid?
Yeah, that's retarded, dude.
Now you can't say that anymore.
Yeah.
Actually, fun fact about that.
And I'll need to double check, but I'm confident enough to put this on the air and go on the record for saying this.
I know somebody who is in their 60s and they live with their adult sister who is mentally retarded.
She's a diagnosis because she's in her 50s.
And so when she was diagnosed with re-dardation 50 years ago, because she was a child when she was diagnosed, that rode through up until sometime during the Obama administration.
And when that was removed as like a legal diagnosis, they removed her benefits.
Oh, shit.
And so because that's not what we call it anymore.
So she's better now, right?
So they got her back on, but there is a few Harry months where there was nothing coming through to help support the full-time care that she needs or anything like that.
So that was kind of interesting.
Yeah.
So not only can you not say it, but you also can't legislate it anymore.
Right.
Which I'm in favor of that.
Language policing is if he in this article talks about Jordan Peterson and his firm stance on that, but at the same time, I'm a big fan of this sort of my general policy on language policing.
In general, I'll be descriptive in a way that's not asshole-ish if I can.
And if I'm told that's wholeish by somebody who is an authority on the subject, I'll change my general descriptors.
But in person, I'll say whatever someone wants.
You know, like, I think we talked about the word black before as like, as term is like black American as opposed to native or African American.
And I always said black American because not all Africans are black.
Not all black people are from Africa.
And it always struck me as weird to say, oh, you're black.
You must be from Africa.
And this kind of like weird, like, you know, you're not from here since.
Okay.
Which you don't do that with, you know, other white people or even other like not black people.
You don't do, you know, Mexican American or Puerto Rican American for the most part.
I think you do.
Some people do Mexican American.
If they're from Mexico.
Right.
But not if they're not that they've been here for 300 years.
Yeah.
Right.
So that's, that's the, that's the part that always worked to me.
But if someone in person wants me to call them African American, I'm all over it.
And I'm not going to protest to them.
Yeah.
But then my other joke, I'm sorry, I'm derailing us.
Elon Musk is African American.
Right.
Oh, South Africa.
Yeah.
So on paper.
And then there's that person who applied to college a few years ago, also from South
Africa, I think.
And she got affirmative action, benefit, you know, perks for applying to different colleges.
And when she got there and she was white, there was some kickback.
But she was African American.
Her family was from Africa.
Yeah.
So I know someone personally who I'm not going to give out name here because she wants to
put this whole thing behind her.
But she wrote a number of stories which were well received and she used the pen name and
the pen name she used was the nickname that her grandmother called her.
And she is, was actually born in South Africa.
Her parents are South African, but they're the Dutch South African.
They're white.
And her parents, interestingly, fought against apartheid like hardcore and were eventually
stripped of, I think, most of their possessions and kicked out of the country for, for their
fight against apartheid.
But anyways, she had a nickname that her grandma called her.
She used it as her pen name.
And the nickname, I mean, it's just, it's a, it's a collection of vowels and consonants
and stuff that you just call a kid when they're all cute and young.
But it kind of sounds like it could be sort of African and like a African ethnic sort of
name.
Would giving away the name, describe, tell her who you're talking about?
Possibly.
Okay, that's fine.
And, and she comes from South Africa.
And like, she didn't ever make a big deal about this.
She just wrote some stories.
But at one point, a anthology contacted her and was like, Hey, we'd like to include your
story in our anthology of African American writers.
And she was like, that's totally cool.
You can do that if you'd like, but just so you know, I'm white.
And she explained the situation.
And there was like a scandal.
People were like, how dare you represent yourself as, as, as black and use this ethnic name.
And she was like, no, this was what my grandma called me.
And yeah, and she abandoned that pen name.
And it's just never going to write under that name again.
That's lame.
No one should make you feel bad.
I agree.
And I mean, that was really shitty.
But yeah, that actually, that sort of thing can and that does happen.
Man, that sucks.
Yeah.
Anyway, that's interesting.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But yeah, no, getting back on the language thing.
I don't know.
I, I agree that, you know, words like gay or retard are bad and hurt people.
But, you know, it feels weird because there's always going to be insults and insults are
going to be like calling people weak or calling people stupid, right?
Yeah.
So people who actually are those things are going to feel bad.
And I mean,
Well, you can't say stupid anymore either.
Oh, you can't say stupid now.
You can't say stupid.
You can't say crazy.
Yeah.
I knew you couldn't say crazy.
That was what I was about to bring up.
Crazy actually bugs.
Well, okay.
We're way far afield.
Yeah.
But the loss of crazy bugs me too.
Some ideas are genuinely crazy.
And I think you should be able to call them crazy.
And especially in a way that isn't pejorative.
Yeah.
Because what else can you say to deliver what you're trying to say?
There was that guy who wrote a book a couple of years ago.
He was on Julie Gayles podcast.
And this wasn't the point of why he was on, but they, they, he changed the name of the
book.
I think like a crazy philosopher, which conveys exactly what the guy was writing that was
the ideas in this book.
And I don't know what he changed the name to, but you know, it wasn't going to be, it
wouldn't convey the same shorthand of message.
That's part of the problem with euphemistic language in the first place is that it's
almost necessarily, first of all, it almost, it's almost necessarily more syllables, which
is annoying.
But it's, it's, it's more vague and less, less clear and, and.
Well, and it'll, it'll always spread.
I mean, when I was a kid, the, the term that you used for intellectually disabled people
was special.
They were, you know, they were special kids.
And then that became used as an insult because everyone would be like, oh, you're one of
those special kids, aren't you?
And like whatever the term is for someone who has that disability, it's always going to
get turned into an insult.
Well, the special isn't okay to say anymore.
I don't know what is cause some things are special and awesome.
But again, it depends whether you put a sting on it, right?
There was a famous comic who must not be named, who had a joke about that Jew is the one like
ethnic group that is both the accepted term and the pejorative term, depending on how
you say it.
Yeah.
And if, you know, you can, you can put, you can put, if you can put a bad spin on special,
you can do it to literally anything, right?
So.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I just reminds me of that, this American life episode where there's a Jewish producer
and he's talking to one of his coworkers and the coworker would not use the term Jew
around him.
He's like, but I'm a Jew.
And he's like, yeah, it's okay for you to say it.
It just doesn't feel right to say.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And we're not going to say the other word that it's said, that other people that you,
you know, even if you're in permission to say, you might feel weird about saying so.
Yeah.
All right.
I was going to try and just buy myself a ticket to that interdellectual dark web by
volunteering it, but I really want to earn that, that seats.
Yeah.
We'll have to take a dark picture in the bushes outside.
That's right.
All right.
You got to earn this.
No free cheap tickets for you, sir.
Deal.
All right.
Getting back into the article, we will go through the summary of parts.
They, they identify six things that have brought us to where we are now.
Do we want to name what they are in broad strokes really quick and then go and teach them in
detail?
No, because I always forget lists like that.
I say we just go through them one at a time.
Let's do it.
Yes.
If you lose count, there's six.
Okay.
The first is the secularization and meaning crisis.
The, did you want to read that first line since you put those in?
Yeah.
I'll read the short ones.
They'll be the long ones.
Okay.
Good trade off.
The secularization and meaning crisis, the meaning crisis weakened our collective understanding
of what ought to be is the short summary.
And the longer quote I pulled out was secularization theories predict an untethering of religious
authority from society would bring about a widespread embrace of rational and scientific
worldview.
And let me just pause right here.
God, I'm so sad that didn't happen.
Like I see those like kind of steampunk era.
I know it's not steampunk, but like enlightenment era people, they're like, yes, we are finally
overcoming the shackles of religion.
And now everybody is going to be, you know, scientific in the progress of man.
And now we are enlightened and God, it just, it didn't happen.
Just ran for new, ran for new shackles.
Yeah.
And it was, oh, cause you think, you know, I would have thought anyway, I would have
been one of those people.
I was like, yes, we're breaking free.
Luckily we're both perfectly sane.
So, oh yeah.
Right.
Obviously.
Continues.
Nowadays, multiple viewpoints compete with Christianity for control over the social
narrative because they were saying earlier in the articles Christianity used to provide
all the meaning, all the narrative that ran life.
It was the big overarching structure that let you make sense of your life.
By the way, this whole thing is just about the Western world.
Yes.
Well, since that's where our culture was taking place.
I don't think we said that.
Okay.
That's a good point.
But you know, every, every religion, every region had their own religion.
It was always a religion that did this thing.
Totally.
This society-wide secularization has given rise to the meaning crisis, which we define
as a meaning famine where numerous contenders are competing to satiate our meaning hunger.
So yeah.
Now we've got, we're searching for meaning and instead of finding it and finding it
in science and rationality, people are scrabbling for like crystals and you do big
foots and UFOs and shit and Deepak Chopra-esque spirituality and that sort of stuff.
Yeah.
Mimetic tribes offer one solution, a raft to navigate the open seas.
They're totalitizing worldviews and the roles they provide are an attempt to satiate the
meaning hunger and the meaning famished.
And I will just say, I totally see that in some of the people that I know that like get
really into some of these things.
It seems to be a lot because they don't have any, anything meaningful in their life and
they see this and they're like, yes, I can, I can change society.
I can help these people that have been oppressed by the colonizers or whatever and it becomes
their thing that makes their life mean something, you know, because everyone needs their life
to mean something.
Right.
Otherwise you sink into depression and smoke pot all day.
Why does this sound familiar?
Kind of like that, that rationality thing I've been hearing a little bit about.
Right.
Um, we'll just, I'll just go ahead and dodge that by saying some rafts are sturdier than
others.
All right.
So we have the step one is the collapse of Christianity that provided meaning to everyone
and now people are searching for meaning.
And part two is the fragmentation and reality crisis.
The reality crisis fractured our collective understanding of what is and anyone who heard
the Sam Harris episode with, uh, who's that comic book or that, that strip comic writer?
Oh, Scott Adams, Scott Adams, um, Dilbert, he was a nightmare to listen to, but this,
this, uh, the, um, the two narratives thing.
Yeah.
Exactly.
He brought it this whole, he brought this up exactly.
The two movie screens.
Yeah.
And each side can only see one and they're showing a different movie.
There you go.
And they, they bring up that in the article, but they say it's not, it's worse than that.
It's like a Netflix, uh, smorgasbord of things.
Not just two used to be kind of just two.
Yeah.
Um, now it's 60 and I'm throwing up and making up a number.
Yeah.
Now you can view it through the lens of the, you know, literally anything white supremacists
or yeah, the, uh, the, the, the crazy people who think the lizard men aliens are behind
anything.
Or is that, was that the QAnon thing, the lizard men, or were they some other conspiracy?
I think lizard men is older.
I'm not sure how old QAnon is, but the QAnon is pretty recent.
If anyone had, no, QAnon was like the entire democratic party is a front for child pedophilia.
Right.
I'll take it.
I had an effort actually heard a QAnon before this article.
So luckily I live a happily sheltered life.
So speaking of lizard people though, anyone who's gone through DIA in the last few weeks
and has noticed that they're under construction and their signs are leaning really hard into
the conspiracy jokes.
It's great.
It's awesome.
Uh, the article says this fragmented array of narratives has caused a reality crisis.
For without some semblance of consensus reality, constructive cooperation becomes extremely
difficult.
This resists and this results in what the leotard le, leotard.
Okay.
And what leotard calls a different, a situation where conflicting parties cannot even agree
on the rules for dispute resolution.
Moreover, there is a lack of agreement on what the conflict even is collective understanding
problems of what reality is, amplify collective action problems of what reality should be.
And also grassroots and underground media productions keep the tribes up.
Well, actually, let me get to that in a second.
But um, yeah, I thought I also feel like I've seen that I have, like you see the two sides
talking about the news issues these days and they're like just radically different.
Yeah, it's, um, even though I highlighted the part a situation where conflicting parties
cannot even agree on the rules for dispute resolution, um, it's remarkable even seeing
people try to politely play the middle on some of these that, you know, I would like
to think I had through, through practice, I'm above average at reaching across the plud,
the ideological aisle.
And I think I am, I did a good job, you know, of keeping a level head in this and just finding
things that we could all agree on.
We were debating the, uh, Kavanaugh, I don't know how to say his name, the Kavanaugh, the,
the alleged serial rapist that Trump dominated for a Supreme Court justice.
Who was the we fun to ask?
Oh, uh, co-workers at lunch Friday.
Um, and nobody seemed to for it, but one guy who's trying to play the middle too hard was
arguing basically how bad it was that this was, you know, being a thing, um, cause his
family votes right and he, you know, thinks and, you know, he, I think fairly he says,
you know, they're not idiots.
They think what they think for the right, you know, for, for what seemed to them good
reasons.
So those guys sitting across from me and then the guy on my left is like, nope, our
Republicans are stupid.
And like, that's his, that's his position.
And I'm like, look, you guys, he's being, you know, the guy across from me, I'm just
drinking straight ahead is being more generous.
You need to like not paint such a broad brush.
You know, these people, anyone who, who votes in a way than you was doing for what seemed
to them good reasons, even if their reasons are objectively terrible, they're not just
stupid.
If that's, if that's your explanation, you're not thinking hard enough.
Um, but I mean, just these, these, you know, we're all left as nerds who all agree.
But even like trying, I don't know, is this, this seems like a, um, relevant to bring
up the ideological Turing test, which I think we've talked about before.
Yeah, it does come up later in the post, but I skimmed a bit.
So, um, then if it comes up later, then it's probably more appropriate there.
So we'll save it.
The, yeah, no, it's, it's weird.
I have a friend who's like kind of on the left.
And when the Brett Kavanaugh thing came up before the testimony, he was like, oh,
well, looks like the Democratic party is going to shoot itself in the foot again per
usual.
And I'm like, what?
Because apparently like all his family and a lot of his friend circle are more
right-leaning and they just see like Democrats throwing a hissy fit and over,
over nothing, I guess, over like someone getting drunk at a party and groping
someone drunk.
I don't even know.
I, it's hard for me to, to see it, but yeah, apparently.
I guess even if you're just see different things.
Yeah.
So, I mean, one way to view this thing is like all those women are liars and they're
just coming out now just to stir, you know, kick, kick mud and do this.
Well, I mean, they could think like that they're over sensitive, over exaggerating.
Like someone stole a kiss at a party and they are traumatized for life.
That's not what many of these descriptions include.
I know, but that's what they see.
Oh, well, that's, that's fine.
So yeah, if you're, if you're going to say, if you've ever met someone who does
blow things way out of proportion, which I've met one person who does.
I was like, I don't remember what the situation was now, but I remember
hearing them tell the story and I was like, dude, I was there when that happened.
That is nothing like what you're describing.
It was like some minor thing and it was being blown up into this like my
honor was questioned and my life was on the line and I could have been seriously
injured and I was like, whoa, that will actually come up probably in the
belonging crisis and weaponized in the warfare crisis, probably.
Yeah, but I'm not, I have written already a whole blog post
about how much I hate fucking breadcalf now.
So I'm not on his side.
I'm just saying how different the things that people are seeing are and how it
can be like portrayed that way by their media and by their social reality, that
it's not that we're discussing rape and we're like shocked that they can be
so cavalier about someone attempting to rape someone.
We're literally discussing two very different events.
Right.
And I guess, and when I had said that's fine earlier, what I meant was if that's
what they're going to say their narrative is, that's fine.
But if you're going to, you know, I guess what I brought to the table was like
listening to these guys talk and then I was like, you know, look, we can just
however this goes down, we can agree that refusing to call witnesses because
they will either have to say that it strongly believed that they'll either have
to say incriminating things or perjure themselves.
So if you're refusing to call witnesses, you're probably on the wrong side.
And that's true no matter what.
If you have to lie or hide the truth to defend yourself, you're not defending
the truth. That's not a political statement.
So it's, you know, I don't know.
That was just my throw into their thing.
What's the third bullet point we hear we have under the fragmentation
and reality crisis?
Oh, right before we move on, one of the things in that section was talking
about how these ideas get spread to, to the groups, to the meta groups,
grassroots and underground media productions keep the tribes up to date
on opinions.
And I'm like, and they say with wildly different perceptions of the same
event, but that kind of struck close to home.
Are we a grassroots or underground media production, Steven?
Hmm.
Are we keeping our tribe up to date on opinions?
No, in fact, check us.
Please God, no, in fact, check us.
We post all these little links for no reason at all.
Yeah, no, by all means do.
Yes.
And we are.
I guess.
Yeah.
I mean, I mean, I just, I like talking with you about community stuff.
I don't, I don't, from the inside, it doesn't feel like I am part of a gigantic
war that's bringing a lot of our society down, you know?
No, if anything, we're doing the opposite, but that's what everyone
thinks.
So, I don't know.
Yeah.
I did notice speaking of liking doing this, that this is, this is like my,
my social outlet for doing things or my, my, my replacement for social media
basically, because we started doing this in February of what?
2016 sounds right.
I think so.
And I think I stopped using Facebook in November of that year.
Or maybe the, maybe it was the following year, but whenever it was, I, I don't
get that much of a compulsion to like, you know, shop, shop my thoughts to the
internet.
Yeah.
And so I'm able to save it for every couple of weeks and get it all out of
once.
That's awesome.
And I, I, I think this is much better replacements.
So I still have to shout on my blog too.
I haven't been caught up in a Facebook fight in years and it's great.
Oh, that's awesome.
Yeah.
So I strongly recommend someone try it.
I don't know.
I'd live it off.
Everyone should have their own podcast.
Yeah.
I have their own podcast or just get rid of Facebook or not.
I'm not going to, I do think this is a wagon worth jumping on and saying that,
you know, everyone should get off Facebook, but it sounds, it sounds
cliched to get on that wagon.
So what I'll say instead is try going without it for a week.
You'll probably notice like this weird separation anxiety of like, I'm missing
out on stuff, what's, what's happening here.
But then, you know, correct me if I'm wrong, but I think that especially if
you're one who gets heated on Facebook somewhat frequently, as many people do
because of all the shit we're talking about here, um, it's, it's refreshing to
say, you know what, I'm going to sit this one out and they sit on enough of them
and then no one expects you to get involved in it anymore.
So it's great.
Much of my Facebook use is like more of a bulletin board service.
Like half my links that I get are from interesting people sharing them on Facebook.
I'm pretty sure I saw this linked on Facebook as well, uh, which is where I
first got it, although I'm not positive about that.
It could have been a different source.
That's true.
So that's something that's something to think about is you've got to supplement
your media income from somewhere else.
And luckily I outsourced it to people like you and Zeke and other people who
send me fun things.
So, but I, yeah, I basically don't socialize on Facebook anymore.
That's probably a good call.
I don't know.
I, it, it's one of those things that like this is a new social media is like a
new tool and it's, it will probably be at a really cool place with it in
generation or so, but just imagining what it could be like in 40 years is weird,
right?
Because of how far it's come in the last 10 or 15, whenever my space came out.
So, um, yeah, I don't know.
It's, it's, uh, it's a precarious situation.
It's already such a powerful thing.
It's, uh, it has me wary of it, like an old man get off my lawn.
So, right.
All right.
Atomization and the belonging crisis.
All right.
The belonging crisis took away a genuine feeling of community.
The belonging crisis is, the process by which individuals come to
experience themselves primarily as separated individuals who are not
part of a greater whole.
The freedom that comes with this is accompanied by feelings of isolation,
alienation and depression, um, which is another, another problem with the
whole breakdown of, uh, of the meaning of this, right?
The, the, I mean, the atomization is the same kind of thing.
Cause when you're a part of a group, even like a large close knit extended
family that has some kind of goal, you're still a group and you have meaning
in your life through how you contribute to them, right?
But the more atomized you are, the less meaning there is because we
find meaning in other people.
Yeah.
Most part.
And then you're, you know, the more atomized you are.
And they might talk about this.
I did, I did skim through because we took the best notes for this section of this
part.
Um, maybe they talk about this, but imagine the more atomized you are, the
more susceptible you are to joining some fringe, scary style thing.
They actually say that just a few lines later.
Yeah, I, I, I got that right after to mitigate, no, it's all right.
To mitigate loneliness, anxiety and other adverse conditions that lack of
belonging brings people are primed to fly into the arms of others.
All they need is an offer of togetherness and a few convincing means.
You know, I'm not dumb.
I'm smart.
I anticipated what these, what these geniuses were going to say.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Um, yeah, I imagine the more shunned and atomized you are, the more likely you
are to find an online community, you know, like r slash incels or, you know,
some hate group, uh, in fact, you know, there was that reformed neo-Nazi that
was on Sam Harris's podcast last year.
That's how they get all their members.
Right.
That was a fantastic episode.
Yeah.
It was, it was put me, it was emotional.
It's put me in a weird mood too.
It was intense.
I remember I was like at the store listening to this and I'm like, I need
to go out to my car.
Like I finished shopping and stuff, but it was just like, holy shit.
Um, it was great.
So that was one of the Christopher, you know what?
If I Google Sam Harris, neo-Nazi, I'm not going to get that episode.
So, uh, I bet I'll find something else.
Um, in any case, it's search on there for Christopher something.
It's in the last year of his episodes.
That's a bad reference, my bad.
I'll link to it if we have to.
All right, fair enough.
Cool.
So yeah, these, these are the things that help tribal, tribal,
uh, memetic tribes exist.
And then we go on to globalization and the proximity crisis.
You know what?
I should have put the summary at the end, but whatever the proximity
crisis removes distance from conflicting views.
They say the internet pornifies our private lives, including our political
views, leaving nothing to the imagination.
When everything is laid bare, respect vanishes for our proximity
exposes all of our ugliness.
This manifests in what psychologists call dissimilarity cascades, meaning the
more we know about someone, the less we like them and environmental
spoiling, meaning proximity with those we don't like spoils the environment as a
whole mutually exclusive mean plexus have no distance from one another.
Thanks to the global village.
This is the proximity crisis.
Good fences make good neighbors.
And the power of media has flattened all social fences.
That's an interesting, that's not one.
I think I could have guessed, you know, thought about from my arm chair.
And that's a really good one because, uh, it's staring in the face once you
see it, but yeah, like name any insane fringe fringe group that exists.
And there was actually a great XKCD about this just a few days ago, um, where
it was that it was that one, you know, that it was the exact same drawing of
that one of the guys pouring over the computer and honey, come on.
It's like, no, I got someone's wrong on the internet.
Um, it's, I thought of this really annoying thing.
I need to see if anyone online actually believes this.
So I can be mad at them and somebody does and there's no looking for them.
Cause they're one Google search away.
Right.
Or they're, they're on your Facebook or they're on Reddit or whatever it is.
So there's, there's no shortage of people to be mad at, mad at, even though
you would never see them in real life.
Cause they're so, they're so small in fringe.
They're fringes don't exist anymore.
Like that.
Yeah, fringes are no longer fringes exist.
They're no longer that far away from you.
Right.
Yeah.
It used to be like, I mean, my neighbor over there, he's pretty cool.
Like he lent me power when he had the fire here and I couldn't do anything
without any power around extension court to his place.
He's a pretty chill guy for the most part.
Uh, he seems kind of like a dude, bro.
I don't think I would like him if we like had to hang out all the time, but I
see him every now and then I'm like, Hey, what's up?
He's like, Hey, sometimes we chat for like a minute or two about like the dog
or whatever.
And that's, that's cool.
That's a good measure of distance.
I'm, I'm happy to have this relationship with him.
But if like, he was in my living room on my computer every single fucking day
posting about like how he loves the sports ball and the beer and bitches and
hoes, I'd be like, the fuck I, I mean, it must start a movement to expunge you
from the earth.
That, that, that summarizes my like, my sense of, uh, I can't think of the word
that that, that summarizes my, my empathy for anyone in the service industry.
Cause there's no telling him to get the fuck away from you.
Right?
Right.
Um, that's why when I was in the service service industry for like four
years delivering pizzas, I delivered, I, I, and you know, it was a small enough
place you could do whatever you wanted.
So, um, but the best thing about delivering is my interactions were
necessarily very short and I was great for like 90 second intervals, but if I
just talked for some customer for, you know, two, three minutes and it goes on
and on and every customer is an idiot.
If you ever worked customer service, then it's, then I, I, I get annoyed and I
can't handle it.
So, um, that's why I lasted six months at the bank because nobody knows what
they're doing goes to the bank and nobody knows what they're doing goes to
the bank four or five times a week.
Right.
These, there were, there were a dozen people that came through our small
branch that would come through four or five times a week.
What were they doing?
Fuck if I know, I mean, so, I mean, I can, I can tell you what they did when
they were in the branch, but I think they're just there because they're
bored or something.
They'd come in like check on their balance or they'd come and withdraw $20 or
come and withdraw in cash from one account, move it to another account.
And like, I know, because they could do this all from the toilet on their phone.
Maybe they really were just like lonely and you wanted to see a human.
Yeah.
Or maybe they feel like our receipt makes it real or something, but like a receipt
exists at the branch.
Like, you know, if, if the one I get, if the one I give you in the branch is
real, so is the one that happens online and how I'm going to lie about the one
online, I could give you a fake, I can give you fake receipt in the branch.
And then people come in and just do the dumbest thing.
You know, like, so I'm going to come in, toss this card at me and I'm like,
and what's your account number?
And he's like, I'm not going to say it out loud, get it off the card.
And I'm like, first of all, don't be such a prick.
And second of all, your account number and writing number, full name and address
are on every check you write.
Are you kidding me that this is some secret information?
Don't be a, don't be a, you're not even being good at security right now.
Anyway, so you can see even years, years distant, the horrors of customer
service last with me.
And that's because they're, they're the proximity crisis to other people that
suck bringing it back, bringing it back.
Yeah.
All right.
We've got the stimulation and sobriety crisis as the fifth part here and the
sobriety crisis reduced our agency and turned us into addicts.
Yeah.
And this, this talked about what I was getting on Facebook.
I think this is where they bring up Tristan, Tristan Harris.
Yeah.
Yeah.
This is basically where they explain super stimuli, which I think is tying
together points four and six, and they had to put this in here to explain that.
But, uh, I'm assuming most of our listeners already familiar with the concept
of super stimuli, uh, it's things like, um, Snickers bar, which has a combination
of fat and sweetness and cocoa that you would never find in nature, but, uh,
exists nowadays.
And so it overwhelms all our natural instincts to, to seek out that sort of
food, which is very bad for us, but it is, you know,
it hits all the notes that our ancestors wanted at intense levels.
Yes, exactly.
And there are good versions of that too.
Yeah.
Um, like music, um, you know, music, art, even, even tasting something that, you
know, isn't necessarily bad for you or having a moderation.
Is, or that's why it feels good.
Um, they bring up the example of the, uh, the beetles.
I forget which kind of beetle it is, but, uh, they, yes, there's a little picture.
Yeah.
There's, there's beer bottles that look, uh, like a super, super attractive female
beetle, like so much more attractive.
It hits all the things that the male beetle, uh, looks for in a sex partner is
attracted to, they will just have sex with these beer bottles until they die of
dehydration or get eaten by ants and they'll continue to bang these bottles.
In the presence of female beetles.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Cause the female beetle can't compare to this bottle.
This actually ties in really well to something I just finished doing this
afternoon and I can't remember why this came up.
It was relevant to something else we were just watching.
Um, so I was showing Rachel the episode of Futurama, which I think is the
finale of season three.
Um, I forget what it's called.
Now that sucks.
Um, but it's one of her fry is dating that Lucy Lou bought.
Oh, right.
And, uh, they were both big fans of Lucy Lou and she did the voice for this,
which is hilarious.
And so basically they, it's the future.
You can clone whatever robot, uh, whatever personality you want into a robot
and then it'll make out with you and love you.
Um, and, uh, this is the, the, the super stimulation of that beetle
reminded me of this because that's not that unimaginable, you know, it'll
probably be in some digital form before it's in, you know, robots actually
touching us, but, um, we're going to, there's, there's going to be a point
where, uh, fake mates are more appealing than real mates.
And anyway, that's exactly what there's, they, in the Futurama episode,
there's this, uh, propaganda film, the show, everybody in the year 3,000,
but fry never saw cause he's from the other 2,000.
And it's like, you know, this guy's sitting in, in his room, making out
with his Marilyn Monroe bot and he's missing out like a chance to like
get a job and, you know, have a date and procreate and all this stuff.
And then, you know, the next day hit the, the, his planet exploded.
What was that planet earth?
Um, anyway, yeah, just like that.
Couldn't be more real, couldn't be more relevant.
I challenge you to disagree.
No, I do not disagree at all.
Excellent.
Uh, their, their actual quote that we pulled is evolutionary trap.
Adaptive instincts turn maladaptive due to exposure to super normal stimuli,
magnified and more attractive versions of evolved stimulus.
Humans are just as fallible.
Whether it be junk food, laugh tracks, pornography, or likes on social media,
these artificial triggers addict us and hijack our agency.
And I think they really brought that up so they could, uh, get into
weaponization and the warfare crisis, which I want to get into immediately after
this, but the, the social media thing I wanted to just hit for one more beat,
which was, uh, this is where they brought up Tristan Harris talking
about our attention hijacking and, you know, fuck it, we're doing this.
We, we see our download numbers.
It's nice to watch them go up and it's, it's, it hits, um, a, a vibe that is
very primal because, you know, imagine giving, I don't know how, you know,
I can, I can make up a just so story of how this sort of thing evolved, but,
you know, it, it'd be a lot like giving a speech, you know, just somebody,
or giving a talk to 10 people and then, you know, doing another one to a
thousand people and that feels a hundred times better.
Right.
It just, it, it really hits you.
So, um, anyway, the, they, they talk about the get off Facebook, uh, ideas
a little bit in that section too.
So, which was also very valuable.
Yeah.
Um, so that does lead us into weapons, weaponization and warfare crisis and
the warfare crisis transformed our minds into weapons for hidden wars and
plain sight and the, well, the big quote that I pulled from this is outrage porn
is the super source, super normal stimuli of the culture war.
Yeah.
And that, that's a good summary of it.
I like that a lot.
And I pulled out a bigger quote, which you guys are going to have to suffer
through me reading, which is, um, I did like an ellipsis dot, dot, dot.
It was some book that advise, it was written in like the 92 94 and it was,
it advises, and I didn't get the name of it, it's an article, um, it
advises Russian operatives to introduce, to quote, introduce geopolitical disorder
into internal American activity, encouraging all kinds of separatism and
ethnic, social and racial conflicts, actively supporting all dissident movements,
extremist, racist and sectarian groups, thus destabilizing internal, internal
political processes in the U S unquote.
After the Cold War, Russia no longer competitive with America in the, in hard
power, pivoted to an aggressive soft power to regain their geopolitical influence.
And anybody who's followed politics in the last two years has very good reason
to believe that they've been very successful at that.
And I think it's worth pointing out, I believe we covered this also in our
episode on, on basically this exact topic, uh, that the, the, the analysis
have been done on, on, uh, the sorts of articles that get shared.
And the more outrage provoking article is, the more it gets shared.
It is, it is a memetic fitness trait to be as outrage provoking as possible,
because that will get your supporters to share it.
And that will get the people who are, uh, on the opposite side to share it as
well in outrage that they're being portrayed this way.
It's, it's like they said, outrage porn is what we have been running on for a while
now.
And I'm kind of getting tired of it, which is kind of nice, but I'm not
sure everyone else is at the same rate as I am.
And it's a horrifying ingredient that it's, it's horrifying that this ingredient
is so successful.
Again, the more outraging, the more it's shared by both sides.
And the fact that you're going to start sitting these out, people, somebody,
maybe not you, but if you were, if you were a, a more involved in, in
some of these outrage fights or something that he said, you know what,
I'm going to sit this one out.
They're going to say, both sides will say, see, he's complicit or see,
he's with us.
And yeah, this is sort of a bleak picture, but we'll get
toward the, to the, you know, hopeful part later on.
So, all right.
So then they dive into culture war 2.0.
And you actually touched on exactly what they're about to say here.
Uh, they first, uh, talk about the types of polarity that are commonly
used, uh, to describe historical periods.
Unipolarity being one superpower exists that creates order, like the, uh,
Pax Britannica, by polarity, two superpowers keep each other in check,
like the Cold War or multi-polarity where multiple nations have
competing influence.
And this is the really unstable one, which is what resulted
in World Wars one and two.
And the contention of this article is that culture war 1.0, uh, for those
of us who are around for it, I don't remember, do you remember culture
war 1.0 at all?
They talked about the Bush era.
Yeah.
And that, that, I mean, I think 1.0 went on for longer.
We're in the first few years of 2.0.
Okay.
So I think we all remember 1.0.
This was, okay.
I wasn't sure if you, yeah.
I mean, I'm young, but not that young.
Okay.
Cool.
You also look kind of young for your age.
So yeah, I get, keep getting fooled.
Uh, but yeah, no, uh, culture war 1.0, which was a lot of fun to be in
partially because we want it, uh, was between, uh, the coalitions and secular
liberals over what they called the soul of America.
Yeah.
I mean, it was like, are, are, is it okay to be gay?
Basically would be the big one, right?
Yeah.
And, and we, I only gave a, uh, kind of a gesture at we want it because like we
won, but then we got Donald Trump.
So like it, well, then it evolved into 2.0.
Right.
But, but, but, but, but it's not like, if you win World War one, but then
cause a worse World War, it's like, who really won here.
Right.
So, but yeah, the, I mean, the first one, like they could no longer force kids to
say the prayer in school, like they could no longer, uh, push, push religion in
school, basically.
Those are so much easier fights.
I know, right?
Well, they weren't at the time.
Like it was a fight to like not have creationism taught in schools.
I remember being incensed about that back in the day, man.
Yeah.
It was a fight to be like, I, I once heard from someone that was close to me say,
uh, and this, this is not a thing that he actually believed in retrospect, but
he was just saying it like because we were in culture war and he was fighting
me.
It's like, yeah, the one good thing Hitler did do was the concentration
camps for the gays.
Right.
Yeah.
No, right.
That's, that's.
Yeah.
My face made a gesture and I'm not a very emotive, facial expressive person.
Yeah.
That was intense.
Yeah.
It was, um, and now like no one gives two fucks, like even hardcore.
No one, no one gives two fucks about people being gay.
About people being not about the concentration.
No, no, no, no, no, no, God, no.
But no, like even people like on the far right for the most part are now like,
yeah, being gay is totally cool.
I mean, they're still there.
There are still some there, but vice president, for example, but like, and
probably our current president, if he has, if you can be said, if you can be
said to have any beliefs.
Right.
Okay.
Right.
Yes.
Yeah.
So he'll, he'll say whatever, whatever we'll get him votes.
You'll do absolutely anything on Twitter, but yeah.
Um, but yeah, like even the Pope, you know, I, that's true.
Yeah.
New pop's pretty dope.
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah.
All right.
So the only people who aren't cool with it are like really the orthodox hardcore
now, like, you know, I mean, almost all Mormons are totally on board with people
being gay.
They're just like, ah, our fucking leadership is anti-gay.
So all right, I guess we're toeing that line.
Yeah.
The Mormons have a weird history with being on the right side of the
fence though, what, what they had in new revelation in like 1970s that black people
were humans too.
Um, so, you know, they can, they can catch on, but at the very least they're not
causing a lot of damage that I guess maybe their numbers are too small.
But I'm just saying every single Mormon I know in person is totally liberal and
on board with, uh, with gay rights.
Same.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Although I do want to go back and say that you, you said that the problems, I
said that the problems back then were like nice and easy.
And I was listening to, um, Elon Musk's episode on the Joe Rogan experience,
which is a lot of fun.
I've heard you listen to it and then I was looking to see what other new ones
were out and Neil deGrasse Tyson was back on recently.
And he was just talking, you're making some of the same talking points.
I heard like 15 years ago.
And, um, not much because they don't need to be said that much anymore.
Cause those, those fights are over, but I maintain those fights were easier.
I, you weren't alienating your friends by saying that, you know, I think that, uh,
we should teach science and science class that, you know, you got, you can get
in fights on the internet, but you weren't like, like there was, there was
never a sense of, of alienation that came about saying these things.
And more to the point, like you knew were your friends and your peers stood.
I mean, like, yeah, as they say in the article, it was a bipolar affair.
There was the right wing questions.
There was the secular liberals.
That was it.
It was like the U S and Russia.
You knew, uh, who was on your side and who you could count on.
And they say nowadays we have multipolar distributions of power, which do not
obey the logic of bipolarity.
Agents do not see allies behind the line and enemies in front of it.
Instead, the lines surround them and are constantly shifting.
Attacks can come from right or left, from state power or mob rule, from
Twitter pylons or swatting.
And this is, this is, uh, for everyone else is reading the terror, not a series
right now by Ada Palmer.
It's the same thing that you get there.
It's the same thing you get in most civil wars nowadays, like in Iraq, one of
the major problems was like you're living in the city, your next door
neighbor's a Sunni, you're a Shiite.
You've been great all along, but now all of a sudden there's like huge issues.
Like everyone is on some other line.
You don't know who to trust.
It's, it's paranoia inducing.
And I think that is the big problem.
Yeah.
And well, one of the big problems.
And I think the paranoia inducing, and they talked about your enemies turn
along, they're in front of you.
They're everywhere comes from like, like, and they, they talk about this.
They're, they're more eloquent about this than I am, but the
multi polarity of the, the current war landscape.
You know, like a fun, annoying concession I used to make to people that was fair
for me, because I, this is something I could probably have, this is something
I probably believed and probably still believe, but it was nice to get like a
quick rise out of people, but it was still an easy issue.
And the example was like, yeah, totally.
Um, we can teach, uh, intelligent design at school, just not in science class.
Right.
Um, so like, uh, it was, it was the response to some prompt that, you know,
our philosophy professor, you know, how does like say, all right, raise your
hand if you think you should teach evolution and or teach intelligent
design at school, hands went up.
T raise hands if you say that you shouldn't, my hand went up and along with
most, you know, other people, all right, now everyone switched sides and argue
for that side and you've got like 10 minutes and my team settled on and
like, Hey, sure, teach it in school, teach it in social science.
Um, not, not in, not in biology.
And that was kind of like a, you know, sideways dig.
Um, but that was the, that was the kind of sideways middle of the road answer
that you could give and not lose friends or gain enemies.
Right.
You, you would, you would irk people because you weren't really making, you
weren't really making a fight, but it was, you know, a sideways shot didn't
hit anybody back then, right?
And now it does.
And now, you know, if you were to make some middle of the road comment, I
can't think of one right off.
I should have thought of one, but, you know, something that I probably
believe that's not, or yeah, private gun ownership is okay.
And you know, it is okay.
Um, that's going to piss off some people.
And that's something I probably believe that, you know, it is right.
If you, if you're a responsible adult, you should be allowed to have a gun.
Um, I'll also say that you should be forced to register it and, uh, that it
should take, uh, licensing to acquire one.
Um, so there are pissed off both sides.
And, uh,
Piss off me.
I also think every gun should be registered.
Yeah.
Well, we're unfortunately, we're both too sensible.
Yeah.
Damn, but if we're shooting to the sides, now we're hitting people.
And even that, I think to me, it sounds like a very equitable, uh, compromise.
That's going to piss off both people or that's going to piss off people on both
sides rather.
And I think that's like the problem because the feeling of betrayal by your
own side really sucks.
I mean, I, yeah, totally.
I think everyone I know has lost like close friends.
Over this culture or stuff or people that they thought they could trust.
Uh, have you?
I'm trying to think of any examples on the plus side.
It's easy to not lose friends.
You don't have that large of a pool to start with.
I'm kidding.
Like, I know Zeke Iran like lost almost his entire, a large chunk of his
support network over something.
Honestly, I probably would have, if I was still on Facebook, um, you know,
like I said, I got off before, it must have been in 2016 then.
Cause yeah, it was before things totally went to shit.
So, um, if I was still on Facebook, I probably would have lost all the friends
that I know or all the friends that I don't know, rather who voted for
Donald Trump or something.
And you know, again, I've got friends who voted for Trump, but, uh, we won't
miss all about him, but he's a big part.
He's one of the big five factors that happens to make all this shit happen.
So, well, for me, I remember the first time this happened, uh, I like always
considered myself a feminist, like a hardcore feminist at that matter.
I totally defended it.
I still like all their ideals, right?
Uh, but, uh, I was just like chatting on Facebook with some friends and someone
was like, Oh my God, these people I know got someone to do their feng shui.
And this guy's totally not an Asian dude.
They got some white person to do feng shui.
I was like, yeah, because it's so much more real when an authentic Asian
person is doing his racial magic, right?
And there was like a massive blow up about how like having a white person
do feng shui was cultural appropriation.
And I was like, it's all bullshit.
Anyway, what the fuck are you talking about?
Who gives a fuck?
And seriously, are you telling me there's racial magic that exists?
And if you are, that's super racist.
Yeah, right?
Cause it's like, unless, unless there actually is racial magic, then it's
just a fact of the world, right?
In this case, we should all know about it.
Different races have different magics.
And we should have certain people, certain races are rearranging our
furniture, right?
Right.
When I was, and we should be careful not to mix the bloodlines because then
the magic gets diluted.
Yeah.
So be careful what you're arguing for.
Those are all, that's a very, uh, sensible implication of that argument.
But it was like, it was, I mean, looking back on it now, I'm like, man,
I can't believe how you were not even enough to make that joke.
Well, no, no, I can't believe how much importance I associated to the event
because it was socially traumatizing.
Like this was a person that was respected.
Uh, and more to the point, like this was someone I trusted as like an ally
in the fight against right wing assholes.
And, and all of a sudden they were like, fuck you.
Fuck everything about you.
I hate you.
And everyone who is my friend should hate you as well.
And it was, when did this happen?
Three or four years ago.
That sucks.
Yeah.
It really sucked.
And I mean, I got over it, but it took a while.
Like it seriously ruined my week and fucked up my month.
Well, and you can't even agree on the rules for discourse that would
have resolved that argument, right?
Cause, and I bring that up somewhat tongue in cheek to bring it back to the article,
but also like that maybe it's because your position seems so sensible to me.
But even putting it from where they are, I guess, you know, it's inappropriate
to make that joke or something or, you know, whatever.
But like, to them, it wasn't even a joke.
It was just cultural appropriation to have someone who's not white, do your
phone or someone who's not Asian, do your function way.
And therefore I was being a colonial oppressor.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I, I'll leave that one there and we'll move on because we won't, we won't
finish if we dive too much into that.
That's true.
Yeah.
We've been going for a while anyway.
Okay.
They say there's four major events that ushered in culture war 2.0 and they're
laying down the history because they've, they've told us what medic tribes are,
what, um, the characteristics and, um,
Oh wait, we actually left at the last sentence of the, uh, the previous section,
which was thus the conditions of 2018, strange allegiance, strange alliances,
rear guard action, unstable positions, and everywhere flux and insecurity.
That's, that's a great for a, a nightmare of interacting with people.
But yeah, they, then they go on to talk about the four major events that have
led up to us being in our current culture war 2.0.
Yeah.
Uh, the first one they say is the end of Occupy, which was my personal
favorite one because Occupy kind of fizzled out without getting anything done
really.
And, uh, they say disheartened by capitalism's invincibility,
people gravitated to identity politics and away from class politics.
We cannot ignore the explosion of social justice act activism post Occupy and
the relative lack of anti-capitalist activism until 2015.
And they say this is because corporations can be woke,
but they can't be anti-capitalist.
This corporate embrace of the culture wars because they can be woke.
They, they can, they, they can't be anti-capitalist though.
They can certainly, they can also definitely be pretend woke in order to
get people, more people to buy your, uh, your non-racist coffee as opposed to
your racist coffee or something like that.
Right.
Or to go to your non-racist, um, your non-racist burger chain, chicken
burger chain, as opposed to your racist homophobic.
That's right.
Yeah.
That said, I think I mentioned this.
I've eaten at Chick-fil-A since they lost the war.
Okay.
Yeah.
And yeah, this corporate embrace helped accelerate the spread of identity
politics throughout society.
So I, I personally hate corporations, so I love that particular aspect of this.
It also served to neuter the anti-capitalist left by embedding issues of
social justice into corporate policy through HR and PR departments.
If corporations can be allies of social justice, then the radical leftist
assertion that all oppression is intersecting has the ground torn out from under it.
This helped fracture the left on questions of its goals, its methods,
and its true enemies.
So the fact that the, the corporations who are, you know, oppressors in a
way, they have a lot of money.
They, uh, employ people, they exploit people, according to some others.
They can ruin the environment.
Not the, no, not the basing, but corporations in general are, uh, oppressors.
And yet they can also be on the side of the oppressed through these HR and PR
gambits, really fractured the left in the post-occupy thing and created, instead
of having one homogenized left, all these little splinter groups that had their
own things that they ran after.
Yeah.
And I, I'm going to pronounce, I'm going to just pronounce this name, probably.
Um, the second one was, uh, Obergefell, Obergefell.
That's a hard name to say.
Sorry.
I think that's what it is.
I don't know either.
Obergefell V. Hodges.
That was the legalization of gay marriage in 2015 and, uh, what to say
there, except that this was a blow to, you know, it, I don't imagine it's a
large portion of our listener base, but there are people out there who aren't
total monsters that believe that gay marriage is, is a bad idea that, you know,
gayness is a bad idea.
Um, that it's getting more and more fringes that go along.
Um, I can't believe that was just 2013.
20, was that 2015?
2015.
When we do the latest gay marriage, wasn't it?
Man, they're way behind.
Yeah.
It's, it's mind blowing.
Um, but to them, this was like an important point, right?
Uh, this was probably, I, it's, it's what would be an equivalent for us.
It doesn't look like this happened.
This might be a useful thought and exercise.
This might be like reintroducing prayer, criminalization, abortion, criminalizing
abortion.
That's a good one.
Or like, you know, compulsory prayer in school or something, right?
Um, uh, yeah, this, this is, well, I think the abortion thing is, obviously, I'm
going to say it's not like that because it's worse, but it's not like that
because it's worse.
You're causing harm that way.
Right.
Um, whereas nobody's hurt if gay people can get married other than your, your
spiritual pureness, right?
If that's your, something you're concerned about.
Um, and do you think that that would harm it?
So, uh, I guess I wanted to, I, well, or all of society, if you
think gay marriage degrades all of social fabric.
Right.
So I, I, I don't want to belabor it because we only put, uh, you know, just
the definite, what it was, the legalization of gay marriage.
But the, I, I wanted to belabor it because it is a big thing.
If you're on the losing side of that to us, it's just like about fucking time.
Can't believe it took us this long.
That's super embarrassing.
But to people who lost are like, I can't believe this is it.
We've, we've been pushed back.
You know, this, this, again, I'm not sympathizing.
Well, I'm sympathizing because they're humans, but I'm not, I'm not, uh,
supporting where they're coming from.
If you can't see a difference, fuck off.
Um, so number, number three was Caitlyn Jenner.
Yeah.
I was surprised by that one.
Existing was, was, was what she did.
Um, yeah.
So what, oh wait, there, oh, there were only four.
I thought there were five major events.
Yeah.
So we want to dive into what the, the, the, the split factor was there other
than like the fact that I guess I can give a rough definition and you can tell
me it's wrong and correct it or say good job, Steven.
I guess the, the positive acceptance of trans people, she was on the cover of
Vanity Fair and this, this, this fractured the left who, you know, we were
all felt, we were all just coming down from the high of, of gay, gay marriage
being legalized, literally like a week earlier, um, maybe two weeks.
Really?
Uh, it was June that we realized gay marriage and early, I think July of one
or July three that Vanity Fair came out.
That was in the article, but the dates aren't on our notes.
Um, so it was like, oh yeah, we did it.
We're all so woke.
We're great.
Oh wait, you know, Bruce Jenner's a girl now and, uh, that, that's weird.
Bruce Jenner's Bruce is a guy.
Caitlin, Caitlin's really a guy under there.
And I don't know if that's, I don't know if that's split the left though.
I think maybe there was more splintering in like the more the center areas of
the country, like, were there really left people?
I guess it did split like the turf's off from the rest of feminism.
It's split off turf's, but I think in, I guess being trans exclusionary radical,
radical feminists for those unfamiliar.
Right.
And I had to learn that term just a few, few, few months ago, or a few months ago,
I don't know.
I think when I said split the left, I meant that these are people who were, who
were pro gay marriage.
And then they, they were confused by this.
Um, so I guess, yeah, on the left of the middle, but you know, there's a
center ground there.
They didn't, nobody on the far left is probably boned about this.
I guess, I don't know, do you want to just dig into that much as much as we
did the last one?
There's not a whole lot to say there other than this upset some people and has
widely been regarded as a confusing move.
I'm kidding.
I'm quoting that Douglas Adams thing.
I'll cut that out.
No, that's fine.
And number four is my, uh, favorite was the chaos president.
Yeah.
Um, and it opens up the Trump, a quote from Donald Trump.
He says, uh, I love chaos.
It's really great.
Yeah.
Which is his fourth level speaking, his fourth grade speaking level.
Right.
I'm not going to hide my digs.
But he makes a great chaos general.
No, he doesn't.
So it was a lot of chaos.
That's the chaos general genius behind it.
The chaos general isn't just about something chaos, right?
It's about winning.
Yeah.
And so behind all that chaos is a masterful plan that will more or less
guarantee victory.
Whereas I'm not sure there was that often a master plan.
Like sometimes there was, but for the most part, I think Harry was just like,
I can deal with chaos better than my opponents.
So more chaos is better for me.
Yeah.
But since he tended to win.
Yeah.
I guess since he was smart, he could deal with chaos better than his opponents.
Right.
Yeah.
So anyway, Trump sent the establishment right and left spinning, self questioning
and delegitimized.
And so now, yeah, now there's really not just two sides.
They're just all all through everywhere.
Yeah.
And to the extent that, I mean, this is one of those things.
You know, everyone on the left never took Donald Trump, or we never took him
seriously, but we took him literally because he would say things.
And it's like, oh, people say what they believe, except when cases where people
are mind reading or whatever.
I'll leave that at all.
I won't dive into that.
And then people on the right, you had lots of never Trumpers because like,
we're not going to have this, you know, cartoon maniac be a, you know, who's only
credential of being, you know, leading people is running reality TV shows bursting
into locker rooms of beauty pageants and doing all kinds of weird shit.
No, fuck that.
We're going to be never Trumpers.
And then some of them stuck to it and almost, you know, many of the famous ones
didn't, you know, Mitt Romney came out and spoke out against him and then was
down looking boots.
You know, Paul Ryan, he said his dad was part of the JK assassination called
his wife, ugly.
And, you know, there he is, you know, licking his boots all the time.
I don't know.
It's, it's a weird thing.
And this, I'm not, I'm being politically inflammatory, but, you know, this is a
point where like, I think these, these are, these are, these are
questions of fact.
Like this isn't my partisan opinion that the right is worse than the left.
This is my, this is my, I'm going to argue, uh, like non-partisan opinion that
Donald Trump sucks as a person and as a president.
I think what it really did to the right is it split off the populist right, the
majority, um, from the intellectual right, the intellectuals on the right are the
only ones that I personally had an easier time identifying with.
And they're almost all against Trump, but the ones that are in politics and need
votes are basically unwilling to not tow the party line because he has the
votes.
The intellectuals are a small minority and everyone else is voting.
Yeah.
And then it's hard to look at polls in today's climate because things are weird.
But when you see that he has like a 32% approval rating in only 40, low 40% of
the country's registered Republican.
This was like one in four Republicans were scared off by Donald Trump, right?
So it's not like, not just one's political power.
It's the muggles on the street too.
So, um, uh, it's, it's a thing.
I guess to be, I'm making an effort to being charitable at all of these.
I would suspect that many people who are in favor of Donald Trump think that he is
succeeding at what they wanted him to do, which was kicking up the system.
And if that was your goal and that's what you think he's doing, then you win.
Um, well, that means the rest of us and for the country is a different thing.
But, but I mean, I'm not trying to be an asshole.
I went ahead and slipped and dastled him towards the end.
Yeah.
So that's what I got there.
We can, we can move on.
Uh, they give us a quick anatomy of him, a medic tribe, which I thought was really
interesting because this is the part where you like get the cool horoscope or, um, or,
um, mixed briar personality test, where you can like look up yourself and see like,
Oh, hey, that was neat.
My, my, my, my, is Briggs.
Oh, did I say, I said backwards?
It doesn't matter.
Okay.
Uh, it's like a horoscope.
So you might as well just call it horoscope.
Yeah.
They say anatomy of a medic tribe, each tribe, they're, they're saying what
consists, a medic tribe consists of, they say each tribe has a telos, an objective
to obtain or a state to attain.
He said, an objective to obtain or a state to attain.
Yes.
Those words sound similar.
And then I put in quotes, do they though?
I think they do.
Does every medic tribe have a telos?
Like, for example, the Occupy one didn't really have a, a, well, it had a state to
attain, it's not a rejected.
Yes.
Okay.
Yeah.
They gave a really cool breakdown that I couldn't pull up my phone because it was
a Google doc of how many were there?
Like 35 or something that a couple of dozen groups.
Yeah.
So that's linked to in the article too of, uh, well here, let me go through the
way.
Yeah.
Sorry.
Go ahead.
Okay.
Each tribe has a telos and objective.
They have sacred values, which are non-negotiable and involve, involve,
viol, invite, they're not negotiable within the medic framework.
There you go.
They can't be violated within us either.
Uh, if these values are transgressed, it will trigger the tribal member.
They will also influence the prime of virtues that the tribal member will signal.
They have master statuses being the dominant identifying characteristic of the
tribe.
Each is persecuted or haunted by an existential threat, which necessitates
tribal affiliation for survival.
They have campfires, like greeting meeting areas, places where the ideas are exchanged,
uh, online or in meat space where they communicate and cooperate.
Each tribe has chieftains who either direct the tribe or provide the theoretical
foundations for the tribe, or are apologists for the tribe.
They each have mental models by which they conceptualize and navigate reality.
And each tribe has forebearers, whether they'd be progenitors of the tribe or
personal inspirations of the chieftains.
And, uh, the rationalist diaspora is on his list, which, uh, I thought was really
cool.
And so I'm going to use their entry for the rationalist diaspora.
They did, they didn't cover though, why they call it the rationalist diaspora
other than the rationalist movement.
Uh, because that's kind of what the rationalist movement had been calling
itself, uh, after the original less wrong broke apart.
I thought that's what happened to it.
Not what it like it is.
I mean, you can use it as a noun too.
I'd seen it used as a noun a lot because there used to be just less
wrong where everyone was, and then that stopped and everyone fragmented and,
you know, had a diaspora throughout the web.
Maybe I only know the dictionary definition of diaspora and it's not
sufficient, but that sounds like a negative thing.
Like we're, like we're, we're wandering now.
We were lost.
Yeah, I see, that's not really the case.
I mean, it, it's, well, we have been much more united since, uh, Scott Alexander
kind of took over the reins and then less wrong came back again.
We, we are more centralized again now than we used to be, but for a number
of years there, there was just like a bunch of individual blogs and tumblers
and things and it wasn't, but they were united about the same thing.
They weren't, they weren't like going off it.
Well, I guess some of them go off in different directions and yeah.
I mean, you know, we got, uh, what was it?
We got a lot of splinter offshoots.
That, uh, more right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
More right.
Exactly.
That went their own way and not entirely went their own way, but somewhat.
It was definitely a bit of a diaspora I would say.
Yeah.
All right.
That's fair.
Okay.
Anyways, they say rational diaspora as the example that we are going to give in
this podcast, uh, the goal of the tribe is overcoming biases.
Their sacred value is rationality.
Their threat is unfriendly AI.
Their campfires are less wrong, slate star codecs and meetups.
Their chieftains are Eliezer Yadkowski, Scott Alexander and Robin Hansen.
Stephen Zuber and Enya Shbrodsky.
Wow.
We made the list.
Dude, that's awesome.
Their mental models are Bayes' theorem, effective altruism and cognitive biases.
And their forebearers are Thomas Bayes and IJ Good.
Are our forebearers Thomas Bayes and IJ Good?
I hadn't heard of IJ Good.
I had to look him up.
He's the guy who defined the term singularity or intelligence explosion.
Okay.
Okay.
No, wait, that's Verner Vingy.
Um, Verner Vingy is the one that you used to create the term singularity for.
Okay.
IJ Good might have been intelligence explosion then.
In any case, I would, I, if I, I mean, I definitely put Bayes on there.
That's what we need our conspiracy after.
Well, that's, that's what Harry named his conspiracy after we ripped off his, but
yeah, I, I, I'm nitpicking maybe because I don't know what forebearers means.
Does that necessarily, does that necessitate and, you know, a dead person
that's no longer involved?
Or like, I don't think so.
Cause I would say our forebearers would have been more like
Eli Zeudkowski and Robin Hansen.
Uh, and they're, they're also our chieftains, but they, because our, the
movement didn't start with Bayes or IJ Good.
I don't know.
If you think about Christians, like, I think the forebearer would be Jesus.
Cause like he didn't, well, you know, assuming briefly that there's a personal
Jesus as opposed to the myth, but like the Jesus myth is the forebearer because
if there was a Jesus person, he didn't know shit about Christianity or about
organizing a church or anything.
And then the actual chieftain would have been, uh, like, um, John Paul or was it
John Paul?
He was, he was the, no, just Paul, not John Paul, uh, Paul.
Yeah, you're the Bible expert.
It's getting late though.
Paul, Paul was the guy who founded the first church and really started
spreading Christianity in the Mediterranean.
And he was a guy that actually existed.
So he had that going for him.
Yeah.
But whereas like Jesus was just like a guy with some cool ideas that God has
asked killed.
I was, uh, looking at the, the list of memetic tribes here that they have in
the Google doc, um, and there are 34 that they put down here and, uh, street
epistemologists is one of them, which is fun.
And they're, and their forebearers are Richard Dawkins and Sam Harris, which is
interesting.
Um, but like when we'd had, uh, Steven on, you know, Peter Bogessian and Anthony
Magno Bosco, I can't say his name are the, uh, chieftains.
So, okay, that's fair.
They don't have to be dead and long gone, but I guess maybe Sam Harris, Richard
Dawkins popularized, uh, maybe, maybe should do postmology evolved out of, uh,
talking across religious aisles or from our religious to religious.
And they did that in a way.
Sometimes, sometimes nice, sometimes not so nice.
Yeah.
Okay.
Fair enough.
I like it.
Um, yeah, I like, uh, I'm going to read one more too from the, from the post,
but before that, I want to read what they put before they start listing out a
few of them, which was a quote, um, in the spirit of charity, we've attempted to
describe these tribes using terms that they would use to describe themselves.
For example, the term social justice, well, it doesn't matter.
I just like how they, they say that forthcoming.
And so, you know, they're, they're saying, I can't find the quote.
They had, they had to think about like listing these.
Doesn't mean that we think that I want to just find it.
Sorry.
While presenting the following, uh, we're adopting a view from nowhere position
in order to demonstrate similar mimetic anatomy.
However, we do not believe that there's an equivalence between these tribal
claims to truth, morality, practicality, or even interestingness.
That is for you a reader to evaluate.
But I did love the, the, the attempt at view from nowhere and charity to say,
look, here's how we think they'd describe themselves.
Um, so let's grab, uh, one that we all hate.
Let's do Neo-Nazis.
Yeah.
That one seemed almost too easy.
I'm scrolling down a little bit more.
Post-rationalist sounds like annoying to get into.
Oh, of course.
Sorters in the intellectual dark web.
Jordan Peterson is the common, and this isn't someone we all hate, but I just
wanted to bring this up because intellectual dark hub was something we're
discussing earlier.
So this is another one of the mimetic tribes.
Um, so Jordan Peterson is the common denominator with these two tribes,
the sorters in the intellectual dark web, which he sorts in, which the
article sorts into one, one of the most important figures in the culture are 2.0.
His central message in the war is an emphasis of free speech and the
importance of self-truthing.
His followers, which we dubbed the sorters, mostly comprised of young men are
attracted to Peterson style and his message of personal responsibility.
The intellectual dark web coined by Eric Weinstein consists of a group of
thinkers who have experienced what they view, who have experienced what they
view as thought policing by political correct elements of the left.
With the ever increasing popularity of Peterson's brand and platforms, such
as Quillett and the Reuben report and the Joe Rogan experience, watch for
both of these tribes to gain further members and make strong push for return
to a classically liberal center in the culture.
I would not have thought that Rogan was part of the dark intellectual dark web.
I would, I would definitely put him at least adjacent to it.
I don't know if he had to consent to be putting on any intellectual web.
Well, that's not really his choice now, is it?
Well, he does have to pose for one of the dark pictures.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Oh, right, right.
If you don't have the dark picture, you're not in the dark web yet.
Yeah, it's on, it's on your, your badge.
Yeah.
And I'm referencing these pictures from an article that I'll dig
up and put on the episode notes, but it's, it's funny and it gives an overview
of the history of the intellectual dark web, but it has pictures of like the
top six people and they're all just like standing next to trees or like
under street lights and, you know, crossing their arms and looking gruff.
And it's like dark out and it's like, get a less.
That to me is what made me think this whole thing was a joke.
Like that couldn't be more like on the nose, but they're leaning into the joke.
Yeah.
And I just, I love that visual aesthetic too.
So I was like, this is pretty.
I like it too.
I don't think I'm wrong.
I love it.
But it, in the sense of like, if they were trying to be serious, it's like,
you guys are being the opposite of serious right now, but they're not.
So it's funny and it's, it's our, it looks good too, whatever.
Anyway, so yeah, uh, back to your notes.
And when I interrupted about Thomas Bayes and I J good.
Okay.
Yeah.
Sorry.
So rationalist diaspora.
Oh, and yeah, then afterwards they have like a little paragraph on each of the
thing, on each of the memetic tribes and where they see them going as well,
which I don't know, did you want to bother with that?
Yeah, I'm going to read the one on rationality.
Cause if we give the intellectual dark club one, I'll give us ours.
Okay.
Incubated on overcoming bias and less wrong.
This is an observatory tribe in the culture war, though similar to the new
atheists and that they prized rationality.
They do not define themselves in opposition to, in opposition to religion.
Thanks to the strength of Eli Zudkowski and Scott Alexander's writings and
Stephen and Niosch's podcast, the beliefs and epistemic virtues of the diaspora,
they command an increasing respect in the culture war.
Watch for popular, watch for a popularity boost to effective altruism, a struggle
with the downsides and downsides of increased attention and possible
pressures by the SJ AEs, which they call social justice activists.
I don't know.
They changed the name until I read this.
For the rationalists to commit progressive value, excuse me, pressure
from the SJ AEs for the rationalists to commit to progressive values.
Cause right now we're kind of watching like I did at lunch the other day.
I'll watch and point out the occasional stupid thing, but not really take
a side cause I don't feel like it.
Yeah.
So it's true that like, I, like I pointed out when you're sitting, when you,
if you set up fights on Facebook, someone's going to call you out and say that
you're, you know, Hey, you're either with us or you're against us.
Right.
Um, and they, they, the authors anticipate that that might happen to
observer groups like the rationalists.
So yeah.
I've seen it happen.
Oh, you put the quote in here.
Oh, no, I put the quote in here.
Good job me.
Um, so I put that quote that I couldn't find in here earlier.
And then in parentheses, I fucking love their writing style.
All right.
So last, this end on the bleakest note of this is how the world ends with
world, culture, war 2.0.
There are proposed steps forward.
This isn't a solution to save the world, but it is little things that we can try
to do to play to fight in the war, I guess.
Yeah, they had one, two, three, four, they have five, they had seven all
together, but I only really liked four of them.
So I put those at the top, but we'll, we'll mention all seven.
I am an arbiter of what is the best solutions of theirs.
And they kept name dropping us in the article.
It's only fair.
Right.
Yeah.
We've got to return the favor.
Uh, so the first proposed step forward is a Hippocratic oath of the culture war.
At bare minimum, a commitment to good faith dialogue, the principle of charity and
intellectual humility, acknowledging I could be wrong.
And I think that would be really neat.
Um, that's a lot easier said than done though, cause we're, we're raised.
Well, we're raised where we've ingrained those into our brain, that, that
lesson to our brain by now.
And it's okay for me to say to you, I think I could be wrong.
But if I'm going to go talk to somebody about something really important, like,
um, you know, uh, being inclusive and not a dick to Caitlyn Jenner.
Um, if I was to go talk to one of my SJA friends and do we have to call them that?
I find that a lot less annoying or excuse me.
A lot more, I hate name changing.
I, I, when you change names, you make me confused.
It seems like a deliberate attempt to do confusing.
Anyway, if I talked to one of my social justice activists, g-warriory friends
and say, I could be wrong about this, they'll say, fuck you.
This is important.
We already, they already talked about early in the article.
These, these are, these, these values are inviolable and they're non-negotiable.
So to say I might be mistaken about this is Tantamount to
shooting your troops in the back.
I've experienced the same thing where, yeah, it's, it's really hard to.
It looks good to us, but only to us.
Well, cause we're the only reasonable ones, right?
Yeah.
I mean, that said, if you can, if you can put out some epistemic and intellectual
humility, um, the thing is, if you, if you do like try to do this commitment to
good faith dialogue and principles of charity and intellectual humility, you
get called out for having privilege.
Like only someone who is white and rich and male has the ability to be like, oh,
so, you know, calm about it when black people are dying.
And then yeah, just it's, it's really frustrating that you're, you're supposed
to be really upset about these things and not take any prisoners.
And if you show any sort of, any sort of willingness to listen to the other side,
it means that you've abandoned the people, you know?
I don't know how you return the charge of privilege and say, therefore, shut
the fuck up, or therefore, we don't have to listen to you.
Like, because you're right, that's going to happen.
And I guess this is a, I'm going to toss this out to listeners.
I have no idea what to do about that.
Like you can't just write those people off because those people might be
eminently other, eminently sensible on most other things.
And we don't exactly have the numbers to be thrown away, potential allies.
So if we agree on enough, that's the thing, man, we can't agree on 90% and
then say fuck you because we don't agree on a hundred, right?
We need to say, we'll work on the rest, you know, um, but they're not willing
to play it by that rule too.
Then how do you, how do you do it?
I mean, I am a big fan of Lacey Green and I have gotten a lot of shit from
people who are like, how could you possibly like that horrible, transphobic,
misogynistic person?
I'm like, I don't know who you're talking about.
Oh my God.
She was one of the earliest YouTubers, uh, sex positive feminist YouTubers out
there that was, became really big and popular for, for being a sex positive
feminist, just helping teach people about feminism and sexuality.
Lacey Green.
Yeah.
Okay.
The name rings a bell.
Yeah.
Yeah.
She was awesome.
And, uh, then it somehow actually got to the point.
There's actually great This American Life episode about it, but to not, you know,
belabor the point for 30 minutes explaining how it all happened, basically
nowadays this sweet, uh, feminist sex positive person is the horrible Nazi
loving alt right, you know, what's the opposite of feminist, anti-feminist.
Sure.
She's a big fan of it.
Just throwing anti in front of anything.
Yeah.
She, just all the bad things that, that, uh, that those people, like they're
on the same side basically.
And I, I got a lot of crap from a couple of people in particular for saying
that no, Lacey Green is actually pretty cool.
Stop trying to be, you know, shitty to her because she's done a lot for the
movement and she's still a good person.
Can you find the, oh wait, that's the, oh, that's weird.
This American life only has four episodes on iTunes.
They only ever have the four latest episodes.
Well, it shows 49, 657, 66 and 402.
Um, the, the last four episodes that they aired on air and they often air repeats.
Oh, I see.
So where do you find this?
Their website or something?
No, it wouldn't be on the website because like I said, they only have the
last four episodes.
Um, would you buy them?
That sucks.
I want to listen to this.
Yeah.
I mean, I still have a copy.
I believe I can send it to you.
And I'd be, I'd be interested in doing that.
Yeah.
But I mean, I can't put it out there in public because they'd be upset about that.
Yeah.
Well, I don't know.
I'll, I'll see if I can find it anywhere.
If, I guess.
Yeah, but I also don't want to have to like have my laptop opened to listen to this.
I'd like to listen to it in the cars.
I mean, I will if I have to, but yeah, anyway, that's, that's super annoying.
It is.
So if I subscribe to this American life, I'll get an episode per week.
Okay.
Well, that doesn't sound like too bad to subscribe to.
It's about time.
Everyone talks about this show.
Um, I only listen to about it like one side of every six or seven episodes to be honest.
Well, listen, I'll read the descriptions.
All right.
Just every now and then I get lucky.
Well, I, what I was mainly worried about is I knew that this had been going on
forever and I want to go through 500 hours of backlog.
Right.
But if I know that at max, I have four, then that sounds a lot less scary.
So yeah, I can't believe they just remove content from the world.
Like nobody does that.
That's the whole point is data or like data storage is ridiculously cheap.
I believe it's part of their pay us initiative.
Okay.
So they are available.
If I'd give them a couple of bucks, pretty sure.
Okay.
That's fair.
Okay.
Sorry, we got distracted.
I got distracted.
Yeah.
No, I'm sorry.
I'm just saying I like the Hippocratic Oath idea.
I do too.
And we've recently had, uh, something like that come up in the subreddit.
If you guys want to go to the subreddit, you can see some talk about that on the
Matt Freeman episode.
Uh, we're not going to cover that here, but maybe someday in the future, we will
discuss that more with someone who's trying to launch something like that.
Oh, it was, it was the second.
It was don't give up Freeman.
The follow up to Matt Freeman episode.
Yeah.
Um, yeah.
Give it a shot.
All right.
Second one.
Clean bias, which is being honest about our biases and tribal affiliations.
We could abandon the pretense to neutrality and more honestly engage with each other,
knowing where we stand, which I also really like because everyone has biases
they come to.
And I would be, you know, when someone tells me like, no, I'm
neutral about things.
I don't see color.
I'm like, fuck you.
Stop trying to pretend that like, or, or like, especially the old timing newscasters
are like, we just give the news.
We, we don't judge or anything.
I'm like, no, just, just give us your actual biases.
Everyone knows that you are left leaning and you guys all vote Democrat.
There's, there's no secret to it.
Just say it upfront.
And so that we can be like, these are the biases I'm coming from.
And now it's having normal conversation.
Yeah.
And I want to reread this section of the article because that again,
sounds way too simplistic to be doable.
I was like, maybe you don't know all your biases and me pointing them out to you
isn't very helpful, especially if you're not a rationalist.
Yeah, but it's like, I have a friend who is a, um, just right wingish conservative.
And he's, uh, he's not, he's, um, a lawyer.
He's argued before the Supreme court, which is really cool.
And, uh, he, he despises Trump with every fiber of his being.
But the thing is, like, I always knew that he was kind of to the right, you know,
he's socially liberal, but politically he usually votes to the right.
I'm like, okay, I know that about you.
We can talk to each other like fucking adults.
So I have most fruitful conversations.
I've mentioned this before.
We're from my roommate through college or through part of college.
He, he's a never Trump.
Everybody's a conservative.
And, you know, like we, we were able to have because, you know, we weren't hiding
where we're coming from.
And part of it for me, and this is what the other thing too, is like, sometimes I
am coming from nowhere.
Like I, I, I now have a political affiliation and I, I leaned left before, but
I'm going to, I'm voting blue, no matter what, I got everything for the next few
elections, but, uh, until Trump gets fucking out until the damage is done or
until the damage is fixed.
But, um, the, well, I'll get into that later.
Someone's going to accuse me of being biased and they're probably right.
And they are well at this point, but not, but now I'm owning it.
Yeah.
Um, but I don't know, it's, it's one of those, like, this is the kind of thing
where someone said, Hey, you're privileged, you know, whatever.
And so it's like, what do you do with that information?
You're like, okay, I'll shut up now.
And it's like, well, uh, that doesn't seem like the solution either.
Right.
Um, it could be the, something valuable to say, despite being white guy or
whatever your privilege is, you know, having, having the social ease of being
able to, uh, get online and say stuff without feeling attacked or something,
or without worrying about being attacked or whatever it is, right?
So like, I don't know.
Again, I'm in favor of this.
This sounds great, but this, that sounds too easy or that sounds too, well, I
don't think any of these are like solutions.
I think they're just steps forward that could help.
Yeah.
So if you're declaring where you're coming from, and that's good, but then
of course too, you've got to be dealing with intellectually honest players.
Yeah.
You know, Fox news, what's their motto?
Uh, you're invalid.
Yeah.
Uh, it, it's scary.
It's weird, but I'm in favor of it.
Yeah.
Be, be straight up.
Yeah.
That's the thing.
You know, if I were to come to, especially a politically charged argument and say,
look, here's where I'm coming from.
Who's I voted for?
Wouldn't get that out of the way.
You don't have to like say, well, you're just saying that because of this murder.
And the thing is, it's not like people don't know that Fox news leans hard right.
People know MSNBC leans far left.
Yeah.
I think people is different groups of, is, is not everybody.
Right.
Everyone knows that Fox news is on the right, but how far right they are.
You know, like when, when Trump got in front of the UN and said, my, my
administration's accomplished more than almost any other.
And he got laugh out loud, a reaction from the, from the assembly at the UN.
Fox news edited that out when they, when they heard that.
And so to someone who only watches Fox news, to see the real clip on Facebook or
something, they'd say, ah, they're editing that in to make Trump look bad.
Which speaks to that, you know, fracturization that, that Scott Adams is going on about.
But it's, I don't know, it's not enough to just declare your bias or even be aware
that like your source might be a little biased.
I don't know how you check to see how biased your source is.
I know I'm digging way too philosophical for 10 p.m.
So let's, let's, let's move past it.
Okay.
Mimetic meat or weight knowledge is short one.
Uh, reinventing debate is bullet point three.
Yeah.
Um, separate into sports debates and sense making debates.
And I like this idea because I really like sports debates.
Uh, I truly enjoy them, but I also realize that they're not actual ways to get to the truth.
So it's a sports debate.
Sports debate is basically what we see nowadays.
It's, you know, people just trying to make their opponent look bad and score points
and get the audience to be like, oh snap.
You know, it's like a rap battle for intellectuals.
So what was the sense making debate then to contrast that with a sense
making debate would be something like an ideological Turing test or, uh, the antagonistic
collaboration that, uh, Scott Alexander just recently hosted four of them, uh,
gave away prize money for them and they were all pretty good.
And tach, antagonistic collaboration is when two people who have, uh, opposing
viewpoints on an issue come together to research it and they put out their
conclusions and they will only put out things that both of them agree on.
Oh, I read the one on, uh, um, mandatory vaccination of kids.
Cool.
Yeah.
Okay.
I didn't know there were three more.
That sounds really fruitful.
Yeah.
Okay.
So I can dig it.
But I guess reinventing debate is to acknowledge what kind of debate you're
having.
Um, that's fair and say, look, I'm just saying, you know, so I made an effort in
having both like, I'd kind of say here's where I'm putting on my charity at and
that's me switching to my, my sense making debate.
But a lot of my, a lot of my points about especially politics were sports debates.
Um, so that's fair.
All right.
What's the, what's the next one?
Next one is memetic mediators.
Memetic mediators could be called in for memetic battles where both
participants prefer peace to continued civil decay, but cannot come to an
accord without facilitation.
These mediators would require a multitude of tools at their disposal.
They would need to be fluent in multiple tribal paradigms and would need to
give the impression of fairness.
And because each tribe has their own method and claims to truth, the medic
mediators would have to be skilled at finding any common ground and building
from it.
And I think this is probably like the coolest idea, but also the absolute
hardest to put into practice because it's going to be really hard to find
someone that two groups can both agree on.
I actually love doing these though.
This is what I did.
This is like, again, I keep bringing up Friday's lunch, but I like doing the,
this is, this is maybe, Hey, this is a good call for rationalists.
Cause we're the, we're one of the observer tribes.
Yeah.
This is what we could do to save the world.
I don't think I would be very good at it.
I, I tend to become emotionally invested.
I try, I can do it for some things, but in general, there's other topics
or absolutely could not do it, but
that's what I was going to say is do it on the topics where you know,
you'd be good at it.
Cause you can acknowledge it yourself.
And I, and I bet that if you're meeting a, an argument between me and somebody
else, and I'd said, you know, if you're not being, uh, just passionate and
unbiased here, I think you would be able to say, you're right.
I'm going to sit this one out or I'll, or I'll try and be better or something.
Right.
In our friend group, I love, love Shelly for this.
And she's been on the podcast, I think once or twice, at least once, hopefully
at least once, but she is, oh my God.
Anytime anything flares up on Facebook and she is involved in it.
She's just like, Hey guys, here's this person's point of view.
Here's this person's point of view.
Look how reasonable you both are and it can be about this.
And oh my God, she is amazing.
I'm like, I wish I could just have you everywhere.
That's true.
You've done this a few times too.
Like when, um, during the, uh, sensitive, sensitive issues, yeah, yeah, yeah.
You, we worked that way for us.
Uh, I will say that like, since our most people are not in our community, this
isn't very useful, but, uh, I was surprised.
The article said that they can't think of any examples of someone like this.
And I was like, Oh, come on.
Have you guys never read the unit of carrying Tumblr?
The unit of caring is amazing.
Like more than on, on more than one occasion on this blog, I've called her the
best person in the world, or at least the best person on the internet.
Absolutely think she's the best person on the internet, just so reasonable and
kind hearted and just, she could be a mediator for anyone, in my opinion, at
least anyone in our, in our, in, uh, from the rational side would gladly
accept her as mediator with anyone else.
That's dope.
As far as I can tell, man, I haven't actually read that because I'm never on
Tumblr, but I will, I've read it open now.
I'll check it out.
Yeah.
Um, one of my favorite, my favorite Tumblr period, hands down.
Fantastic.
I don't know.
Have you seen the one that's, uh, like just repost the, uh, we rate dogs Twitter?
Cause that one's pretty cool.
Okay.
Um, so anyway, you said, uh, like Shelly, just that sucks that I'm missing out on
these interactions on Facebook.
Maybe there, there, so there are some things out there.
Well, I mean, they're really rare.
But it'll be, I see, you know, candle in the dark there once in a while.
Yeah.
Well, where'd you go, Shelly?
That's, that's awesome.
I wish, uh, if you see any screen caps or something that you can, you can share.
Uh, if you have to censor names or whatever, not, not, not necessarily to the page,
but, you know, put them, share them with me because I want to see them.
Yeah.
All right.
Um, so there were, there were three more.
And, uh, I didn't actually finish this part.
I was running short on time this evening, but, um, I've got the notes.
So you let me know what I missed.
Reclaiming philosophy as a way of life is number five.
Yes.
And that sounds nicely poetic and, and lofty, but good luck with that.
Good.
You can't, there's no philosophers on the battlefield.
Dude, I don't know.
Like, um, stoicism has been handed having quite a comeback lately.
That's cause we need stoicism, man.
Well, for whatever reason, it's, it's kind of being a thing.
I can dig it.
Okay.
That's, that's a good example.
I'm picturing just, you know, somebody advocating stoicism, you know, in the
mid, like walking across no man's land in World War two.
Oh, right.
It's like, yeah, good luck out there.
Um, gray pilling.
All right.
So I didn't read this.
So I'll take your guess.
I didn't really get what gray pilling is.
It seemed like basically to be street epistem, as street epistemology, like
it's like quite a questioning of people, just asking them, why do you think that?
And, you know, trying to, trying to get them to question their own stuff
without being a dick or anything.
The gray pill is the process of relearning the values and of questioning
and doubt after you've been seduced by your answers and certainties and
leaving comforting secret societies for continued intellectual growth.
Yeah, all that.
I don't know what that means.
Basically finding rationality.
Okay.
Okay.
Come join our secret society for intellect, continued intellectual growth.
Yeah.
Everyone listens gets the in jokes.
So let's see, workshops for depolarization.
Exactly what it sounds like.
Yeah, that sounds great.
Yeah, getting people to come.
Yeah.
Yeah, they give the example of the open mind platform is a psychology based
educational platform designed to depolarize campuses, companies, organizations
and communities.
And I guess for like, if it was a mandatory thing as part of your job or
something, it could work.
Yeah, I don't actually know anything about it.
I don't either.
But workshops would be nice.
But again, like getting to people to do them is hard.
And I get the feeling forcing people to do them would be the same kind of the
same sort of effect as sensitivity training.
It'd be useless.
Yeah.
Yeah, you could people to do whatever, to say whatever they have to say, check
all the right bubbles in the Scantron and then just leave.
So that's why I was not entirely enthusiastic about that one.
I'm like, I don't, I don't know if it could happen.
But these are helpful things.
And maybe, maybe as we work our way there, you know, this sounds like the kind
of nerdy thing that rationalists would be into.
I know I keep putting us at the top of the list, but whatever.
Since we're not in the intellectual dark web train yet, or the, you know, what
are some of the other crazy ones, other ones on this list, forget it.
Um, yeah, fingers crossed, you know, this might be the cool thing to do.
Like maybe if you're in college or something, because there's already a bunch
of, you know, meeting places and communities like that.
It's tough because if you're the only one attending these, you know, like I
could imagine going to see a speaker you disagree with or something.
But if you're the one going, then you're just suffering from it.
And it's not making society any better.
Right.
And you could try and learn and become less polarized that way.
But I don't know.
Well, that sounds like a stretch goal.
I can see why you put the last three in a separate category.
Did we want to cover our three or less wrong posts tonight?
Or if we went out for two and a half hours already.
Yeah.
Yeah.
All right.
We'll start our less wrong posts next week, next episode.
I was really excited about them too.
What if we, what if we do in advance, tell people what ones we're going to talk?
No, well, yeah, no, actually it's a good idea in case they want to read two.
Yeah.
If you want to, if you want to read ahead.
All right.
So instead of doing AI rationale, instead of doing rationality AI to zombies,
we are actually going to be reading the original sequences in the order they were
posted.
Uh, and you decided that.
Yes, I did.
Curious why?
Because that was the way I read them.
That's fair.
Yeah.
Enough said.
Yeah.
Why go for the, the organized refurbished version when you can get the old model
that, you know, runs on diesel.
This is like being, you know, just slightly post-counsel of Nicaea and being like, yeah,
I see you got a nice cannon over there, but fuck you.
I like all my original 117 apocryphal books of the Bible.
Thank you.
That said, there wasn't much cut to put in rationality AI to zombies.
It was just sorted better.
It was sorted better.
What, there was some cutting too.
Okay, fair enough.
So the first three essays we read, what you can find on less wrong.com under the
sequences, uh, it's kind of difficult because yeah, the sequences takes you to AI
ration, uh, rationality AI to zombies.
Uh, there, there is a resource that posts, uh, all of the less wrong posts in the
order that they were originally posted and actually includes the ones put out by
other people too, not just Eliezer, but we're only going to be reading Eliezer's
ones.
Anyways, I'll put a link up to that, but we will also link the first three less
wrong posts ever posted, which we will talk about in our next episode.
They are the martial art of rationality, why truth, and what's a bias again?
The and separated posts two and three.
So yeah.
And, uh, yeah, we'll have links to those on our website, um, Bayesian
conspiracy, the basin conspiracy.com.
And so you can go to them straight from there, um, or just find a way to read them
on your own.
Yeah, but they were, they were, yeah.
Good posts.
We're going to be reading through this thing.
Totally.
And if you just Google the first one, martial art of the martial art of rationality
and click next post, next post takes you to the next ones in the right order.
So cool.
I think about that unless you wanted to pitch what video game you were playing
me lately.
Oh yeah, right.
I did want to do that.
Um, so since you pitched one last time, I was like, oh yeah, I got to talk about
this video game.
There's a really fucking cool video game called Soma.
It's a first person game and the tutorial part starts out like more or less
modern day, maybe five years in the future.
Uh, your guy has a brain injury and he's going in for some treatment and then,
uh, like you wake up after the treatment and you're like in a, uh, bunker under
the ocean, the thing is overrun with, uh, not zombies, but like machine mindless
destroying things and it's, it turns into a survival horror game from there.
Uh, but, and it's one of the survival horrors where you don't get weapons.
You get to run away from the big thing before it kills you and then solve
puzzles and try to not die.
Uh, so it's, first of all, it was, I, I thought it was really fucking well
done as a horror game.
There were a number of times where I was like actually scared.
I had physical reactions, you know, which just does not happen anymore.
I, I get the feeling I'm jaded enough that that was, that was really
well done, that I actually had those reactions and I would have to stop playing
the game for a bit.
Oh, you got to play like Outlast or something with the lights off and the
volume up is, I played like half an hour of that game.
I can watch playthroughs.
That's fine, but like, uh, I don't play a lot of horror games and I think
cause I, I get pretty into it and I get, I get into all the games and stuff.
So, you know, if there's a, there's a jump scare or like even a loud thing,
you know, and I was playing Horizon Zero Dawn, something snuck up
and me, I jump in my seat, um, I'm like a horror game and a good horror
game does what this game does.
Like you said, there's no weapons, uh, or, you know, if, if, if there are
weapons, ammo is limited, um, that's hard to find, you know, the brittle weapons
aren't, they don't get OP until the end of the game.
If they get OP ever, there's never a sense that like, all right, finally
got all this shit, I need to be safe.
You're like, you're always, you're always stressed out.
Well, this game was interesting because there is safe periods and, uh, dangerous
or safe spots and dangerous spots that you alternate between.
So yeah, you get a break between every moment of mind bending terror.
Then after that, there's like a level where you get more of the storyline
and you talk to people.
And that's where like what I really loved about this game, uh, it is.
Super transhumanist almost.
I mean, it's a horror transhumanism, but it is at the point where like it
tackles issues of identity and who you are once you're uploaded.
And what does it mean to have these memories and what does it mean to be
interacting with non-human intelligences that don't have the values
you think they have at first?
It's, I don't want to spoil too much about this because saying much of
anything is very spoilery, but yeah, it's very transhumanist where you, uh,
you get to make deal with the, the ethical issues that we sometimes have to deal
with or that we never have to deal with in real life.
But, you know, as transhumanist thought experiments that we sometimes run across.
Did you read, uh, Dan Dennett's Where Am I?
Yes.
It's there's, there's a component of that game.
That's a lot like that that stuck with me.
I watched this playthrough years ago.
Oh, of Soma?
Yeah.
Oh, cool.
And I, cause I never played it, but if anyone wants, I'll link to the
play through of this YouTube, uh, YouTuber who does playthroughs that I
really like, um, back when I was watching, he had like 300 subscribers or less.
I think I mentioned this to you when you asked that, oh, when you told me
about this game, yeah.
Um, for whatever reason, Xbox throughout like random, pointless achievement,
like you don't get any points for the achievement when you're just doing
things that aren't games.
And one of them was, uh, it was like indie guy or something, indie, indie
viewer, watch three hours of YouTube videos that have less than 300 views or
something.
And, uh, nice.
And so Marshall Dyer does these playthroughs and he's just got this
nice gentle voice and he talks about what he's doing.
If he's doing something that, you know, it is that he talks to his thought
process, he doesn't have a YouTube voice.
He doesn't say, be sure to smash that like and subscribe button.
Like we're about to at the end of this episode.
And, uh, um, it anyway, and, you know, no floating head.
It's, and then he'll quietly do the parts that, you know, are supposed to be
quiet and he'll talk the parts where he's, you know, inventory managing or
something or whatever.
Um, anyway, give it a shot.
If you want to watch it, if you want to play it, it's something great to play
it too.
Yeah.
But if you're like me and don't play horror games, but just watch
them, this sounds fun.
Cool.
See, I think that's all we got for today.
Cool.
Yeah.
Oh, we got to think of patron.
Let me ask you real quick and we'll like put this next part only into the, uh,
patreon supported part because it's also spoilers for the game.
Do you want to, uh, save this after, after we close the episode?
And it doesn't matter.
I'll, I'll chop it out.
I can, I can handle it.
Oh, uh, do you want me to?
Okay.
All right.
Uh, but yeah, uh, this next part only for Patreon subscribers.
So subscribe to Patreon.
Um, oh yeah, we can, we can let's, let's plug that really quick.
Oh, okay.
I forget.
So we have a Patreon account.
Yes, we do.
Patreon, just search the basin conspiracy.
You're welcome to support us.
It's not required.
If it's anything like a financial hardship, or you'll even notice the loss,
don't, but if you have a free buck a month or, you know, whatever by all
means you're welcome to, uh, it really means a lot to us.
It does.
And it, it, it, you know, I was thinking about this just yesterday that, you
know, you put up all the forward costs for the show, which included the time to
build the website, the hosting for like the first year you bought the mics.
You bought the, the mic, uh, you bought all the equipment, the mixer.
Um, so you just recoup the costs for that, like last year.
Right.
Um, so, or yeah, last year, um, you know, it, and, you know, down the road,
we could get better mics.
We could do, um, whatever you guys think we could do with this.
Uh, it's not like a big money in our pocket kind of thing.
It's just something to make this, um,
it feels nice to be able to go out to dinner a few times a year on, on like,
Hey, this is Bayesian conspiracy money.
Yeah.
Or, you know, one of these days, maybe we'll want to guess who wants money or
something like that, right?
So, um, you know, maybe they have a time budget.
I don't know, but, uh, whatever it is.
So we're, we're trying to, to make it useful, not just make it, make, give you
more than just feel good for being a patient supporter.
So, um, we do have some patient only content out there.
Um, usually just us chatting about random stuff.
My goal is down, but we're going to start getting more and down the road.
I want to add some more like interesting conversations.
I don't think we'll get to the point where we ever do full episodes that are
just patient only.
Um, but maybe we'll start doing things where patients get to vote on the next
episode or something, um, or at least put out ideas.
You know, we'll take them from Reddit and stuff now too, but, um, maybe we'll,
we'll highly prioritize the ones from Patreon.
Um, so, uh, those are things that exist.
If you don't feel like doing Patreon or if you already do, uh, that's awesome.
We appreciate it.
And, uh, there is, um, iTunes.
You can like an episode.
You can like the show there, leave a review, tell other people about the
episodes that also helps.
Yeah.
Just, you know, if you think this is valuable to you and you think that
there's anybody that you think it might be valuable to us or other resources,
rationally speaking, is another good podcast.
It's not the same exact thing.
It's not rationality with the capital R, but it's, it's rationality adjacent.
Um, you know, the reason that I think I wanted to do this show was that
there isn't really a thing like a rationality podcast that I could find.
At least there wasn't two or three, three years ago.
So, um, in any case, no, I'm rambling, but thank you.
We really like our listeners and I can tell that I'm rambling.
So.
And this episode, we in particular like, dun, dun, dun.
Thank you, uh, to our, uh, call out Patreon supporter this month or this
episode, uh, Crystal, thanks a lot.
Fuck yeah, Crystal.
You know what we might actually do one of these days?
Uh, our sound engineer got busy with a paying job and, uh, we've been editing
the last few ones, which is time intensive and, and, uh, doesn't sound as good.
So we could actually pay a real person to do this for us.
One of these days we might pay a real person to do this.
Oh my God, that'd be so nice.
I'll look into what the costs are.
I want, you know, we don't need a, we don't need a, an amazing sound engineer
to add effects and do this and that, but you know, something to clean this up
and save us four hours a week, four or five or six, it seems like.
Yeah.
So that'd be really cool.
Yeah.
Anyway, so the reason I brought up all the Patreon stuff was because we are
going to go into some Patreon only content, which maybe we'll start announcing
when we do that.
All right.
So all of that last part up until the mid-afterno, I think should go into the,
um, the, listen to the Patreon supporter thing.
Sounds good.
All right.
Thank you for listening.
Bye.
Thanks.
Bye.
