Yeah, I'm ready. Okay. We're probably gonna do that too. Yes. I thought that was like the thing that is the thing
but I want to start with that with something else. Yes, totally. Okay. Welcome to the Bayesian conspiracy. I'm
Yash Brotsky. I'm Stephen Zubri. I'm Jessica Dickey. And we're going to start out with a question that is very pertinent to us today.
Someone emailed us. I forget who and I don't have the email up right now. Crystal.
Was it Crystal? Do you know what email I'm about to quote? I assume so. Okay. The email said,
who is Jess? That's the one. Okay. Yeah. We're going to start out with this. Okay. We're going to start
with saying, Jess, we are, we finally made it official. You are actual third co-host now for good.
Like no longer just this guest spot bullshit. You know, show up if you want to. Now you're stuck
with us. But welcome to the show. No, this is fun. Thank you. Yeah, I'm really happy about this.
Yeah. And so who are you? My background. I'm from New Jersey and I used to attend the
Philadelphia Lesserong Meetups now that I'm in Denver. I'm attending these Denver ones.
My work background is really varied. I just have lots of interests. So I have a Bachelor of Arts.
I used to make soap. Like if you know the company Lush, I did like something similar with handmade
soap, lotions, bath salts. Oh, I think that's Fight Club. It was, yeah, no, it was, I actually
quit because the manager and the director of the place were really scary. I loved making the products
and maybe. I also worked for a restaurant as a sous chef for a bit. And then I spent six years in
game design. I was working on mobile and web games for Microsoft, Disney, and then I was in a startup.
And most recently, I was a librarian and now I just graduated from a clinical research school
and I'm interning at a clinical research facility here in Denver and I'm hoping to get hired soon
as a clinical research coordinator. That is a lot. I'm not sure exactly where to start. Let's
start with how did you hear about getting to this whole rationality thing? Well, like a lot of people,
I found out about it from Methods of Rationality. Shout out. So how'd you, okay, for starters, how
did you find about Methods of Rationality? Actually, I was a really big fan of the Skeptics Guide to
the Universe podcast and one of the co-hosts mentioned it in the notes at one point. They were
like, used to have like little recommendations of things to read. They're like, oh, and then there's
this weird, like rationalist Harry Potter fanfic that is really cool. I started reading it and I
just, it was on fanfic.net and I just assumed it was some like smart ass college kid writing it.
And eventually, like I looked it up and there's a Wikipedia and it said it was Eleazar Yukowski
who I'd heard of in some other form and I was like, wait a minute. Why is this guy
writing Harry Potter fanfic? I thought he was respectable. I thought he was trying to like
save the world with like robots or something, right? Like if you just from the, you know,
tertiary point of view. No, I was like, this is awesome. I was actually like, more intellectuals
should write Harry Potter fanfic. Hell yeah. I think that's his caption on TV tropes is like,
Dear God, the future of humanity is in the hands of someone who writes fan fiction.
Really, everyone should write fan fiction at least once. Yeah, it's a wonderful thing to do.
Worth a shot. Yeah. So you got into reading into the Harry Potter stuff and then from there you
found less wrong. Yeah, I found the sequences from the methods of rationality. I think he was
directly linking and some of the titles were directly based on the sequences. And at the
time I kind of was like, I love this fanfic. Wow, this is so nerdy and cool. And then I would like
jump over to the sequences and be like, I understand 20, 30% of this. This is hard. I'm
gonna come back to this later. And yeah, went in and out of that and kind of just kept coming back
to less wrong. And I felt like I was just like absorbing more and more of it over time. Awesome.
And I actually like super got into less wrong after I started reading Gorn.net. Gorn is my hero,
and actually like has a lot to do with why I became interested in clinical research
with his N of one studies. Right. So how long ago was this? I'm making her face. I don't remember.
I don't know. I think it was maybe like 2010, 2011, when I first found out about that. When did
methods of rationality come out? Because it was like, that sounds about right. You wrapped up in
2014. And there were like a couple of like slow years. So it stopped for a while. It was so upsetting
because I thought it was done. It's just like, yeah, no, it's another one of those things where
it's like, it's so cool. And then it's just like, they disappear and you never hear from them again
and they never write anything again. Please come back and write more. But yeah, that's it. I don't
know. So the God, I had a question, and it just completely spaced my mind because I was trying
to figure out the timeline of methods of rationality. You nerd sniped me, damn it.
I'm right there with you. I'm trying to think of years. I'm doing math in my head and it's not
adding up. I'm imagining that meme where like, it's like a dog looking at different like the
Pythagorean theorem and some algebra. Steven's looking it up, huh? Yep. Nice. Let me install
this one. Excellent. Started February 28, 2010. Okay. Oh, it went through March 2015. Not 14. That's
right. Okay. Yeah, but it was March. It was Pi Day. Yeah, exactly. So yeah, you got into the
rationality thing like really hard fast then, sounds like. I guess. I don't know how long
Lesserung had been around before methods of rationality. Been a little while. Yeah. I mean,
I think a lot of people actually jumped the bandwagon after methods of rationality. So I'm
like right there with a lot of people. It's I think like a third of the community came from that.
That was also kind of the point. Right. Yeah. I mean, I assume it was also fun
at parts anyway, where it didn't feel like work writing it. Yeah, I think that he said that was
one of the reasons for the big stop right near the, you know, three fourths point. He just stopped
being fun and started being work. Well, then we kind of all counted on him and I guess probably
been finishing it. So yeah. Well, positive peer pressure is fantastic for motivation. Yeah.
But you said you were in New Jersey then. How was the rational scene there? Oh,
that's right. That was a question I was going to ask. People are always asking us what the hell
is rationality good for? Was there like changes to your life before after? Was it any good for
anything? Yeah, absolutely. Like it changed my career path recently. And before then, I found
the Philadelphia Lesserung group. I don't know if there's anything in New Jersey. I think there's
a group in Princeton, which is cool, but I didn't know about them and I didn't actually end up hanging
out with any of them before I moved, which is kind of a shame. But um, yeah, I like made friends
through the community. I met you guys through the community part of like, you know, the reason
why I moved here is because I met a bunch of cool people through the rationality. So that was awesome.
Friendly reminder that you also made the art for our show. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And then I went to the
Solstice in New York as well. And like, now I'm still Facebook friends with a bunch of people
I met there. And that was really kind of formative. Awesome. That was two years ago.
Well, um, two and then three, because I've been to two of them. Okay. Well,
welcome to Denver. We're glad you're here. Thanks. I love Denver. Yay. Everybody here is super nice.
It's actually like still creeping me out. Really? The fact that I can just put my turn signal on
and then like people will let you into traffic is such a culture shock. I have like a 60%
of success rate doing that. So I guess the fact that it happens at all is just shocking to me.
In New Jersey, people will just run you off the road. Yeah. How do you switch lanes?
You just have to play chicken. Jesus. It really is a nightmare to drive in places where people are
aggressive like that, which is, I still see it on the highway basically every time I'm on the
interstate, but like people will just force their way up 40 feet so that you can't get over. But
then they're only 40 feet closer to their destination than they would be otherwise.
And that just drives me nuts. Like we're all in this together. We're all gonna be on the highway
for like another hour. What time are you saving? What percentage of your trip? Like nothing.
It's more fun for them. The other thing about the interstate system in Denver is that like
when you enter the interstate usually have, it depends on the entrance, but a lot of them
have like 800 feet to get to 70 and get on before you hit a brick wall and die. So like
when people don't let you on on the main exit that I get on on it, it's like, it's not life or
death. I could just slam on brakes and stop on the shoulder, but that sounds really stupid and
dangerous. So just people are weird. There's a few exits here in Denver that are just
awfully designed. Done like in the 70s before anyone knew anything about traffic or some
shit. I don't know. Your road's here so well designed compared to what I'm used to on the
east coast. Dude, 6th Avenue on Wadsworth. Oh, that is a terrible, terrible ramp. Take a weekend
in Fort Collins just like an hour north of here. I have been to Fort Collins and actually it was
fine. They spend, it seems like they spend everything on just keeping the roads super
nice up there. Okay. I thought you were going to talk shit. I was like, no, I was able to get
everywhere. It was great. I lived in Fort Collins for like 25 years. It's great. Yeah. It's,
yeah, it was great. But like I mentioned, just the roads are night and day. Yeah.
This is obviously the highlight of the show. No way. All the roads here are really nice. I think
a lot of it has to do with the fact that there's more space. I find driving really boring and now
there's podcasts and audiobooks. But when I was a teenager, the way I made it less boring was to
like race. Same. And yeah, I wasn't racing anyone in specific, but I was just like, how fast can
I get there? What happens if I try to slalom through these cars? I never had that mentality.
I listened to a lot of Dragon Force while driving in my teens and it would just be like.
I did that too. Pumped you up. Yeah. But how did you do it? Not get all pumped up and want to race?
No, I still pumped up, but like I was kind of envisioning like killing demons with swords in
my head and just driving normally. So I've always been paranoid about cars because they're,
you know, one of the main things that kill people and also two of my best friends were killed in a
car accident when I was in my first year of college. So even worse now, I'm just like a very
defensive driver. Well, that's, yeah, that's the way it should, that's the way that people should
respond to cars. I have only recently, well, not recently, I guess like in the last five years,
gotten really conservative with how I drive. Just very, I don't know, grandma style. Good
grandma driving, not like blind grandma driving. I let everybody in. I'm in no rush. I don't,
I never gun it, you know, unless I'm trying to dodge something or make it, you know,
hit the speed on the interstate or something. But yeah, it's, I delivered pizzas through college
and then drove a lot for my last job. And I'm just, I just totally burned out on road rage.
I realized the difference between raging the whole time and not was like three minutes. And I'm
like, yeah, it's not worth it. It makes like no difference. Like the people that speed make me
so upset because I'm like, you're going to get where you're going maybe like five minutes
earlier than you would have just calm down. It's not worth it. It's not worth the risk to your
life and other people's lives and property damage. And just why are you doing this to yourself and
everyone? I just thought it was more fun. The cops finally beat it out of me with enough tickets.
I got one big ticket at some point and it was a drag. I had four big tickets. And after the fourth,
when I was like, I just cannot afford this. Except for the fifth one, they probably take your license
away. You only get so many speeding tickets. Well, it wasn't all in one year. Okay. But I mean,
it got to the point where if there were people driving behind me and they, you know, there's
the posts on the road sometimes holding up the side railing. And if there's a car like driving
through that and the headlights go through the posts, so like it flickers, it kind of looked like
cop lights flickering and like my adrenaline would spike and my heart rate would go up. And I was
like, this is no good. I can't do this anymore. Yeah, the worst ticket I got was when I was
driving to college, eating a banana and a state trooper pulled me over and was like,
distracted driving. I was like, but I didn't eat breakfast. Then he's like, oh, you know what,
you've got a little stuffed cat on your dashboard. That's a that's obstructed vision. So I'm going
to have to write you up for that too. Was he just fucking with you? No, he actually gave me a ticket
for it. And I just drove to college really mad. What the fuck? It was also I should mention a cop
that hit my friends and killed them in that car accident. So like, I don't love cops. Did you
that particular cop should be like? Not a cop. I was going to say worse things. But then I was
like, I shouldn't say worse things. But I think not a cop is a fair way to say at least not a cop
and probably spend some time in jail or some shit. This guy sounds awful. It was not the same cop.
Oh, oh, oh, I thought you said that it was. No, I said it was like also a cop.
Also the cop. Yeah, it's just I've had bad experiences, which I think a lot of people have
had. But mine's been mixed. I mean, obviously, my selection is bad is biased. I've had cops pull
me over like desperate to give me a ticket, but then they couldn't. And then I've had cops that
totally could. And I was apologetic and stupid. And you know, like, there was one time I was driving
my mom's car. And I had like three other people in the car. And one was my twin brother in the
back seat. And we get pulled over because I thought that the left lane was like a go through the
light lane, not a left turn only. Well, it was left turn only. So I go blazing and oncoming traffic.
And then the guy that I kind of cut off to, you know, save everyone's lives,
he just pulls over immediately to let the cop behind him pull me over before his lights were
even on. Okay. And then the guy comes out and he was like, and I explained to him what happened
and, you know, whatever. And I couldn't find the registration. Someone in the car was calling
my mom because I couldn't find it. Like, it's not my car. It's my mom's. She knows we have it.
I'm trying to find it. And so I handed my license and he was he looks at it. He's just like,
how do I know this is you? And I'm like, blank, because I look like the guy in the picture.
I thought that's why they had pictures. I was always so worried that someone's going to ask
that question, like prove this is you and your ID. And it's like, Oh, do you want to take my like
DNA? I don't know. Yeah, there's literally nothing you can ask me a survey of the information on the
license or you can look at the picture and look at me. I changed my hair a lot. So I always look
different in licenses. But the funny thing was I told him I was like, because I look like the guy
in the picture. And he's like, well, you know, someone else could look like the guy in the picture.
And I was like, I guess just my twin brother. And I brought to the backseat and he's like,
Oh, you've got a twin and he leans in with the flashlight. And he didn't give me a ticket. But
it was he, you know, I think it was jovial enough where he could have. And it wasn't like I was,
I was being, I don't know, it was reckless to like, I don't know what you call it. It wasn't
like reckless endangerment. It was just like, I've misread the lines, whatever. Yeah. But yeah,
mild incompetence. There you go. Yeah, if mild incompetence was a ticketable offense, nobody
be driving. Yeah, I think we talked about this before. Like I'm kind of on board with Steven
where like, I don't hate cops, though, I feel like I kind of was just really negative about cops
for no reason there. But like, I also was a volunteer EMT for a while, I worked pretty
closely with cops, there are good cops. It just tends to be one of those careers where
you can attract some really awful people who want to abuse power, just like politics.
And then I think, pretty nauseous point on that that he made that I think swayed me a bit was
like the fact that the institution doesn't shut that shit down really is reflective on the
the institution as a whole. Individual officers very, you know, their mileage may vary, but
yeah, I mean, the fact that, you know, people can do horrendous things and be caught and they get,
you know, the joke is they get a paid vacation, but often that's the case or they get, you know,
no punishment or whatever. I'm not sure what happened to that woman who went into the wrong
apartment and killed that dude a few months ago. But, you know, that sort of thing happens,
not that frequently. And the, I don't know, it's, it's like Trumpian to say like, hey, you know,
if you're investigating us, let me provide you, you know, the opposite of like, kind of what the
administration does, right? Where it's like, if you're, if you have integrity and you want to
actually do the right thing, you say, let me provide you everything we've got. I want the
responsible parties sacked as well. This has been terrible. But instead, you know, you hide stuff,
you lie, delete footage, whatever. Yeah, if you're doing that sort of stuff, you're not on the up
and up. No, the cops, the cop singular who killed my friends was on suicide watch was doing 70 miles
per hour on a 35 mile per hour road and ran a red light supposedly chasing someone and then just
hit them, drove their car into another car, and also like really seriously injured a dad and his
kids in the other van. And then he just kind of got off with a little slap on the wrist. And
everybody was like, oh, that poor cop. I was working for someone at the time who was like
friends with this cop and was like that poor man, he didn't deserve to have such a terrible thing
happen to him. And I was, I had to quit. I had to quit that job. After you killed your co-worker or
no, after the after that, um, I made a joke that your co-worker didn't get away from this like
in like hot coffee splash on their face or something. Yeah. Actually, it was a coffee shop.
I was working with a lot of coffee grinders and I was just kind of like... Look at self-control.
This coffee is you. No, um, yeah, no, I probably have more self-control than I should because I
should have actually like talked back to her, but instead I just quietly fumed and then just quit
for no reason. Better than what I could have done. Yeah, there's there's a line, I guess, the
you know, Aristotelian golden mean between like, you know, savagely murdering them on the spot
and not doing anything. We're just calling them out. Yeah, you could just say,
fuck you. I could have been like, yeah, fuck you. I'm quitting because you're jerk. But that level
of confidence is hard to get to. And you know, it's the kind of thing you think of to say later,
right? So there's been a number of times I regretted not saying something in my life. Oh, that's,
I think, like super typical, right? I think there's even a word for it. There's word for
everything in German, but like staircase wit is what they call it. It's the whatever the translation
is, where it's like when you're leaving the room later, you're like, fuck, I should have said that.
Yeah, I think but that's like different from regretting not having stood up for someone.
Oh, sure. Sure. Yeah, that's more important. Yeah. And more serious.
I think I'm always worried about saying the wrong thing in the moment. I like specifically
thinking of this one time I was in Starbucks, and this guy was just being a huge jerk to the
barista for no reason. And I was right behind him. And I was like, I need to say something.
But I can't really think of the right thing to say. And then he'll just be mean to me. So I'll
just like ignore it. And then later, I was like kicking myself. It's like, I should have said
something as opposed to just standing there and like, being wide eyed.
I've done that. And then what I've done usually, I don't usually, I don't think I've ever
confronted somebody being an asshole, like to somebody else in public like that. But I'll,
if I'm like next in line, I'd be like, man, that guy sucks. Sorry, he's a fucking prick.
You know, here's an extra couple bucks or something if I can.
I would have said that but the first actually like ran away crying and then somebody else came
and I was just like, well, that sucks. I was actually also kind of concerned that this guy
was going to get violent. He was just being very wild and crazy in public.
So that's always something that you're kind of like, should I speak up?
Is this going to like become an altercation?
That's unsettling.
I was really impressed with Drake. A few months ago, we were in a Chipotle and some guy pulled
into the handicap spot and ran into the store. And you know, he'd ran in behind us and Drake was
like, Oh, you got your temporary tags. It's like, what? You temporary handicap tags. They're not
hanging on there. You probably should put them up. It's like, no, man, I'm not handicapped.
And, and Drake was like, then why are you parking in the handicap spot? It's like,
look, I'm just running in for a burrito. You jerk. And Drake's like, I'm the jerk.
Yeah, handicap spot, not a temporary parking spot.
You prevented somebody who is handicapped from being able to access the burrito place as well
now. Come on. And I mean, no one who was handicapped came in in that time, but that's not, you know,
that's not the point. Exactly. Yeah. And I was just like, I probably would have said nothing.
So the fact that he was there just willing to be like calling the dude, I was like,
that's awesome, man. And then, you know, if you could rally behind him,
because there's already that focal point or somebody doing something. Yeah, that's nice.
There needs to be more critical mass of people like that to catalyze those things.
Yeah, I admire that kind of personality type. Alrighty. Shall we get into the episode or do
we want to talk more about Jess? Let's talk about anything else.
Well, there was a segue. I'm not that interesting.
No, you're good. There was there was a segue from traffic to something
we got a question a while ago and I maybe there's a way to do a whole episode on it that wouldn't
be just super mandatory. But what I've been trying to do is just plug it every time I can make a
something, which is like, how do you do rationality in your day to day life? And one of them is the
that I just kind of thought of when we were talking about traffic is like, I don't text and
drive anymore. And I only for a while would like, you know, do it while actually moving, but you
know, I do it at stop lights or at stop signs and then the light turns and then yeah, doing it for
the first exactly for the first few seconds. Those are kind of critical. So it's just one of
those things like, I feel perfectly safe, I feel like I'm in charge and that I'm I'm cognizant
of everything, but everybody feels that wall on the zooming. Most people feel that way behind
the wheel, right? No one's like, I have no idea what I'm doing, but I'm snap,
self reports as being a good driver. Right. But obviously, there's like a scale of drivers.
I don't. I've been told by enough people that I drive like an asshole that I fully admit that
I'm probably a bad driver and I drive like an asshole. I think bad driver and asshole driver,
like how many accidents have you been in slash caused caused? I think I rear ended a person one
time and even driving for like 20 years. Yeah. I think that's that's a fair record. But I mean,
like I drove into a tree once and no, I rear ended two people. One time, though, it was just like
on massive ice and oh, that's nobody's fault. I suppose I could have driven more carefully,
right? But man, I just started. I hit, you know, pushed my brakes and my car just
didn't stop. And I was like, well, I guess I'm going in that guy's bumper. Yeah,
no, it happens. That's how my last car got totaled was the guy hit me as a perfect gentleman
about it, though. And his car was fine. He drove a, I think it was a 2015 Forester and
like it might have cracked his license plate cover. So now that's what Rachel drives. I'm super
happy that she's all that she's safe in there. So but the reason I brought up cars was that
I trust the fact I trust the numbers that people aren't safe when texting and driving.
And so I don't I will occasionally do it at stop lights. But if the light turns green,
I set it down where I can't see it before I like hit the gas. So I don't finish. I don't do whatever.
But it's just the one I'm trying to say I'm accepting the numbers over my own my own judgment
because I'm a judgment there is flawed. So just the capacity to do that is kind of an example.
This is, you know, we're just talking methods of rationality to sort of that.
What is the methods of rationality or, you know, all the little things that Harry's
constantly monologuing about in the story are largely things people can do in their day to
day lives. You know, not privileging hypothesis, you know, actually stopping and analyzing the
problem for five minutes before trying to solve it. Yeah, I've taken a lot of that to heart.
Yeah, the rationality differently made like a pretty big impact on my life where actually
going to my Philadelphia less wrong meetup I was talking about like we did a bunch of calibration
meetups, especially on New Year's we would do like the whole let's make predictions on various
like political and like world news things and then we'll like calibrate them next year. And I
was told by like my group leader, I don't know, we don't have titles, but the guy who organizes
the meetups was like, oh, you're you actually seem like you're like kind of pathologically
underconfident. And I was like, no, I'm not. And then like I like thought about it. I did a bunch
of decision advisory stuff. I'm going to plug decision advisory again. I love them. I was like,
oh, yeah, I'm super underconfident and like everything in my life actually. And this is
actually a cognitive bias. I always thought of it as being like a rational underconfidence
because I was like everybody else in the world super overconfident, but I'll be more successful
than everybody if I'm underconfident about everything. Turns out that there's like a happy
medium. So I've been trying to take more risks lately. I've actually been making monetary bets
with people about things to try to calibrate better. And it's actually made like a pretty big
difference in a lot of regions of my life. Five bucks say your prediction estimates don't go up in
the next year. That's really cool. All right, now you get to plug one in, Yash. What do you do
rationally that makes you better than not better than superior?
How are you better than the muggles? That's what I was going to jokingly say. And then I was jokingly
running with synonyms to better. But what do you try to do to try to better your own cognition
and decision making? Or what? Why do you care about rationality? Why are we? Why do you read
the stuff? Why are you? You should come back to me. All right. If you want. And say one thing that
I've observed is that you, well, I don't know if that's, yeah, maybe. Like the other thing that
I kind of got was it's one of the jokier posts, but I think the message is one of the most
like succinct in all the sequences. I think it was the use the try harder Luke. Yeah, which is
where it's like a joking version of the script where Yoda is trying to instruct Luke to raise the
X-wing out of the swamp. And Luke is like, I can't do it. And stomps off in the movies. But in this
little script, he's like, okay, well, this senior of 900 years just told me I should be able to do it.
I'll actually try. And he was like, no, don't try. Just do it. And that that mentality of like,
I don't know, shut up and actually try. Yeah, there's there's another post shut up and do the
impossible, which is awesome and inspiring. But I think the easier version of that and much more
attainable to the average person is just shut up and try. Like whatever the thing is, I mean,
that was the main thing for me when I started doing software stuff was, I just assumed it was
too hard. And I was like, well, I never actually looked into it. And friends sent me a Python
tutorial. And it's like, Oh, this is like written in English. I thought it was like all ones and
zeros and like, you know, special characters and stuff. Oh, like in the movies, literally everything
I knew about programming. Okay. So, so how do you hack into the mainframe? Yeah, exactly. You always
have to be like, I'm in. Yeah. And you've got it. You fingers got to be going really fast. Yeah.
You don't just call them and like ask, you know, or you don't like Facebook stock and
find out the name of their pet or something. It's kind of a mini game where you have to type
faster than the security guy on the other side. Yeah, that's the other thing too that I always
liked. You know, but like if you have your own private server for whatever reason, and you notice
like, you know, some sort of DDoS or some sort of traffic influx that's weird, the best security
is you can just run over and unplug it. Yeah, like you don't sit there and like, Oh my god,
what's happening? You're like, Oh, fuck this and turn the power off. And you know, you don't lose
anything. So that's, I think how a real hacker would win 10 times out of 10. Anyway, yeah, so
the just try and do stuff. And so that's a really good one. It is. And I mean, some things are
prohibitively expensive, you know, but not, I don't know of anything that's too hard to like
sample. That's super cheap, right? Like, you know, even like a home, you know, home improvement
or something, it's like, well, try and restore a coffee table before you redo your floors, right?
And a coffee table, whatever, you're out 40 bucks if it's if you ruin it or something, right? So
turns out redoing floors is actually surprisingly easy. Well, see, I wouldn't have known I would
assume it's super hard. Now that I know that that's actually really reassuring because we're
definitely going to have to redo ours before we move out. So yeah, they make these nice laminates
now that you can just snap together like a puzzle. Yeah, that's literally what this is. That's what
I put in my first house. And then like, there's like a little soft padding that you can put on
the floor first. So it makes it really smooth. I heard a guy, an installer talking at the Home
Depot while I was shopping for them to another guy, where he was like, Yeah, one of my clients
saw me putting this in and used to be, you know, you had to do glue and gun staples and all this
other stuff. And they saw me putting this stuff in and they're like, I could just do that myself.
I hate this shit makes me look useless. And then the installer was like, ha, ha,
you're paying me to do Legos. It's very like, yeah, that's kind of similar to Legos. It was
so satisfying putting that flooring and it like actually has a little groove on the side and
they just snap together next to each other. And you can just do it and like, I did like one room
and under an hour, we were just like snapping them together. The challenging parts was like
where the fireplace is because that's at an angle and cut things. That rock goes all the
way to the floor. Yeah. Or is there a baseboard? Well, I mean, there's there's like a little
quarter round. But yeah, thank you over there. All the all the doors are pain in the butt like
the door between the kitchen and the bathroom. I was that was difficult. But yeah, aside from
a few areas where you get this challenge points in, it's just snap, snap and go. Nice. Anyway,
little things like that. Yeah, a lot of underconfidence kind of relates to that too, where
I had this fear of failure and this fear of disappointing people around me for so long. And
it was just like, what's the actual consequences if you try this thing and fail? Oh, I know that
one. Yeah, it's usually never that you're going to die. It's usually or like be maimed or like
outcast from society. It's like people might be disappointed in you. And that is actually pretty
like upsetting, especially if it's like your family or whatever. But like,
the worst part is when no one's even disappointed because they don't know. Is that
bad? Or if they don't know? What was I going to say? I guess it depends on the the scale of
what it is you're trying to do. You know, if you're trying to, I don't know, whatever,
learn how to think of something like fix your car. Like who's going to be disappointed in you
other than yourself? It's like, I thought I could do this and I couldn't. So yeah. And then what do
you do? You like take it to the shop afterwards. And then they're like, Oh, no, this is how you
do it. And you're like, Oh, which is what you're going to do anyway, but you tried to do it yourself
first. You know, I guess what I'm getting at is like so few things have like a, well, not so
few, but most things that I think certainly I was nervous about these five years ago more,
but not nearly scary at all. They're just they're a thing. Sorry. I'm going to skip this one because
that noise was I'm doing a, I've got a twin brother. We've been doing longitudinal twin studies
since we were like really small. They sent us each phone and it beeps us three times a day.
And it's basically this one's studying like, all right, how stressed were you since the last
survey two hours ago? What have you been up to? And all right, now do these quick cognitive
assessments. And it's kind of fun. I like doing these things because I always love seeing the
like, Oh, this such and such is, you know, X percent inheritable. Well, this is the kind of
way that they find that out is by testing identical twins and seeing how they compare to each other.
So is this the three times a day thing? It's not like permanent, right? There's spurts of it.
No, this for the started on Monday, it's going to go through week from next or whatever, two weeks.
Okay. Yeah. Oh, if it was all the time, I would make them just give me an app on my phone.
This thing is way too cumbersome for me to be carrying around. It's sucking up valuable
pocket real estate. If it wasn't winter, I'd be the complete loss. If I didn't have coatpockets
to offload into. I didn't know you were in a study. How did you enroll? Did you seek the study
out or did someone approach you? They must have contacted my parents. I mean, we've been doing
it since before I remember, you know, so we've been three or four or five. Interesting. I think
we're the earliest ones. So it's in CU Boulder. Yeah, I wonder about people who have identical
twins if like researchers just kind of wait outside their house with clipboards because like,
would you like to take a survey? Twin studies are so important. They are. I don't know how
my parents got into it because they must have gotten some flyer. Probably from the hospital,
actually. Maybe. Yeah. And maybe they got some, you know, couple hundred bucks. I don't know.
Like, I think that's the most I've ever been paid was $200. Maybe they got those in early little
because I don't know what would have motivated them to spend a whole day driving down to Boulder
and spend their days sitting around doing nothing. They usually compensate you.
Yeah, but not, I mean, I don't know. Or like pay for your travel. Yeah, last summer,
my brother and I got MRIs, FMRIs, while we did some super boring tests. But I was excited about
that because I tried to get an FMRI when I was at CSU because I was pretty sure I had brain
damage from all the times I've been hitting the head. And I'm bad at like faces. I can't
understand words in music. Like, there's a lot of things like other people can do this.
Words in music are hard to understand. Well, that's why they used to have liner notes.
Fair enough. Now they have the Google. Well, so it's not just me.
No, it's everyone. Although it is me more than it's other people. Like,
I can listen to popular stuff and I can ask Rachel and she'd be like, that's what they said. And I'm
like, oh, okay. Has Rachel heard it like 200 times, though? Because after a while, we start to.
Maybe. There's definitely different competencies in being able to pick out lyrics in music or
to be able to recognize faces and stuff like that. There tends to be a spectrum among like
human abilities for these types of skills. Anyway, so if you do an FMRI for a place that
isn't like a doctor looking for stuff, you can sign a thing that says if they have an
incidental finding, which is like if they see a golf ball size tumor pressing on my
what, fusiform face area, and that's why I don't I'm bad at faces.
So how much brain damage do you got? Turns out, well, they didn't they so what they'll do if
you sign this thing, they'll send it off to a real doctor who specializes in that than that
doctor will call you and I never heard from anybody. So apparently I'm brain drain damage free.
Yeah, you're just naturally bad at braining. There's that. Yeah.
All right, I think that's about it. As far as I want to touch on like, you know, anytime that
any of us think of like, oh, I this is a rationality thing I did recently, I can bring that up. But
to answer that really long running question, I think the general thing is just to, well, I guess
there's an easy way to put it out that we'd already done that. It's just if you see a way to
apply any techniques that you can, even on sample problems that like I wonder about this or like
real life problems, those are, you know, the harder versions, because there's way more variables
than that than there are in any stories. But I don't know. The other thing is like, it's not hard,
you know, if you if you fail, usually no one dies. So can I push decision advisor one more time?
Go for it. Yeah, it's a guided path decision advisor. And we'll put a link in there. I made
a lot of decisions recently, just based off of this kind of multiple choice web based
questionnaire that actually kind of calibrates your confidence of how how likely do you think
these things will happen? How important is this to you? And it like will compare all your decisions
and come up with a this is what you like you actually feel about this. It's kind of cool
because you can put decisions in that you thought you felt really confidently about one way and
you comes out with the opposite. And you're like, Oh, wow. I did that too with trying to decide
whether I wanted to pursue a library masters or go to a coding boot camp or like I had a bunch
of other things. And it was just like, Hey, go to the boot camp. And I was like, really? You know
what, that makes so much sense that I looked back at all the like, Oh, yeah, like you could trace
the decision all the way back to the root and realize how much like valuable are these things to
you versus like, how hard is this thing going to be versus, you know, what do you think the outcome
is going to be worth? Oh, that's nice. So it actually shows you the decision tree that led to
where you're at rather than like, just accepting the answer like a buzzfeed which came with her
own character care. Yeah, no, it's it's a bit more definitely more complex than that. It's got
graphs. That sounds awesome. Alright, I've never never used this. I should definitely look into
that. Yeah, and the team is working on it is really cool. They keep coming out with all
different kinds of tools. I actually was in like a web chat with one of the developers giving them
like suggestions and feedback on some of the stuff. So they're really interested in like
hearing about Hey, what like cool brain tools do you want to see us make? So what funds this?
Did you pay for it? Or no, I didn't pay for it. I don't know. Angel investors still I guess, I guess.
Yeah, that's an interesting question that's worth looking into philanthropy. Yeah.
I'm surprised how many things are funded on nothing right now. Just like, hey,
it's got the word web in it. Here's money. It's kind of the way of the future, right?
Investors can throw money at like 40 things. And then if one of them actually hits the jackpot,
then they like yay. And then the other things got some money and then they didn't do well. And
it's like, Oh, whatever. It's nothing to that investor. I'd be such a non asshole shark tank
style investor if I had $50 million. Because what's $200,000? I mean, it's we do the math
is exactly whatever. But it's you say that but throw that $200,000 at bad bets long enough
and you don't have the 50 million anymore. No, but I could I could throw it at five
that I was reasonably confident in. And then I'm only Oh, no, $49 million. And then I could make
make some people's lives awesome. I could make a bunch of money. That'd be really cool. I also
like the show Shark Tank. Was I gonna say about the decision tree thing? Oh, a lot of like a lot
of stuff is free. You know, most podcasts, right? Especially most of the content that most podcasts
make. But I mean, most podcasts are basically like a gift to the listening community, right?
Right. But I mean, even most apps, I guess, maybe not most, but most apps on anybody's phone.
They're free with quotation marks. Exactly. Yeah, they've got ads in them. They've got ads. And
then they've got, you know, paid versions that are leveled up versions of whatever. But if they're
awesome enough, like Apollo for iOS, I'll throw him a buck every couple months, just because it's
awesome. I like to throw a few bucks at Pokemon Go every so often because it's I've gotten a lot
of like play hours out of this game and it's free. And it's like, I'll just buy some Pokeballs,
whatever. Like I kind of want to get back to this development team. I've been playing this game
longer than a lot of console games. You realize they're not hurting for money. Yeah. And you're
the first person I've ever heard who said that. No, but I like to, I don't care if somebody is
making a lot of money off of something or not. But it's like, you know, if I'm getting a lot of
value out of this thing, I'll give them some money. That's fair. That's nice. Yeah, I was playing
some free game that I think is just one developer and it's just some little kind of like, you know,
clan beat up thing. It's not class of clans. It's like little turn based game.
And, you know, you get the full game, but there's unlockable other tribes to play as. So I like
bought one of those just to like, Hey, this is fun. I spent 10 hours doing this. Here's a buck.
Pokemon Go I played for like the first year. The thing is when it launched, it was such garbage.
If they'd hold on to it for like six or months and actually like,
No, that's how you have to do it. It's not. You can like a lot of this. I've made web games.
That's fair. And maybe I'm being too harsh, but I just know that like a lot of the stuff was,
you know, it was still like inversion zero point something because it was still like
technically in beta for like a year. That's part of how you get your data on what people want and
like, you know, what the bugs are and so forth and so on. I mean, you can kind of do like a QA
team for a while, but no, that's fair. You make you make a compelling point that maybe I'm being
too harsh on them, but I did just buy what two bucks worth of stuff last month. And that's the
first one I've ever spent on it. So yeah, I mean, I'm not saying I've like, thrown a lot of money
at them. I'm saying every so often I will throw them a few bucks, which again is partially just
because I have made mobile games. I've also waitressed. So like when I go out to a restaurant,
I will give people like a 20 to 25% tip because I'm like, yeah, I've been there, buddy.
I basically do not play free games because they're always like trying to suck money out of you with
these. It's so annoying to me that it's the game is a vehicle for trying to sell you things as opposed
to being an actual game. Like I would like to pay you money for your game. Please give me an actual
game. And even even AAA games are doing that shit now. Yeah. Like the first game I got hosed on
really hard was Destiny a couple of years ago. And that game, you know, came out campaign was
like 13 hours to beat it in two days. That's pretty bummed. And then the multiplayer is just
nonstop grind. And then they did like raids where you could farm for like better gear. So you could
level up a little bit and fight more like stronger other real people. And then they had, I think
60 bucks worth of DLCs for that game. And then I think another $30 like expansion that wasn't
included. This game ended up being like 150 bucks. And then games like God of War, there's not even
DLC for God of War. And that game was outstanding. It's interesting that yeah, a lot of them, I don't
know, like free games, they're also like never really worth the fun. Like I play Clash of Clans
and Pokemon Go and a couple like word games. Those are fine because whatever. And I look at the ad
and I click the X. Those aren't a big deal. But yeah, Clash of Clans has this, it's that Farmville
mechanic from like early Facebook, where you've only got a certain number of builders and something
takes X hours to build. And then eventually X weeks. And so you can buy, you can spend real
money to buy another builder. And then you can buy more gems to rush your builds. And it's just like
Yeah. So the reason I quit the game design industry was because over a period of six years, I watched
the industry turn into turned from let's make a cool game with good art that when good mechanics
that people will enjoy to let's make people addicted to this game kind of monetize this kind
of slot machine mentality and then just like release micro transactions. And unfortunately,
that business model works. It does. And it's the only way to make money because if you have a if
you build this awesome game and be like, Hey, it's four bucks. Is that too much to ask? Everyone says
fuck you. That's way too much to ask. There was actually one pirate stuff too. Can you pirate
stuff on phones easily? Well, I like the independent game community scene where I mean, it's the games
aren't necessarily as high quality in terms of like graphics and other things. But it's like
just a guy or a team of a few people working on the game. And, you know, they get the money from it.
And it actually feels like a real game again. Undertale was just one guy. And that was amazing.
There's some success stories, but usually the people that make these indie games, it's a labor
of love, and they don't make any money off it. And sometimes it ruins their lives. So like,
I like to say like, I also like the indie game community. But like, I think that the people
who do it are heroes. Basically, you have to do it as a labor of love and expect you're never
going to get anything out of it. That's basically everything nowadays. If you weren't working for
the man, it's like, you know, you kind of do it because you love it. And you hope maybe someday
someone will pay some attention or give you some money. The way I look at it, like I get a lot
of things for free off the internet to like podcasts and stuff, right? But I don't the what
and fan fiction, right? Lots of things. But I feel like since I'm helping to put something back
into the pot with the podcasts I do, that it kind of evens out, right? So if everyone is does some
work to to add to the pool, then it's not it's not I don't consider them like morally bad for
put drawing from it as well. Creative fields are a mess right now. Oh, God, that's an understatement.
Yeah, I hate to give any credit to the church. But like, you used to be able to get a bunch of
money thrown at you from wealthy donors who wanted you to like, you know, make icons, religious
iconography or whatever, or like portraits of my wealthy family. And then you had a career in the
arts and now like we have Patreon, which is kind of a poor substitute. And so you can go into the
arts and you can other kind of just do marketing. I'm not sure if it's a poor substitute. I mean,
having a patron back in the day wasn't that great a thing either, because I mean, sure, it was great
that you got to live and get paid money for doing your art. But you had a market of one. And like,
if he was like, I want all the art to be big tidied ladies with blonde hair, that was your job.
Or, you know, draw me the the Madonna carrying Jesus's body over and over again, then at least
with Patreon, you have a little bit more freedom. I guess so. Just a little bit of give and take
there where like, I feel like if you apprenticed with an artist back in the day, kind of like if
you apprenticed with any crafts person, like it was more or less guaranteed, you would have work.
Whereas nowadays, you can kind of make for YouTube videos forever, or you could like make
fan art and fan fiction. And it's like, a very small number of people actually make it in the
industry, or make enough money off of Patreon and coffee to be able to support themselves. You
can't really support yourself in the arts unless you again work for the man, like you say, or
or you hit it big, really lucky. I wanted the lucky people. That's why I'm looking forward to UBI,
because I think that people get a lot of value out of the stuff people make for free. And I would
love to see those people be able to make a basic income and keep making the cool, free stuff.
There's so many, like we were talking about earlier, fanfic artists and fan, or fan artists
and fan fiction writers who create like awesome content for two or three years and then disappear.
Well, I think Wild Bo, the author of Worm and All the Pear Humans and Pact and Twig, he just got
in the last couple of years, like to a point where he had sustainable income.
Yeah, I think he was working as a handyman, doing something by train, writing his books on the train.
He's still publishing two chapters a week. And he's so prolific and his work is such high quality.
It really is. It's outstanding. And it's not like he's making a lot of money. He's making like
subsistence. Like you said, maybe he's making more now. I really hope he is. I hope he's making
a bit more. I think he's almost at the median American income right now. So a decent amount.
And he lives in the boonies in Canada, so he's probably doing great. But we're doing good.
Yeah. I don't know how much money he needs. He seems like he just likes to write.
It seems like he likes and like needs to not just to live but to...
I think he explicitly said that. Like, I need to write. I was in college and I realized I just need to
write. That makes sense. I can't do anything else. It's like, man, I wish I felt that way about something.
So I got a fun segue speaking of the church and how having Patreon supporters is better
than having a patron. We can see how many Patreon supporters we lose by diving into tonight's topic.
Oh, okay. Yeah. If you guys are ready to move on. I don't think we'd lose any from this topic.
I don't think so either, but I was fine. Okay. Like, our patrons are pretty much on
board with this as far as I can tell. Atheism. Yeah. It's the best. Well, all right. So...
It was the best. Still the best. All right. This is interesting. We're already confused and
disagreeing, I think. No, I'm talking about the... Go ahead. No, you're good. So I think in general,
this topic, it's still a little coverage in the rationality community because like nobody cares.
I think we've touched on that. It was so obvious, you know. Well, and that's what they all say.
And now we have rationalist Catholics and rationalist Mormons and stuff.
Do we have popular ones? I don't know about now. I think they've been around.
Oh, well... I mean, yeah. By now, I mean, yeah. Not like recently, but...
I've never heard of them, but I'm sure... I mean, just like we've always had religious scientists,
you know, it's like you have somebody who believes the earth is 10,000 years old and then
puts on a lab coat and goes to work on Monday morning and does publishable science. It's hard
to say that they have a scientific orientation in their head on how to approach real problems,
right? So anyway, I guess I wanted to mention why nobody talked about atheism and rationality
for the most part. Maybe they do now. Most of my community following is mostly the sequences
and start codex posts. I don't do a lot of the current forms and that sort of stuff. So maybe
there's more discussion than I'm aware of, but my impression was just that this was a problem that
was like uninteresting and easy. And so it's like we don't get a lot of traction just rehearsing how
cool we are for solving this. I mean, that was basically the sentiment for a long time.
And then we got a not like a huge amount or anything, but a more than zero amount of really
dedicated rationalists that were also religious. And then it became something people talk about
every now and then. Is it just like the scientists where they like pretend it's scientific or they
just don't talk about it? They say it's separate from science or do you get like rationalists who
say, no, it's really rational. God doesn't want you to masturbate. What do they say? Like, no, it's
I do rationality Monday through Friday to five. And then I do religion for the rest of my
I've seen that least one. I don't know if you would call it an apologetic or what, but like a
strong I don't consider the argument strong personally, but the person obviously does
consider it a strong argument for why rationalism and their religion is compatible.
I'd be interested if you dig it up. I have it remembered. I wanted to do an episode on it
sometime soon. Oh, nice. Yeah. I mean, not right now because now we're on something else. But
no, that's not interesting. I would dive into it. Yeah, the vague introduction to that. I wanted
to call it cyber Christianity. Yeah, I specifically wanted to bring up the Slate Star Codex article,
which was how did new atheism fail so miserably? Before we dive into that, I had one like quick
thing. So atheism as like what it is, I've always had like kind of two definitions.
There's like the strong version of like, I don't or I believe God doesn't exist. And then there's
like the weak version of like, I don't believe God exists. Two very similar sounding statements,
but one is like a positive assertion. One is like a lack of like being convinced. I think
it's fair to say like, from my own mind, I see them both as technically true, like to the extent
that like rationalists understand what it means to say, I believe something. Right. That is to say,
I sign a very low probability to it and I would bet against it, like I'm currently betting against
it with my mortal soul. I mean, I'm starting for Chronix. If I have one, it's going to go in the
tank with me, I hope. So like, it's the kind of thing that if I don't know, I to somebody,
I've had conversations, it's been a long time since I've had like a really just like debate
with somebody like, I don't know, at least over five years, probably in real life. Like,
I actually had a minor religious debate with someone less than a year ago. That's refreshing,
isn't it? Yeah. It's like, let me dust off the old boxing gloves. Oh, they're still, they're still
fit. Yeah. I hate doing religious debates with people because it always makes both of us sad.
Oh, it depends on the person. Yeah, certainly. I haven't had a bad natured one in over a decade.
Like the good natured ones are, you know, people who, you know, approaching the rationalist community
mindset were like, no, I just think this is true. And I'm like, well, I don't. Here's why. And they're
like, no, I get it. Oh, that's cool. But, you know, as long as you're a little friendly,
you want to just hash it out for a bit and, you know, have fun and have a drink or something.
It's never been like, geez, you're a fucking idiot, man. Mine was with two other guys and
me and the one other guy, like, got into it pretty decently. There was a little bit of like
exasperation on both sides, but we were having a fun time, right? The third guy only poked us
head in on occasion, but by the end of it, he was devastated. He was like, I feel so bad for your
immortal soul. Oh my God, you don't deserve to go to hell. And I was like, dude, I'm so sorry for
you. That's the kind of thing that makes me sad. My response to that is always like, I feel bad
for yours because you're not a Muslim or because you're not a Mormon or you don't have cryonics.
Yeah, well, or that. But like, well, that's the that's my real answer. Right. Like some,
but my cheeky answer is like, you know, the God of the New Testament or the Old Testament and the
New whatever is sort of an vindictive prick. And if it's not like just have faith and you get in,
it's like, it's my way or the highway. Here's the long list of rules. I'm very clear. I'm vaguely
clear about it. And you're going to burn in hell forever. If you don't do what I say,
there's not as far as, you know, like the mutterings of the new pope aside, I don't think there's a
lot of like biblical support for the idea of like, we just care about that you have a sense of, you
know, good and bad, good, good and bad or gratitude towards the universe or something. And that's
enough, right? It's, oh, I have so much gratitude towards the universe. Not that I think the universe
is like sentient or anything, but it's like, wow, it's really cool that I exist. Yeah. No,
Dan Dennett talks about that a lot. And I think we'll talk about that. Yeah, we're going to
dive into the new atheists, if you want, if you guys are ready. Sure. I didn't mean to keep
steering here. I'm just kind of on a roll. I'm kind of hyped up. So it's good times. Yeah. It's
the hot cocoa. It's actually probably they have a dural I had like eight hours ago. So the steroids
got me all jazzed. Yeah, should be a fun episode then. I'm moderating pretty well. So we'll do
all right. I think we're doing good. Good. If my speech goes too fast, let me know.
We'll just slow you down in post.
If only it was that easy. I know. So you had a thing you were bringing up?
Yeah, pull up the title again. Yeah, the title of this late star coast codex. I can't talk either.
Post was how did new atheism fail so miserably? And I was thinking about it recently because I
recently reread the God Delusion, which I remember really enjoying when I first read it.
And I kind of came back to it because I was like, I remember the arguments and this being so good.
And I kind of reread it. And I was like, these are still good arguments. But like,
I don't know, like whatever happened to all of this. And I remembered this article too.
And I went back and reread it. And I kind of like just started getting really upset.
So what is the central thrust of the article?
Kind of like as you can, you know, imagine from the title, new atheism was a thing. It was in the
media. The Four Horsemen were writing books. And it seemed like at the time, like I was in
college and I was really idealistic. And I was like, yeah, you know, science is like
improving the world and these new atheists are out in public. And this is just going to be like
the way of the future. And then like it just disappeared in the past, like what five years?
I mean, I think he has a very good explanation for that, which we can,
which I agree with and which we can go into. But I, I never thought that like, I mean, I was,
I was an atheist before it was cool. But that's hipster. Yeah, seriously. No, but I mean, like
before any of the new atheism thing broke, it was, it was, it was already brewing online for
years before that, right? And I was part of that whole scene. I'd listened to Jeff D on the nonprofits,
which later became the atheist community of Austin. And that was a cool scene. I mean, there was,
there was a whole thing. I listened to the infidel guy, man, Reggie, that takes me back.
This was before they had like Reddit and other places to gather. So everyone had their own like
website and forums that you would go on to. Those are kind of the days. Yeah. But,
but the thing is like, I never really had any delusions that the mass of the world would come
over to atheism in my lifetime, in, in my lifetime, meaning in the next, you know, 60 years or something.
I obviously hope to have a very long lifetime, but colloquially using that term. I was like, yeah,
you know, all I'm trying to do is gain some acceptance for my tribe so that we can actually
hold office openly and not be spat upon and not be the most hated minority in the country. You
know, that's what I'm going for. That's what I want. And I think we won that pretty damn hard.
And all the people who were like, yeah, atheism is going to take over. We're going to be the new
Christianity and the whole country is going to get rational. I was like, are you fucking kidding
me? Have you met the average human that's, that's never going to happen. All I want is some semblance
of like respect and rights. It's interesting. I remember, let me adopt a kid, you know,
was that a thing? I'm sure. Oh yeah. It was a big thing. That was a dumb question.
It's as bad as trying as like a homosexual adopt a kid, you know, they're going to pervert them
and turn them into their godless, evil ways. That seems like so long ago, but it's, that seems
like so long ago, but every year in Trump years feels like 10 years. So like this feels like
30 years ago, but it was like 10. I remember during the Bush era, like, you know, there, that was
like the, what was the quote that the secretary or the press secretary put out that was like the
reality based community or something, which is kind of a weird, yeah, we're like, we're all kind of
reality based community people, as opposed to your fantasy based community. But yeah, it was the,
the push of, like you said, you know, I remember this was like all the surveys and stuff that
were in all these new atheist books of, you know, look, 2%, or what was it 10% people said they'd
vote for an atheist or something. It was like, this was like in 2003, and it was like, like,
three times less than the number of people who'd say they vote for a Muslim president.
Not to say that voting for a Muslim president is a bad idea, but across the average American,
you know, the average, whatever, post 9-11 American, they were like, I'd rather have a Muslim in
the White House than an atheist. And we've crossed that line recently in the last two years,
we're finally less unpopular than Muslims.
Yay, all right. Well, has Muslim popularity gone down or is done?
Has Muslim popularity gone down to meet us, or did we just go up with go above where they were
at? I think it was both. That's a drag. I'd like the numbers just to keep going up for everybody,
but whatever. As far as like the God's Illusion, that was the first one I read. And I, I think I've,
I went over my like religious background of the show were way back in the day. But the real short
version is, is that I sort of believed tacitly, like you kind of believe everything your parents
tell you. I used it, I used the analogy of like believing that Japan existed. Like I've never
been there. I'd seen it on TV, people told me it was real. 10 books. Yeah, exactly. And so that was
sort of my take on, on, on religious claims. And it just turned out like in my early and mid teens,
they sort of fell apart under scrutiny, actually catalyzed by George Carlin. He was like the first
public person I saw who was like making fun of religion. And I was like, I thought just everybody
bought into this. Turns out they don't. The God Illusion was, I haven't read it,
you know, since it was relatively new. I imagine it wouldn't be as much fun. I think
it's interesting too. And I want to caveat, I mentioned this before, but Dawkins in that book
is like at his most grumpy. Which still is not very grumpy. No, he's still nice. I mean, his,
his most grumpy, I think is his Twitter more recently. That's fair. I should, I should mention
his grumpiest book. Twitter destroys everybody's brain. I think that's fair. That's that Sam Harris
just had a, the CEO Twitter on his podcast. And they, they talked about that a little bit.
And then he just had Stephen Fry on earlier this week or last week.
I listened to most of that one, but it was so depressing. I had to stop.
It was pretty depressing. Stephen Fry is a really jovial dude. And he,
it was a pretty, pretty bumming episode. But you mentioned the Four Horsemen. They had this
two hour conversation that they had on YouTube that's still out there for free. But they're
releasing, I think the Richard Dawkins Foundation for Science and Reason. And is it Center for
Inquiry or like now one big, whatever organization? Oh, we should quickly interject for anyone who
doesn't know the Four Horsemen of New Atheism were, I was going to get there. Oh, okay. Sorry.
No, no, no, that's totally fine. I was going to mention that there's a transcript of this
two hour conversation that's coming out in book form. Okay. Yeah, but the Four Horsemen,
our docs as our, our docs, Richard Dawkins. Nice. Yeah, Richard Dawkins, Daniel Danette,
Sam Harris and Christopher Hitchens. They were the first four really big people that came out and
sort of led the movement after 9-11. Yeah. They were the really like prominent ones. There were a
bunch of other atheists and actually a lot of people kind of brought up how annoying it was that
people only wanted to focus on these like old white intellectuals when there were a bunch of
queer people and people of color and so forth and so on, blogging about this stuff. But anyway.
Harris wasn't even old yet. Yeah, he was like, well, yeah, he was the young, he was the baby of the
he was. But the, the, yeah, certainly it's been a conversation for a while. I think what set them
apart is they all had bestselling books on the subject. And so I think I get where the Slate
Sarcotics post talks about how the movement failed, but it did accomplish a lot of stuff. And like,
it's not like these people made a lot of noise and then everyone hated them and they shut up
forever. Like they made a lot of noise, wrote books, made a fortune on the subject or whatever,
made real money on the subject and they helped change the culture a little bit. Yeah. I mean,
nowadays, everyone knows someone who's an atheist. Do they? Maybe. I think so. Even like,
there's even people in the deep South that like will be on YouTube and they're like, all about
my guns and my beer. But you know, I'm not necessarily into this church thing and that's
all right. And like, that's cool. Yeah. And you know, they all talk about that whenever they,
whenever the, you know, their books come up or something, but they, they still get people
writing in being like, Hey, I just came across the end of faith. I live in Pakistan. This just
changed my life. So these, these, the content still reaches people and the, what I like about
their approaches is that they all really had different ways of analyzing this whole thing.
Richard Dawkins came at it from the point of view of a disgruntled scientist who couldn't
believe after like 60 years, he still had to argue that evolution was real. Yeah, specifically an
evolutionary biologist. Yeah. And so his, his thing was just like, wait, you guys don't believe
it because of your religion? Well, that's fucking dumb, right? Wait, you don't think so? Okay. Well,
geez, fine. So his, the God delusion is him just like grumpily arguing, like making, and again,
it's, it's a pretty, he's a light, cheerful person for the most part. The book is actually
very poetic. A lot of that, like, what I really liked about Dawkins back in the day was that he
used to write in this kind of like, almost a poetic language where even in the God delusion,
he kind of would kind of wax poetic about evolution and science. And like, there were just
these great quotes that you could pull from it that made you feel kind of hopeful and optimistic
about the world. According to Stephen, who's read some of his other books, like all his books
are like that, right? Yeah, grant is not the grand design that's Stephen Hawking, the greatest show
on earth, but Unweaving Rainbow is one I always plug. Yeah. So the last chapter, I think of the
God delusion is the, what it's called, something that word burkas in the title, but he imagines,
he's trying to just sell like, he's trying to challenge the position that like, oh,
the scientific worldview is bleak and annoying, and really only the religious view offers anything
worth, you know, being happy about and being inspired by. And he was like, check this out.
And he uses this metaphor of like a burka with like a one inch slit that, you know, that's all
you can see the world in. And that, so he's like, all right, cool. Well, just imagine like, that's
the band of visible light that one inch, the actual presumptible light waves go up for miles and go
down miles past what you can see. The world is so much grander than you're just aware of through
the little lens that you have. So that was that is like, I think I said, that's the last chapter.
And that's kind of signing off on like, to me, the more happier note of the book from what I
remember, it's been like 10 years. It ended up being kind of an unfortunate metaphor, because
a lot of what he and the other horsemen got slammed for was homophobia or Islamophobia.
I can't like, put words into concepts tonight. Phobia phobia. What is Islamophobia, by the way?
Just hating Muslims. So do they hate Muslims or they hate Islam?
I think they just hate religion. But the fact that they tended to specifically rail on Islam
got them a lot of hate from the left. Yeah, I noticed that. And I knew the distinction before
I asked, but I just think it's an important one. Because I do think that hating, hating or being
fearful of, which is I think what phobia is, is implying. It's what's the definition. Yeah,
that's what it means. But in common parlance, things like Islamophobia and homophobia just mean
like, dislike it against. Yeah. But I think being bigoted against
set of ideas is different than being big, bigoted against people. I realized in practice,
that's really hard to space out. And if you tell somebody, it's just like religious person saying,
I don't like, I don't like what you do, but I like you, right? You know, if you're gay or something.
And again, many, many religious people don't have a problem with gay people. It's just, it's,
the Bible is pretty clear on where you should stand on gay people. So anyone who's read it and
takes it to heart doesn't buy kind of de facto, doesn't like gay people, otherwise they'll go to
hell. So, and I realized that biblical scholarship is a lot like comic book scholarship, where you
can say, well, if you read between the lines here, really, it means this.
Or even if you read this verse directly, it happens to contradict all the other verses.
Yeah, all the other verses. Yeah, there's a, this was back in the days when I was,
you know, having fun arguing, there was like a paraphrased Bible that just highlighted the
crazy shit. There's all kinds of online interactive things that just show contradictions,
like direct ones, and they have like a line with a chapter and verse, and then have like a line at,
you know, later on where it says the exact opposite. Yeah.
Oh man, I'm just reminded of, I was like a dick when I was first coming out as an atheist,
and I did this thing where I pulled a bunch of facts from the Bible about Easter that were
all contradictory, and I was like, hey family, do you want to do a quiz? Yeah, okay, you remember
the Easter challenge? I did that to my family, my sister cried. Why would she cry? Because like,
she thought that I was actually like coming back to the faith, and then like, I was like,
haha, I played a joke on you. They're all correct. What's the Easter challenge? You cannot make a
cohesive narrative out of the four accounts of Jesus' resurrection in the four gospel books.
Yeah, so you can go to religious first and be like, which one of these is the correct
biblical interpretation of Easter, and they're all correct? Yeah, I don't know how you square
that circle. That's part of why I'm not religious, and that's actually, it's a metaphor, Stephen.
Well, but that sounds tongue-in-cheek, but except it's not because he's supposed to have been real,
and so like, it's a metaphor, except when we want it to be real, Stephen. The apostles disagree on
what his lineage was and his ancestry, and it's like, it's either this or this, right?
The lineage thing, I don't even think it's that big a deal, because you know, whatever
lineage is, they get mixed up, but yeah, not having a cohesive story of the most important
event of your religion is a bit embarrassing, in my opinion. Yeah, it's literally what your
religion is founded on. This guy came back to life. And like I said, that's why I'm not religious,
because I can't make myself just be like, well, I'll just live with that, what do you call that
disharmony in your brain, cognitive dissonance. So that sounds tongue-in-cheek, but it's not.
If I notice that I believe contradictory things, it grinds at me until I drop one.
Well, it turns out that most people just don't care.
Exactly. And I'm one of the people who does, and so I can't.
When I was a new atheist and had come out of the Jehovah's Witness faith, I was like,
I want to just print up all these pamphlets and leave it on everyone's dashboard,
in front of the kingdom hall, because they call the church's kingdom halls.
And I was so full of them, and everyone will see what a lie this is, and they will all be like,
how could you have lied to us about this? And I never actually did it. And now I realized it
would have looked at it and been like, and thrown it away, and not given it two thoughts.
Yeah, the answer I always got as a kid was like, well, that's where faith comes in.
And so Richard Dawkins puts it poignantly, is that faith is a license people give themselves
to believe something when reasons fail. And for those of us in the reality-based community,
we like reasons for beliefs. And so do religious people on almost everything. They just have
separate areas where they apply it indiscriminately. Well, the reason for belief is this is what my
community says they believe, and this is what I need to say in order to get the benefits of
being in this community. Or they really believe they have a soul or something. Some of them
actually believe that part. And not even that. Some people are emotional thinkers as opposed to
rational thinkers. There's, I don't know, like how inborn this is. But it does seem like there's
genuinely kind of two classes of people. And so I believe in this thing that makes me feel good,
and that makes me feel like I am going to live forever. And my family members are going to live
forever and be rewarded for all the suffering that we're having and telling somebody that like,
nah, it's actually really upsetting to them to the point where they will actually lean into
that cognitive dissonance. And like, no, actually, this makes me feel terrible. I'm going to have a
panic attack. You know what? Nope, rejecting that. I believe my belief. Yeah, or they lean the other
way and they just like, well, this makes me happy to believe this. And so these are probably the
same people that say you're not listening to me when you're clearly listening to them and just
not agreeing with them. Well, that's because also because English is like really a non specific
language. Yeah, but I mean, I've talked with people who literally thought I just needed to
listen to them better. And I'm like, no, I'm listening to you. I hear what you're saying.
They mean like, you're not being empathetic to me enough. Yeah, I know. No, yeah, it's infuriating.
It's like, no, I can repeat back what you said better than you put it. And I tell you why I
disagree. And they're like, no, you're not listening to me. I got something of value from
from all the four, the four horsemen back in the day. And I haven't revisited any of their stuff
lately. But what's fun is that they all came from different disciplines, and they brought
something new to the table, which is also, again, I got into these books in like late high school.
And it was like the first time that I saw that, oh, depending on like what your specialty is in
real life, you'll approach whatever issue this way. And it was always fun to see Dawkins bring
it back to evolution or something. And then it bring it back to kind of like philosophy and kind
of cognitive psychology. And then Harris would kind of lean more on just like philosophy and just
hard logic. And then Hitchens had it, where it was just, for him, it was just, you know, I think
Richard Dawkins said he seems to have read absolutely everything. He'd bring it back to
some reference of some book. And he would he had this fire where he could just be, he'd sound
enraged speaking of Stephen Fry. He was he was great to watch. Speaking of Stephen Fry, there was
a great intelligence squared debate with Stephen Fry and Hitch on one side and like two deacons.
Yeah, it was great. And you know, Hitch could get up there. He'd be like, you're going to tell me
that my friend, you know, pointing or touching Stephen Fry is an abomination who's going to burn
in hell because of what he is. Fuck you. I don't think he said fuck you, but the rest was a direct
quote. But but he he would have this this fire, but they could go out for a drink afterward. Like
he was never, I think, hating people. He just had this kind of energy to him. But speaking of it,
always making, you know, well, this makes me happy. Harris had this memorable, what parable, I guess,
of like, oh, yeah, every every weekend, my family and I go out in the backyard and dig for a diamond.
We we believe that there's one the size of a refrigerator back there somewhere.
Well, of course, there's no good reason to believe it, but it makes us happy. That's a good reason.
And it gives us hope. You know, if we find this thing, we'll be rich forever. So together as a
family. Exactly. And so it's like, he's mocking all like the same reasons people go to church or
whatever it is. But he was saying, like, this isn't a sufficient reason. Like, it makes me happy.
He doesn't make this. The thing is, like, if you don't care about, you know, analyzing your beliefs
that way, that and that maybe that's another reason rationalists spends a little time talking about
this, because we're not engaging with people like that for the most part. We're well past the point
where we think something makes me happy. Therefore, it's true. That's not even a thing that occurs
anymore for me. And I'm assuming it's the case for a lot of people. So but if you're if if you're
just not interested, you're not, I don't know, not to say that you're that unexamined, you're not
that introspective, but just that's not a part of your life that you introspect about. You'll be like,
look, it makes me happy. That's all I need. And if I think that makes it true, whatever,
hand wave. So I just assign so much value to the truth that it's kind of what you're talking about
with cognitive dissonance. Like if I, I can't lie, I'm like the worst person in the world at
like lying about something even a white lie, it just like kills me. And having like a belief that
I think is false, it just it's like an itch that I have to like go look on Wikipedia and figure
out what is true. But like some of those beliefs were actually really sad and hard to come to.
But a lot of people, you know, don't want to do that. And it was really rough. Like changing your
beliefs is really hard. I know any Ash can talk to that because you know, you did come from that
Jehovah's Witness background and converting to an atheist, I'm sure was like really hard.
Yes, yes, it was. Yeah, we can't hear your nodding.
Yeah, for me, I looked at it was fairly easy. My family, I think, you know, my dad, there were
different varieties of religious, both Christian, some kind, but like the fact that I don't know
tells you how strict my upbringing was. A part of their thing is like, of my upbringing anyways,
like my parents had three kids, and I think had the energy for two. And so like they, I think
they wanted to I like to joke that my brother and I are each half of an accident. Yeah, so between
the two of us and then my older sister, I think they just didn't have the energy like to actually
commit to stuff. So at some point, I think it was right when I was like an early teenager,
and I started asking all these hard questions. It was like sixth grade. I learned about how
the nice sixth grade version about Christopher Columbus came over and like Christianized the
Indians. And yeah, there's obviously a not PG version of that. Did all the ones before he came
go to hell? That was my question. And turns out that that's a really confusing question for
religious people. Because it says you have to you have to accept Jesus into your heart to go.
But if you didn't know, yeah, all the unbaptized babies, yeah, all the people like in every other
country that wasn't Christian throughout all of human history. Yeah, what about the proto humans?
Like what about like Neanderthals? Well, it depends on when when God leaned in and injected the soul.
Right? Oh, your parents don't your parents don't have souls, but you do is how this just how this
happened. You just don't tell the kid. Yeah, or they have it at that many depending on how strict
you are. Right? Yeah. Yeah. So that was my my, I think my first brush with like the challenge of
the institution. And so they're like, Oh, we're going to read the Bible, like we'll read a verse
at night. And it went on for like three days. So I think he doesn't take long to get into before
you get to really weird shit. Yeah, reading the Bible. Genesis one. Yeah, holy shit. Your parents
had no idea what they were doing, did they? My dad had to read it cover to cover before. I don't
think my mom had really wanted you to read it sequentially. They were going to read it to us.
I think that he whatever and I again, like I was trying to indoctrinate a kid, I would cut out
large chunks. That's what they do in church. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. So to be clear, my memory of my
childhoods vague, but I'm pretty sure that's how we did it. Okay, again, three days from 20 years
literally just read it front to back to you. No, no, no, I think he read it front to back
himself at some point in his life. I'm told it's rough. There's like all the big gats. There's
like Ecclesiastes, which is just an old man complaining about things. Song of Solomon,
which is like completely unrelated. And just pages and pages describing how to build altars for
animal sacrifices. So much animal sacrifices, especially in the Old Testament. So much incest,
so much foreskins. There's whole talks of like raiding villages and coming back with piles of
foreskins like it reading the Bible cover to cover was how I officially became an atheist.
That's actually running joke to an atheist community. If you want somebody to be an atheist,
just have them read the whole Bible. I was trying to think of, I guess, the other horsemen
stuff, but I guess we're getting pretty far afield from the SSC post. So what did new atheism fail at
and why? It failed at keeping up with the left that basically runs the liberal side of our political
war. Because the after the political right invaded Iran, Iraq, was it? No, god damn,
where did we go into? We went into Iraq, right? Yeah, okay. And Afghanistan. And Afghanistan,
right. After the political right made it their mission to have wars in the Arab countries,
all of a sudden, being Muslim became like the new minority that has to be protected.
And the new atheists were like, no, we're still we're still not down with religion. Whereas before,
when all the religious people that got beat on were on the on the political right, they were like,
your southern rednecks, your hillbillies, your televangelists, all the people that the the liberal
that the political left hate anyway, they're like, yeah, these new atheists are cool, they're witty,
they're beating up on our enemies were working along for this ride. And then as soon as the
Muslim population became, you know, who the right was beating up on, it was sort of an enemy of my
enemy kind of thing. And the political left was like, no, no, the Muslims are protected minority
now. And you're not allowed to treat them the same way you treat southerners. And since you are
still saying that, then fuck off. And really, or the the atheist community was kind of like an
equal opportunity hater, where they're like, I'm not going to discriminate based on someone's
religion, whether or not I just like the religion, the religion is stupid, regardless. Screw your
dumb religion and your dumb, you know, things that you make women do. Yeah, there's um, that was
one of the hypotheses in the article. The other one was just that it like failed to gain cultural
relevance because people found them to be boring and redundant, especially in, you know, the
rationality community. It seemed like they weren't reaching their, what was it, political adversaries.
They were just kind of like preaching, you know, the same thing over and over again, saying like,
this obvious thing, and being really like, in your face about it, and everyone was like, oh god,
we know, shut up. I think they kind of won though, because like the newest generation,
almost everyone on tumblr and reddit is some flavor of not the religion their parents were,
even if they aren't necessarily atheists, they're at least like, oh, I'm spiritual, you know,
instead of, yeah, I don't know about tumblr, people are very spiritual on tumblr, not necessarily
Christian, right? That's not Christian. Yeah, they're, they're, you know, they're spiritual,
or they're into crystals or whatever, but, but they're no longer like the televangelist
moral majority people. I don't know if the Four Horsemen had to do with that. I think that was a
kind of cultural shift that was happening already. And I've definitely experienced a lot of the
attitude from family members of like, you don't believe in anything. Oh, I would rather you believe
in something as opposed to nothing, regardless of what it is. Right. No, I mean, I don't think that
they were obviously that's not what they were shooting for, and I don't think they were necessarily
directly responsible, but I think they were a contributing factor. It's kind of like Bostrom
and Newt Kowski writing about AI safety, like they weren't the only ones making these noises,
and they weren't the first, but they, they were large and charismatic and got a, got a large
audience. They were, they were a lot of shit for it too. Yeah. And I think, you know, they think
it's a similar thing with the new atheists that like, they weren't making their message wasn't
wholly original. You know, some of their arguments might have been like their flavor of original,
especially like Dennett's, excuse me, Dennett's book, Breaking the Spell sounds like it's like
breaking the spell of being religious. The spell is the taboo of talking about religion
scientifically and investigating it. And so his whole thing was like, we should just, this is
like a super important thing in the world, you know, 75% of people claim that religion is the
most important thing in their lives on the globe. We should be curious, like, where did this come
from? Where did these impulses come from? Why are we like this? What, what are the varieties of
religious, uh, interpretations, that sort of stuff? Yeah, I think Rick Warren called his,
has come about to a large extent. Yeah. Like I, I, I contest the, the thesis of that post. I don't
think that new atheism failed miserably. Me too. I think it achieved some of its goals and, you know,
not all of them. It might, a better title might be, why didn't it succeed gloriously? Because it
might not have done that, but I think failed miserably sounds like it tried and just caught on
fire and died. I don't think the word miserably was in there. I think it is. No, I'm forgetting
the thing that I was quoting. But in any case, the, Oh yeah, no, the word miserably is right there.
Yeah, there's that. And I think I've never had a hard finger on like the pulse of society and
their political leaning is very well, especially 15 years ago. But I'm pretty sure 15 years ago
it was more acceptable to say, as a politician, those are my private religious beliefs. And
that's why I'm voting this way. Fuck you. Minus the fuck you, whatever. Fuck you implied. But now
I think there's less of that. Now there's a lot more pushback, especially like from like,
liberal politicians saying you've got to back that up. You can't just say it's my private
conviction that I came to, you know, last night reading the Bible. And that's why I'm voting this
way. Otherwise, we're going to call you out. Is that my interpretation? They're wrong. It seems
like even politically, they still vote religiously, but they have to, they have to hand wave and make
up some science or like something. It's certainly much less, far less acceptable on the left. I
think it's probably less acceptable than it used to be on the right, but it's still got some
legitimacy on the right to say that. But I think people on the left call them out more now. Whereas
like it used to be a tacitly supported thing among everybody that, Oh, of course, your faith is your
faith. I respect that. Oh, you don't want gay people to be allowed to marry or live. Well, that's
your religion. That's fine. I understand. You know, I can't challenge you. I'm not sure very many
people went that far, even back in the day. Oh, that's good. I mean, yeah, I mean, death camps
I don't think death camps, but I also think like, well, if they get HIV, then that's their problem.
Right. Was a thing that happened. It was. But like marriage, for example, there's no,
there's no good secular argument against gay marriage. It used to be legitimate to say that,
you know, God said Adam and Eve. Right. And yeah, and now it's not. So that seems like a win. Yeah.
I do think that you're right. I think it probably has more to do with the fact that there were
equal opportunity haters. And when it became unfashionable to hate equally, then it was like,
oh, you guys are making, because the thing is, and that's the, that's sort of the downside,
and there's still sort of the carryover of that with like Sam Harris, especially, because he's
the only one I still like, if Dawkins had a podcast to listen to, but I'm not going to get on Twitter
to follow him. Good choice. Right. But you know, even now, Harris, if he, he doesn't talk about
religion all that much, it's sort of his springboard onto being popular. But now it's like,
I can't remember. He had one religious episode, maybe in the last year on his podcast. And that
was actually really fun. Maybe this is a couple years ago, it was with, I forget her name. She was
Fred Phelps' daughter. So that was kind of interesting. He was the Westboro Baptist Church
leader. And just what it was like growing up with him. And now she's not, now she's not religious
and that sort of stuff. For those unfamiliar with Westboro Baptist Church, were the God hates fags,
picketing funerals people? Yeah, they're, they were a drag. Yeah. I guess they still do do that.
We're going to continue to be a drag, but I think that they're actually like a group that is acceptable
for everyone to hate. Yeah, there's a joke about Kyle Kanane that you have like a crowd of like
homosexual protesters and the Hell's Angels saying fuck you guys. That's like, that's, that's quite
a villain, right? That's, that's a good, Fred Phelps is a good, that was actually, this was
mentioned methods of rationality, but it was also a favorite psychological study from the 60s.
Sheriff and Sheriff did the, well, long story short, the robbers cave experiment in the 1960s
or 50s, where you separate two groups of young boys into two, two groups to try and encourage
animosity. And all you have to do is separate them, but unite them with a common enemy. And
that enemy was Fred Phelps. I think you've cast him out and made a joke about this in one of his
posts that, oh, in fact, it was the same, it was the same one on the robbers cave experiment where
like the world having a super villain would actually be like handy in the sense that it would
give us all somebody to unite against. And thus the plot of Watchmen. That's why I love Watchmen
so much. And Harris makes the same point. And I think the end of faith that barring an attack
from outer space, we don't have like something that humanity can rally against, right?
Global warming would be cool. That's exactly what I was going to say. It'd be cool if climate
change could be that thing, but it's not for some reason. Global warming doesn't have a face.
Yeah, you can't shoot at it. Yeah, we got to answer for Morpheus global warming. There's got to
be someone in that costume. Jay's blog post, 500 million, but not one more was really good at
that. No, it wasn't that one. It was enemies with faces or something. It was a very similar
post about how, yeah, as soon as you can anthropomorphize a disease, people are like,
what was it? If you told someone that they can make a deal with this demon that has been murdering
hundreds of humans throughout all of all of our history, and only recently has been brought under
control towards only killing a few humans a year, but you make a deal with him will let you infect
hundreds of thousands of people again, if we can spy on our political enemies, anyone who took that
deal would be labeled a monster. But the US did exactly that when they let CIA in through the
vaccinators, the vaccination program in Afghanistan. And now there's a lot of people in Afghanistan
and surrounding countries, which don't let the vaccine crew people volunteers come through and
vaccinate their kids because they use those to spy on their enemies. Slight digression. I do want
to recommend the book. I think it was on immunity, which was actually talking about what is the science
behind vaccinations and what is the history of vaccinations and why do people hate vaccinations.
And it's interesting because I read that thinking, okay, I know this I've heard this a million times,
but some of the history and some of the biases that people have against vaccination was actually
kind of news to me. One of them was colonization, where for like, you know, I have a hard time like,
oh, okay, like, Andrew Wakefield said this thing about autism, so I don't want to vaccinate my
babies and I'm going to buy like a smallpox lollipop on the internet and like, okay, I hate you.
But people that are like, yeah, this force of colonization came and destroyed my country and
then like was like doing all these terrible things to my people for so long now wants to
take my child and inject them with something mysterious. I don't trust that. And I'm like,
well, I have a hard time like hating you that you have a point. But no, this is a good thing
they're going to inject your kid with. It's going to be great. It's more sympathizable. It's still a
drag and it'd be nice if things hadn't shaken out historically to where it was so hard to
sell like, look, do you want your kid to die terribly like your uncle did? No, well, then
seriously, this is free. We'll hook you up. But it's at this point, it's like, yeah, I've heard
that before, you know, get the fuck out of here. And it's hard to hard to fight that.
Yeah, here, here, we're the saviors, we're going to come rescue you from your like tribal ways. And
it's like, yeah, that sounds familiar. Yeah, you like to give me some blankets too.
Early attempts at someone else also gave us small amounts of smallpox at one point.
We've heard this story. Yeah, where are we on this? Atheism rules, religion rules.
I've heard anything lined up that went a long time. That was great. That was nostalgic.
Yeah, the Slayster Codex article started out with quoting I think a baffler article, which like,
I'm not actually familiar with the baffler. Where that was the argument, though, that like,
the new atheists are boring and dumb. And that seemed to be like, kind of why a lot of them
went away. And there's all these like, kind of triumphant, like, Oh, remember those boring,
old new atheists. But it's coming from the blue tribe. And it's kind of interesting, because
it's like, well, yeah, but they did actually have this effect on society. And now we're able to
kind of like reap the better people and be like, yeah, but Muslims are a protected minority. And
we love them. I find that a little bit awkward, where, yeah, I don't know, somebody brought up,
I think I forget it was actually in the article itself or maybe in the comments, I think it was
the comments. No, it was in the article, Scott said this too. The one of hypothesis for what
might have happened is that kind of the split between the blue and the gray tribe kind of
happened. Didn't realize they were kind of read articles, Seminole or Scott Seminole post on the
gray tribe. This was the when I clicked it, it said, I can hate or I can tell everything except
the out group. Oh, is that where he coined it? Well, I think that's that that links to liberal,
but I mean, still are liberal, but no longer identify with the political left because of
all the crazy shit they do. And now are much more like the Silicon Valley, almost libertarian
type word of key issues. Gotcha. Kind of like the Sam Harris folks then too. Yes. Okay. I would
say he's pretty like, yeah, I think the difference is that I think Harris votes blue, whereas I
think maybe libertarian vote libertarian. So I mean, the thing is libertarians, at least the
old school libertarians always voted Republican, which tribe is people who are disaffected with
how shitty the Republicans are. Whereas great tribes, people who are disaffected by how shitty
the Democrats are. They're just the disaffected people at any point in time. Yeah, I was actually
reflecting on the one with the left. Please old man, Zuber, tell us about the problems.
The left doesn't mind. We we are fine attacking the shit out of ourselves. And, you know, we can
have somebody and you get that that mob big enough, then that person's out and you've got a smaller
group. And so we're way less cohesive. And I think this is a weakness of the Republican party.
Jesus Christ, where was this? It's amazing. It's like she gets murdered every day. It's a
Groundhog Day movie. But she's getting murdered every time. It's PG 13. And there's this scene
where she, again, it's irrelevant, I promise. Honest Trailer is a YouTube series that does
like four minute trailers of movies, but they're like satirical. And then at the end,
it'll do like starring and it like makes up people instead of the actual characters,
and then the murderer is trying to kill her. And it looks like they're kind of like rough
housing on the bed. And this guy leans in and he's like, Hey, and he closes the door. And then
it says like starring. This goes back to where on the right, it's much more common, I think for
no matter what, the world's like, Hey, you're in our group, you're fine, you're with us. Yeah. And
it's not a big deal. Being a member of the right than a member of the left, because I feel like
if I was a member of the left, I would constantly be having to watch my back for people trying to
stab me. Whereas if I was a member on the right, I would be like, I can rape someone on this that
comes with that sort of loyalty. Yeah. And it's it. I can see how it doesn't franchise some people
on the left to fall into this great tribe. Meta note, I'm noticing that the lines aren't like
right now I'm talking, it's not now it's back. Hello. Okay. I'm sure it'll be close. I bet when
you say it'll say it lost some files, and we probably didn't lose a lot. I'm not sure what you
could do to make it not do that. I think I'm going to buy a SSD drive, because this is still an
old school hard drive. And I think every now and then like something else tries to access memory,
Windows tries to update or some shit. And I just need, I just need a better piece of computing.
Put it on the podcast budget. Oh, yeah. Okay, that sounds like equipment that we can now afford.
That sounds like for the show. And so cool. All right, back off of animal liberation back
into rationality. We yeah, we're at nine o'clock. So we should probably move on to the
less wrong post unless we have more stuff to say. I feel like there's a lot more to say about this,
but maybe we should kind of keep expanding on it and like successive episodes on atheism or
animal liberation. Oh, you know, those are two good, good topics. Yeah, we can come back to it.
Sorry, this is sort of a meandery episode. I this kind of hits like not close to home like
in a bad way, but it's close to my heart. These were important figures in my development. Yeah.
And, you know, they, they had like a different approaches and different messages,
but they, they kind of united around the like, you know, reason first mentality. So I liked,
I liked all of them growing up. It was fun. Yeah, they were, they were, I don't want to say
proto-rationalists, but they were part of the budding of rationalism as well. Yeah, I think that
was a lot of why they became rejected, actually. Like Steven was kind of pointing this out earlier,
but their message was not just got a stupid how obvious is that it was, let's actually think about
what we're doing here. Like our cognitive biases, the fact that we're not like examining our own
beliefs or our own source documents. That's definitely, you know, the, the beginnings of
the rationalist movement is like, you know, why do we believe what we believe? That was actually,
I think that I heard that from one of the four horsemen before I heard it from anyone in the
rationality community. Like, what do we believe? And then how do, like, what do we know? How do
we know it? So they had like, you know, they had that kind of formative impact on a lot of people
who now are in the rationality community. I think a lot of people did come from the atheism community.
And some doubled back. I know that Harris, like, read the sequences, what, in the last couple,
or at least he read some of Yutkowski's stuff. I don't know if you've read all of it. I think he
may have. There's some rationality from AI to zombies. And so he's kind of come full circle,
which it's always fun to see like a big celebrity, you know, pitching, you know, rationality is not
that fringe, but it's not like, it's not like atheism where everybody knows what an atheist is.
So yeah, I like the more celebrity involved, the better. Well,
give or take. Yeah, not necessarily a good thing, but it couldn't, you know, well, it could hurt.
You get what I'm saying. Yes. Exposure is nice. Yeah. All right. So speaking of
the rationality from AI to zombies and sequences stuff, do we want to move on there?
Let's move on to our sequences. All right. Before we do real quick, the digression about
the animal liberation stuff, I was thinking, we just, it's totally unrelated to what we were talking
about. And it kind of like happened, it started out with a standing and do, well, I want to just
cut that and put it in the bonuses for patreons. I was going to suggest that because that actually
turned into kind of a cool discussion, but yeah, it's super unrelated. That's good. But this part
stays in as people know that there's patreon only content. Okay. If you want to hear it start off
kind of shady, because we're all walking around and stuff, we can sit down and talk about animal
rights and Peter Singer for 10, 12 minutes. That's out there on patreon. If you're a supporter of
the podcast. Excellent. Perfect. All right. Moving on to the less wrong sequences. Post one,
chronophone motivators. No, post one was Archimedes Chronophone. Damn it.
Post one. Archimedes Chronophone. No, you're good. All right. So what's what's a chronophone,
Inyash? This is confusing. I know what Chronos is. Chronos is the god of time. Yes. I know what a
phone is. Do you know what a chrono trigger is? I know what Archimedes is. It's a video game I
never played, but I owned for many years. You owned it, but didn't play it. Yeah, I bought it from
a friend and then I was like, Oh, such a good game. Should have played it. What is it? Video
Oh, you haven't heard a chrono trigger talking about. It is one of the most famous JRPG
games. Do you get to shoot a time gun? No, no, but you get to jump around through time and part
of the gameplay is like going back in time to change things. So then you can jump forward in
time and reap some of the benefits of that. Nice. Yeah. And it's it's it's got a whole lot of it's
a great storyline. It was good game mechanics. It was just one of the the height of the JRPG,
you know, phenomenon at that time. I'll point out that Ocarina of Time did the same thing.
It wasn't the point of the game. Yeah. But there's a larger aspect of that involved. Yeah.
That was a major game mechanic and also life is strange. And wow, here's another digression.
And I think I'm the one who brought it up. Now I feel bad. Let's go back to the Archimedes
Chromophone. Okay. Chronophone. No, I mentioned Chrono Trigger. I think that was me. It doesn't
matter. Anyway, Prince of Persia. Let's rewind time and keep trying. Now we're going on.
Archimedes was a smart dude back in the day. He was he was like one of the leading,
the most famous mathematician of the ancient world, I think, right?
Sounds right. Or one of them. There's like Agrius and all those people around running around at
that time. Right. The post Archimedes Chromophone asks us to imagine that Archimedes invented a
temporal telephone or chronophone for short, which lets you talk to him from us in the 21st
century to him in his century. And we can make suggestions to him. But the chronophone avoids
transmitting overly anachronistic information, doesn't want to screw things up too bad.
So it transmits cognitive strategies rather than words. So if you follow the policy of
check my brain's memory to see what my culture recommends as a wise form of political organization,
you don't say to Archimedes women should have the right to vote. What comes out of the chronophone
is the result of Archimedes following the same policy and looking up in his brain what his aura
lads as the wise form of political organization. So it'd be something like find a very wise and
just tyrant. The same dilemma applies to scientific issues. If you say the earth circles the sun,
it comes out of the chronophone as the sun circles the earth. It doesn't matter that our
civilization is right and their civilization is wrong. The chronophone takes no notice of facts,
only beliefs and cognitive strategies. You tried to transmit your belief about heavenly
mechanics. So it comes out as Archimedes' belief about heavenly mechanics. It's funny because
the next thing he says is exactly my thinking, which is kind of like, all right, I'll lay out
there's like really careful step of like old school philosophy. Yeah, and we'll daisy chain you there.
But yeah, why won't that work? He's very good thing that you try to do that though. Okay,
if you try to do that, what comes out on Archimedes end is a careful style of Plato like
philosophical analogies, which argue that wealthy male landowners should have special privileges.
You followed the cognitive policy of come up with a line of philosophical arguments intended
to persuade a neutral observer to my own arrow's point of view on political privilege. So it comes
out of the chronophone is what Archimedes would think up if he followed the same cognitive strategy.
And the point of this is to point out how hard it is to come up like with anything truly novel.
I think Eliezer says later on in the post, the really odd thing is that some point in time,
someone must have turned against slavery, gone from pro slavery to anti slavery,
even though they didn't start out wanting to persuade themselves against slavery.
We touched on the animal liberation thing. That was analogous to that with me.
I'm still, I don't know, it's hard to be like an animal rights activist in the 20%
with Peter running around doing it all the wrong ways. But the message of like, you know,
factory farms are a nightmare and we should be dealing less meat.
And animals do have some level of sentience or at least some animals.
Yeah. And that matters. Those are messages that are important, right? But those aren't
things I started out believing. Anyway, wanted to derail us for no reason.
That wasn't a drill. I was directly directly related.
All right, cool. Tangent or wait, no, hold on. What do you call a parallel tangent?
Right next to what we were talking about. What do you call this?
I think that was just on topic. Well done, Steven. Go Steven.
So it's such an unusual feeling for me. I felt like I was doing it wrong. Okay.
He points out humanity did not invent the scientific method by setting out to invent
the scientific method by looking for a garden path that would lead to the scientific method.
If you know your desired destination, i.e. the scientific method, you're already there.
So yeah, the basic point is that to get non obvious output, you need non obvious input.
If you say something that's considered obvious in your home culture, it comes out as something
that's considered obvious in his culture. And the question, the challenge at the end,
which I found I could not answer, although to be fair, I did not give it five minutes by the clock,
is what advice do you give our comedies? And how do you say it into the chronophone?
This is fun. I almost kind of want to take a five minute break to think of one because
I didn't think about it really that much yet. All right.
We could also all three of us just talk about it for five minutes. Does that work?
Yeah, that's fair. Okay. So the constraint is that I can't just tell him a fact
because he'll look at like a relevant fact that he has in his head. So I also can't share with
him like a moral conviction because he'll look at his similar maps moral conviction.
So I need to be more abstract than that. Yeah, cognitive strategy. So a strategy,
but like my strategy for like find the truth is the scientific method or something. His strategy
for find the truth is let's not say it's our comedies and someone dumber and say it's like
whatever stargaze or something, right? What do you call reading stars?
Oh, Plato's method for finding truth was literally contemplate what the perfect nature is. Yeah.
You will never find things just by looking at the real world because the real world is but a
shadow of the true forms of things. The bummer is that Plato was mostly wrong.
Yeah. No, how do we actually get the scientific method? What I thought of immediately was alchemy
and the idea wasn't like, let's discover the scientific method. It was let's transmute something
into gold. And the fact that they kept failing to transmit something into gold means that,
okay, we didn't do it right. Something else. Okay, we didn't do that right. Obviously,
this isn't the correct thing. Something else. So something like iterative attempt set something
with like a really high tolerance for failure. A lot of the scientific method or the starting
of it was just the practice of writing shit down. Yeah, that's true. You mean like both your
predictions and your results? No, just the results even writing it down, but also like
testing it first because I think a lot of there was this armchair philosophizing about, okay,
here's how the heavens work. Here's how the humors work. And people are just like, okay,
that sounds right. But if you're trying to, you know, transmute something into gold, if it's not
gold at the end of that process, then you fucked up. Yeah, 700 years ago, like it was just natural
philosophy was the closest thing that I had to science. That was people like, like Aristotle
going out to the beach and lining up a bunch of dead animals and just like, this looks kind of
like that. These things are closely related, which like was better than anyone had ever done.
But he also had some weird shit. I think we mentioned this once before that like men have
more teeth than women. And no one ever counted. No one counted. Well, then again, actually,
how many people had all of their teeth during that time period? And somebody wrote in with
the correction on maybe I got something wrong there, but he made errors kind of that basic.
But what he did was he was out there cataloging stuff. And that was like an innovation. So yeah,
writing stuff down is a big step. I mean, I know a lot of the early scientists, not really scientists,
but I mean, they started out as hobbyists who were just like, I'm really interested in birds.
I'm going to write down every bird I observe. And you know, oh, these these star, I'm really
interested in stars. I think Tycho Brahe had like 10 years of observations of just the movements of
the planets just written down every night. He's like, this is the this is the coordinates where
this was at. And just tomes of data, which he kept because he was a weird eccentric dude.
And, you know, Kepler used that to to form his theories of motion. Human databases. Yeah,
I mean, just writing things down. It's having people meet. They're like, we're really interested
about this aspect of the natural world. Let's talk about it and write down everything we see.
And and eventually science grew from that. I think observation is a really good first step
and like kind of a value of the scientific method. And also writing it down. So recording
your observations. Would that turn into anything if you told our comedies record your observations?
I think so because we already know it's like interacting with the malicious genius like
determines to misinterpret you. How did our comedies misinterpret write down what you what
you discover? Well, because we already know it's a good idea to write things down and to compare
data. So for our comedies, it would be like, it's a really good idea to consult a wise man
who who has this knowledge. But the difference is like, we're saying not how to get it, we're
saying how to share it or store it. So like the wise man is a store of knowledge, right?
And he shares it with people who ask him. Okay. Our comedies also did experiments and stuff.
Like he was able to measure like the volume of like weirdly shaped objects by placing them in
water and measuring the displaced water, right? Right. Yeah. I believe so. Wasn't the whole bathtub
Eureka thing? I think those are comedies. I don't think so. But I don't know some but well,
our comedies in particular, whoever it is, we're talking to some Greek skimming the comments to
try and cheat. And I've noticed this, you know, years ago, but it's funny, Robin Hansen's handle
on less wrong is Robin Hansen too. I don't know if you forgot Robin Hansen or someone else took
it, but that's really funny to me. Well, we've we've used up our five minutes. Yeah. We only get
five minutes. Oh, yeah. Okay. Okay. Okay. Yeah, that was that was our comedies. All right. You
don't want to guess what Robin Hansen's advice was. Wait, make prediction markets halfway there.
All right. That on things. Yeah. Robin Hansen said 12 years ago that it would it would sure help
if you could speak into one end and then hear how it comes out of the other end and then edit and
repeat. If so, I try and encourage him to make useful devices that make money and create a tradition
of this activity. Yeah. Well, again, that was the gold. You need like an incentive to get things
right. We think it's pretty obvious nowadays, though, that economic advancement is a good idea.
It's not even necessary. Well, I guess it's also economics, because if you, for example, cure a
disease, now you can sell the cure. But but yeah, no, that's good Robin Hansen. Actually, I was
trying to think of a way to phrase that of like, find something that people actually care about
getting the answer right about whether it's curing a disease or whether it's transmuting gold, and
then be like, pursue this, try a lot of things, be really open to failure, iterate, whatever that
would come out as an Archimedes time. I don't know. I mean, I don't, I think they already have the
values of truth is good, and persistence and hard work is good. That wouldn't be new information
we'd be giving them. But then why were people, you know, able to just like make up shit about
how many teeth people had or how the stars worked? And then everybody was like, sounds right.
Like it didn't matter what what the truth was, because nobody was making money off of it,
or curing a disease, or you know, nobody's life depended on it. That's actually that adds more
actual wisdom, I think to Robin Hansen's reply. I sort of just took it as like a funny like, of
course, you're an economist, you would say make money. But that's super uncharitable. I didn't
really think about it as just reading it. Obviously, you can make money on super valuable
discoveries. And if you find something that, hey, look, it turns out if you put your hands in, you
know, like whatever clean salt water and rub them around a little bit, and then you do surgery,
people die a lot less, you know, something like that, you could sell that knowledge and save lives
or something, right? So yeah, if it has money, there's there's incentive. That's actually a good
suggestion that sadly was not borne out by what actually happened in history. No, when it was
proven that washing your hands reduces mortality in surgery by a fuck ton. People were like,
we don't believe you. Are you implying that we're dirty doctors? And like,
it didn't catch on for I think 20 years after that. As far as how long it takes things to
catch on pre internet, you think that people would have, you know, been able to make money
by not killing their patients as quickly, you think doctors be interested in anything,
and able to interpret statistics. And yes, it was a whole sat affair. Even more recently,
Atul Gawande wrote the checklist manifesto where he was, you know, advocating for have a checklist
of the things that you need to do when you're performing surgery or doing some kind of medical
operation. Because often people are, you know, humans and they're prone to human error. And
also nurses and doctors work crazy schedules and they forget stuff like oops, I sewed that
patient up with the scalpel in their chest, or you know, having a checklist. It seems like such
an obvious thing. But people are like, Oh, are you saying that I'm like stupid and I need a
checklist. I'm a doctor. I've got you know, yeah, there was a lot of pushback against the
checklists. I feel like that's kind of the same thing too. We're like, you know, somebody who's
not an expert in this field is coming in and being like, Hey, guess what? You salt water.
They're like, Yeah, like, okay, who's the doctor here? Anyways, yeah, that's, that's just a bummer.
Not rationalists are doing that, though. Rationalists would be like, that's one of the
strengths of argument from authority. Well, well, yeah, so we see that as well,
I kind of the reverse, like, I'm an authority watcher listen to you, but a rationalist would
be like, Oh, you've got data. Give me, right? I hope so. That's kind of the goal. Yeah. Like,
if you tell me, I would think that if I was a surgeon, I'd be like, I would totally understand
where they're coming from. I'm the fucking doctor. I've been doing this for 15 years. I almost never
screw up. Why do I need your stupid suggestion, you non doctor. But if you were a true Bayesian,
you would say, Oh, wow, you've got survey studies or whatever data that show that this actually
does reduce incidences. If you're a true Bayesian, you also have to take into consideration how much
you trust your source. And maybe they didn't trust the source of that guy, since he was not a doctor,
you know, they're like, what could you possibly know? This is more, you know, scamming, trying to
get money from us or something, trying to build up your own name so you can sell a lot of books.
Yeah, but all right, fair enough. But it's, you know, just to back and forth on that,
there's a very low cost thing to hang this thing up and try every year, right? You don't have to
pay for the pace of paper once. And it's probably like eight cents. So I guess medical grade papers,
$10. I thought you were talking about the hand washing until Gawande is like, actually,
I forget what his position was at the time. I think he was like the head of like a bunch of
hospitals and actually like a very authoritative figure. I think the checklist thing does have
a cost though. You can't just go right in and do your surgery. You have to go through this tedious
checklist every single time. And that's a pain in the ass. I have a checklist. Yeah, I have a checklist
at work for the closing of the accounts that I do every month. I update that checklist two weeks
later when I'm all done, because I'm like, I don't have time for this fucking checklist right now.
I got to do my work and I'm already working long hours. Well, that's, that's a number on the plus
side. On my procedure today, I was able to watch because I could see like they've got the, the
some sort of x-ray, but it's like live, hopefully it's on x-rays because I didn't have anything
covering my, my nethers, but my, I can't see your penis on an x-ray anyway. There's no bones in it.
Oh, it wasn't, it wasn't a telescope. That's not my point.
No, the, I was more worried about x-rays damaging my sperm, right?
But I could see where the needles were and stuff and watching them putting a dye and all that.
And luckily, since I was able to watch, I could see them taking both out because he put in like
the little prep needles and stick stuff into them and then pull those things out. I'm pretty sure
I'd be able to feel it like this too, but it was just, you know, I could see they did all the right
stuff because I was able to watch. So not, that's a tangent. That wasn't related at all.
Yeah. Damn it, Steven. You were doing so good. So I think the main point of our committee's
chronophone was to set up the next post, Chronophone Motivators, which I thought made some
really interesting points. So, Alias starts up by saying the challenge is supposed to be difficult.
It's really hard to get somewhere when you don't already know your destination.
If there were some simple cognitive policy, you could follow to spark moral and technological
revolutions without your home culture having advanced knowledge of the destination, you could
execute that cognitive policy today. That actually, I'm going to go back to where I didn't read all
the comments, but that again is the one of the wisdoms of Robin's answer. Like making money was
already a value 2000 years ago, right? Presumably. I mean, sort of. It was, it was, depending on your
culture, it was often really looked down upon. Like merchants were dirty and it was really
a scandal when they started gaining political power because they didn't come to it honestly.
Yeah. Not making money, having money, having money in your family, being an aristocrat.
Right. Right. Having money is good. Making money makes you like a dirty merchant trader person.
It's a nouveau riche. Yeah.
And I totally see what you're saying. You're right. Merchants are, you know, these thieves who,
you know, steal stuff and sell it kind of like today. They're all used car salesmen.
It's rich people. It's like, look at this person trying to become a rich person like me when they
weren't born into it. Yeah. You're right. Having money made you awesome, but trying to, trying to
have money made you shit. Yeah. All right. We're weird. So I don't know how you would have successfully
got that to him. I guess if you could get past the like earning money part and just have to have
money part, then it's worth five years people hating you maybe. I mean, obviously a lot of people
thought it was worth it. Yeah. There were a bunch of people who got money and power. Fair enough.
All right. So I found this interesting comparison to the modern day. He points out that one of
the commenters, Ger, suggested teaching our communities decimal notation. If you speak decimal
notation, our culture standard representation numbers in the chronophone than the chronophone
output standard representation numbers used in Syracuse. But as you did note, place notation
is revolutionary because it makes it easier for ordinary people, not just trained accountants
to manipulate large numbers. Maybe maybe an equivalent new idea in our own era would be
Python, which makes it easier for novice pro for novices to program computers. Coming up with that
chronophone input suggests that maybe we should pay more attention in this era to Python, which I
was like, that is a new and non obvious conclusion that he just reached. Am I doing something wrong
by not knowing Python? I think that that's actually a pretty common sentiment now where they're
trying to like push every child in school, learn programming, that's become a new thing. I don't
know if our incentives are coming from the right place, because it's not like people are like,
Oh, these kids need to learn programming because that way we're going to elevate the human race.
I think a lot of those coming from we need to teach these kids Python so that like they will
have employment, which again, it's the economics thing. So it's not like I don't want to say that
having money is bad or that trying to gain social status or whatever is bad.
Unless you're a Python developer right now, which case your marketability is going to plummet
here soon when there's a bunch of high school graduates who can do entry level work. But I
mean, that's how initial literacy and numeracy came about too, right? It was economically useful
for people to know it. And eventually we were like, this is so useful, the whole human race
should have these skills. I feel like I'm missing something. But I don't, I don't think it's obvious,
at least I didn't until now, that everyone should know Python the same way I think everyone should
know cursive. No, cursive, that everyone should know how to write the decimal system. And yeah,
and know how to use numbers and how to read. I think with cursive was just that I think that
they're teaching kids a lot of stuff that's outdated and not very useful nowadays. Like
cursive. Luckily, they're not teaching cursive in a lot of places that much much
disagreeing of our grandparents. Yeah, no, I actually met somebody recently who like,
was like, huh, people don't even know how to do cursive anymore. Like, I don't know,
my kid or my grandkids or whatever doesn't even understand cursive. And she's laughing. And I'm
just like, uh, yeah, but she could probably fix your phone. Yeah, it's like, grandma, you just
gave half your half your life savings to Nigerian Prince. Yeah, when you forget how to log into
Facebook and you call in your grandkids and you can't write them a letter and cursive to ask for
their help. So tough shit. Yeah. But this is coming from somebody who tries to make a living
programming. Like it's not clear to me what the benefit is to the average person. Like, hold on.
If you could quickly automate simple tasks that lots of times people go through the more tedious way.
I mean, the whole point of it is that it's supposed to be non obvious, right? Like,
yeah, but like a thousand years ago, people would have been like,
why do my children need to know about decimal notation and how to manipulate numbers? It's
not a useful skill in their farming. Yes. Like if you knew basic scripting and you're doing
like similar things most days or something that'd be nice, but it's not clear to them. Most people
have the applicability to put that into their lives. I don't know about Python, but like basic
kind of computer language literacy, computer literacy, like just how to cut and paste and
all that stuff. Well, that sounds super valid. I'm an accountant. I don't do math every day.
I don't even do math every week, really. But I still think it's good to know how to do math for
the times when you do need it. That's what I'm struggling with. Because yeah, it's valuable
for me. Yeah, again, I don't do math that much either. Like it's just reading and writing. There's
some people that just never read a book after school. But the fact that people are literate as
opposed to not is just such like a force multiplier for people having the ability later on in life to
elevate themselves or to develop new interests or just communicate with people.
Just the ability to see information that is stored in the physical world is super handy. Like
yeah, I heard about a guy who was a long haul truck driver who couldn't read. And whenever
he like needed to get some places where he needed to read signs, he would call someone up and he's
like, Yeah, I'm kind of lost right now. Can you tell me is there like a landmark nearby or something?
And I mean, eventually some people cut on but didn't know how to read kind of a kind of a handicap
when so much information is stored in written form all around us. Yeah, that's weird to think
about. I mean, I'd like to think that actually I did this I can confirm even though I can't well,
I don't know if I haven't did this like to save my life on the highway, but I did do this a little
bit in Japan, like I can't read Japanese. But I could look at what the place is called on my phone
in the whatever the kanji and just line it up and be like that looks the same. This is
probably it. You weren't trying to drive down the highway. Exactly. Yes, I wasn't on the interstate.
Yeah, maybe that's the point is like a lot of these things aren't like the things that you need
to do to live every day. But it sure is a handy tool to be able to like do basic addition when
you're grocery shopping or something. Or just have a framework of understanding of like a big,
I don't know, I want to say the word magisteria and that's a terrible word.
One of my thinking of paradigm, maybe a big paradigm, because so much of our lives is digital now,
and it's just going to become more and more that and if kids don't know how to program,
I almost feel like that's like not knowing how to read where maybe kids didn't need to know how
to read quote unquote when there is mostly agricultural stuff going on. But like the
industrial revolution shifted everything so far in the other direction that those kids would have
gotten left behind real quickly. Yeah. And also like just I feel like it's almost depriving somebody
of understanding something that's so integral and so interesting to I'm having like a failure
of being able to come up with words again, somebody else talk. No, I think you know what
you're saying though. And if anything, I moved to learn more Python, I know the very basics,
but that's excellent. It's useful. I've never written a Python script for something to do at
home and to be like, Hey, you know, I've actually thought about this too. Like when you download
a torrent program, and I'm sure there's already things tools that do this online for you, but
I'm not sure where they are. You get whatever game dot thrones dot or whatever game and it's all
separated by periods and it's got the year and like whatever the torrent or his name on it.
I've never done this, of course, because I'm a good, you know, whatever, yes, copyright loving
American. But I've heard tell of this type of thing. It'd be super easy to write something that
recognizes the period spacing and just replace that with spaces and then give everything proper
capitalization. That sounds super doable. I should do something like that. And Python sounds like a
great language for it too. Okay, cool, fun, fun idea, writing this down, steal stealing my own
ideas. So the point that was made is that most of what we desperately want to say to Archimedes
is not obvious relative to Archimedes culture. This strongly suggests that the most important
things the future would want to say to us are amazingly enough, not things that everyone already
knows. If you want to really benefit humanity, you've got to do some original thinking, come up
with the sort of non obvious idea that you would speak into a chronophone. And you have to do some
hard thinking about areas of application and directions of effort. You can't just run off
in the direction of what your contemporary culture has instilled as the reflex answer to the question,
how can I benefit humanity? And I think this is really like, knowing now what I know about
where the rest of the sequence is going, I see that this is where he's setting us up for. Yeah,
this AI shit sounds really weird, especially here in 2008, but I'm talking to you from the future.
Right, but like, you're going to have to do some weird thinking and stuff that does not come to
mind automatically when people say, how can I benefit humanity? If you really want to actually
benefit humanity the same way that someone from the future could benefit our community society?
That's what I love about Yudkowsky's approach to everything is that, I mean, the sequences
weren't just for him to get, you know, ad revenue on less wrong, right? The whole, the whole goal
was to raise the sanity waterline enough to get enough people. And luckily, he's a good writer
and he's charismatic and all that helps. And so from when he started writing the sequences to when
Miri got like sufficient funding took what, 15 years? Something like that, 10 to 15? Yeah,
just what a couple years ago, one of their, one of the early less wrongers was one of the people
who made a fortune on Bitcoin. And they now no longer have funding needs, right? So this paid
off. The whole thing was, you know, let's get people on. If that's not long term awesome strategies
and taking a novel approach to solving a problem, I don't know what is. Not only paid off and getting
Miri funded and noticed and everything, but now there's people that can work on these things
because they've had this training in rationality. Yeah, I think that's really cool. That's fantastic.
Was that the whole second one? Yeah, the the ramp up was the point of the
chronophone dilemma is to make us think about what kind of cognitive policies are good to follow
when you don't know your destination in advance. If you can just tell our communities to build a
capitalist society, because your culture already knows that's a good idea, it defeats the purpose
of the dilemma. The chronophone. The chronophone transmits cognitive policies, not sentences.
What sort of thinking are we doing now that is analogous to the thinking that we wish our
communities had done then? And I think this is when people ask us what good is rationality. I
think this is basically the answer that rationality is about trying to find good cognitive policies,
not necessarily like good actual answers, but good policies that work to get us to these goals
that we didn't know we had. Yeah, and that we didn't know we had is I think the crux there,
right? Because I certainly wasn't really concerned about AI before I read this stuff and it took
years of getting into the community before I really thought about it. I think that rationality
isn't necessarily how to achieve a goal, it's how to have find the right, like I said, the right
mental tools to be able to pursue your goals in general. Yeah, we had our monthly meetup
last night, there were a couple of first timers and wait, at least one first timer. When newcomers
come and if they're not already have they haven't drank the Kool-Aid, they're kind of like, what
do you guys do? What are you guys about? And it's not really like a skeptic meetup where it's like,
oh, we talk about, you know, consumer protection, you know, about like not buying snake oil and,
you know, not giving my money in tithes to those damn religious people. We don't, I mean, there's
things that is popular in rationality, EA, AI, other abbreviations for things. But it's more
about, yeah, fostering a community of, I mean, as far as the meetup, so I told somebody last
night, you know, because when we had dinner, when Robin Hansen came for Harris's podcast,
a few of us got to chill with him. He asked, like, what does your guys's community do? And I'm like,
nothing. But that's not the right answer. The right answer, the real answer, not just the right
one, is that like, exactly. Well, he said like some people, some groups that he goes to, like,
they're doing like the next blockchain, whatever this person's doing this, whatever. But all we're
doing is kind of cultivating a community of that sort of mindset. And so it's a group of
sane people that I can talk to and say, what do you guys think about this, that I can trust them
to actually know how to assess that and give me, you know, feedback that matters. And hopefully,
I can be the same for them, right? So, you know, you can do all this in your basement, reading
less wrong if you want, but doing it in real life gives you that external, I guess, motivator and
sounding board, you know, because you can't do it, you probably can't do it perfectly by yourself.
Having other people to do this, do thinking with makes, who would have thought collaboration is
useful, right? I get a lot of value out of, again, the kind of productive peer pressure,
or like the positive peer pressure, if I'll actually like actively ask people now and now
that it is cool, because I know people in the community who it's like, hey, you want to go to
the library with me, and then like, we can force each other to do things that we want to do, but
like aren't doing right now. And that was something that I could never get in like my other social
circles, because it would be like, people would pay lip service to the idea and then not do it in
this community, people actually will do it. I love that. I like that too. And even though we
didn't go to the library on Tuesday together, I went to library by myself and do trickle down
effects. So Stephen, what are we going to be talking about next time? Next week, we have actually
one of the most popular, I guess popular to me, probably other people, but that's the, so the
first one is self deception, hypocrisy or acracia, which sounds fun. And then the other one, which
sounds way more fun is Seruko Naritae, which is Japanese for I want to become stronger.
That was a damn good post. Yeah, it was fun. And I think that one's memorable too.
It's one of the ones that sticks out in my memory. Yeah.
I still say that to myself. Nice. Yeah. Like I haven't read it, I think, in years and years,
but yeah, I remember it. That's sort of the final message that Harry has for himself in
Methods of Rationality. It's like, I need to level up my game. It's, and that's valuable, right?
And hopefully it doesn't take almost destroying the world to do that. So.
And that's, we will have links to it on less, not less wrong, Jesus, on the basinconspiracy.com,
if you would like to read ahead along with us. And then we'll talk about it in our next episode
in two weeks. Yeah, cool. And we don't have a patron to name this week. What we do have is
somebody who wanted to remain anonymous, but they joined us, I guess what, almost two weeks ago.
And they more than doubled our podcast income, which is great. It blew our mind. I contacted
him. I contacted the person twice to say, are you sure you didn't like mean to press a decimal
point here? It's an extra zero that wasn't supposed to be there. Yeah. So. But it turns out, no.
No, it was intentional. Very generous, awesome patron. Yeah. So what we plan to do with that,
that income is to upgrade our equipment. First things first, we noticed that's what
led to our tangent on animal rights was stopping to talk about the computer. There might be some
lossy data here. We're not sure, but it looks like there might have been. Yeah, we'll find out.
We're going to buy a solid state drive. So that shouldn't happen for that anymore. Maybe some
new microphones, or something. Yeah, possibly. If you find like a microphone that you think is good,
let me know. Yeah, I'll definitely look into it just because it'd be nice to have one record
a quarter remotely that doesn't totally suck. Yeah. But yeah. Anyway, that blew our mind.
Yeah. I just wanted to let. That was amazing. Thank you again. Yes, thank you. I wanted to let
you know that everyone here is aware of it. And it's your generosity is remarkable. And so is
our generosity of every person who ever wants to donate us, you know, throws a buck. Definitely.
It all matters. Yeah. You know, this all goes to keeping the lights on, keeping the show online,
and not costing. Actually, I started putting everything online. So it was really costing
him money at first for like the first year and year and a half. Yeah. That reminds me. When did
we were coming up on what episode 78? That's not a big anniversary, but it's what almost three years.
Is it? When did we start? Well, if we're doing every an episode every two weeks, 52 would have been
two years. Yeah. Yeah, we're coming right up on on three years. We might have just passed it.
Okay. Cool. And next month to us next month is our four year anniversary for our local
song meetups. Yes. Yeah. Party. Yeah. I'm getting old. That's what I'm hearing here. I have some
listener feedback about that, but we are out of time because it's 930 about aging. Yeah. Speaking
of getting old, it's also getting late. So we're going to have to get back to the listener feedback
next time because there were a number of cool things that I wanted to hit on from the listeners,
and we just ran out of time again. Sounds good. I will just point out to Taylor Balkan that I
read this late star codex post you linked to and that was really cool. And I want to talk about it,
and we will. Next time. Yeah. Cool. Alrighty. Yeah. So that's what we got for this week's episode
or this I say week. I know it is this week. Think for this by weeks episode. Yeah. Someone asked
they hate their Patreon or not the Patreon their podcast feed is drying up and I totally sympathize
with that. And I have an idea for an off week podcast that isn't division conspiracy. Okay.
That I think would be a lot of fun. Okay. And that's cooking, but I'm not pitching the idea yet.
If anyone's interested that there's something brewing, stuff's brewing. That's what I wanted
to get out there. Okay. Yeah. Super fun. Super cryptic. Oh, also, speaking of things that
happened not related to the podcast, I wanted to mention that I was recently, the serial novel
I'm putting out online, What Lies Dreaming, I recently got it accepted, I guess, included in
the web fiction online, which lists a bunch of them. So you can now vote for it every week.
Once a week, if you want to at top web fiction, and I will post a link here. And yeah, it helps out
if you want to do that. There's a little link at the bottom of every chapter as well as a little
link at the bottom of the front page. And it'll get the word out to more people if you're reading it.
Oh, that's awesome. Yeah. I'll include the link this one time because I mentioned it in this
podcast, but definitely not everyone will also include a link to your book, which should be there.
Okay. Which is great. I've only read the first chapter. All right. But it's not because I didn't
because I'm bad at juggling new characters and names and stuff. I would like to finish Ward
first, but honestly, it's gonna be like another two years. So maybe I'll just, I've got some time
I'll get caught up on yours, but you're still a good writer. Everyone should check them out.
Oh, thank you. And I'm not just saying that. Yeah, can confirm. Yeah, if you saw it, I'd be like,
it's not for me, but that's all I'm saying. So it's great.
