Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky.
I'm Stephen Zuber, and today we have a guest.
Rhys Lenmark, thanks for being here.
Thank you for coming over.
And we are here to talk about cryptocurrencies.
We have you on because you know some things about cryptocurrencies, whereas we don't really
all that much.
I mean, I guess I know a little bit now, but not a ton, ton.
Can you tell us first of all what a cryptocurrency is?
Is this like E dollars?
Yeah, so the initial version of it was thought of as like an E gold, but now it's kind of
expanded into various other things.
And so a cryptocurrency, the way that I like to imagine it is it represents some kind of
value within kind of a network or a protocol that can be used to kind of spend on some
other on something within that network.
So for example, there's a thing called the basic attention token, and you can imagine
it as kind of a new version of Facebook where right now with Facebook, Facebook pays.
If you're scrolling in your feed and you're scrolling, you're scrolling, you see some
ads, the advertisers pay Facebook essentially to get your attention.
You get with basic attention token, instead, they essentially define these like API's in
this protocol and say, okay, now as you're scrolling through your feed, if someone wants
your attention, they will pay you not Facebook in not dollars, but instead in basic attention
tokens.
And then you get those basic attention tokens and then you can either spend those to get
other people's attention or you can sell them for US dollars or fiat or what have you.
So this is a question that I get a lot from, well that I have gotten a lot from my roommate
and from other people who are new to the whole thing.
Why would anyone exchange anything for a Bitcoin?
Or a basic attention token, like what is it good for?
Wait, quick pre-question.
Are basic attention tokens a thing that are actually happening?
Yes.
Because I just was mentioning before we started recording that I haven't been on Facebook in
a long time.
Oh, I haven't seen it on Facebook.
Oh, sorry, sorry, no, no.
So this is basic attention tokens are happening.
They're happening through this thing called the Brave browser, which is started by the
person who is a co-founder of Firefox and made JavaScript, invented JavaScript.
He's making this Brave browser.
That's not a bitch.
And so he's making this browser and within that browser you can pay with basic attention
tokens that's currently in beta right now.
Okay, and I'm assuming you can kickstart your amount of basic attention tokens with real
money, right?
So you can buy basic attention tokens on any exchange?
Is that kind of what you're talking about?
Yeah, but then you can earn them by watching ads before you watch it.
Exactly, exactly.
But so for some people they can just like, oh, I want eight million of these to start
with and then I'll get my stuff rolling rather than have to watch ads themselves.
Exactly, exactly.
Thank you.
Thanks for clarifying.
So why would anybody want to buy a Bitcoin?
So there's a couple of key underlying things here.
The first is that there's this, Bitcoin's our part of this new concept of digital
scarcity, which is something that didn't really exist before.
The internet is kind of defined by being able to take any object, duplicate it
in infinite times, send it around the world wherever you want, all for zero cost,
which is cool, but there's no scarcity there.
And that's how you see the issues with pirating and Spotify and all those things
like that. So with something like Bitcoin, because it's essentially digital
scarcity that is controlled not by any single party, not by like a given
corporation, but by that it's controlled like by these miners or what have
you through math.
So it's the Bitcoin has digital scarcity.
And the reason why you would get into Bitcoin, there are kind of two reasons.
I like to think of it as a the pure kind of scarce value or mimetic value or
collectible value of the currency.
So what this means is a good example.
This is Dogecoin, which is this stupid little or also fun little coin that it
just, it was based off of this Doge meme and there aren't that it doesn't
actually do anything, right?
But because it's a digitally scarce good and because there's demand for it,
that means that it'll have a price and a value.
And so it has a hundred million dollar market cap.
It's kind of essentially representative of the network value underneath.
It's representative of the Reddit community and all these things.
And they kind of used it to kind of, and they've sold Dogecoin to bring the
Jamaican, Bob said, team to the Olympics and they've done like some cool things
with it. So that's kind of one side of things for why you would buy a Bitcoin
or any of these other things.
It's just pure collectible value as a collectible or as fundraising.
Yeah, collectible or fundraising.
You can, well, and I'm talking about why you would buy into one.
So you could say, Hey, I want this Dogecoin because I love the Doge meme
and there aren't that many Doge coins.
And so this person is going to sell me on sweet.
I'll pay five bucks for it or whatever.
So what stops there from being more Doge coins?
So the the amount of tokens is defined by the protocol.
So, for example, with Bitcoin, they're only ever going to be 21 million
Bitcoins ever.
And that's why the current price of Bitcoin is, you know, 4,000, whatever
dollars, if they're going to be one trillion Bitcoins, then all the Bitcoins
today would be worth a lot, a lot less.
So it's essentially coded into the system is how many, how scarce the item will be.
I know about how the blockchain works.
But I think a lot of people might not.
Why can't you just say I have more Bitcoin and like duplicate a Bitcoin on your computer?
Yeah.
So this is, so we're kind of covering starting to cover like the four main
sides or I don't need to go into that.
But there there's the blockchain is another key underlying part of the system.
So you can imagine the blockchain as kind of this distributed ledger where, you
know, if any Ash sends me one Bitcoin says from any Ash to Reese and then I send
one to Steven from Reese to Steven.
And you can imagine all those are transactions on a ledger.
They all all those transactions get put into a block.
And then those chain of blocks is the blockchain.
I like to imagine like a toilet paper roll.
So every single Bitcoin that's ever been created, there is a record of when it was
created and every single hand it's passed through.
Exactly.
It's like a real physical coin whoever holds onto it is the guy who's holding
it and there's no way to trace where it came from.
Aside from, I guess you probably know it was minted in the mint.
Well, isn't there like one transaction between say, you know, you know,
gives you a Bitcoin and then before you give it to me, you put it in this jar
with a thousand other Bitcoins and I, you put one in there and I take one out.
And then there's no way to know that I got it from you, right?
So that's how you would anonymize the transfer.
Totally.
And that is so this anonymous.
So, so a couple of things.
So first it doesn't say Reese or Steven or any Ash on the blockchain is it has
your, your public key with this like RSA cryptography thing.
And then the, the other side of that is like you said, you can, there are
certain currencies like Monero and Zcash, which are built for more like more
intense anonymous transactions.
And they use that system that you just talked about, Steven, where you put all
of them together and then you kind of redistribute them.
You don't know from whom it came in to where it went.
I thought you could do the Bitcoin.
I'm not an expert, but I was under the impression that people who used Bitcoins
to buy, I was going to just say illegal things, but that's way too dark for the
kind of things you can buy with Bitcoin who buy drugs online with them.
They use some sort of anonymizing server service like that.
They might do that.
It's not built into the protocol.
There are others where that system is built into the protocol.
Right on.
So the point with the Bitcoin is that every single Bitcoin is tracked.
So if someone claims to have another Bitcoin, you can go back and check the
public ledger and say this Bitcoin has appeared out of nowhere.
It is not a legit Bitcoin.
Yeah.
So, and exactly.
And so you can, if you try to say, hey, Reese gave me a thousand Bitcoin.
That's not, you essentially need my private key in order to sign the
transaction in order to say that that happened.
And you don't have my private key.
So it's impossible to make the claim that Reese gave me a bunch of Bitcoin.
So there's an unbreakable chain tracking the life of every Bitcoin,
which is how we can actually make them scarce.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
And then that's why, and it exists in kind of in this in between zone,
not in a data silo at like Google or Facebook or a bank or whatever,
but exists on the blockchain visible for anybody to see.
Now, on the blockchain, when you say that there's no one central server
anywhere that has all this information, right?
Where is the information stored?
It's duplicated across all of the network.
So my computer, for example, has another, another blockchain on it called Ethereum.
And I have the, I'm running a full node for Ethereum.
So that means I have the full list of transactions over time.
And it's however many gigabytes and it exists on my computer and also exists
on 25,000 other computers around the world.
And so, yeah, it's not just one place.
So people who are into the scene and want to be a part of it somehow,
put a program on their computer and then that keeps the entire record on their computer.
Pretty much.
And you don't have to be running a full node and there's like not that much of a reason to.
There's a lot of ways, more consumer friendly ways to kind of access the blockchain
without needing to have a full history of it.
But yeah, you can if you want to run the full node.
And if you want to, you can take your computer and turn it into a miner as well
and just start to try to solve these mathematical proofs in order or mathematical
hard problems to get Bitcoin or Ethereum or would have you as well.
So what's the block part of blockchain?
So the block is just the transact.
So it's just like it's the list of those transactions.
So it's transaction, transaction, transaction, a bunch of those together,
get put into one block and then the chain of those blocks is the blockchain.
And for every block essentially that goes, I guess, added to the chain,
there's a reward given to the miner that solved the cryptographic problem
to kind of check the safety of that.
So let's unpack and pack that briefly from what I heard.
If I want to send you a Bitcoin, we go ahead, we make that request,
we exchange our keys and then someone has to run a bunch of calculations on it
to what verify that we wanted to make the transaction.
Yeah, so this and I don't have a perfect knowledge about this,
but essentially the way that I understand it is that transaction from any ash to
Reese, we essentially submit that transaction to the network.
And then the network says, ooh, I'm going to put this transaction onto the next block
and then a bunch of those together, go on to that block.
And then when they essentially take the list, and this is where I'm not exactly sure,
but what they do is they essentially take the kind of a bunch of those transactions
as inputs and then do this like essentially what I understand is like a reverse RSA solve,
which means that they're essentially solving a hard problem.
And that hard problem is it's kind of a two only a one way problem.
So what I mean by that is if you take two big prime,
or if you take one big number and you're trying to determine what two primes
multiplied together to equal that big number, that's hard to find out.
You can't just say like, oh, this like, you know, really long digit number.
It's definitely these two primes.
That's hard.
And so unless you have a time turner, which we might.
And so but so it's a hard problem to solve.
So it takes a lot of just like brute force in order to solve it.
But once you solve it, the rest of the network can easily check and go up.
Definitely, you got that.
And so they use that with these things called nonsense, which are like leading zeros.
And so there's there's kind of some deeper, more cryptographic mathematical things
that I personally don't totally understand.
But the key is that it is a one way solvable problem, hard to solve, easy to check, essentially.
OK, so once someone has run through this this process of finding the number that matches,
they submit that to the network.
It is verified.
And then that goes officially onto the end of the chain.
As the new state of the network.
Yeah, exactly. OK.
And that how much effort does it take to find one of those?
Lots. So for a given day.
So the amount of electrical power that's used to you essentially can imagine
bitcoins as like a representation of electricity.
So you essentially go to a place, whether it's in China or America,
or like, oh, great hydroelectric power here, we're going to take this electricity.
It's really cheap.
Essentially build a sort of farm there of Bitcoin farmers, turn that electricity
into bitcoins and the amount of electricity that is spent is equal
to the country of Denmark right now, I believe.
And so this is this.
This is called what we're talking about right now is called proof of work,
where people are proving that they've spent their computer time working on this problem.
And people are sad about how much electricity is being used.
So there are different versions of consensus algorithms that people are
excited to use in the future that will use less electricity.
These things are like proof of stake or delegated proof of stake and things like
that that are going to be less electricity heavy.
I know that I've tried to buy things with Bitcoin before where it took
like more than an hour for the transaction to go through, because I guess
there was just so much traffic and each transaction took an amount of time
slash electricity to solve that there just wasn't enough to clear them quickly.
Yeah, exactly.
Pain. Any any questions so far?
Um, no, I'm kind of just, you know, following.
I I'm not sure if this is the point to segue into this, but I just sold
my Bitcoin last or what Sunday.
So I bought what, 0.04 or 0.04 bitcoins?
I had bought like a hundred bucks worth.
And I bought it, I don't know, in mid June when it was climbing.
And then it climbed for like another two hours and plummeted for three months.
And I finally sold it.
I bought about a hundred bucks and then I sold it for 181 in what four months
turn around. OK, yeah.
So I was feeling pretty good about that.
That is a huge return.
I'll say.
But I mean, I sold Bitcoin.
That's like a sin, right?
But you should have.
But I'm thinking like, how long is it going to stay above for a grand?
Could be forever.
Could be that other things will take off.
I still have my Ethereum and Litecoin. Cool.
Yeah. So my friend keeps asking me, why do people give money for Bitcoin?
Oh, wait, I have a really quick question.
Yeah. Was I stupid in selling?
I should have waited till after this conversation to sell.
It depends. So I was up.
I'm going to blame you. Yeah, exactly.
Exactly. So first off, everybody who's in this space is pretty hilarious.
Everybody says who's in the Bitcoin, who's in the Bitcoin blockchain space,
says, hey, I have some advice here, but remember, this is not financial advice.
I actually should say that.
I think that you can essentially it's a kind of a bimodal distribution
for what this could look like going forward.
Bitcoin could either be the biggest thing that's ever happened and be worth,
you know, millions of like each single Bitcoin.
There's only 21 million of them ever.
And if it's the main store of value in the world going forward
is the main way to do remittances across, you know, countries or what have you,
then it's going to be really expensive, you know, as more and more people get into it.
And so you sold it for 4,000.
If it's worth a million in 10 years, you're going to be a little bit sad.
So that's one version of reality.
The other version when Bitcoin hit $80 and I was like,
there's no way it's worth $80 and it crashed down to 40.
And I was like, I told you, yeah.
And then I waited to buy until it was like three and a half thousand.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. And there is a version of it where it equals zero, though,
whether it's if, you know, there's Bitcoin and Bitcoin cash,
and then maybe it'd be this third kind of Bitcoin.
If there are better ways to do remittances or if a store of value
just becomes one of the ones that has more utility, like Ethereum or what have you,
then maybe your Bitcoin goes to zero and you wish you would have,
and you kept it up until 20,000 and then you wish you were sold it,
but then it went to zero.
So I think I don't blame you, but I think the one way that I do think about it is
the tokens that you hold kind of make you pay attention to that space.
And so if you are not that interested in the Bitcoin space,
then I feel like not holding makes sense.
And if you're more interested in Ethereum or Litecoin,
I feel like it makes sense to hold those.
I'm more interested in the ones that coin-based,
the super user-friendly, easy app that lets me buy these things.
So I mean, I'm not wedded to any of these current these cryptocurrencies.
It's more just like, well, they were all easy.
And I was like, oh, I've made almost, you know,
at one point it was over 200 bucks than what I had in my Bitcoin wallet.
And so that went down a little bit, then went back up and like, all right,
well, it's on its way back up.
I'm going to go ahead and just cash out now.
But yeah, you're right.
It could turn into, you know, a big thing down the road.
I'm kind of interested as to what other sorts of things
that might be used for, and maybe we should get into that later.
You know what?
I'm going to shelve that until later for, for why I'm holding on to my Bitcoin.
Like it's, it might not just be money, but the thing my friend keeps bringing up
is like, I don't understand why I'm giving money for this,
that there's a bunch of people going through hard math equations on their computer.
Why am I giving the money?
And ultimately what it was is a guy or a group of guys who said,
hey, we're going to just make this ledger on the internet.
Here's our coin.
Give us money for it.
Like, why am I giving the money for this?
What is just basically a ledger?
What, what does this makes no sense to me?
Is your question, why do the miners get the like Bitcoin as I think his
ultimate question is like, what is, what is the value here?
The, the he's like, what stops me from just going out and making a coin of my own
and saying, hey, come give me money for my coin.
Yeah.
So, so the value comes from the pure scarcity of it.
The other part of it is the utility value.
So there's no real scarcity if anyone can make their own coin version.
Totally.
So that's why, so that gets into the third point around stories that people tell.
And like, there's this big Bitcoin and it's just like the same stories
that we've told around various kinds of currency in the past, whether it was
shells or gold or fiat currency or what have you is, hey, this thing has value
because there are enough people that believe it has value.
That is, so that is something to expect going forward, especially for something
like Bitcoin that, so, so certain things do have this utility value where you can
spend the currency itself.
So for example, with Ethereum, you can spend the currency itself to run these
like smart contracts to essentially run computation on this world computer.
Let's get to that in a few minutes.
Yeah.
Well, we won't get to that or like basic attention token is similar
where you can spend it for utility value.
But if you just deny the utility value, then you can imagine this system
as one that allows people to start creating their own currencies.
Yeah.
So whether it's Bitcoin or like, I kind of have my own Reese coin
through this like Patreon site.
And because of kind of the early adopter incentive structure where if you get
in at the beginning of one of these, then that's better.
So people, as a result of that, people kind of expect there to be many different
kinds of these things going forward.
It's like, hey, I didn't get early enough into Bitcoin.
Let's me and a bunch of other people create Bitcoin too.
We'll all get in at the beginning and then the people who are in later
have to pay more than we got in the beginning.
So that's sweet.
I think that is his main objection.
Like I point out that Bitcoin is just like any other fiat currency.
Like the actual dollar is not worth shit in terms of the materials.
Like what are you going to do with a little slip of paper?
But it's you know that with that dollar, you can exchange it for one
dollar's worth of goods or services.
And so I tell him, you know, a Bitcoin is the same way.
You know that if you paid $50 for a Bitcoin, you can get about $50 back by
giving it to someone else and change for money or exchange for, you know,
drugs or whatever it is that you want to buy with it.
So, you know, it's, it's, it's a store of value more or less.
And, and his point is like you said that I don't, it seems like a Ponzi scheme,
that you get in early, the price gets pumped way up.
And then what's to stop everyone from just cashing out and abandoning it.
Totally.
And I think we'll see some of those things happening and that's already
happening within the space and various other ways.
And for Bitcoin now it does have these, we're used to like in Western countries
or in America, we have a stable government with a stable US dollar.
But like Venezuela buys it has a lot of Bitcoin, you know, because they,
that's a stable form of currency for them.
And in fact, a currency that goes up or for people who are like doing remittances
from where you're going, you know, from Nepal, like lots of their GDP comes
from people in Nepal going to work in the oil fields in the Middle East
and then sending that money back to Nepal.
And right now you go up from Saudi Arabia, up to the Saudi Arabian Bank
across the Nepali Bank down back into Rupees and to Nepal.
And that is, it requires, you know, 10 days and a lot of transaction fees.
And if you can do that with Bitcoin instead, then people are excited by that.
And we'll actually use it for that pure kind of cross-functional or cross-global
utility value as well.
I've heard one of the main advantages that people like about the Bitcoin
is that it does remove the major institutions, the banks and the governments
from the chain.
Yeah, that's what people are excited about.
It also kind of makes it worrisome because I, the big Bitcoin crash
that happened a few weeks ago happened after China announced that basically
Bitcoin is not going to be legal in China.
What is all that about?
That is a, so China, so this is going to be, this is part of a macro trend
that's happening within blockchain and Bitcoin, which is things that have
been existing centralized power structures of trust, whether those are banks
or governments are kind of being dissolved into the network through
things like Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
And that is going to be sad for the current people in power, whether
that's banks or with Jamie Dimon saying, Hey, Bitcoin is a scam.
So whether it's banks or governments like China.
So that is definitely going to happen for the Chinese one specifically.
I don't know that much about it, but I do know that they are planning on
reopening both Bitcoin and the ability to do these token sales and ICOs.
But China, more than other places, has kind of a top down kind of government
controlled system.
And so they were one of the more aggressive ones and kind of being more
regulatory around it while things like America and between things like
Singapore or Switzerland are kind of more free market and are places
where these things live.
So China is basically saying that any legitimate business that tries to
accept Bitcoin is going to get shut down by them.
Yeah, that if you try to pay for your groceries with Bitcoin and the grocery
store accepts, then some government regulator is going to come in there
and find them or jail them or something.
Yeah.
And I don't know.
So it'll be fascinating to see what China does with Bitcoin going forward
because the strategy that they used with the essentially the internet and
social media companies, which was keep them out from China with censorship
focus strategies and say, you can't be in here, Google, you can't be in here,
Facebook, they just banned WeChat actually or not WeChat, but what's
that and by banning them that allowed for the Chinese specific ones,
whether that's WeChat or Taobao or Baidu, which are all Chinese versions of
the big media companies and big internet companies, those ones that
allowed them to flourish in China.
And so we'll see what China does with something like Bitcoin and other
cryptocurrencies because they'll want to probably employ a similar strategy,
but it may not work because collaboration is so incentivized and
because you can't difficult to stop things like Bitcoin or what have you.
So I don't know exactly what's going to happen going forward.
It's definitely in uncertain territory.
Now people have heard of people like selling their mining equipment and
stuff, and then we'll see what it looks like in a week and in a month.
But I would definitely expect China to come out and they've said that they
plan on coming out with new regulations around Bitcoin and other crypto.
Can we get a quick explanation for people who don't know what mining
equipment is because that sounds on the surface, a ridiculous thing to say about
it, digital currency.
Totally.
And mine equipment, it should really be called like transaction workers or
something like that.
Computer transaction workers or verifiers, validators.
Yeah, so it's just a bunch of hardware, kind of like I talked about earlier,
where you have places where electricity is really cheap.
You'll build a bunch of computers there, essentially, and have those computers.
You kind of give them GPUs, really advanced like ASIC GPUs, and then you
tell them, hey, solve these hard problems that we talked about earlier and get
some Bitcoin, and then you just have these big mining operations where they're
quote unquote, mining the Bitcoin.
And what mining means is just solving the hard cryptographic problems and
getting Bitcoin in return.
So in the real world, I have a problem with Bitcoin in the same way that I have
a problem when I try to spend gold or silver, as the libertarians wish I would,
in that no one accepts my slips of gold, nor do they accept my Bitcoin in the
real world.
What is this ever going to change?
The hope is that it will change.
So some of these B to C, so at a high level, we expect there to be Bitcoin,
the early adopters for Bitcoin were people who wanted to run away from
censorship and who wanted both from a like bad nation state perspective, but
also from like a drugs or illegal perspective or what have you.
And then, so those were those early adopters, the early adopters for a lot of
these other new technologies are like developers, developers that want to
build on open source platforms and stuff.
So that's where we're seeing all the early adopters stuff happening now, but
there are some consumer facing applications happening.
We expect those, those are things like Toshi, which is made by Coinbase or status.
But those kind of consumer facing applications are not, are just at the
very beginning and most people who use them won't even be aware that blockchain
is underlying them and then we'll see what it also, it looks like for people
to, for the ability to buy like in real life goods and services with Bitcoin.
It definitely is not a thing often, but there are some places that do it.
That is, that is the thing that kind of worries me because it seems the vast
majority of Bitcoin is used for illegal things.
And I have no problem with that when it comes to drugs, because I think
drugs should be legal.
So I'm like, yeah, go Bitcoin.
But then it also seems to be mainly used for paying ransoms when people are
kidnapped and really bad things like that.
And I totally understand why if all the governments look at Bitcoin and say,
this is a currency that enables kidnapping and human trafficking and other
bad things and it doesn't do anything else, we should ban it.
That's kind of a problem.
Totally, totally.
Yeah.
And I don't know what percentage of Bitcoin traffic these days.
So I, first, what percentage of Bitcoin is actually being used from a transaction
perspective and what percentage of it is actually being, is just being
exchanged by speculators.
I don't know that number.
The other number that I don't know is what percentage of Bitcoin usage is for
kind of these illegal activities and what percentage of it is actually for just
like remittances across borders or whatever.
I don't know.
I think, yeah, I don't, and I don't know what the long term situation will be with
this kind of, and people in the space will say things like, hey, you can't track
cash, you know, which we talked about earlier, which is true, you know.
Um, it's, but it's different because cash is more physical and this is digital.
So this is kind of like digital, untrackable cash.
Um, and that does have some clearly negative actors will come and have negative
ramifications.
I don't know what that looks like.
I heard with, um, things like spending habits and massive data mining, it's not
terribly difficult to tie, uh, a public key to a physical person anymore.
Yeah.
I, I've heard things of that variety as well, that you can look at the date and
say, oh, this was Reese.
He purchased those, that LSD, yeah.
Not, not necessarily as anonymous as people like to think.
But you could use Bitcoin to buy a more anonymous currency and then use that to
buy whatever nefarious thing you're looking to purchase.
Right.
I mean, so like cash isn't trackable, except it more or less lives in your
bank, which has your name on it.
And then you go in and be like, can I have $80,000, please?
Sure.
And if you withdraw more than 10 grand, they want it.
They have to, the, the, the teller fills out a piece of documentation saying this
is why you're taking that out.
Interesting.
Um, so, you know, you could get around that by keeping it all in your house all the time,
but that almost seems shadier than saying, I have 11 bitcoins.
Like if you have like, you know, a safe in your closet with, with stacks of cash,
like that's, one of those people looks more like a criminal than the other one.
Right.
Of course that's just, that's just speculation, but I don't know.
I feel, I guess I'm not sure how easy it is to track, track your, uh, public keys and
stuff, but I guess that was my thought on the, the cash versus Bitcoin, uh,
attaching to a person line of thought.
And I think that what you're, one of the, one of the things that I'm thinking about
here is this idea of self sovereignty is a big thing in the space where you say,
Hey, um, like I have ownership over my own money.
It's mine.
It's not owned by the bank.
It is my private keys that own this.
I have a written sheet of paper that gets them and I can get my Bitcoin, whatever.
There's also like self sovereign identity where you have your identity on the block
chain.
It's not owned by, it's not a social security number.
It's not owned by a Facebook idea or whatever.
It's your thing that just exists on the blockchain only you can access it.
That this idea of self sovereignty and kind of like, like libertarianism is, is
huge within the space.
And what we're seeing from people and what I'd hope to see more and more is
people themselves, it becoming the status quo for individuals to kind of like
showcase and signal that they are being good actors within the space.
So for example, there's these 16 projects just recently got together under
no regulation or anything, but said, Hey, we're creating this transparency
project within the Ethereum ecosystem to, to, to signal that we're being
transparent.
You can see our salaries.
You can see our, um, where all the money goes.
You can see all this stuff and they're kind of signaling that as a way to kind
of be like, we're good actors here.
Um, so I thought maybe we'll see that happen more in the space is it's possible
to do bad, but people will signal that they're doing good by it with transparency.
So you mentioned Ethereum, which, uh, I want to pivot to Ethereum now because
I am pretty darn excited about Ethereum.
Can you tell us why Ethereum is so cool?
And so many people are excited about it right now.
Yeah.
Um, so Ethereum is cool.
Um, and, uh, Ethereum, the way I like to imagine Ethereum is you had Bitcoin
at the beginning and people were trying to do other things with it.
They were like, Oh man, let's make this dogecoin.
And when they made the dogecoin, it was like a little bit too hard to like fork
the Bitcoin code and make the dogecoin thing.
People were also trying to like build on top of Bitcoin, but like you have to
code this really bad language to do.
And like, it wasn't working that well.
So this guy Vitalik Buterin was like, or guy slash kid, um, he's like 22 now or
something.
He was like, Hey, let's just essentially make it so that we have an abstracted
kind of turn complete computer on the blockchain that can, uh, make that so you
can decode any kind of arbitrary transaction.
So the way that I think about that is through Ethereum works through this, um,
key underlying primitive called a smart contract.
And a smart contract is just something it's essentially a peer to peer agreement
that allows you to transfer value.
So for example, with that basic attention token, um, example we gave before, that
is just a smart contract that lives on the Ethereum blockchain and says if it's
just an if then statement.
So it says if you put your, you scroll across this ad, then pay Reese one
basic attention token.
And so all these smart contracts, they are ways to essentially, um, give an
exchange value in this peer to peer way, um, on the Ethereum blockchain.
Can you, so how does that happen?
Because you said there's a turn complete computer as part of the public
ledger, what, what, how does that work?
I thought the public ledger was like a static thing.
Yeah.
So these smart contracts, um, so on the Bitcoin, so, so on the Ethereum, on the
Bitcoin blockchain, you can imagine it as just the like list of transactions
going back and forth on the Ethereum blockchain.
You can imagine it as a, you can, when you actually code a smart contract, you
put that smart contract onto the blockchain and has like an address.
So that says, okay, there's this smart contract at this address.
Um, just like I have my own address where you can send me ether or whatever.
Um, the smart contract is just like that.
But instead of sending me through, you can send the smart contract ether.
Um, and the smart contract is essentially like, you know, it's just, it's, so it's
on the blockchain, you can see the code essentially in this Ethereum, um, code.
And then you can run it in this kind of Ethereum virtual machine.
Um, so it's a way to essentially, you have, in addition to sending and receiving
in addition to the blockchain, having, um, transaction notes, Reese to X, Reese to
Y, it also has, there's a smart contract at this address.
And if you want to run the smart contract, you can look at the rules of that
smart contract and interact with it in various ways, send it some basic
attention token and get some people's attention or, um, there are these things
called distributed autonomous organizations or DAOs where it's essentially
a smart contract that you essentially can vote with like some tokens and say,
Hey, we want to vote on where to put this.
There's some money on this smart contract.
Let's allocate that money to a good thing.
Where should we do it?
And we all vote essentially in that smart contract takes those votes as input
and then as output sends that money somewhere.
So that's what a smart contract is.
So is each, I'm trying to figure out exactly how this, uh, Turing machine works.
So I, I assuming that the code is not run on an individual people's computers.
Is it that each transaction hash is another clock tick on the computer?
Or what, what's happening?
The way, so I don't know the full deep level, the way that I understand it is
there is, um, that in order to, you essentially it's, so you have your code,
um, and that code is, you know, if statements or what have you, and you can
essentially say, um, so, so what you need to do is you say, Hey, I want to do this
thing.
I want to add this to the list of running this smart con or the weights or I
would say this is running the smart contract should be added to the next block.
I believe.
And so you say, okay, not only did we send money to X and recent money to Y, but
he also ran this smart contract.
That's what he's claiming.
And then when that happens, running that smart contract, um, you essentially,
you need to, um, do the computations within that.
And you essentially need to pay a little bit of ether, um, in what's called
gas, which is like a small little bits of ether to run that code.
Um, and so, yeah, I believe that that's how it's run and saying, Hey,
this smart contract was run.
And then the, the, the computers and network run it, spending some gas to do so.
Okay.
And then the output is put into the next block.
Yeah, exactly.
Neat.
Okay.
And, and what, so basically all that computing power that was being used just
for hashes is now also being used, uh, to run small little programs as well.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And what, what is so great about that?
It's great because it is a, um, like why the term smart contract?
Yeah.
So you, it is okay to imagine as a smart as an actual contract.
It's okay to imagine as like an agreement between people.
Um, and it's nice because you can start to define for any kind of peer to peer
agreement.
Um, you can say, Hey, let's create a new version of this peer to peer agreement.
We can code it up very quickly, like basic attention token or whatever.
We can create this new system essentially.
Um, and with that new system, it can be run very easily in this kind of
trustless way this smart contracts exist and, and people can run, uh, can start
to run things in a peer to peer way, which was not really possible before running.
You'd always have to have a trusted third party in case something went wrong or in
case your friends, you know, spend, you know, eat all your Cheetos or whatever.
Um, so that's the idea.
And we're just now seeing a lot of these kind of, um, the killer apps of, um,
smart contracts.
The first one that we've seen is the ICO, um, which is an initial coin offering.
And what that is, is you essentially tell your friends, you say,
Hey people, what if like a good example, this is this thing called file coins.
You say, Hey, what if we made, um, what if you could like buy and sell, um, in
this peer to peer way, like, you know, storage on everybody else's computers.
And everybody's like, yeah, it seems like a good idea.
You write a blog post about it, gets a bunch of upvotes.
So then you write a white paper, which is like a detailed, um, computer science
way of formalizing the protocol and saying, here's how it's going to work.
Here's how the incentives are going to work.
So you, you say that and you write the white paper and people are like, oh,
this is sweet.
You say, okay, cool.
Everybody seems into this network.
Um, you say, great.
I'm going to put a smart contract on the blockchain.
I'm going to run an ICO or put this ICO smart contract on the blockchain that
says if you give it money, if you give it ETH or Bitcoin or whatever, then you
get in return, you get some file coin, um, because, and people will want to do
that because they will then want to use that file coin later within the network.
They'll say, Hey, I'm going to pay some money for the file coin now.
And then later I'll be able to use that file coin within the network.
Um, or they could just be speculating and say, Hey, I'm going to spend some money
here, get some file coin return and then sell the file coin later.
But it's essentially a way to kind of jumpstart a new network, um, and get a
bunch of aligned early adopters, you essentially aligned a bunch of incentives,
the incentives of speculators and early adopters and the employees, um, all
around this new network.
So that's kind of one of the first killer apps we've seen, uh, with smart
contracts is the ICO.
It seems very much eating its own tail kind of thing though.
We have a, a coin contract that's good for making more coins.
I mean, definitely what, what, what can you actually do on it?
Cause I imagine you can't store a lot of data on the, on the.
No, yeah, you can't, you cannot.
Yeah.
You don't want to store very much data on the ledger.
There is this, um, the way that a lot of people store data in the space is
this thing called IPFS, which is the interplanetary file system, which is a
way to kind of have a cool name, a way to essentially store data across many
different, um, and it kind of this distributed way, not in like Amazon S3
or whatever.
Um, so yeah, I mean, if for the ability to do ICOs is to just the ability to
get more new kinds of tokens and to jumpstart networks.
And that is powerful, um, for like a new kind of for breaking down the
defensibility of networks, but like you say, those people should only get into
these ICOs if they think that the token that they get in return will actually
have utility value.
So you'll be able to use that basic attention token to buy attention or you'll
be able to use the file coin to, um, get storage on people's computers.
Um, so that, those are the, those kind of this, I mean, Ethereum came out
essentially in 2015.
Um, there've been a bunch of ICOs this year in 2017.
People, like there's, there's other projects happening a little bit
earlier than that as well, but people expect to see some of these tokens.
It's kind of a make or break time in these next couple of years where you say,
okay, is the promise of this network, which is these awesome distributed basic
attention or awesome distributed file coin network, will that actually get
built out and then will these tokens be used in this great new network?
Um, we'll see if that happens.
I, I have covered basically most of the things I want to know about ground
based knowledge there, you things you want to know.
That's all the like pre-req knowledge.
I think that anything that I would have asked about.
So there was a bit of news making rounds recently, uh, recently, isn't like
the last two weeks from the time of recording.
What was it?
Showtime's website was, uh, using, uh, through the browser, uh, using viewers,
computers to mine Bitcoin, not dissimilar to how Pirate Bay was doing it.
And so my thoughts were like, all right, Pirate Bay, I'm sailing with pirates.
I kind of suspect that, you know, I kind of like understand what I'm getting into.
You know, if you guys want to, they were, well, what did, what did Pirate Bay say?
They were doing, uh, like piloting some tasks or something.
Like, just see if it was possible.
All right, that was it.
We got discovered.
So yeah, we were just seeing if that would work.
All right, bye.
Um, Showtime though, you know, you're not on there to steal stuff.
You're on there, you're paying to view stuff on the website.
And hey, while you're here, we're going to go ahead and use your browsers.
So I was curious, A, if you knew much of like the technical implementation of
how they did that, and if you had any thoughts or responses.
Yeah.
So I, the other one I heard about for that was FC Barcelona, the soccer team was
also doing that.
Um, and I think that it was just like, I'm not sure for Showtime's example, when
I was talking to someone about the Barcelona example, it sounded like it
was just kind of a rogue dev who was kind of trying to be funny.
It was just like, let's just inject this code in here.
You know, it's been the user CPU cycles on mining some Bitcoin.
Um, and, uh, yeah, so I think that I, so I, yeah, I guess it's happening.
I don't know.
So whenever my computer is running slow, it's cause someone is hacking my, uh,
my cycles to mine coin for them.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Cause those bastards.
Um, when your computer is running slow, it's almost always your browser.
If it's only one window that, you know, is slowing things down, then yeah,
keep an eye on it.
Probably Bitcoin.
Yeah.
I don't know what they're going to do.
I think that that's an interesting thing.
And it's in, in theory, that is leveraging the thing that we want to be
happening generally, which is take any kind of liquidity in the world, whether
that's liquidity of, um, CPU cycles.
It's like, Hey, you're not using them.
So like, why not mine some Bitcoin?
You know, well, also cause I'm paying for the electricity.
Oh, totally.
Well, I think, I think that you should get the value back, you know, but I
think there is this, this is kind of the beautiful world that some people in the
blockchain world say is like, let's take any kind of liquidity and use that
liquidity to then transfer it into some other to use that to get some kind of
scarce thing.
So this is an example of that.
There's also these things called prediction markets where you can kind of
take, um, the liquidity knowledge of the world, kind of matching that
liquidity with the capital.
So you, so essentially reducing the salt about reducing the friction for things.
Um, and so reducing the friction for anybody to say, Hey, I think I know
something about this future market here.
I'm going to match my knowledge with my capital here.
Um, and so yeah, that's, yeah.
So hopefully it's a matching liquidity thing.
I don't, I hope that less injection code injection things are happening
going forward, but I don't really know.
So you are particularly excited about, uh, cryptocurrencies because of something
with EA, by EA, we meant effective altruism.
We had a episode or two on that in the past.
How, how do these two things, uh, intertwine how they run it?
That's a good question.
And I actually, I was taking some, uh, I'm writing an article right now for
the effective altruist forum, uh, about this.
Cause, cause right now you have like 80,000 hours has a cause selection list.
Um, and it says, Hey, they essentially base it off of, um, how neglected the
problem is and then how impactful it is and then how tractable it is.
So how solvable it is.
Um, and right now something like artificial, like aligning AI alignment or AI
safety is, you know, top on their list and saying, Hey, we should really do this.
Um, and there are other things up there as well, but Bitcoin and blockchain and
all that is not at all in the radar really it seems.
Um, and I think it should be, um, so yes, I'm into it.
And I have some notes here about why I think it's true.
Um, I'll say them at a high level and then we can dive into them in a second.
Um, the first two, and I want you guys to kind of push back on this from
like a rationalist, you know, like, I'll snap or be tested or tested or not.
Does not really know this is, this is rough.
I guess it's another way to say this.
So I think that there's four big points.
Um, the first two points are about how this blockchain technology, people talk
about it as like a new wave of the internet and like, um, and I think that
just in general, if effective altruism could get in on new technology at the
beginning, like if you injected effective altruism into the beginning of the
industrial revolution, maybe we'd have less climate chains around, or if you
injected effective altruism into the beginning of like AI, you know, in those
kinds of things, then maybe we'd be less far behind on like the AI alignment
problem or have you, um,
What do you mean by injected effective altruism into those things?
I think what I mean by that is injecting a essentially injecting a mindset,
which is, um, quantitatively based around all human lot, around outcomes,
utilitarianism and having human lives all being treated as equal.
Um, and saying, Hey, right now, instead of the profit motives of the companies
that are pushing it forward, being the primary determiners of what happens
within this new, with this new technology, instead, we should also be
thinking from an EA perspective around, um, how this technology will impact
society.
Um, how, how it impacts human flourishing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Did you want us to push back after you've listed all four points or when they
come up?
Yeah, that's a good question.
If you have pushed back right now, push.
Yeah, push.
Let's push.
I'll just say, like, given like the limited resource of effective altruists
and the speculation involved of like which, which fields do you want to jump
into and push our, you know, EA speculators into, I guess I need to hear
the rest of the argument because like that sounds like there could be a lot
of wasted effort there, but it's kind of like with everything, it could pay off,
right?
Yeah.
There could be a lot of wasted effort investing in Bitcoin.
And yeah, boom, five years later.
So yeah,
I agree with that though.
I mean, I think in that, this is a, this would be, this is something that the
EA community is talking about generally, which is these, um, essentially a
hits-based business, which is what EA has traditionally not been able to do
because every little person mattered.
Um, but with, you see things like why Combinator won't have you in the startup
world is all about hits.
Um, and so EA is getting more into hits-based investing.
And that's what they're doing with like their EA grants program.
That's what open philanthropy project is doing.
And so this would definitely be a hits-based investing thing where you
essentially bring effective altruist mindsets into the RNA or into biotechnology,
into blockchain and cryptocurrencies.
And then maybe they, they wouldn't have had any effect or maybe the effect
would have already happened or what have you, you know, um, but maybe in some
cases it was good to have those couple people there, um, from that kind of
hits perspective.
So that's, that's the macro point here.
And this, this point, as, as I said, is not just applicable to blockchain.
I think that this is true generally.
This is just like, Hey, we should have do gooders with any new technology, essentially.
Yeah.
Cool.
So that's, that's point one.
That's kind of at the macro level.
Um, and then, and that one's really based off of how much you believe that the
technology will have a big societal impact.
If you think it's a small technology, then we might not need, it doesn't have
high expected value.
Um, the second one here is again, um, kind of a little bit abstracted away from
blockchain and cryptocurrencies, um, but is about kind of so, so people talk
about blockchain as a new way to kind of coordinate people and to motivate people.
Um, and what they mean by that is like, um, so there is traditionally, you've
had things like the state or the market or the, you know, the firm.
Um, and then up and coming, these are things like the network, things like Airbnb
and Facebook and what have you, these are ways to kind of coordinate people
around things and then kind of motivate them and incentivize them to do stuff.
Um, and blockchain is another, seems like a new way to do this, where you
kind of coordinate people around a given protocol.
You say, Hey, let's all come together.
Here's how the protocols can work.
It's going to be a basic attention token, blah, blah, blah.
Um, and you start to motivate people with tokens there.
So this is the macro point here is that if there is a new kind of operating
system or new kind of kind of coordinating, motivating organizational structure,
that, um, effective altruism should be, uh, part of shaping what that
structure looks like.
I don't think it, it doesn't strike me as a very new way to do things though,
because basically it's money, like people like tokens, because then they can
exchange them for goods and services and just straight up currency in whatever
country they reside in.
So, I mean, there's nothing that new about paying people, right?
I think there's not, so the way I like to think about this is money thus far has
been kind of one dimensional.
If I have money in my pockets, like it's a US dollar, whether it's one or a thousand,
whether I got it for, um, hurting somebody, or if I got it for like saving
the world, it doesn't really matter.
It's just like, it's kind of a one dimensional object.
You can imagine cryptocurrencies and all these different kinds of cryptocurrencies
as kind of indimensional money where you're able to see, um, oh, wow, this
person has some do good coin or this person has some basic attention tokens.
You can kind of see in an indimensional way how, uh, like what they are incentivized
for, what they're, what they're looking into, where they got their money, those
kinds of things.
So this doesn't, this, this answers, I think your point about, um, this as a new
kind of money and what this new kind of money looks like, this doesn't answer
any pushback around it as a new coordination and motivation system.
It's definitely still incentives, but you could incentivize people.
I guess it kind of, the way I like to think about it is kind of like it
democratizes new incentive structures.
So you can say, Hey, I'm going to make this smart contract and this new smart
contract, it's going to have this incentive structure built in where if you
want to get some of these tokens, you have to do this kind of thing.
Um, and in the past, it was probably more, it was more difficult to do that,
especially on the internet.
Um, but now you can essentially create these new incentive structures in a more
easy way with low costs, low refriction to kind of create new incentive structures.
I did read a interesting, very short story about a thing called nice, nice coin
where, uh, people would get nice coin basically for being nice.
And the main, uh, benefit of having a bunch of nice coin is that people liked
you and wanted to be around you.
They're like, Oh, this guy has a lot of nice coin.
He might be a pretty cool person.
Whereas if someone had almost no nice coin, they'd be like, Oh, don't take that
guy. He's probably a jerk.
I saw that episode of black mirror.
Not exactly, but they did one like that kind of like with, uh, it was like a
hybrid between that if people had Yelp reviews out of five stars and Facebook.
Yeah.
Except like it was literally everywhere.
Like, yeah, there's little attachments in your eyeballs.
Okay.
Um, so that didn't work out well, but nothing works out well in black mirror.
That was a good episode.
And I do, I do in general expect something like that to happen in the space is
people talk about reputation a lot because if you can track all the things
and you can see what all the people have been doing, well, we're going to have
some intense reputation systems and there's like this new Chinese social
credit system that's being pushed by.
So like, I think the problem with number based reputations is that they are
stupid that anyone can just ignore a number and be like, you know what,
whatever I like Bob, he came to my house and helped me chop wood that one time.
And his number can be zero, but that's probably because those social justice
warriors called him a, I don't know, Nazi or whatever.
And I'm just going to ignore the number.
There's always have the actual reputation reputation.
Well, and, you know, also consider that you can let someone else take
the reputational hit for you.
You know, like if, if, uh, if say I wanted to buy drugs online with Bitcoin,
but I wanted to be tracked, I'm going to run that risk.
I could just give like paper money to my friend who has Bitcoin and be like,
Hey, you want to buy some drugs for me?
And then that way it's on their history and not mine.
Right?
It's like the cash doesn't come with a receipt on it, right?
But your friend still knows about your reputation, what you did,
cause you did it with them, but they might tell some, their friends, you
know, there's, but this is the actual reputation means, right?
What people think of you because of their interactions with you.
I guess I was looking at like the kind of thing that like,
I were to pull you up on a website and be like, oh,
Enya has a 3.3 out of five.
And that's because he did these things.
I also tend to not trust websites anymore for those sorts of things.
If I see a bunch of people piling on someone, it happened.
I don't know, not too long ago in the writing community where someone just
like got everyone piled on him.
And I was like, well, maybe he did something shitty, but I don't know him.
I ain't going to judge him until I meet him myself.
Cause I know how the internet works.
I see someone making a really shitty joke about, about AIDS in Africa.
And then they lose their job a few hours later.
And I mean, yeah, you shouldn't have made the shitty joke, but it's, I just, I
don't, I don't trust, I don't trust the internet to give me decent ideas of
people, of who people are anymore.
Like if the internet someone says someone's reputation should be really
shitty, I'm going to be like, I'm going to make that decision for myself.
I am a big fan of Mr.
Zuber and I don't really like Mr.
I don't know.
Not Zuber.
Yeah, exactly.
I think it might like just to, you know, with the hypothetical though, it could
be less about like who you're going to be friends with or who you're going to
hire or who you're going to like invite into your house.
But maybe who you're going to hire for your company, right?
You get 200 applicants.
That score might come into play, right?
Cause you have, or 2,000 entirely on how much society like values that score.
If the majority of people do value that score and say that you're a bad company,
if you hire someone with anyone less than a three rating, then yeah, that
would probably affect my decision.
But if I can convince all of society that the score means nothing, then it
won't matter, you know, that's what I'm going for right now.
I'm trying to convince people that these numbers are stupid.
So I dislike your coin ideas.
I mean, well, it's going to happen.
If it's inevitable, you can dislike it, but it won't be part of the future.
That's true.
I can dislike communism, but it's still there.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Yes.
Exactly.
One, so finishing up this point, I do, cause I decided I do want to get a little bit of
pushback.
So there's another side of it, which is this, it's this new coordination system.
And in theory, and a new organization structure, it's also very aligned with
like these new coordination, these new like networked human organism, like
collective intelligence things that are happening.
There's some really interesting, like peer funding stuff happening
within the EA community.
And there's also, there's a pure funding, pure funding is when one person
pays another person to do something instead of an organization paying.
So it's essentially what I do with my Patreon as well.
Patreon is a subscription kickstarter.
So I have my Patreon.
It's online, patreon.com slash Rhys Lenmark.
And you go and go there and you can pay me money per month to do my thing, to
create a humanist blockchain future.
And, and so it's not a company that's paying me money and I'm not being
sponsored or whatever.
It's, it's like a person, a peer to peer kind of person way to sponsor people.
So that's happening generally, but it's also happening in some interesting
ways within the EA community specifically, which is cool.
And it's happening in other things as well.
And the, and the hope also is that another big macro trend that people are
talking about is this idea called a teal organization.
Have you guys heard of like a holocracy before?
It's like a really flat organizational structure.
So like Zappos does this and it's like no managers, you know, it's like really
flat kind of very bottom up and that people in space talk about how like tech
informed society and society also informs the tech.
And so like the blockchain, this is kind of Conway's law, which states that
essentially the code that you create will be representative of your organization
and your organization will be representative of the code that you create.
Um, and so because blockchains are so kind of distributed, decentralized, what
have you kind of bottom up, there are these new organizations that are coming
around in this thing called teal and teal.
That's like the color teal, um, which is where you kind of imagine the organ,
the organization as a organism.
So instead of like in the past, you know, there's this thing called, you know,
they say orange, they color code them in this funny way, but orange is like, um,
the organization as a machine, their inputs and their outputs.
And that's kind of what we've done for a lot of the last hundred years or whatever.
Um, and then recently in the new kind of Silicon Valley style, it's like,
Hey, we're into green, which is like the organization is family, like very welcome
to the Slack family, welcome to this family.
Um, and so people are pushing that that's, that's what has been and now what
people are expecting and see is like the new frontier for this is kind of these
new teal organizations.
Um, so this is me saying that this is blockchain is essentially equal.
It's like the technological equal to these teal organizations and that this
all is part of this macro trend towards this stuff, this thing called platform
cooperativism and this kind of new concept of how people, one of the new
ways that people can organize and motivate themselves.
And if there is a new way for people to organize and motivate themselves, then
there should be a little bit of EA within it.
So is there like, uh, like Bayesian conspiracy coin where if we need some
accounting done, we're like, you will get Bayesian coin for doing our accounting.
And then when we put on a show, we get Bayesian coin for time on mic or stuff
like that is just like, you need something done.
You offer Bayesian coin to anyone who can do it.
Are you, yeah, are you saying like, is that like how teal works?
Is that teal organization?
Oh, so how do you coordinate humans through teal?
Yeah.
So there are three main ways to coordinate humans through teal.
Um, the first is like self management.
Um, and that's essentially the, uh, idea that people define their own goals.
They define their own, um, metrics and they, and then they can become part of
these kinds of like, like, um, organizations that call circles.
These are kind of like little groups, essentially.
So like a team of teams kind of thing where you become part of a circle and
you allocate, you know, 30% of your time to the diversity circle and you allocate
50% of your time to the effective, ultra circle or whatever.
Um, so it's kind of this bottom up people defining their own roles and then
becoming opt in into certain kind of circles.
Um, that's one part of it is a self self management piece.
What if everybody wants to be like the, uh, actor circle and no one wants to be
the guy holding the boom mic circle?
Totally, totally.
Well, everybody, there will be if the organization wants to, the organization
will still have these kind of bottom up, um, like the organization needs to exist
as a thing.
And so if there's a bunch of people that want to be the actors and there's no
one holding the boom mic, then the organization will cease to exist.
And so in a kind of a peer to peer kind of circle by circle way, people will
determine, okay, everybody needs to spend 20% of their time holding the boom
mic or whatever that looks like.
Um, so it's kind of instead of a top down, like, this is the way things are
going to happen.
You will be judged on your results and here's what your job is going to be.
And everybody's kind of specialized.
It's like, it's kind of bottom up peer to peer, uh, way to determine how work gets
done.
That sounds like it would be a thing that doesn't work.
Totally, totally, totally, totally, totally.
Just, just for my interaction with other humans.
Step, you said there are three ways of managing people in a teal environment.
And first one is they manage themselves.
Oh, that is hilarious.
And the other two are just nothing.
Yeah, it is true that, um, there are, there are some good, um, success
examples of this, um, within non-blockchain space.
There's this, uh, great nursing organization that, uh, it used to be,
this is in, I believe the Netherlands.
It used to be hyper specialized.
Everybody had their own little roles.
Everybody was timed on all the specific things.
This new company came around that was tealy and it was very community based
instead of having a specific accountant and specific, whatever.
You had these small teams or these community based nurses, uh, you know,
10 to 12 nurses who were, uh, you know, responsible for their
county or their community.
And, um, every, all the metrics went up.
Um, they've experienced ridiculous growth.
They have, um, they, they're all these sub-communities.
Everybody's happier.
That is the care that they're giving is better.
Um, and, and there's only, there are these coaches that exist one level above,
which like work with like 50 or so of these given communities.
And that's kind of what the hierarchy looked like.
It's essentially a two depth hierarchy or three depth hierarchy.
Um, remember the name or can you send us a link afterwards?
Yeah.
It's, it's part of this book called reinventing organizations.
Um, and that's what there's, they have a bunch of case studies in there.
And there's a specific company within the blockchain space called consensus,
which is very tealy.
Um, and, um, yeah.
And there are, I assume that many of the other companies in the space
operate in that way as well.
So, but so this is the point, the macro question for you guys is, it's kind
of a weird argument.
These top two arguments I think are weird because they say, Hey, if there's
this new technology coming out, or if there's this new way to organize people,
then the EA community should be in it.
Sure.
That's not a classically given argument.
I don't think within the EA community.
Are you guys convinced by it at all?
Or do you think it's like kind of weak?
No, I, I, I am not convinced by it.
I like, if I would want to know more than just like, oh, there's something new
happening, so we should have someone in it.
I, I'm always sort of in favor of throwing smart people at new problems.
And so, I mean, kind of like, you know, I always want like scientist
philosophers and like people who take thinking as a core value to be thrown at
any new thing.
So in general, I'm persuaded by like the general theme of the argument.
Um, but I mean, I don't know.
Yeah, I'm, I'm interested.
I don't know if I'm ready to come down.
Like, I mean, VR is becoming a rather big thing now too, which is neat, but I'm
not hearing any arguments for like, because it's becoming big, we should
have some EA people in VR.
Well, I, and I agree, but I think based off my first point, I would argue that
that is true.
I would argue that people, that there should be EA people in VR, actively
trying to shape this new kind of more addictive, more intense environment in
kind of an EA way or have you.
Um, so I would, I would make the argument for the first one, which is new
technology, I would argue that for VR or biotech as well for EA.
And then for the second one, I would argue that for any new kind of
organization organizational system.
I don't know of any other of those that are necessarily coming out these days,
but, um, what do you, what do you mean by like, we should have an EA person in
VR, like, I mean, do, do we assign someone from the community to watch over
the VR companies and be like, don't do that, sir.
That is the other problem there is that the implementation is like, who's
going to listen to somebody be like, Oh, you're, you're, you're trying to talk
me out or something.
That's not my bottom line as far as profits.
Like, why the hell am I going to listen to you?
Yeah.
It's like, you know, it'd be really cool.
Virtual five virtual war games.
And the person's like, that could have not bad knock on effects.
It's like, well, fuck you.
I want to make my virtual war game.
Like, why should he listen to them?
Or she, and this is, and this is the tough thing.
And I've, you know, I've talked with people in the community around the early
days of when Google was making their deep mind thing.
And the EA community was generally arguing, let's maybe wait a bit on this.
Um, and saying, and trying to talk with Google and saying, Hey, I don't know.
Like maybe this makes sense to kind of chill on this for a little bit.
It didn't work.
And Google said, no, no, we're still going to do this now.
But they got their voice heard at least.
They were able to be part of the conversation in their, as you guys are
saying, and this is all just about what metric you're optimizing for.
And there are people, all these, um, all the, all the classic companies are
operating for profit in various ways.
Um, usually in US dollars or would have you and the EA's kind of one metric
that matters to their KPI is instead kind of qualities or, you know,
something quality adjusted life years or something like that.
Um, so I don't know exactly what they do.
But they probably, they operate around instead of the profit metric,
they operate around a, uh, human race and kind of quality metric.
Okay.
And to kick back on my own point that, you know, it might be hard to get your
voice heard just because it's hard and maybe has low chances of success at the
payouts, huge, and it's not that hard.
You should, or excuse me, and it's not like all that life consuming, right?
If you're not going to dedicate your life to trying to get the people at VR to
listen to your EA, your EA pitch, but you're going to dedicate, you know, a
weekend a month for a year or something, uh, you know, that doesn't sound like a
bad idea because it's not like ruining, you know, it's not dedicating a huge
investment, right?
Yeah.
The opportunity costs that.
So, but I mean, if you, if you're a, uh, especially if you're a figure with, you
know, a following or something and someone's inclined to like take your calls,
uh, hit them up.
Yeah.
Sure.
So did, did you want to keep going?
Or I do, I do have two other points here, which I think, which, if you guys think
they're interesting, and these ones are specific to blockchain, so they would be,
so they're not at the macro level.
So these ones, so the second one is all about, or sorry, so this first, this
third point rather is, um, specific to blockchain.
It's about this kind of redistribution of wealth.
So, so the, the blockchain is all about kind of redistributing and
decentralizing all the things.
And, and, and one thing that they're doing that with is kind of wealth and also
a little bit with power.
Um, and so that has some implications and this is, this is one way to kind of see
the Bitcoin in the blockchain story is as one that is very connected to a bunch
of young people who want to do good in the world.
They're trying to go out there.
They're trying to do good and they're like, oh man, the world's really bad.
It seems really hard to like operate within the existing ecosystem to do this.
Like I can like go and like try to work for a politician, but I'm not sure
whatever.
And they also want to have an impact and they've told their special.
Um, and then something like Bitcoin comes along and they're like, oh man,
this thing is a, this went up 20 X, you know, a theory went up 15 X in the last
six months or whatever these people started to get into the state.
This is what the new society looks like.
This is the story that we're, that we as young people are, are part of and it's
like bringing power back to the people or whatever.
Um, so that's kind of what part of the Bitcoin or what part of the blockchain
reality is about and that has kind of two implications.
One of them is from a wealth side.
So right now you have like, you know, 8% of people owned as much wealth as 50,
the bottom 58 or the top eight people have as much as the bottom 50.
And you have not that many people who are giving to various EA causes or who are,
um, doing good EA things or what have you are, they're just a surprising amount
of rich people with a surprising amount of houses.
And, um, that's moderately sad, but you have these new kind of crypto millionaires
that are coming up that are just, that are 27, they're pretty young, whatever.
Um, and if we can kind of get them to have this kind of EA mindset around taking
the giving what we can pledge or taking the founders pledge or like what I
want to do, this kind of like crypto's pledge, um, a crypto pledge, like founders
pledge, but for crypto, I think if we can get this kind of new generation of people
with money, um, to kind of partake in EA activities, that would be cool.
And this is happening to some extent already, like Vitalik Booter in the
main, the dude who invented or who was the main Ethereum guy, he gives to, um,
he is on less wrong.
He talks about, uh, he gives to give directly into against malaria foundation.
So he's into this and also like Miri machine intelligence research initiative.
The biggest, um, donation that they've ever gone was a million dollars in
ETH and this happens like three months ago or whatever.
So this is one side of this is like, if you have a bunch of new wealth being
generated and a bunch of money essentially going from fiat into Bitcoin and other
cryptos, we want the people who are part of that Bitcoin, other cryptos, that kind
of new wealth to kind of give that money back.
So, uh, I totally agree with you that, that, that's cool.
And I encourage everyone to be into effective altruism, but on the other
hand, I don't see how that's specific to cryptocurrency.
That's like a new field has arrived and people are rich.
And I would like to convince rich people to be active effective altruists, but
what does that have to do with crypto?
Really?
I mean, that could be anyone.
Yeah, I think that that's relatively correct that they're that, but I think
that the difference in why in crypto it's so special is because it's part of
this macro trend where we're, where you have essentially like, if you imagine
yeah, all the initial like, if you could convince all the initial people who
made the social networks at the beginning, Google and Facebook and what
have you to that, to be more EAE, that would be cool.
And that would be kind of a power law return where if you get Eric Schmidt to
do it, that'd be awesome with, and I agree that pretty much any time that
there's this new macro wealth transfer that getting EA in on it would be good.
And right now what my, my hypothesis is that a macro wealth transfer will be into
or wealth transfer slash wealth creation will be into crypto and it will be kind
of decentralized and bottom up and that if we get many of those people and to,
to have EA like mindsets, and that would be good.
So I agree with you that it's not, it is kind of specific to crypto and that
this is kind of this macro trend away from like fiat, perhaps into these
new cryptocurrencies, but it is, this would happen with any kind of money
being any kind of new, nouveau rich kind of situation.
Can I push back real quick?
I also consider crypto to be a fiat currency.
So when you say moving away from fiat, I'm like, I know the traditional
definition is fiat money backed by governments, but I still think that
cryptocurrency is basically a fiat currency.
I almost agree, except that when the, when the things have utility value.
So for something like ether, I would claim that that is not just backed by a story.
I would claim that ether is backed by the utility value itself by people.
Even if, even if, yeah, people want to run smart contracts on this computer.
And so if people want to do that, then it's not purely backed by the idea.
It's backed by an actual desire to, for ether to run smart contracts.
Okay.
Yeah.
All right.
Point taken.
There's another side of this, which is this like creative destruction
externalities piece, which is we were, if, if, and a lot of people talk about
these ways, if the bank is going, if, and these are kind of the more
aggressive versions of reality, but if the bank kind of be, gets
distributed into the network and, and the trusted centralized institution,
whether it's a bank or whether it's a government, if that kind of gets pushed
into new city states or gets pushed into these like non bank entities, a lot
of the people with power will no longer have power anymore.
Um, and that is worrying, uh, because whenever there's a power shift like that,
then that, that what I call a creative destruction externality, which is when
you create a new thing that has like the classic example is like, um,
self-driving cars.
Since I can do that.
And then there's going to be a lot of job loss for, you know, the truck drivers.
I love that.
That is now the classic example, like the classic example used to be the
person making the horse buggy whips and now to smart driving cars.
Yeah.
Yes.
Exactly.
And if, which hasn't even happened yet, but so we're going to have this
externality, which is both some of the like white collar jobs are going to be
disintermediated by blockchain, but also you're going to have, um, this,
this power, uh, this, this shift in power.
And if you have that shift in power, I just, I'm worried when that stuff happens,
whenever these shifts in power happen, it's kind of worrying.
And so I guess that this is maybe still another kind of not specific to blockchain,
but kind of just like, whenever there's a shift in power, if there's some kind
of good, rationalist kind of C far trained, double cruxing person that can come
in there and kind of help the power shift better.
That is something that I think would be good.
Okay.
So it seems like your two micro examples or Michael micro, uh, points, yeah,
we're sort of implementations of the first main point that it's good to have
EA people in stuff.
Yeah.
We're going to get our feelers in as many things as possible, which I'm in favor of.
I also would like to spread the EA ideology.
Yeah.
I mean, I'm just trying to think of something more useful to say about it.
Like, wouldn't it have been great if we'd gotten, you know, the creator of, uh,
or the creators of, you know, whatever, uh, Facebook and, uh, Google and YouTube or
whatever, all, you know, EA minded before they did that.
So I guess the goal is to, all right, well, let's not let that keep happening.
Let's get the next Facebook things in our, uh, let's, let's inject our memes into
them first and then when they become billionaires, we won't have to like talk
them out of giving them their money because they're already going to be
inclined to give it away.
That's pretty much the macro concept here, I would say.
And I do agree that these, this, this point that I thought was specific was
actually more just like, Hey, this is this macro power trend.
And it's like having EA's in high impact situations is good.
Um, yeah.
There is one final point here, which is about this.
You guys read meditations on MOLIC.
Yes.
Yeah.
Great piece about how incentive structures can kind of go bad and how like in,
in MOLIC for listeners is like this MOLIC essentially capitalism gone wrong,
where you have like game theoretical things that involve like arms races or
kind of, um, race to the bottoms and things like that.
And, um, a lot of like kind of sad things in society can be shown as like
MOLIC did them, AKA incentives did them.
Um, and that's the final hope here, um, is that in this space you have, we can
create a new, because we can kind of rewire the operating system of the society
and of incentives that we can kind of democratize the incentives, create these
new incentives, we can start to also represent kind of this middle ground in
between us by saying, Hey, we both own some ether.
So let's, if I can help you out with your Ethereum stuff and you can help me
with my Ethereum stuff, we can kind of collaborate here around this either
things, you can kind of start to solve these kind of like tragedy, the
comments and issues here, um, and hopefully beat MOLIC.
How would you do that?
See, so, so that sounds really interesting.
Like the other stuff was like spread EA.
Yes.
I'm on that.
How do you use Ethereum to, to, uh, do that?
Yeah.
So this is, uh, so here are, so you can imagine.
So one example of this is, so I think that the macro concept is that you're
able to democratize incentives.
So you can democratize incentives and you can, by democratizing the incentives,
um, and by those incentives, kind of existing, not with any given person, but
rather kind of in this middle ground area where it exists, like a non-profit is
the person who controls the Ethereum, like the Ethereum foundations that because
it's kind of this ability to, because these blockchains exist in the, in
between, in the commons area, you can then create incentive structures there that
people altogether agree with that can be more beneficial for the commons itself
and for like society as a whole.
Now, okay.
What are you talking about creating incentive structures that people can
agree with?
Yeah.
So yeah, let's, let's do a specific example here.
So you can imagine there is a, um, so let's say there's Google and Facebook and
they are both trying to make better and better AIs and they're going to do
that very quickly and it's essentially a version of the nuclear arms race, but
with the bad result being an ASI or like a AI safety, AI alignment issue, um, you
can imagine, um, the ability to, uh, and people are starting to work on this to
either from a data perspective to instead of having the data in the silos and
having it be where people are kind of operating in isolation, kind of
secretly that data is instead on the blockchain and people can kind of operate
on it, um, in a more kind of transparent way.
And it can exist kind of in between Google and Facebook.
And by existing there, um, you can be, and by the data not being yours, not
being mine, um, you can have more people operating in a transparent way around it.
So that's kind of one version of this.
And like Toyota is working on this with self-driving cars, like a version of
a self-driving car data set that exists on the blockchain rather than on, um, in
the silo data system.
Um, what is, what is the incentive for doing that though, as opposed to
keeping it in-house and capturing all the gains once they make the AIs?
Totally, totally.
So, and so for someone like Google and Facebook, this would be tough at the
beginning, what you hope is you can then, so, so this goes back to the
indimensional money thing where you can start to represent, um, outcomes and
different versions of, of value that are provided to the world, um, that you
weren't able to do before.
So you can imagine creating something like an ASI coin or like a no ASI coin or
like a good ASI coin.
Um, and that could be something that exists and, and, and it, it is a way to
essentially represent, um, you can, you can do a bunch of different versions of
this, but the easiest way to represent it is to say, Hey, this is something that
people can kind of buy into as a way to signal that they are into good ASI or
really quickly, can you, um, define ASI artificial superintelligence is an ASI.
Um, and, uh, that is scarier version.
That's more intense than we expect it to be, um, and, uh, or could be really good.
So by creating this coin that represents, and again, these are, these are not
fully-formed ideas, but it's so the ASI, the ASI coin can represent either people
wanting and signaling that they want a good outcome there.
It can also, the coin itself could also represent, could also have kind of built
into it kind of smart contracts.
So this is a concept of like a social, uh, they call it a social outcome coin or
a social good coin where you essentially buy into the, um, coin at the beginning.
And then as you buy into the coin, it uses this, um, concept called a curation
market where the coin, buying into the coin at the beginning essentially is
easier and then buying into it later is harder.
Um, and so as you buy into that coin, you buy into it and then once essentially
checks an outcome later and after the outcome later, it then, uh, distributes that
money, depending on the outcome distributes that money back to the people, um,
based off of that outcome.
So basically sounds like signaling with your money, what you want to happen,
like vote $1 one vote, right?
Yeah.
I think it's very, I think it's relatively similar to $1 one.
The simplest version is $1 one vote with maybe a little bit more of an aggressive
version where you can actually more aggressively signal by getting, by giving
$1 to open AI project, um, and then getting one ASI coin in return.
Okay.
That's, that's kind of the simplest version.
There are more advanced versions, which I didn't explain very well, but that
involves smart contracts to enable you to essentially peg the value of the money
of the coin to a, to a metric that represents that value.
So essentially a prediction market on whether we think that there's going to
be a good ASI.
So if you got in at the beginning of that, and then that prediction
market was saying, yes, this is good.
Then the value of that coin would kind of like increase.
But if Google doesn't buy any of those coins, they don't have any incentive
to make the price go up.
Totally.
Yes.
Yeah.
I guess, I guess it's sort of like a crowdfunded X prize then.
Yeah.
It's not too different from a crowdfunded X prize.
I think it's also like you're saying, I think it's, I don't expect Google
or Facebook to do any of this soon.
This is going to be hopefully part of this macro trend.
We're kind of, uh, that they call tokenizing the enterprise where you
kind of take businesses and people, they're doing this with this company called
kick, which is a messaging company.
And they're kind of tokenizing it, adding this cryptocurrency, Ken to kind
of tokenize like the ecosystem in there.
People might be expecting something like SoundCloud.
And so this would be hopefully part of this macro trend where businesses
themselves become more tokenized and we start to tokenize not just profits,
but start to tokenize outcomes as well.
Um, but yeah, I think, I think it is a, I think that the two big things are
hopefully that there's the open data set.
And then also that there's a, um, that there's a way to kind of signal that
you're into the, the, a good outcome here.
And there are smart, contractly ways to kind of incentivize people to create
those good outcomes.
Yeah.
All right.
I, I, I, I see how it could have some benefits.
Like I don't think it's the, uh, complete solution to things, but, but I can
see how it could be.
And there's, there's one version of this.
I didn't say that this guy, Amin Soleimani talks about.
He has this project.
He's an effect vultures that has this thing called Molek ventures, which is
his, um, uh, blockchain based venture studio.
That's trying to create things to beat Molek, essentially.
And, um, he talks a lot about this beat by putting a smart contract on the
blockchain.
It's essentially it's, it's a way to, that you can't go back on it.
So like when people are trying to go back on like the Paris agreement or
whatever, hopefully that there, we can create these smart contracts that make
it the case that if you went back on it, you lose a bunch of your GDP or things
of that variety, um, it's a way to essentially makes, um, immutable contracts
in a way, perhaps that were not possible before.
Um, that's another thing that people might be excited about to beat Molek here.
Yeah.
But Molek's the one that I have the least, uh, uh, uh, conceptualization around
at this point in time, I'd say, yeah.
We are coming up on an hour and a half, so we should probably wrap it up.
Are there any other things you wanted to hit?
I don't, nothing on the top of my mind.
We talked about some of the EA stuff.
We hopefully did a high level over you.
What are you, Steven, what are you, yeah, what are you?
Um, we covered a lot of stuff.
Uh, I guess I'd be remiss if I let you go without asking maybe five minutes on
Litecoin, any cool stuff.
So I bought the three currencies that I did because they're the three I could get
through Coinbase and they were the three that the people that I knew who were
into cryptocurrency were excited about, but I didn't bother doing a lot of homework myself.
So I didn't know most of what you just said about Ethereum, which is kind of cool.
Um, is anything cool or bad about Litecoin that's out there?
Is it just a random competitor that took off?
That's a good question.
So it does have, it was one of the first competitors, which was powerful.
The person who is the leader of it, I forget the name of right now.
He is, um, he's very well known in the space.
So kind of that is a good signal.
Um, and it doesn't have as much of the kind of Bitcoin has a lot of inter tribe arguments
because there's no clear benevolent dictator kind of like, uh, the Litecoin guy who I
can't believe I forget his name right now, Charlie Lee, Charlie Lee, or like this guy,
Zuko with Zcash or Vitalik Buterin with Ethereum.
There's no, you know, Satoshi is not known whoever Satoshi Nakamoto is, the creator of Bitcoin.
So Bitcoin has a bunch of like inner tribe issues.
Litecoin, I don't think has as many of those.
Litecoin also, the reason why it's called Litecoin is because it uses,
I'm not sure which algorithm it uses to get, it has faster transaction times, which is nice.
So a good example of this is, I did this podcast with this guy, Ryan X.
Charles from yours and yours is a micro, it's kind of like medium with a paywall.
So kind of like a micro payments platform, um, that wouldn't be possible kind of with
traditional currencies and going through Visa or PayPal or Stripe or whatever,
because you have the, the 3% plus the 30 cents, um, but with something like Litecoin,
they switched from Bitcoin to Litecoin because it had faster transaction times,
and especially because it's transaction fees were lower.
Um, so that is why people generally like Litecoin.
Cool. And since that was under five minutes, I have another question for you.
The Bitcoin fork that happened a couple of months ago.
Yeah.
Um, I can't remember if we talked about that on the air or not at any point.
I don't think so.
I don't see why we would have, but I feel like I talked about it in this house at some point.
That's what was on my mind.
Is there a quick overview of what happened there slash why that happened?
Yeah. So that's a good question. The, so at a high level, I don't know as much about it
because I'm deeper into the Ethereum space. Um, there's this lady, Linda here, who writes,
who used to work for Coinbase and is writes these really good intro articles and has this
great intro to Bitcoin versus Bitcoin cash article, which just gives us great, um, table.
And I'm kind of forgetting the table right now.
The, at the high level point is that there was this big debate among the kind of the
two parts of this ecosystem, Bitcoin core, which I believe are the developers and then
the Bitcoin miners, um, which are the people that run a lot of the mining equipment.
That's like 10 people around the world kind of, um, who have like 90% of the hash power.
Um, yeah, people. Yeah.
That's kind of scary.
Yeah.
It's supposed to be more distributed than 10 people.
Totally. And this is this funny decentralization, centralization thing.
Uh-huh.
Um, so yeah, it is, um, I, that number is close to correct. Um, hopefully the, um, so the miners
wanted, I believe that, and I don't understand this well enough, but they wanted to just purely
increase essentially the, the network was getting too filled with things and there were, they needed
to scale this. This is a huge thing within the space generally is how does it scale?
How's the theorem going to scale? How's Bitcoin going to scale?
So one scaling way was to create this, was to essentially increase the block sizes.
So instead of a one megabyte block, instead of one megabyte of transactions going on there,
instead of let's increase it to eight megabytes or two megabytes or something.
And that's what the miners wanted, I believe.
And then the non miners, the developers, Bitcoin core, they wanted this thing called,
um, segwit, which is an algorithm that allows you to essentially get faster transaction times.
Um, and so that was the battle between these two groups.
And that battle happened for a while and, but they actually came to agreement around
this thing called Bitcoin cash where they would, uh, or I believe where they would essentially
do this hard fork. Um, and as a result of that hard fork, it would, you essentially,
all the currency that did exist gets duplicated. So there's all the Bitcoin and then there's all
the Bitcoin cash. Um, and now Bitcoin, I believe that Bitcoin itself has, um, has segwit online
and that Bitcoin cash has some people over there who are excited by or more like Bitcoin cash
maximalists and that I believe has increased block sizes. Um, so that's kind of what's
happening in the space right now. And then in the near future, there'll be this thing called
two X, I believe, which is where you have on the main, um, Bitcoin blockchain,
you also increase the block sizes, um, from one megabyte to two.
So I think that's the space I could be, do not trust me on any of that because I really,
I know just enough to say that, but not much deeper. Yeah.
I wanted to go back to a thing you said just a little bit earlier. Uh, you were very excited
about how, uh, the cryptocurrency like democratize democratizes the power and like pulls it away
from the big governments and the institutions and these centers of power and spreads it among the
people. But I, I, it's, I'm pretty sure that there's more than 10 people in like the old school
institutions and governments. It seems like we have just managed to concentrate things even,
even further if it's down to 10 people in the group.
Totally. That's a, I think that's a good point. And that's this, there's this great piece by
this guy, biology, who is the, um, co-founder of 21.co, which is something that you guys should
check out as well, which is a way to essentially get money to, um, to receive emails kind of,
or to do tasks. Um, in any case, he talks about quantifying decentralization,
this great blog post, and in that they say, uh, he, he does his quantification because that's
the main goal of this whole space is to decentralize things, to make things more like equitable or
heavy. But because of the way that systems work, they recentralize in various ways. Um,
and so yes, there's definitely recentralization on top of these platforms and there's definitely
recentralization happening generally. And I think that is one of the hopes and that is,
let me say one other thing, which is that the Ethereum blockchain, which I believe actually
does have a similar, um, decentralization coefficient, this like Gini coefficient as Bitcoin,
but in theory, they hope that it wouldn't because you don't need to, um, on the Ethereum blockchain,
they have a different kind of consensus algorithm within their proof of work algorithm that means
that you can't use these specialized ASIC GPUs to run. Um, that doesn't give you any advantage
in Ethereum, but it does give you advantage in Bitcoin. So I was like an attempt by them to try
to decentralize it more. But yeah, it's, this decentralization thing is, uh, that's the hope
and the goal. And there's definitely recentralization happening. Cool. Uh, so before we go, what are
you working on now and how can people find out about it if they wanted to? So, uh, what am I,
I am working on primarily two things. Um, the first thing is, uh, I have a podcast, my own
podcast called creating a humanist blockchain future. Um, and it's about some of these concepts
that we talked about today, um, and interviews various people within the space to kind of, uh,
get a, and kind of do deep dives on both from a technical side, from like a philosophical side,
um, and having like some good philosophers within the space coming on soon, which will be sweet.
So I have a podcast and I also have a, I do kind of a consulting thing within the space as well,
where I use these kind of teal principles and kind of lean and agile practices that I've done in the
past to kind of help people within the space, um, in this way. So I do that through my Patreon,
which is patreon.com slash Rhyslenmark that slash R-H-Y-S-L-I-N-D-M-A-R-K. Um, and I implement some
other cool things there. Like if you give me 10 bucks a month, then for every 10 bucks you give
me, you get one Rhys coin, and then that Rhys coin can be spent on my time. Um,
we're implementing Bayesian coin after this. Get that money going. Um, I also do have a
self-imposed income cap as well because I am of the EA mindset and think that, you know,
studies show that after about 45,000 bucks in America, you have decreasing returns or essentially
very small returns on month on happiness when you get more money. So at around that point for me on
my Patreon, um, I essentially stopped taking the money and redistributed it back to the system
in various ways, um, like charities and things. So that's what I do. That's what I work on. Uh,
yeah, you can come check me out if you want and definitely support if you want.
Cool. All right.
We'll definitely link to all of those on the website.
Well, thank you guys so much for having me on the show. Um, and yeah, happy to talk about these
things. No, thank you for coming. This was great. I, I enjoyed talking to people. Like,
if you and Ash and I just, you know, chatted about this, it ended up like our game theory episode.
So which was where we were supposed to have somebody who knew what they were talking about
on and then we kind of just winged it. So no, I appreciate your, your expertise and your time
for spending here with us. Yeah, it was fun. Thank you guys. And Stephen, you want to stick
around after this to do some listener mail? Sure. Okay. Excellent.
All right. Before we begin, we have to thank our generous Patreon supporters for helping us.
This week we want to thank Casey.
Thanks, Casey.
And anyone else who wants to support us, you can do so at Patreon, or if you would like,
simply leaving us a review at iTunes also helps quite a bit. It gets to spread the show to more
new people. Yeah. Ultimately, you can just trap somebody in the car on a road trip and just keep
playing episodes of this while they are, you know, unable to change the channel. Yes.
I'm kidding. Don't, don't hijack that. No, totally do. If they reach for the, the, the
switcher on the, on the thing, just slap their hands. Be like, swear of the car. Yeah. Listen,
you got to listen to the sexy Enios and sexy Stephen being like, Hey, listen to us talking
about nationalist things. Man, one of us has, uh, what am I trying to say? I was going to,
I was going to make an illusion to how I had, had something, had, I had been drinking a little
bit earlier and you haven't, and you wouldn't have been able to guess that from this exchange.
Right. I am just high on life. Thank you.
Uh, so for going to listener feedback, let's start with the great Nick who asks, um, this is
after our parenting podcast. Did any of the panel, and it's just going to be you and me,
I guess, since we don't have the rest of the panel here. Did any of the panel have any thoughts
on the issue of overpopulation as someone trying to do better? I struggled with wanting children
being that it's pretty much the single worst thing you can do for climate change.
So those are two different issues are my first thought on the one hand. Yes,
your carbon footprint goes radically up with a kid. I'm, I mean, I was going to say I'm personally
not worried about overpopulation, but I'm also not planning on having kids. Uh, but I'm also
thinking that by the time that becomes like a real thing where like we're running out of,
like landmass people to live on and food people to eat, uh, I think we'll have other solutions to
those problems, whether it's like, you know, uh, artificial islands or living in space or whatever.
But yeah, I've always sort of been torn on like the carbon footprint, uh, problem. Yeah, I don't
really know how to get around that. Like, yes, you're making a carbon footprint, but you're also
like producing potentially a lot of good value for the world too. And for like your life and other
lives, if you, you know, if your kid goes on to make people happy. So like, I don't know how I'm
not going to do that math and say, you know, they need to have this number of utilize and share
as much happiness as the world to accommodate their carbon footprint. But yes, people have carbon
footprints. Yeah, I, I am also of the opinion that those are kind of unrelated, that yes,
people do burn things for energy, but people also do a lot of good. And really who is going to
figure out how to scrub all the carbon out of the atmosphere, if not for people,
because I'm sure pretty darn sure the dolphins ain't going to be doing it. So, so if we're
relying on humans to eventually find some technological way to get the carbon out of
the atmosphere on net, the human species will be carbon neutral. And you're not going to help
things at all by reducing the amount of humans that could be either working on the problem
directly or helping to keep the system running that funds the people that does work on those
problems. I don't know if we talked about this directly in the episode or not, but like, you
know, a lot of like cults and religions have the great meme of like no protected sex. So like,
therefore lots of kids. Yeah. So like, there's some virtue in like having kids that not like
you're going to like just force feed rationality, but that you're planning on raising to be somewhat
sane rather than just like, you know, no one is raising their kid to be, you know, a religious
nut job on purpose, because they think they're doing the right thing. But yeah, you know, the more
scientifically and rationality rationally oriented or inclined people that we get out there, the
better, right? So maybe one of them will be the people who solve all these fun problems.
So I personally think that it is a bit overpopulation is kind of sort of an issue,
in my opinion, because the human race, as long as it grows at any sort of rate will eventually
outgrow the universe. I don't remember, I know we mentioned this at an earlier episode, and it's
been so long now that I don't remember what the actual timeframe was, but Robin Hansen once calculated
that if we continue growing even at 2%, that within a matter of a few hundred thousand years,
there'd be more humans than there are atoms in the universe, which is obviously unsustainable
if you want to remain it physically bodied. But even if we go entirely to simulated humans in
some sort of computer, there's an upper limit on how many people could be simulated too. So
overpopulation could eventually in the long run be an issue. But I don't see it being
issue for a while. And by the time it starts getting to the point where we're running out of
universe, I think we'd be able to self modify our own desires quickly and easily enough that we
could take away the desire to have lots of children. So I'm going to go out on the limb here and say
that everyone is okay having one kid to replace themselves without any sort of guilt that they
should have at all. And if you are in a relationship with one other person, then that is two kids
between the two of you. I do seriously side eye at the like quiverful movements and other sort of
we are encouraging people to have 12 children because that is that is some
way too many children in my personal opinion. You are not doing your kids a favor when you're
having that many of them. But I am going to go ahead and at the risk of sounding egotistical
saying that I think brash lists and the sort of people who would be listening to this podcast
have tend to have higher than average value children, which I know goes directly against
my earlier things where I was saying that all human lives are valued the same on a moral level.
But seriously, I don't think you you are going to be the type of person that has shitty awful
children. Your kids are probably going to contribute to the world in some way. And so
go forth and multiply by two. Right. Don't think it is the single worst thing you can do for climate
change or for the human species or for the planet or whatever. That is just that's basic
misanthropy that humans are evil and we should have less of them is what that feels like.
And I dislike that attitude. Right on. Cool. There was also some back and forth following
this with Nick and another user and they they basically came to similar conclusions as what
we've just talked about if I recall correctly. But I wanted to get your input on it too because
I thought it'd be interesting to ask you. Cool. The Great Nick also says because I talked about
them at an earlier episode at just as Nick, I believe I made this username back 15 years ago
on somewhere like Newgrounds. I originally wanted the username The Great Nickname,
but it was too long. So I cut the last word off. My name is not Nick. Sorry about that Nick.
From now on, I will refer to you as the Great Nick only or Nickname or something, but not just Nick.
So it's a very common misunderstanding. Yeah, maybe I'll just call him The Great.
The Great. Yes. So on the ritual episode, we got feedback from Shelley Doesn't Drink saying,
I love sing-alongs and don't get creeped out by them. Not even if it's Christian songs from back
when I was a Christian, but chanting along as a group. Very, very creepy. Even if the words
endorse something I express something I endorse. Around 2000, I was in a city where anti-war
protests were going on and I happened to walk by one as they marched down the street with their
signs and chanting. I felt instantly overwhelmed by emotion, deeply moved and inspired. I got
physically choked up and my eyes watered. But I did not actually want to feel moved or inspired by
this, which caused me to feel simultaneously repulsed by the experience and how it was hijacking my
emotions. Basically, anytime I see something like a protest or a group display of earnest
reverence solidarity, I get this reaction. Even the cliched scenes in football movies.
It affects me like that and it's icky. I totally see how if you are having your emotions hijacked
when you didn't want to, that's a bit of a violation. I'm sure they weren't doing it
specifically to target the person, but that is also something I would dislike and I would
stay very clear of ritual and religious sort of things if I knew it affected me that way.
Yeah. I'm just off-put by chanting in the first place because it does seem like the
kind of thing that you do right before you throw someone into volcano. No one likes being tugged
around without setting themselves up for it emotionally. If I'm going to be freaked out,
it's one thing to get scared if I'm going to go see the new it movie or something. That I'm
wanting it. I've consented by buying the ticket and sitting down and watching it,
but if I'm just scared in public, somebody just screams on the train or something, then that
sucks, but I don't know. That's just part of being in the world. Occasionally,
someone swears in traffic or something. Just today, someone went around me at a straight
lane. They're like, I'm going to go faster and went around to the right turn lane and cut me
off. I'm sure glad that I was watching because you did that out of nowhere and if I had straightened
to go over this pothole thing, we would have collided. I signed on the brakes. It's like,
they scared me without my consent, but what am I going to do? Yeah. I try to endure social
norms of not doing that, I guess. I try not to be a dick. I try not to get in people's way and step
on people's toes. That's probably the way to go. Do you also try not to join groups of chanting
people in the streets? I can't think of a single situation off the top of my head where I've ever
chanted. Oh, I've been in a few marches and the chanting is really fun. I've been in a march
and I don't think we chanted. No. I did almost do one. I was at a conference
and Bill and I, the Science Guy, was doing a thing and I was still more shy back then
and I wanted to do like a bill, bill, bill and I didn't and it's one of my regrets.
But as far as regrets go, that's pretty mild. But that would have been a chant,
but that's sort of not the same. I'm going to go ahead and just say that's distinct enough
because everyone has seen the show where that's in the opening music from his 1990s television
program, Bill and I, the Science Guy. And that's not me just being like, you know,
all hail the Science Guy out of nowhere, right? Right. All right.
Googleplex Byte says, I think an intellectual monopoly on anything is fine so long as it
abides by Georgia's philosophy. That is, every intellectual monopoly's value is to be evaluated
and some portion, example given 20% per annum, is to be given to everyone as intellectual property
in, as it's fundamentally everyone's common property.
Share the proceeds in intellectual property or share the property itself?
The proceeds from it.
Okay. Yeah. Initially, I thought you said the property itself. I'm like,
how do you share 20% of an idea? You can read the first page of my five page thesis.
Yeah. I mean, I don't have much to add there other than that's interesting.
That would take a lot of the problem out of monopoly, right?
Yes and no, I think. I think it would take some of this thing out of monopolies if,
if the, you know, portion of it did go back to everyone. I think people would be much less
concerned about monopolies if a lot of their profits were divided back to people and like,
hey, you've given us this monopoly power, we're giving you back something for it.
But on the other hand, intellectual property, I think is a slightly different domain.
As you are probably aware, Lovecraft is very big, his mythos. I have this game next to me called
Cultists of Cthulhu, which is based on the Lovecraft mythos. And it's, I mean, it's pretty big
in geek circles, but it's, it's like, I don't know, half the games out there, board games,
are based on some sort of Cthulhu mythos. Half is an exaggeration, but there's a lot, right?
And people really enjoy the, the Cthulhu stuff and write a lot of stories with it and it's
become sort of like a rich cultural ground that we all can pull from and, and express ourselves.
And part of the reason for that is that Lovecraft died early enough that he just got missed being
swept up with the Disney Mickey Mouse indefinite copyright forever on everything thing. So,
his works, most of them went into the public domain, which is why we can do things. And I think
that's a good thing. We now have this cultural background that we all share and we can all
tell each other stories and build on it. And I liken this to what if there was a Disney type
of monopoly back in ancient Greece that didn't allow people to travel from city to city and sing
about the, the gods and, and pass on their cultures like, nope, I'm sorry, but corporation X
has a, has a monopoly on all stories about Zeus and, and Aries and corporation Y over
there has all the stories on Hercules and Hera. So, and you, you can't tell any of these like,
I feel like the, for example, Marvel, the superheroes that we have today are basically
the equivalent of the pantheon of the ancient Greeks. They're humans with superpowers that we
tell stories about to make sense of our own lives and to inspire us and they're bigger than life
and their problems aren't really real, but they kind of reflect the things that we struggle with.
And they, they've very much taken the place of those more human gods in my opinion, but only
Marvel is allowed to tell any fucking stories about it. Like if we try to go out and build on this
and make it into something, we get sued. And I think that really impoverishes our culture to have
these stewards owning all the intellectual property that we build our psyches upon.
And this isn't something I've done a lot of reading about, but it's interesting to me,
first of all, you make a compelling point and you're right, it would take some of the sting out
if you got some money back, but then you still lose like, like what if Tolkien was able to patent
high fantasy, right? And if I'm, if I'm correct, Tolkien's is high fantasy, right?
Basically Harry Potter is low fantasy. No, Harry Potter is definitely high fantasy.
I thought high fantasy was took place on not earth in a place with different rules and regular fan
or low fantasy, whatever not high fantasy is took place in our world with magic or some other element.
No, well, okay. So high fantasy is definitely, I mean, Tolkien is like the earth example and
it's generally things that are on other worlds and a non human or not, not him, but a non earth
type world with no reference to earth at all, right? But I would consider
Harry Potter to be pretty darn close to maybe not high fantasy, but in that same school because
the only difference between Harry Potter and Tolkien is that it does take place on earth.
Oh, but Harry Potter could just as easily not take place on earth because it's not talking about
like, well, not really talking about like the, the actor prime minister in 1990 or whatever,
right? Right. So like if it was relating to actual world stuff.
Well, it does like reference World War Two. Yeah. And like at some point,
minister fudge meets the prime minister or something, right? But like
it's probably closer to urban fantasy. Gotcha. But urban fantasy is still fantasy. It's not like
when I think of low fantasy, I think of things like Game of Thrones in the first book. I guess the
first book was called Game of Thrones. It's in the first book, there was like basically no magic
the and like one or two little things and the dragons were born near the end. But for the most
part, it was just medieval Europe. People with swords and bad hygiene hacking at each other.
Gotcha. So I was going to say, what if Tolkien could patent like high fantasy? Yeah. And then
suddenly no one could write in that style without paying Tolkien Enterprises some dividend from their
their returns on that book. Yeah, we wouldn't have Dungeons and Dragons.
Yeah, or like lots of other stuff, right? So that I guess I'm not sure what counts as intellectual
property. Like if I make up an idea and I share it, I don't know, I am not well thought enough in
this subject to give any meaningful thoughts other than to say, I basically with everything you said.
And like, I could see if you reduce it to absurd pretty quick, yeah, things get really
boring really fast, even if you're not talking like in the context of like products or like
things that we can touch, right? If the rounded edges rectangle is my IP and you can't make a
phone that looks like that because you're not Apple. Well, that's going to slow down like everyone
else's phone market. So that's one aspect. But yeah, just like, no, we have, you know,
sorry, Marvel Universe has patent on anything that has to do with superhuman anything. If the
person can lift more than 700 pounds, that's that's beyond, you know, what you guys are allowed to
publish. Yeah, that would be insane. Yeah, that would be crazy. And it's not quite that bad. But
I do think that anyone should be allowed to make a Mickey Mouse movie if they want to. And that
would also introduce some competition with Disney that they would now have to be more,
they would have to create the best Mickey Mouse movies, the most Disney-esque ones in order to
make people want to go to Disney Mickey Mouse movies. So I don't want this to be like the,
you know, intellectual property episode or post episode discussion. But like,
so what if that was the thing and somebody made just a bunch of videos of Mickey Mouse beating
up minorities and, you know, throwing racial slurs. And then like, their big thing of Mickey
Mouse that they've had as their icon for like a century is not being associated with all like
these, you know, Nazi-esque bullshit, right? Like someone pepe to Mickey? Sure. So like, I can kind
of see the benefit of like, no, we're going to sue you if you try to pepe Mickey. Because, you
know, people think of us when they think of Mickey Mouse and we don't want them to think
of us when they think of pepe mouse, right? So I kind of see the rationale.
I don't know. I don't think it would really do that because there have been people like drawing
Mickey's with Hitler mustaches and such. Yeah. But if they made that into like, if that showed up
on the Simpsons and on Rick and Morty and, you know, other cartoons that hadn't, you know, audiences,
then, you know, people would be associating that with Disney, especially if there was like no
protection of like, yep, I'm from Disney. I'm the real one. That's what happens when I'm not on
the screen with Disney. I'm pretty sure that you could still like, protect your brand. If someone
says they're making Kellogg's cornflakes, but they're not actually Kellogg, then you could sue them.
You can like, you can make your knockoff cornflakes, but you don't call it Kellogg's cornflakes,
much like you can have your own Mickey movie, but you can't say it's a Disney Mickey movie
unless you're Disney. Okay. Yeah. All right. I can see where that goes. All right. I'm ready to move on.
Okay. On our sacred cows thing, Zerth says, I confess I roll my eyes when I hear rationalists
have few or no sacred cows. I bet it's because they define sacred cows differently. Bayesian
conspiracy's definition is a falsifiable belief about the world that one doesn't want to falsify.
Or at least risk falsifying. Yes. Like it could be true, but I'm not going to look at it because
if I open that box and I'm wrong, then my belief is shattered. Yeah. In which case, it does seem
like rationalists have fewer sacred cows than non-rationalists. But I will define sacred cows
as a belief that causes you to not notice mistakes you make. Example of this kind of sacred cow.
Thinking that talking about it makes it better. Thinking I'm unworthy. Thinking worrying solves
nothing. Thinking people need structure. You walk into conversation and start talking and miss
what your interlocutor was saying because you believe things like this.
What was the definition? A belief that causes you to not notice mistakes that you are making.
I'm fine saying that that's a thing and it's a problem. And we can call them sacred cows,
but then we're just messing up definitions. I feel like mine is closer to the colloquial usage.
I think that sounds more like, it almost sounds more like they're defining a bias.
That's what I was thinking. I thought that's what they're going to give examples of.
Yeah. I mean, it's good to... I don't know if it's necessarily a belief that keeps you
to prevent you from noticing when you're wrong. Yeah. I'll have to think on that.
I mean, that sounds like a conversation worth having, but I don't know if it's the same...
I think we're talking about different phenomena entirely. And whether or not we want to call
them the same thing is, that's whatever, but I think they're distinct things.
I think there's definitely things that make me wince and not want to talk about them.
Like if someone says that different races have different IQs on average,
that is a thing where I would be like, you know what? I am not comfortable talking about this.
I... For a number of reasons. Does that make it a sacred cow?
That we have to hold on to the mythology that all people are born equal?
I don't know, man. I mean, yes, by my definition, I think it would, right?
But it's a separate question to wonder, is that worth digging into, given what could
happen and what would be the benefit of finding that out? It actually happens to be that tall...
That sounds totally like a sacred cow, then. Like he was saying, it causes you not to think
about it. What would be the benefit of finding that out? That is totally a thing that you would...
Say if you have a sacred cow belief. One benefit of finding that out,
if it turned out to be drastic, which is probably definitely not, because somebody
have noticed by now, could be like, okay, so it looks like for whatever reason,
people under five feet really struggle with spatial reasoning. We could adjust our curriculums
and schools to help with that, right? Or choose something that you care about more than spatial
reasoning or something, right? But it just so happens that tall people make more money,
but they also have typically shorter lifespans. So those are things that I think are actually
true about tall people on average. Obviously, mileage is varying. That's kind of an important
thing, right? So not acknowledging those things would be pointless and just make you wrong.
So I'm not really sure... When you grab politically charged topics and then say,
I don't feel like touching that. There's all kinds of good reasons not to do that, right?
So it's like, oh, you know what? I don't want to be the one person arguing that we should
do a rigorous IQ analysis by race, because then you sound like an asshole and that's
going to ruin your reputation. So that's a great reason not to do it just pragmatically.
In addition to... I guess it's like asking, is it worth the reputational cost to go down this road?
Yeah, probably not for most people, right? Like Charles Murray, the author of the bell curve,
he has like security risks because of a book that he wrote. And people who haven't read it
assume that he was like some Hitler. And he wasn't even making really that big a claim.
No, and the claims that he was making were pretty substantiated. I mean, at least
if they were incorrect, they were at least well-reasoned and it seemed in good faith, right?
This didn't seem like some bullshit book to push an agenda. This was like, I wonder what's
happening? Oh, this. These are my findings and this is how I got there. So that's different
than saying like, I'm going to write a book that proves that top people are actually smarter.
Yeah, so I don't have much to add there.
There's an interesting question from Meladin. What intrinsic value would you give an object
of mystery? This was when we were talking about... I don't even know what we were talking about.
Maybe it was after the burning of the Picasso painting or something? I don't know. By object
of mystery, I mean a thing, not a person that nobody knows anything about and possesses a
fascinating unique phenomenon to be discovered. If it were destroyed, no one would ever have
the possibility of researching something similar. An example would be like the monolith from the
movie 2001. Well, movie and book, but most people are familiar with the movie.
I'd give it exactly six value.
Yeah, that's a weird question because I don't... Yeah, I don't know. It would be...
Then the question is like, does it have value even though it's not a person?
Yeah. How can you know what value it has if it's a mystery object? As far as you know,
it's just a black piece of rock.
Part of the prompt though is that it has unique and interesting properties that are
unique or that are unfindable anywhere else. Who knows what that could be?
It's value, I think, in this context would be interpreted or discoverable in hindsight.
You look at it and be like, okay, it just turns out to be a different shade of blue
than anything I've ever seen before. I'll give that one value out of 100.
But it's like, oh, this is like a recipe that cures cancer. That's 100 out of 100.
So I don't know. That's probably kind of a flip and answer to a
sincere question, but the better way to phrase it is like, do things that aren't people have value.
And I think things that aren't people do have value.
I think so too, especially insofar as they provide value to people, right? So like,
this lamp isn't a person, but I sure value being able to see.
I'd be willing to pay $20 for this lamp.
Right. So in that way, I think it's completely reasonable to say that things have value.
I don't think things have value. Well, maybe that was another interpretation of the question.
Like, do things have value in and of themselves just because they're rare and interesting?
I can see an emotional case for that, but Sam Harris has this great quote in,
I think it was the moral landscape. He says, imagine a box that contains something that has no
bearing on the well-being of conscious creatures, whether hypothetically or in any possibility,
it can't weigh in on the experience of anybody. You have by definition the most boring thing
in the universe, right? So like, if this thing isn't going to do anything for anybody at all,
no matter what, then it's super, super boring, right? It has no value. Again, if it's a box with
a cure for, I'm thinking a cancer nonstop, if it's a box with a cure for cancer,
then it's super valuable. But like, its value is depending on how useful it is to people or
other things. Maybe it's the box that you crack this vial and it releases this thing in the air,
and now whenever an animal is about to die, it gets this shot of endorphins and it feels great
rather than dying in agony like everything does. So that can be valued to not people,
but it's still only valuable insofar as it reflects the well-being of conscious things.
That's how I'll define that. I like it. All right, I'm ready to move on.
Cool. Chlorine Crown says, I was listening through the archives where we got to the one
before you talked about the Those Who Walk Away From Amalis by Ursula Gwyn.
They have a solution. Imagine you're behind Rawls Vale of Ignorance and this city is explained
to you, knowing you have a large chance of living in a wonderful place or a small but
substantial chance of being tortured for 70 years in order to give that splendor to thousands of
people. Wouldn't you still accept it? Probably. I'm a gambler. Let's do this.
Plus, I like those odds, right? It's not one in five. It's one in 100,000s.
Well, probably not 100,000s, but one in thousands at least. I'm not sure exactly how big the
population center was, but at least several thousand seemed like.
Yeah, I think that I'd probably take the shot, although I think it's an important part of the
story that's heavily implied that the person being tortured wasn't given the option.
That they're just fueling some horrible machine. I think that's important. I also,
I don't know, that is a weird question though, because that sort of brings out the question
of the utility monster. Am I obligated to sacrifice my life to someone else if they
would get a lot of utility out of my sacrifice more than like, am I obligated to be someone's
slave if my 70 years of misery would make their lives much better than how miserable I am?
Yeah, that seems analogous, and that seems worse, so now I don't know where to go.
I mean, I'd like to think no, but that's the whole point of the utility monster is like, well,
good luck arguing with this because it seems to hit every point that you care about,
and yet this horrible thing happens. Yeah, I don't know. I don't have a good
re-bottle to the utility monster. I have me neither. I'm sure they exist. We can look it up.
I think that's one of the reasons it was a good story.
Bayes and Confused says that... That's a great username, by the way.
Almost everyone would agree that raising the sanity waterline for everyone and giving
rationalist techniques to everyone, even if it's only a little bit per person, would be massively
useful. I'm going to give an example from my own background. My family is an Egyptian,
but I've been a U.S. citizen since about a year old. I've been highly Americanized.
I went back to Egypt for the first time about a year ago, and the thing that struck me the most
is what happens to an entire society when the average education level is about second or third
grade. One of my younger cousins who was who's asking me what things I had learned that helped
me in life in America so he could try them in Egypt, I pointed him to the less wrong community
and the sequences. It's been over a year now, and we realize there is an interesting dynamic
at play between the effectiveness of an individual rational person if the sanity waterline is low
in their society. I'm sorry, I'm kind of screwing up the reading of this. Specifically, he's gotten
better at practicing even simple rationalist techniques like repeatedly asking himself why he
believed stuff and defaulting to looking to data instead of going with his assumption.
The results are really good with him. He's gotten multiple promotions and he's doing
better in school than he's ever done, significantly better than his classmates.
But now, he keeps running into issues of cooperation. Because he now thinks through
his plans a bit more slowly and deliberately and comes up with good plans, he wants to have
people who can help him and can follow that line of reasoning. But at a certain point,
he just can't find any other intelligent people and his progress stalls.
A formulaic way of describing the phenomenon on is to say that the bigger the difference
between the rationalist and the society, the faster they will climb upwards towards whatever
success or goal they have. But it is the overall sanity waterline in a culture that determines
how high you can possibly ascend. In Egypt, being a rationalist means that you can get to the top
really quickly, but because of where society is, that top is not nearly as high as it would be in
another educated society. I think that's why it's important to make rationality and ideas
related to it more popular as a whole. Yes, even to the soccer hooligans. Because if they can get
even 5% smarter, I think it moves up the maximum upper bounds significantly. And I thought that
was a really good point that if we can spread the whole rationalist thing a bit and move up the
sanity waterline just a bit, there's leaps and bounds more progress that we can make at the
highest levels. Because everyone else working with them and keeping society running is just
better at doing that. It's a multiplier effect almost. Yeah, that's an awesome story. And I
appreciate sharing that. I have a couple immediate thoughts on that one. Yes, I think that that
general point is probably true. So you can only get so high, but without cooperation,
there's no more edifice to keep building on, right? Because you can only build so high by
yourself. I have this thought every few months whenever something sparks it, but I'm pretty
sure Eleizer had many motivations in writing the last wrong sequences. And I think that's
probably one of them. There's only so much that I can do by myself. I need more people who are
interested in this kind of thing, kind of closer to where I'm at, so I can get more of a team on
things. And maybe that was an expressed goal, but that seems like the kind of thing. And that might
be a solution. I'm not sure exactly what problems your, was it cousin or nephew, whatever it was,
your cousin was facing. But man, if they have any friends that they want to get into this kind of
thing, then at least that way you have like a brain trust to people that if you want to really
think through a hard problem, you're not just doing it by yourself, right? You can be like Harry
Potter in methods of rationality, starting his own basing conspiracy with Draco to try to try to
get some more sane educated wizards on his side. That's like 70% of the reason I wanted to do the
local meetup here. Oh, really? Not just for like, you know, getting, well, let me rephrase that.
It wasn't for that exact reason. It was, it was for the reason that I preferred about like getting
a brain trust to people that thought enough like me that I could bounce ideas off of and we could,
you know, but they could provide original content back like I can't do by myself.
I find that super gratifying and super useful if I had a problem, but you know,
really, it hasn't been so much of like a, all right, brain trust is my problem.
Has it, has it worked out? Has it helped you to have the lesser on group?
I'm actually just thinking about that. And probably now that I think about it, because
I started, well, I didn't start the group, but I, well, I helped get the local community going.
And it was around the time that I was just out of sight of my current life trajectory at my,
where I was at professionally with my job and, you know, where that was going.
And I'm not, it was, I was ready to like take the dive and do something else, but like,
I didn't really know what to do. And it was these people who were like, you know what,
you should give this a look into and check this out. And I don't know if I'll love programming
in 15 years, but I like it now. And if it gets boring, like there's only a thousand things to
do in that field. So I feel like I could stay busy there for a while. So yes, now that I think
about it, that could be definitely a consequence of doing this. So yay, that's good. Awesome.
Yeah. I hadn't realized that before. I'm glad things have worked out. I feel like a warm glowy
right now. Well, I'm hoping that helps other people too, right? Like, I mean, that was,
that's the thing about like, you know, it could just be a Slack channel if I wanted just ideas
to bounce the people off of, right? So I think there's some special about meeting people in
meet space. Agreed. That's, that's why I like that. So when you meet people in real life, you get
like a, you know, a real community that feels more personal because it is. Yeah. You meet faces,
you meet names, you get stories, that sort of thing. So yeah, I'm hoping it's valuable. I'm
assuming it's valuable to other people than just me because people keep coming. So yeah.
Excellent. That's all I got. Yeah. I don't have any other feedback.
Okay. Cool. I mean, there's other people who wrote in and we, I think between us, we probably read
absolutely everything that, you know, comes in on Reddit or through the email or through the website.
There was an interesting back and forth on one of the Reddit's about someone explaining why Harry
Potter, Canon Harry Potter is very classist and pro capitalist. I was like, Oh, that's an interesting
point you make there. And I had never seen it because I'm just living in that water, you know.
This was on the, on the Bayesian conspiracy subreddit. Okay. I gotta find this. Yeah.
That sounds awesome. Because I'm curious what the argument was. Yeah. Okay. That's it. Thank you
everyone for listening. We'll be back in two weeks. Thanks. Bye.
