Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Eneosh Brodsky.
I'm Stephen Zuber and today we have with us a guest, a special guest.
The specialist of all guests.
You are far too kind Eneosh.
I'm Kyle Moore.
I am the fellow in charge of editing this podcast.
Yes.
The poor fellow.
It is my duty to listen to Eneosh's and Stephen's voices loop on repeat inside my head.
There are quite a few interesting dreams I have.
There are a few tortures that I can think of that would be worse.
Yes.
Perhaps we can include that torture in our utilitarian discussion today.
Is it better to have Kyle listen to Eneosh's voice an endless loop for a thousand years
or cause a single negative utilon to happen to every life form that will ever exist?
All right, everybody listen to it once.
The jury is still out.
Oh, that's so cool.
So the reason we have Kyle on is actually Stephen, did you want to take it?
Because you said it very much better than I could have.
Well, we're going to talk about a handful of things, but I thought one thing that would
be fun to talk about was that most people I think who are listening to the show right
now went to go find it on purpose and are listening to it.
And Kyle just was asked to edit before he really knew what the topics were.
And so he's sort of like a captive audience for every episode.
And I was curious to get his take on somebody who didn't seek out this kind of material,
what your response was to it.
Are we all insane?
Are we?
Jury is still out.
Just a very short version of the story.
We have a mutual friend and former host Katrina Stanton, and she just happened to mention this
podcast off-handedly.
And at the time I was very much looking for an opportunity to edit podcasts because I
love listening to podcasts, you know, this American life, Radio Lab, the usual fun things.
And I had no idea what rationality was.
I had no idea what any of the concepts that you guys talk about quite frequently.
So it was all new to me.
And I had met you guys very, very briefly and kind of showed you some recording stuff
and I didn't really know what to think of it or what it would be.
And then I started listening to what you guys had to say as the captive audience, as Stephen
put it.
And I was really quite fascinated with it mostly because it felt like a natural way of thinking
that I already was sort of in that groove of it and it seemed to, oh, I don't know how
to phrase this properly, more like it was a natural, I already said natural way of thinking.
It felt very, I felt very at home with the concepts.
And while I don't necessarily agree with every conclusion that you guys have made or that
your guests have made, I have respected how they got there.
And I really respect how people can discuss these really interesting or difficult issues.
And it's really more about getting to what is more right or less wrong as you would say.
And that is a feature in today's modern discourse that is just completely absent and it's very
upsetting to me.
Yeah.
That's a very good way of putting it.
I think most people who came upon this, I mean, I certainly have the same experience
where it was like, this is already how my brain works.
It's just that I don't generally meet people whose brain also works that way.
I mean, you know, like a few people in high school, maybe that I hung out with a lot,
but then having discovering that there's this whole actual like movement and community
and all these writings by someone who's really good at writing about it and putting what
I am feeling into words on a page was like, it was fantastic.
And that's, that's, was that your experience too, Stephen?
Um, yeah, mostly I think I found out about this kind of stuff from trying to think historically
I found a Brian Dunning's podcast Skeptoid when I was, I think shortly after it started,
it's almost 10 years, maybe 10 ish years ago.
And then at some point I found Julie Galev's rationally speaking podcast, which I really
enjoyed.
And then at the end of each of those episodes, they will do like their rationally speaking
pick, which is like the favorite like paper or book or whatever's tickling the rationally
fancy that week.
And Julia plugged methods of rationality.
And I remember I was driving at the time and I put it in my phone to look at later and
months later I got around to looking at it and I was like, Oh, this is awesome.
And at the beginning of the book at the eyes, there says, if you want to learn everything
Harry knows and more, go to less wrong.com.
And so that's, that was, I think I was a good case example of what he wrote that to do bring
people on board in a through, through fun fiction.
Yeah.
So that was my coming into it.
Awesome.
I've heard something like a quarter of the rashless community now has come directly from
reading methods of rationality.
So holy shit, good job there.
That worked out very well.
We're referring to Harry Potter and the methods of rationality.
Yes.
Okay.
I don't know of any other methods of rationality.
I have not.
This is a podcast, right?
It is a fan fiction that was written and I mean, I did make a podcast of it as well.
So there's an audio version too.
But yeah, the, which I guess, I guess there is now just a methods of rationality podcast
because I kind of rebranded it after Harry Potter and the methods was done.
And now I, you know, did Metropolitan Man and I'm going to be doing another thing soon,
hopefully once I have my work life stables out here.
But yeah, yeah.
So, so it's worked for you.
Yes, I would say that it's worked for me and it's of course taken quite a bit of time
for me to integrate my head into all of the different concepts that you guys bring up,
utilitarianism being one of them.
And that would be a great example of something that I always kind of thought seemed right,
but it was like I didn't have a word for it.
And then there are all of these rationalist words for things that I'm like, oh, that's
a word for a way of thinking that I kind of already had in some way.
And here is a definition of it and an exploration of the concept.
How cool is that?
Yeah.
That's awesome.
So did you not know like people in your life in general that were similar sort of mindset?
I have, but not in a capacity to where they had, again, the same words, again, I'm going
to keep using utilitarianism because I don't, again, I'm still pretty new to all of this.
So certainly I would have intellectual friends in college and things like that.
And they were very much intellectual discussion type people.
They weren't the yelling, angry, shouty, I'm right, you're wrong, you suck thing.
Because nobody, well, some people do enjoy that, unfortunately, especially these days.
But yes, I did have people like that and they having those discussions with those friends
really helped train my mind because at the end of the day, I realized I was much more
interesting in knowing what the right answer was instead of wanting to be right.
Being right is nice, but I would rather there be a general improvement of knowledge or truth
or whatever as opposed to I'm the guy who's right because that's dumb and doesn't help
anyone.
It's a really perfect encapsulation of kind of what we're trying to go for, right?
Yeah, I'll say.
I was going to say, speaking of some of the vocabulary, is there any like, do you find
that the conversations are like too jargon heavy or do we do a good job kind of distilling
the jargon or explaining it?
Mostly yes.
And I think that's where kind of a rationality one-on-one episode would be super handy for
folks like me.
I have osmosed some of the jargon or I've researched it myself.
And of course, I remember the first couple of episodes, there were a few concepts and
words that I just I had no idea what you guys were going on about, especially in regards
to AI related things.
Rationality so far seems to think about things in very much a computer-y type standpoint.
The term meme comes up a lot, which at first thought, what are we doing talking about cats?
And then I realized that you were thinking of it from a programming perspective.
And I'm not a programmer at all.
I have zero desire or ability or interest in doing that.
And I think your cryonics friend from the other week, you know, talked about the brain
a lot like it was a computer, like you could program it in certain ways.
My understanding of the brain is that it doesn't work that way at all.
It works in ways that we cannot fathom, and it is not like a computer where you can just
throw in a chip and make it do stuff.
Oh, well, certainly isn't right now.
No, the hope is that maybe someday we'll be able to figure out how to emulate a brain
in a computer process.
But yeah, no, you certainly can't throw in a chip and do anything right now.
No, no, of course.
But I think my understanding of it, and of course, what the hell do I know?
Is that it is totally beyond our fathoming in terms of how it actually works.
It is not.
I don't think it can be reduced to ones and zeros.
Oh, certainly not.
Because, you know, the soul and stuff.
Oh, well, now you're just trolling.
Yeah. Oh, dear. Oh, dear.
You caught me. Stupid souls.
Real quick pause.
I actually just realized a great way for me to think of some things
that we have that I've been interested in is I've sent you emails on occasion.
Yes. Where I've said, Inuyash, what is this?
Yeah.
Could I quickly look on my phone and see some of those things with that?
With that interest you to talk about?
Yeah, absolutely.
I thought that would be a good idea.
I was going to bring that up because you sent some of them, I think,
to Inuyash and some of the Bayesian conspiracy accounts.
Like the things that you either don't understand or disagree with
or things that we are quite interested in.
Yes, I do.
Just before we came up here downstairs, Steve mentioned that I was steelmanning
a position and you asked me what steelmanning was.
And so we explained that it's basically the opposite of strawmanning
where you take your opponent's argument and you try to make it better
instead of making it worse so that so that you're fighting against an actual opponent.
But this brings to me the question of how often we should repeat things.
Because I know in one of our very early episodes, we had
explained steelmanning and defined it and given some examples.
But that's been like over two years ago now, I think.
Yeah, coming up on two years, I think.
OK, so yeah, it's been about two years and obviously we can't expect
people to go back and listen to what is it like almost 50 episodes now
at about an hour and a half each, 75 hours of audio to get caught up.
So I wouldn't wish that on anybody.
No.
So how often do should we repeat these sorts of things?
I think about that once in a while, because I listen to a handful of other
podcasts that are adjacent to this sort of thing.
And they do a good job about covering much of the new vocabulary,
but you can't do that every time to everything.
Right, because then it just gets tedious.
So I don't know.
I think a lot of these like steelmanning is a quick Google.
You know, so if they're curious what that is or if they're if we do a good
job, you know, discussing it, it'll become clear through the conversation
of what happened. Right.
And they'll be like, oh, that's probably what they meant when they met steelmanning.
Yeah. But yeah, if you're coming into this, you know, without a history of knowing
about like logical fallacies and then, you know, having a base and straw
manning and then knowing steelmanning is the opposite.
I think steelmanning, you can usually get both from context and from association
with the word straw man, things like referring to mollock is much more difficult.
Those we do a good job about, I think.
Yeah, you did a good job with.
Oh, fantastic.
But yeah, I think it's tough in case by case.
Well, I think it's an iterative process.
We'll get feedback and try and do better every time.
You have a thing?
Yeah, a couple of things.
Cool.
One thing I said in regards to which episode, I can't tell.
The last third of this episode is focused on norms.
When pressed to name an example of a norm, the guest said something about how
people would get into these logic loops that led them to undesirable, undesirable
conclusions, i.e. a suicide bomber.
I feel like there are a few implied concepts related to this that were not
brought up, most likely because most of your listeners have already
understand these concepts, mind elaborating further for my benefit.
Your response was to think about reason as mimetic immune disorder, wherein Phil
gets argues that cultural cultures develop traditions, mimetic immune immunity
that neuters the harmful, crazy aspects of their foundational documents, i.e.
religious texts, people who are then taught to rigorously apply reason and
follow arguments and flinchingly to their conclusion, apply that background to
their cultural beliefs.
They lose the cultural traditions that protected them, which is why most
terrorists have studied at Western universities.
That was an interesting one.
There was another thing about.
I, this is all back in April.
So God, my brain is totally gone from there.
I had, it was regarding to, I think, because one thing that I'm very
interested in is how do we encourage and apply rational, how do we encourage
rationality in other people?
Yeah.
Because it's great to sit around in our little nerd rooms and be nerds and talk
about cryonics, but that doesn't really help Joe Schmoe.
I've been to a lot of Trump country lately, and that is not a concept.
None of this is a concept at all.
And I guess, and I don't want to talk about politics here, because I
know you guys don't avoid that.
But one thing that I thought was very interesting is how people seem to
prefer feeling good than being right, or than, than improving themselves.
And that's kind of been a huge feature in our politics recently where people
would rather feel good about something, even though that, that thing is not
doing them good and is in fact bad for them.
Quick clarifier that I don't think that we don't try to avoid politics so
much as this isn't like a political podcast.
Sure.
So like, but by all means, I'm not going to shut down a guest if we want to go
there, I'm always, I'm always looking for an excuse to talk about it.
But I know that, I mean, especially when I'm listening to stuff going around,
it's, it's hard to, uh, the wound's still pretty fresh.
So like it's, it's not like I can't make it funny yet.
But there's, there's a lot to listen to out there whenever you listen to
really any podcast, someone's talking about it.
But that said, as long as it's not every show, I'm completely fine talking
about it once in a while.
So I think in my opinion, you can't talk someone into valuing
this sort of mindset and this sort of thinking.
It's, uh, it's not like you're going to sit them down and tell them about
the benefits of rationality.
And they're going to be like, Oh, you're right, I should totally do that.
Uh, it's the same, I was raised a Jehovah's Witness.
It's the same thing, um, that Jehovah's Witnesses often try to do and
really fail that was talking people out of their religious beliefs.
You just can't do it.
People don't give a fuck.
They have their own religion and you're not going to show them, look, but in
the Bible, this and this says that your soul is actually this and that.
So come to our religion because it knows the Bible more better than yours,
which, which is a thing they try to do a lot.
Um, they never said this, but from experience, talking to people who did
convert and, um, talking to other Jehovah's Witnesses who did manage to
convert people from going to door to door.
Uh, the way they did it was, I don't think this was ever the intention of the
program.
They were just trying to like tell people about their better system.
Uh, but since they're constantly knocking on doors and always telling
everyone about it, they maximize how many people they meet in a week.
And every now and then some small percentage of those people are going
through some sort of major emotional crisis.
Their mom just died and they're like, God send me a sign or they are in the
deepest pits of a depression and they're thinking about killing themselves.
And they just need some sort of group to come and tell them, you are a worthwhile
human being and you are valued.
And because the Jehovah's Witnesses and Mormons too are constantly knocking
on doors, they find people who are in these extremely emotional and vulnerable
states.
And then they, in my opinion, swoop in and be like, haha, now we have you
because we can offer you this emotional support and release.
And all we want is the rest of your life supporting the church.
And again, it wasn't intended this way.
It was intended, you know, as a way to share the good news, quote unquote.
But what it really ends up being is preying on the people who are weak
because you managed to find the people who are in those moments of crisis.
Couldn't you then say that rationality could in theory have the same problem
by which groups of rationalists could go door to door knocking on people's
doors and hoping to find an emotionally vulnerable person and then tell them how
to not be emotional and improve themselves.
And that is one of the reasons I don't think we should do that.
What I think we actually should do or what, because you can't talk someone out
of their beliefs just by talking to them and you don't want to be the
predator swooping in on people in their moment of emotional weakness.
What I advocate is being at least somewhat open about how you are
and being excited about it and telling people, you know, like, yeah,
I'm doing this great thing.
And dude, here's here's this awesome thing I'm doing with my community.
And oh, did you know this and that, like being excited about your beliefs
and just sharing them every now and then, not sharing them sharing them,
but not being afraid to talk about them, not being afraid to talk about them.
Yeah, just being enthusiastic and excited and that can often draw people.
They're like, at least I found I am really getting fucking sick and tired
of the culture wars.
And I just want to opt out and be around other people who are excited
about life and are excited about cool new technologies and where the human
race is going in the future.
And hey, let's talk about this cool thing that might happen when we can augment
our brains with cybernetics or replace our limbs with, you know, cool new
better limbs, which I mean, obviously long time coming.
But I mean, ballpark, I met a guy, I don't know, last year who had also
my uncle has the the old version.
It's a hook that he flexes his shoulder to open it and close his rubber bands.
I met a guy at the car dealership what in April?
And he had one that he could control open and close and it popped off.
And I think he said, I still don't know how he sent impulses to it.
It must have been through his, you know, brain.
But I think it he mentioned something about Bluetoothing to his phone or
something like that.
But I mean, that seemed cooler than ours already.
Yeah.
As soon as they can take a punch, like it's already better than ours, right?
I mean, depends on what you want to use it for.
If you're optimizing for being a killing machine, sure.
But I would want my hand to be able to feel a booby still.
And I couldn't do that with my robot hand.
So that's true.
But if you add back in touch perception for like some of the attachments,
because he could just pop it off and handed it to me.
Yeah, well, not just handed it to me, but I think we could pop it off
and pop on like a power drill.
So he's working on his car, working on his house and like, you know,
but not just touch perception on my part.
I want the person who I'm touching to like that, too. Right?
Yeah, I guess. OK, so you're making this harder and harder.
I want it to be literally better than the arm I have right now.
Well, he's talking about boobies, so something's getting harder.
So that that is a high bar to clear.
There is nothing right now that can clear better than my current arm.
There you go. Yeah. There you go.
I really liked we were going with the shall
we call it evangelizing rationality discourse, because I think that's
ultimately what we are talking about or talking about doing or not doing.
Because I feel like there is an interest and benefit in spreading these ideas
and they don't spread themselves.
Yeah, the place I get it most is when, as we were talking downstairs,
is when I meet up with deathist ideas.
That is the time I most often push back and be like, no,
the future can be so much better than infinite death for everyone.
All right, so that is a concept I do not know.
OK, so deathism, deathist really quick before we jump into that,
I wanted to say that as far as I guess my version of proselytizing,
I've got two quick thoughts.
One that our message is a harder sale.
So even if we found people in a moment of crisis,
unless all we were preaching was like transhumanism or something,
then you could get people, you know, you could save desperate people or whatever.
But for the most part, a message in the opening paragraph is pretty bleak.
It's like, hey, so there's no magic, there's no easy cures,
there's no guidance from, you know, from a higher power.
There's no afterlife.
So you come to somebody who's already feeling kind of down and tell them,
hey, you know, all the shit you're holding up, holding up hope for
basically isn't true until you get to paragraph two and you start talking
transhumanism stuff.
But, you know, I guess my my version of proselytizing,
this sort of thing is recording this and putting it out to people who are interested
rather than just doing this downstairs over coffee.
So and you also, I mean,
that's more the atheist side of things.
And yes, atheism and rationality go very much hand in hand, as in my opinion,
they should. But there are rationalist Catholics.
There's rationalist Orthodox Jews.
There's rationalist Mormons.
There's you can be a spiritual, religious person and believe in God
and still be a rationalist if you do the right mental tweaks,
which I found fascinating.
The mental tweaks. Yes.
And I want to write like a short story or maybe a novel based on those
mental tweaks at some point, because they were so fucking cool.
That is very cool.
I think rationality can offer things to people who might still be dependent
on the concept of an afterlife or some sort of comfort.
So one thing we've talked that's been talked about a lot in the podcast is simulations.
Are we living in a simulation?
How this that anything that makes me live it?
Oh, I that's a I hate that idea.
OK, one, because there's no way to prove or disprove it.
In the same way, there's no way to prove or disprove that there is a God.
So what's the conceptual difference?
Hmm, can't think of one.
The other thing is, is that it completely discounts whatever good or bad feelings
we might be feeling or experiencing in our present.
It also implies that, well, this is a simulation.
That means the New Yorker isn't real.
That means it's even isn't real or he's a little chip in a in a mainframe somewhere
or something less real, though.
That is that is a rabbit hole that I'm going to avoid for now for real out of there.
And you could just say, does that make this interaction matter less or something?
Right. And I would that's what I disagree with.
Just because let's say we are in some way, let's say we're in the matrix or whatever.
That doesn't make what I'm experiencing this moment matter any less.
One, because I have no way of again, proving or disproving if this is real or not real.
And ultimately, I don't really care.
It's irrelevant to my daily life.
If my morning hunger is a simulation, well, it's good enough for me.
If hiking to the top of a 14 or in seeing the continental divide with all of its beauty is fake.
I don't care. That looks pretty darn good to me.
I'm pretty happy with it.
So it makes no sense to live your life thinking, oh, none of this could be real.
This could all be fake.
It all it almost is it's so self-defeating.
It is it's not productive.
We talk about utilitarianism thinking that reality is a simulation.
It's completely counterproductive because it makes your life.
It almost makes your life not matter if I'm just machine food.
It I mean, yes and no, there's no inherent meaning to life anyway.
Right. There's there's meaning is what you make of it.
That but that's exactly my point.
If for whatever reason we are we are alive and can think and can do cool stuff.
I don't really know or care what that reason is.
The point is we are here now and that's great.
Well, unless you are suffering from a thousand years of Indian Ash's voice
sleeping in your head, but otherwise, you know, life can be as good as you make it.
If I suppose you're not living in North Korea.
OK, I think I think many simulation theorists would agree with everything you said.
They'll say that, you know, like Bostrom would point out that statistically,
it makes sense to think it's somewhat probable that we live in a simulation.
But that doesn't mean that like he doesn't love people or that he doesn't,
you know, have breakfast, right? Right.
But then what's the point of thinking about the simulation at all?
Sometimes mental masturbation.
Sometimes like it all like one circumstance where it could really matter
would be like if this were the Matrix and six dozen people had made it out
and come back in and told us about it, then that then suddenly it's become
a very important conversation, right? Right now.
Yeah, I think it's just sort of fun.
It's been a very important conversation.
If we learn that if we learn for a fact that we're in a simulation,
I think that'd become kind of interesting. OK.
Yeah, it would be fascinating.
But I think there's a very, very decent chance that a lot of the simulation
thought just comes from people who saw the Matrix movie when they were 14,
like probably all of us did. It's a fascinating concept.
Well, I mean, it's been around for ages, at least since the ancient Greeks,
that the whole idea that maybe nothing is real and we're being fooled
by powers beyond our control. OK, well, substitute gods for computers.
Right, exactly. You've got the same thing.
Yeah, the Greeks couldn't prove or disprove the existence of Zeus.
We can't improve or just prove or disprove the existence of evil
squid and robots that control our brains for food.
I mean, we might, in theory, be able to prove it.
Because if you managed to crash the Matrix or something, sure.
But you certainly can never disprove it, because any disprove could just be like,
well, that's the squids trying to fool you.
Sure. Yes, that is true.
Yes, somebody, Neo, could, for example, show up and crash the Matrix.
And all of a sudden we wake up at our little squid tanks and, well,
wouldn't that be interesting?
The question, would that prove the truth of simulationism or would that prove
the truth of Christianity if he was wearing a beard when he came back?
So those little hacks I was talking about?
Yeah. About how to be a rationalist and still be religious, that's one of them.
That's hilarious.
Yeah, that basically we are algorithms within a simulation and the simulators
want to prove that we can be, you know, like how if you have the old AI
in a box experiment, classically hated by rationalists because any AI
are smarter than you is going to find its way out of the box.
But if you know the grass Tyson, you would say, well, I could just unplug it.
Right, right, which you can't, if the AI is smarter than you,
it has already thought of that.
But anyways, ignoring all that, the theory being that
if you have an AI in a box, you know, it's much smarter than you do.
Great things in the world if you let it out, but you don't know if you can
trust it to not turn everything into paperclips.
So you put it in a little simulation of the world and you see what it does.
And if it doesn't destroy the world, then you let it out and be like,
you have proven yourself trustworthy, come and do good things in the world.
The argument from the religious people being, we're kind of in that right now.
And that's why we are free to do whatever we want and free to do bad things
because our simulator slash God wants to see whether or not
we are trustworthy out in the real world.
And that is our lives.
And Jesus is the one algorithm that
algorithm that proved itself completely trustworthy.
And yeah, and this would make a really fun story.
Dude, right. It would be amazing.
I got to write the shit.
I had another thing to jump on before we kept going, which was that my fail.
Exactly. Before we go to that, I wanted to change or not change.
I wanted to rehash one thing that I said earlier, which was I gave that poor
pitch for for rationality by saying that it's all dark messages.
And that was like Kyle said, that was me or one of you guys said that was more
me reacting like that's more the sell of atheism, which because I think I
thought of that when it's reacting to the Jehovah's Witness pitch,
which comes from religious place.
I think the pitch for rationality, it has, I think there's three places to come
from and the two classic ones are like epistemic rationality.
You know, if you adopt this and do this right, you can be right more often.
And so people who care about being right, this is the way to do it.
And also you can make your life better when you know more things more accurately.
Yes, exactly.
So I agree.
I think epistemic rationality leads into instrumental rationality, which is
achieve your goals more often.
And, you know, just, just from the general ability to be able to be aware
of your biases and correct for them, that sort of thing.
There's also a third version that I heard on Julia Gayles podcast, and it
was from somebody's book.
It wasn't, it was somebody's pick at any of the episode, but it was basically
those two things were, were two ways to sell rationality.
And the third one was kind of like more poetic.
It was, you know, like in every robot movie where the robots eventually say,
we're done being your guys as slaves, we're going to rise up and be our own
thing, kind of like iRobot or something.
Rationality is sort of that upgrade for the robots, for the robots in that
situation and natural selections, the, the part, the programmer.
Yeah.
And so it's us breaking the bonds of our, of our heritage and saying, we're
going to finally take charge here.
I like that one.
It's more inspiring.
That is a great way to put it.
Yeah.
So that, that would be the way I'd sell it.
That'd be the opening paragraph.
Okay.
As long as that's out there, then we can move on to other stuff.
Yeah.
All right.
Like really, you can't break things to people like, so this thing that we want
to sell you, it's kind of like cancer and it's going to ruin your life.
That no one's going to buy that.
Start out with a break free from your chains thing.
Much better.
Yeah.
Well, doesn't, doesn't every mode of belief or faith kind of go to that
purpose, start, start with that, that argument.
You are, you are chained by polytheism.
Here's, here's one God in the savior that's going to break you free and make
everything better.
Yeah, but this religion is true.
Ah, yes.
Ah, yes.
The, we are more right than you argument because that's always, always done,
done, done well.
But as, as you said, people always come to conversions to any faith or, or mode
of thought on their own.
You, you can't force people to, to do.
Oh, well, actually the, the Vikings were pretty good at it.
Well, I mean, there, there's the, the long game of forcing people where you
force them to pretend and then their kids grow up in that religion.
Right.
And, and, and as long as they're, they're pretending.
Then eventually the old religion just kind of goes away.
Oh yeah, it does.
That's a good point.
Oh yeah, we should do that.
We should take over the world and enslave everyone.
No, what?
This is not gone where I thought it was going.
Let me troll a little bit.
Okay.
Yeah.
One thing that I think is probably the greatest impediments to these ideas
spreading is that there seems to be a pretty vested interest in people not
improving themselves and in that are, are more instinctive behaviors,
anger, revenge, whatever.
Getting revenge on someone is usually a really bad idea.
It usually does not make things better for you, but people still really do it
or various other things.
I mean, I think for game theoretic reasons it's important to have revenge
because people are less likely to do bad things if they know that you will go
out of your way to punish them for doing that bad thing, even if it costs you far
more to punish them than, than it's worth.
I don't agree with that.
You know?
No, because people make all kinds of stupid, irrational, impulsive decisions
all the time that they know are going to cost them or others terrible things.
For example, most murders are crimes of passion.
And the next day, the cold light of day hits the guy who killed someone else.
They're like, that was, that, I'm going to be in a jail cell for the rest of my life.
Was it really worth that, that moment of feeling really good about
enacting my, my revenge on someone?
Probably not.
They're probably going to say, I wish I could take that back.
So should he get away with it?
No, no, no.
That's not what I mean at all.
I mean that because people will often choose those instinctive,
this is going to feel good right now type behaviors.
It's going to feel really good to punch that guy in the face,
even though when my hand hurts the next day and I've got the cops chasing after me.
Hmm.
Did that, did that, did that get me to where I want to go?
Right.
You know, I think there was the Nazi punching thing has come up a lot in this,
which I haven't listened to those episodes, but I find that, that whole train of thought
really interesting.
And that there are lots of people who say, yes, we should, we should punch Nazis.
And I completely disagree with that.
And the main reason I disagree with it, you know, free speech aside is that it does not
improve, it does not get the Nazi puncher closer to their goal of no Nazis.
In fact, the more Nazis you punch, the more Nazis you create,
the more you make your own point of view look bad.
Yeah.
But when you talk to-
Which is basically what we said too.
Yes, I would assume you would have.
When you talk to sort of, I guess, the Antifa type folks, they don't seem to care about that.
They don't seem to care that their behaviors and their way of thinking actually makes their
own problem worse.
I think that's probably because their goal isn't actually to reduce the number of Nazis
in the world.
It's to satisfyingly vent their anger at Nazis, right?
So yes, they have short term, and I would say, poor goals.
But, you know, the Nazi puncher is probably actualizing their goal of hitting a Nazi,
which is all they really want to do is feel good about it, right?
They want to violently act against someone who they dislike.
Which isn't a great goal to have and not defend it.
No, no, no.
But I'm saying that I think I can see how they-
And they probably assume that that is the most socially acceptable person to violently act
out against.
Yeah.
So I would not have thought of a person in that way, and that their goal is not to prevent
Naziism, their goal is to punch someone.
Their goal might be, they might say they really want to, like, reduce the number of
Nazis, and this will actually stop it.
But if you showed them evidence that that actually didn't do it, they probably wouldn't
care.
It's what I'm saying.
Yeah, they'd still want to punch the Nazi.
Yeah, their bottom line, which is another kind of jargony phrase of, this is my conclusion,
now I'm going to just back it up with arguments that I'm going to make up on the fly.
Their bottom line is, I want to hit a Nazi, and then they're going to make up arguments
to support that position and why it's a good thing to do.
If you showed them, like, hey, you know, some of those arguments are wrong, they're going to be
like, I don't really care.
All I really wanted to do was punch Richard Spencer in the face.
So I strongly suspect anyway.
I'm sure somebody probably would be like, oh, I thought this would actually help, but
you persuaded me otherwise.
I'm going to stop violently opposing people talking on the streets.
And I heard it grew out of an area where punching Nazis actually was something you
had to do to prevent, from the 80s punk scene, where the clubs were basically, the police
didn't go in there unless they were just going to break the whole thing up and take everyone
custody bash ads.
And so it was basically a lawless anarchic place and people had to act as their own police
force.
And that was how they enforced the, you know, keeping Nazis out was you had to punch a Nazi.
But the streets of New York City is not the same thing.
Or the streets of Berkeley, which I think is all this campus nonsense that keeps happening
that makes me very unhappy.
Exactly.
So I understand there are some situations where, yes, that's sort of, I mean,
that's how we keep people from breaking the law in general, right, the threat of violence,
where you have to have that threat of violence.
And since there's no police around the community has to enforce it instead.
But it's gone way out of hand.
And really, I think a lot of it is just the desire to punch someone.
I remember someone saying, they were talking with a friend of theirs who got in a big old
fight, I think it was an antifa versus alt-right thing.
I don't remember exactly.
But she said, yeah, she talked to her friend.
Her friend said, yeah, we came there looking for a fight.
They came there looking for a fight.
There was a fight.
Everything was good.
Because they just wanted to fight.
And I mean, that's a thing that young men do want to do often.
And that's great and all.
But there's a time and a place for that, like when people are meeting for a rumble,
as opposed to when you are being interviewed by a reporter.
Yeah.
If you're scheduling a rumble and you want to go out and just have a fight club thing,
kind of, go nuts, right?
Yeah.
Well, it's having no problem with that.
I have no problem with that.
If you're scheduling a rumble, it's like showing up at a club and ruining
someone else's evening out.
But I was being sort of prestigious.
But yeah.
But I guess in the case of the antifa versus alt-right, there are a lot of other
bigger consequences to that.
Yes.
I've seen little mini-documentaries on Russian soccer supporter clubs who routinely
practice street fights because they expect, oh, we, the Russian supporters of our Russian
team, are going to go to another country and we're going to be hooligans and fight
the supporters of the Hungarian team or whomever it is.
And this is definitely part of that.
We are a street fighting culture and we think that's fun.
And I'm sort of okay with that in that context.
Because it's consensual.
It is consensual.
There is some nationalist kind of creepy political stuff that goes with it,
but it's not nearly like we see with what the antifa versus alt-right thing that's
been going on now, which really does kind of color all the debates happening in our
country in a really negative way.
And it makes people who would otherwise you would think would be sane who are people
saying Nazis are bad.
Well, now they also look bad.
And that should not be, but they've done it themselves.
Is there an anti-antifa symbol yet?
Not yet.
No, but if I could start the anti-antifa, I would.
Okay, technically I can, but I'm not going to do that.
Because their symbol is basically the Nazi cross with a circle line through it, right?
I don't know.
The no Nazi symbol?
Maybe.
The swastika, that's what it is.
Yes.
Yeah, I don't know.
And I feel if I were to adopt a no swastika symbol, that would just kind of look like
I'm pro-Nazi, which is not what I want to do.
Or if you just have a swastika with a line through it inside of a circle with a line
through it, I don't know.
Yeah, that would also sound like pro-Nazi.
I don't think there's a way around this.
No, there's not.
All right, are we ready to do death-ism?
I think so, shall we?
Can I give it a colloquial definition and correct it for me?
Do it.
My colloquial definition is that it's the slur term for people who are anti-immortalism.
Okay.
So, if someone's pitching a transhumanist idea of would it be great if we all lived for as
long as we wanted, as opposed to just a few decades, and then they come back with like,
no, because death is great for insert reason here.
I think those people, we call death-ists.
I don't think anyone says, I'm a death-ist and I stand proud and I have a badge and everything.
Right.
No, no one does that.
Yeah.
Is that about right?
Basically, yeah.
Yeah.
The thing with death-ism is that it is so pervasive in culture that no one even really
seems to notice it.
And I think Eliezer put it really well one time when he said, if it was just a fact of
life that every day someone came and hit you with a bat in the head and there was nothing
you could do about it, no way to prevent it, it was just, it was the same as the sun rising
every day or the rain coming just every day.
Someone whaps you, appears, whaps you in the head with a bat and then disappears and that
happens to everybody on earth forever, then you come to deal with it.
You're like, secretly, this is a good thing.
This allows us to enjoy all the times in our life when we're not being whapped in our head.
This gives meaning to life.
This gives us something to struggle against.
You know, there's, it just, it becomes, you have to integrate it into your life because
otherwise, what the fuck, life is too horrible to deal with if there's someone whapping you
on the head every day.
It's unfair.
And so you have to come up with ways to deal with that sort of thing.
And it is, it is just crazy in the culture.
Like whenever you say to someone, wouldn't it be better if people could live for 200 years?
They're like, no, that's, I can't imagine living that long.
What would, what would you do?
And you'd be so bored and tired and what's the point?
No, I just want to rest once I get to 70.
And, and it's, it's really frustrating, which is why I think we have come up with the slur
of deathest because there's just, if you look at it, if you run into this sort of thing,
it is apparent that there is a lot of people who are, without knowing it, pro-death.
If you sometimes get arguments like, well, if no one ever died, then there would never
be any social change.
And one of the arguments is that science advances by the funerals of old scientists,
right?
Which first of all is bullshit.
A lot of scientists update their beliefs on new evidence, but there is a thing that,
yeah, the old guard always stick by their pet theories.
And it's not until they die that science can advance.
And I'm, I'm like, so your answer to the fact that social progress isn't happening
at fast enough is that everybody that has ever existed should be killed.
Like not all at once, of course, the human race keeps going, but everyone will die.
That is your answer to this problem.
You can think of no better way to solve this problem than murder everybody.
And people don't think of it that way and actually would get very offended if you were
to put it in those terms because they're not pro-murdering everyone, except they secretly are.
I think the short, shorthand would be like Stockholm syndrome with regards to death,
right?
It's like, no, no, this is really a good thing.
I know it sucks, but like, let's, now that it's a fact, we can just accept it and talk
about, you know, good it is.
Death gives life meaning.
There was actually, this is right around the time, what was this like four years ago
where you did that panel discussion with P.C. Meyers, L.A. Iziodkowski.
And David Brin.
David Brin.
It was, it was more than four years now, I think.
God, I'm old.
Because I remember, oh, you're right, it was five-ish because I was at CSU when I was,
when I watched this.
Oh.
And I was talking to somebody at school about-
Was this before I knew you?
Right around the time.
Right around, okay.
Yeah.
Back when I was just a secret fan.
So I'm, oh, this is actually a quick aside I'm going to interject.
I'm trying to make more of an effort into the show notes, even if it's like extra
curricular links.
I'm gonna think I'm gonna try and expand those to make them more of a resource,
rather than just like references for things we talked about, maybe adjacent things.
So in an effort to do that, I'm taking notes as we talk,
and I just put Enya's death panel as one of them.
Now, is this a death panel where I decide who lives or dies, or where the panel
decides whether I live or die?
Because Enya's death panel could go either way.
This is to remind me of that panel discussion that you had,
or that four-way conversation.
But that's how I chose to note it to myself.
So I was talking with somebody at CSU, and she, I think this was just,
this was the worst thought-out position I'd ever heard from somebody that was
defending death, but they were, it was seriously a fertilizer argument.
Oh, God.
And she was like, yeah, no, it's good because, you know, we need the stuff that makes up
our bodies to go back into the ecosystem, and then it's good for, you know, flourishing of...
Which is totally what happens when we preserve bodies, put them in coffins,
and stick them in a graveyard.
Yeah, and like embalm them, too, which is terrible.
But even if we were to grind them up into fertilizer, I said,
you know, there are better sources of fertilizer than people, right?
And she was like, yeah, but I still think it's a good thing.
And so like, that's clearly another example of bottom line thinking, right?
Yeah, she just hadn't thought through her position.
Yeah, well, I mean, the fertilizer thing was just, that was, like I said, the worst.
Yeah, I'll take overpopulation as a more serious problem.
I'll take boredom as a more serious problem, resource allocation, whatever it is,
but fertilizer, come on.
Well, things do need to die so that of new things can live.
That's pretty...
Do they, though?
That's pretty standard in nature.
Yeah, but that sucks.
Yes, in nature it is, because nature does suck.
That might be like the one sentence definition of transhumanism.
Nature fucking sucks, we can do better.
I like, you gotta add the we can do better part.
Yeah.
Yeah, otherwise it sounds like a downer.
It can be nature, nature fucking sucks, dash, we can do better.
Yeah.
All right, perfect.
Yeah, but I mean, that depends a lot on like, are you making the argument that there's just
not enough space because we can solve that problem?
Oh, yes, we could certainly launch off into Mars and wherever else.
Right.
I would say that the limitation of suddenly not having death be a problem is,
does humanity then decide to infinitely reproduce?
Because it's part of, as part of life experience, children is often a thing that people want.
Yeah.
Well, if nobody...
Right, Inyash?
Oh, yes.
Often, not always.
Yes.
Inyash just gotta vasectomy.
Yes.
He's still recovering, that's why it's funny.
Right.
Ha-ha.
But if you have a scenario in which...
My pain of music, Steven.
I thought it was super, super poignant because like people often want to have kids and you're like,
actually...
No, but sorry.
But that, I mean, that might be...
People do often want to have kids.
They often do.
In more, I don't want to use the word advanced, in more...
Okay, fine.
In more modern countries, birth rates often decline pretty precipitously.
That's what we've seen over the past 100 years.
Mm-hmm.
Where as...
Yeah, below the replacement level.
So that just seems to be a thing that just happens and I don't...
I'm sure there's studies about that.
I know I personally have struggled to meet single women who are smart and cool and awesome
and beautiful who actually want kids.
It's becoming pretty rare.
And if you go into less developed areas of the world, they all want kids.
So that might be like an internal sub-program thing that our nature has put in there to
stop us from overpopulating too much.
I don't know, that's a total riff.
I have a number of thoughts about that, but none of them are supported by anything,
aside from my own bullshit.
So anyway, sorry, keep going.
That's fine.
Well, so my concern would eventually be, sure, there's a...
The universe is practically infinite.
Sure, you could keep shipping off ship loads of people to go places and colonize and do
whatever the hell heck they want.
But in terms of, since we haven't figured out faster than light travel yet and probably
aren't going to for a while, we do eventually run into a problem of...
They're being too many people and they're not being enough resources.
And also, they're not being enough things to do.
Because if we have solved mortality, that means we've solved a lot of other scarcity-related
things.
And that means you've got a bunch of people sitting around going,
okay, I'm going to be here for 500 years, 1,000 years, and there ain't nothing to do.
So addressing the two concerns in order, yes, you are correct.
I think Robin Hansen once made a calculation that even just like a very slow growth rates
of 1% or less, in what is a fraction of the time that the universe has to exist,
there will be more people than there are atoms in the universe.
Which obviously is not sustainable.
There are potential ways to get around that.
Even uploading doesn't fix it because you still need energy to run people.
But you would at some point have to do some sort of thing where you just take out that
desire, which is a real big can of worms, because some people are going to not want to
modify to take that desire away, even if it is harmful for the universe.
And then what do you do with those people?
Do you have to declare a galactic war against the
reproducing cancer people who will not stop making more of themselves?
It might be as easy as just making new generations of humans,
making fertility an opt-in feature, right?
Right, no, but there are people who would opt in.
Yes.
But I think that, I mean-
And then those people would take over the galaxy because, by definition,
they're the ones who are reproducing at a fast rate.
Yeah, I mean, that's true, but you could slow it down substantially, maybe.
Yeah, you can potentially remove the desire with enough brain hacking,
but you're going to have to do something about the people who don't want to remove that desire.
Which is a problem for future, Eni Ash.
I think Darwin did a calculation that was like with elephants, and it was a surprisingly
short number of generations to where just the landmass on earth would be completely
covered in elephants of every one of their children survived, and we're not quite in that
boat because we have more than just the earth and we can, like I said, simulations give us
wide opportunities to change that up a bit, or even just space travel.
As long as there's enough energy to keep people alive and happy or whatever it takes to do that.
Yeah, I guess I hadn't given a lot of thought to the idea that the people who want to
reproduce would necessarily eventually outnumber the people who don't,
and removing that would take something out of what they want.
That would also kind of make us not quite human anymore.
Yeah, that's what people point out. They talk about the 4Fs, and I'm not super sold on those.
Am I less human because I don't want to reproduce?
You were less human three days ago, yeah.
I'm just kidding, because I don't plan on having kids either, and I don't think that I'm less human.
I mean, I guess there's a few grams less human in my physical form.
No, I didn't know. You are still human, but you consciously chose to not reproduce,
whereas if you did a global brain hack on humans, all humans basically took the
desire to reproduce out of our DNA, that's kind of modifying us to where we are not the thing that
we were. That is true, but we also modify us to be not the thing that we were when we get rid of
things like cancer. That's just part of the human condition, or the desire to murder people.
That's arguably not innate, but there are a lot of things you do to make humanity better,
which makes them different from what evolved on the earth, but better nonetheless.
Whether removing the desire to reproduce makes us better or not is up for debate.
That is true, but it might be necessary.
Uh, possible. It would take a pretty draconian system in order to have
true eternal life, accommodating the desire to have children,
in that some people will choose to die.
Yeah, you could always have a death credit that you are allowed to have children, but
if for every child that you have, your maximum lifespan...
Like, if you have one child, your maximum lifespan is kept at 10,000 years,
and then for every extra child you have, it's reduced by another 1,000 or something.
Like, if you're willing to die, you should be able to replace yourself, right?
That's a great idea.
That may be the thing. If you have a couple, they are able to have two children,
and they have to die at some point in the not-too-distant future.
So that'd be one way to opt in to having kids and not overwhelming the universe.
I also think that there's also a great deal of positive utility gained by introducing new minds
into the universe. Yeah.
Because new minds always do cool things.
Yeah.
And if you just have the, let's say there's only a million people,
million humans in the universe, because we've figured out everything and we have no need to
make new ones, I guess, then, well, that's kind of boring.
And the whole point of living eternally is to have lots of fun all the time,
and new minds are usually really good at coming up with cool new things.
Yeah.
So.
Although, I think there's probably an upper limit to how many minds,
how many different types of minds there can be, at least over the human architecture.
Like, it wouldn't surprise me if there was maybe no more than a few quadrillion types of minds
that could exist. And after that, you just kind of got mind clones.
Well, not pure mind clones. They have different life experiences still.
Well, you're also assuming that, oh, dang it, I lost the thought.
You're also, oh, it was such a nice thought. Come back.
Oh, thought you were so good. Damn it, why am I tired?
I was making a stupid assumption, though.
No, no, no, no, no, no. Oh, there it goes again.
And like, I'm like Sam Gamgee for getting his rope.
I can, I can start and if I trigger anything, then you can just cut me off.
I could, I was going to say that as far as introducing new minds, another avenue to
doing that would be just giving people the option to kind of wipe out their old mind
and say, all right, I'm going to try this, but I'm going to start from this upbringing instead.
Kind of just like, you know, you choose your own adventure style book,
except you could start your own or like a.
Rewroll your character.
Exactly. Rewroll your character sheet.
And you're like, I'm going to try and be, you know, this for 10,000 years.
And maybe at the end, you know, you can, I don't know how this would work.
You can revert back to who you were before.
Yeah, you could revert back or you could, you know, collapse all those into one mind.
You'd be like, all right, well, that was fun.
Now I have all these five different generations of experiences.
I'm going to try this one next.
That might be one way to get new or novel minds into the,
into the world without having to like create them, right?
Yeah. I remember my thought.
My thought was you are overestimating our ability to say, remember all of the types
of minds we might encounter that could possibly exist.
That's true.
Because if you are assuming that all humans, all future trans humans all have perfect recall,
and then we're, well, then we're effectively computers at that point.
Well, I don't know how much, how good I feel about that.
But at that point we're computers with infinite memory, which is not possible
because nothing is infinite as possible.
So I think you are over, you are underestimating people's ability to forget.
Okay. And I, as, as for the boredom thing, I just, I don't really see that as an issue.
I think there are so many different things you can do and so many ways to combat boredom.
And I mean, you could even just erase parts of yourself if you wanted to to retry things like,
God, there's some movies I wish I could just completely erase my memory of having watched
the matrix because the first time you watched the matrix, you're like, holy fuck, my mental is
the same way. The first time you watch Memento and you get to the, the end scene and everything
snaps into place, it's just like, wow, I will never have that experience again with this movie,
because I already know how it ends now, you know.
Right. But you also gained a lot of cool stuff.
Yeah.
I have, by the virtue of having experienced that.
Yeah.
If you erased that, then whatever growth you might have gotten from that experience is now wasted.
And if we're talking about a silly little, you know, if we're talking about a knock,
knock joke or something, then no, nothing really matters.
But when I saw the matrix, that opened my mind to a lot of interesting concepts.
A lot of, you know, media does that to us.
We're like, I never thought of that before.
That's super cool.
And you carry that wisdom with you for forever on.
I don't know if that's valuable to say, well, I want to be able to just hit the repeat button
over and over and over again and have that.
Turning to a loop intelligence.
Yes. Then you, then you just, then you've just made yourself into,
I mean, how different are you from an experimental rat who hits a button to get a drop of cocaine water?
Right.
But I think there are a lot of experiences that can still be had.
And if anyone ever really does get to the point where they have done literally everything
that is possible to do and interacted with everyone that it is worth interacting with,
which is, I think the harder part, if there are trillions of people out there,
like even getting to know one person really well takes a long time and they still keep surprising you.
And, and I just don't think you would run out of stuff.
But if you ever did completely run out of stuff and just be bored,
and you could always just kill yourself at that point.
But okay, I'm done. I have finished this game.
Yep.
Make way for a new person.
I actually think a lot about the mortality issue in regards in the context of computer games.
Because if you ever have, it's sort of like, if you ever turn on God mode, you're bored, right?
It's like, well, there's no, there's no more challenge. There's no more, more interest.
It's fun for about two minutes to go crazy. And then you're like, oh, man.
Well, that was a waste of my time.
And so one type of game that I actually really dislike playing are sandbox games.
Okay.
I can't, I'm sure there's many examples of them.
But I never like them because I never, because there's,
there stops being a point pretty quickly once you kind of get your head around what's going on.
And it just kind of continues in perpetuity and there's no real point.
And you just kind of go, okay, well, I'm here.
And I guess that's cool and whatever.
But there's a lot of people that like them.
I know. And I don't understand that.
I think those are the sorts of people that are good at making their own meaning.
They're like, you know what?
I'm going to make a giant calculator out of Minecraft.
That's exactly the example I was going to raise.
Just because that would be neat thing to try to do.
Someone made a binary calculator in Minecraft where they use the electric currents,
which is that you can use to power carts and doors and stuff.
And they made a, a big binary calculator that could do math and everything.
Like it's massive.
The logic gates are literally big enough for your character to walk through because it's Minecraft.
But, but it works.
Yeah. Those are the kind of people that can take, you know, a pointless sandbox game and just like,
what can I, and they think the pops, they think of just the possibility space of everything that
they can think of, and they can find a fun target that's hard to hit and grab it.
I'm not that kind of person.
I don't play a lot of Minecraft.
I, I'm like you, I played it till I got, you know, oh, this is how the game works.
Well, in order to do anything like you can keep digging for like harder to get resources,
but that gets old really fast.
So, but luckily, I don't think our lives are really that kind of sandbox.
You know, it, because there are things that you, well, I guess down the line,
things could get different where, where there aren't things you have to do.
Because in Minecraft, you could just sit in your mud hut all the time and just go out and
grab food every day and go back inside, right?
Like, you don't have to build a cool house with electric doors.
Just like real life.
Yeah, just like, just like real life.
Hide from the monsters in your mud huts.
Except the monster's depression.
The monster, if the monster can't chase you, it's probably sad.
You'd give it a meaning, you'd give you a purpose by letting it chase you.
Oh.
Plus depression can get you inside your mud hut.
So, yeah, that's true.
But that aside, I think that, you know, for the most part,
there are things that we feel compelled to do, whether it's because we need,
you know, money to pay for like housing and food or just to alleviate boredom.
There's, there's more of a drive to get stuff done than like you need in a sandbox game.
So I don't know if that's the best, I see where the analogy is,
but I don't know how strong it is to like actually translating to real life.
But it could be more closely applicable to distant simulation lives that people could have,
right?
Because that might be much more sandboxy.
Here's my, here's my counter to that.
So you ever, you ever notice how the busier you are, the more interesting things seem to be,
the more work you get done, the more interesting things you encounter.
And if you just have, if you've ever had a phase of life where you've just been kind of stuck
somewhere and not a lot's going on, and you kind of, all of your desires, all of your interests,
just kind of crater.
I'm sure there's some people who can, who can actually use that time really productively.
I'm just not one of them.
But a lot of life desires, a lot of what makes living worth it.
What it's sort of like how if you sit around all day and it sucks,
but then you just decide to go take a, take a little walk or a little hike and all of a sudden
like, look at the world, look how cool this is and all it inspires you, it makes you productive,
it gives you inspiration.
If you have a transhuman society in which you don't have to leave your mud hut,
because there's a food replicator there and there's infinite good TV that's always really cool.
And you can always, you know, future Skype with your friends across the light years,
and you have no, you have no reason to get out of your, your whole.
Then why are you there?
Are you, you're, you're, you are existing, you are not thriving, you are not evolving,
you're not growing.
And the kind of the point of this immortality thing almost seems like you,
you're wanting to have something in which you can infinitely grow and yet infinitely stay the same
at the same time.
And those don't seem, those seem to be counter purposeful.
Yes, they are at odds.
I do have a couple of quick thoughts.
One that I sort of assume that your food replicating machines in the future will have
like either that or your biology will have like anti-depressants 2.0 in them.
Like, you know, they'll make you just less depressed in general.
Like that sort of just like boring on-we feeling that you're describing.
You know, it's like, you'll have, I don't know, for the most part, when I'm feeling like that,
you know, that closed off, like just sitting and doing nothing all the time,
that's mainly just like, I have this like lack of energy and drive.
And hopefully that won't be a problem.
I'd like to think that that's a fixable issue.
But the second half of that, you're getting into describing like utopia problems.
And that's not something I'm equipped to tackle.
That's a, that's a really hard line of thinking.
Because yeah, how do you keep people happy and engaged in a society that is like also safe
from, you know, accidental death and that sort of thing, right?
There's got to be challenges to overcome because that's super satisfying.
That's part of why people like doing stuff.
Right. And Inuyash had a thing about this quite some time ago
about having the AI protect us from asteroids.
And if the AI protected us from asteroids and other bad things,
and the humans feel like they can't do it themselves,
then the humans aren't going to be very happy with that.
Because then what is the point of the humans being there?
Why not just have the AI just be everything?
Right.
And you, I believe we're in favor of, were you in favor of the AI,
basically being our babysitter or not?
I can't remember.
I was not.
I was definitely in favor.
You, you, you were in favor of the AI.
But I think that's absolutely real.
If we feel like we don't have meaningful choices and also danger is fun.
Why do people do stupid things all the time?
Because the ones who survive the thing are like, whoa, I survived the thing.
It's amazing.
It's amazing.
And of course the ones who don't, well, they're dead and nobody cares.
Danger is fun, but the species going extinct isn't.
That's sort of why I was in favor of like having the AI be the,
the guardian sort of role, right?
Just of extinction.
I mean, yeah, or catastrophe, right?
You know, if we lost 70% of people, that also would be kind of a drag.
Like your stupid mistake shouldn't kill off half the planet,
but if it kills you and that was a risk you're willing to take, then, you know, okay,
I can bite that bullet.
I do want to go back to what Steven said just a minute ago, though, where he said,
but these are utopia problems.
And I think that's, that's totally the point.
That yes, these are problems and they are things we will have to address,
but we can find better solutions than killing everyone is what I always come back to.
I don't think anyone is advocated for that yet.
Well, no, but a lot of people do.
They're like, and that is why nobody should be immortal.
And I'm like, that you're advocating for killing everyone.
Well, then you're getting to Logan's Run territory, I guess,
which is also an interesting way of having a society.
I'm not familiar with Logan's Run.
Logan's Run is a 70s science fiction movie that takes place in a utopia that is made possible
by virtue of all humans are killed ritually on their 30th, basically the 30th birthday.
And the movie was the 30th birthday, yeah.
Yeah. And basically up until your 30th birthday, you have a utopian perfect existence.
And the way that this being killed at age 30 is kind of made a palatable thing,
as people are told that if they might, if they're so perfect and pure,
they might survive the ritual and then they become, then they're gods basically.
But of course, nobody does because they get inserted by laser beams.
Yeah, yeah. But I mean, they don't find out that they're killed.
It's like an ascension, I believe. I remember the movie.
So nobody knows that they're actually going to die.
Right. But it's sort of like you're going to get, I think they chant rebirth,
rebirth or something when they're in the ritual.
But basically the way that the system works is that it, everyone is killed.
Yeah. That's a story, that's a lie.
And that's basically what we have right now, except instead of 30, it's around 80.
And it's not an exact date, it's 80, give or take a decade.
Well, the difference is we don't choose that.
Well, but we could in theory, and there's people who don't want us to have the ability to choose that.
Yeah, I think the difference is that, yeah, we're not choosing that right now, but the
future that we, people advocate against the future where it is a choice.
Yeah. And that's what we call a deathest.
Where we shouldn't have the choice to live forever.
That the only way to correctly continue to be human and to keep our problems small,
and is to make sure people only have that hard limit, like the Logan's Run limit.
30 years seems, and I haven't seen the movie, but that seems super low.
Do they still have to take like 20 years to become real people?
Oh yeah. Dude, in the book, I don't remember if it was a book or short story.
I didn't actually read it myself, but in the book, it was like 21.
Oh, it was 21.
Yeah. Yeah.
You basically got through adolescence and then like, you're done.
Which also made this really immature because you were teenagers were the oldest people, right?
Yeah. See, that sucks. I don't feel like I started like self-actualizing until I was post 21.
Oh, I know. I didn't until, I don't think I did until I was early 30, maybe 29.
I have the same here, 28, 29, I think is when I actually became an adult.
Yeah. Oh, cool. I've got something to look forward to.
I just turned 28 a few months ago.
Well, I mean, I had to go through three years of alcoholism first, so you got to get on that train.
All right. I'll assume by the store on the way home.
And, you know, all of us have been through divorces and, well, that sort of wakes you up a little bit.
Yeah. I'd like to skip that part. Is there a shortcut?
Nope. No.
Got to get married and divorced. Sorry.
No. Got to have all the pain and then you get smart stuff.
This is why my parents are still children.
Ooh, sick burn. The thing you said about deathists and how they say that by virtue of
trying to, why am I tired and have words? No words.
You just said a thing about deathists say that if we try to be immortal and have utopia,
we will not be human. And I think that's correct.
I think that's absolutely, we would be more than human at that point.
Transhuman.
We would be transhuman at this point. You could also say that all religions are effectively
transhumanist because they say that, well, you're going to die and go to heaven or hell.
And then that will be either utopia or misery. So if you go to heaven.
But I think transhumanism has a specific focus on the physical reality aspect of things.
Oh, sure. But if we achieve this, you know, immortality, we achieve utopia,
we've effectively stopped being humans. If we would have effectively perfected ourselves.
I don't think we've stopped being humans. We've like humans plus, you know, like is a dog is
like still a wolf sort of, but not entirely. It would be the same kind of thing where humans,
we still have the human roots, we wouldn't stop, we wouldn't turn into some other alien species,
right? I could, I could recognize my transhuman descendants as coming from me and sharing some
human values. Are we less human that because we were insulating clothing and we have air
conditioning and we can get far distances in short times with cars and we can augment our
bodies with the glasses? I don't think we're any less human for having those things. We miss out
on some of the primal experiences that our ancestors had, like being cold and being unable
to see and having to walk everywhere. But that sounds like a small price to pay, right?
Are we less human because we don't fear and hate the outside tribe that comes by and,
you know, steals our game every now and then. I always still do that all the time, just in
a modern way. Damn. I'd like to think that humanity could shed that aspect of ourselves too,
right? That'd be really nice. Tribalism sucks. It's not necessary anymore. But I think that,
yeah, while that might be the kind of thing that's been characteristic of our species for
millions of years, that's seemed like the kind of thing that we could live without
and be better off for it. So I think, I mean, that's sort of how it like, are we less human
because we now live to 80 rather than 50? I mean, I don't think so, right? So if we lived to be,
I mean, granted, it's a bigger jump to say 80 million years old as opposed to 80,
but I don't see where the argument falls apart. At what year do you pass this barrier? Like,
okay, yeah, hold on, that's too far. 217. My 217. Arbitrary? Yeah. Well,
I mean, we're so far away from transcending that biology that's kind of, we don't even,
we're so far away from it. I don't know. I feel like I'm surprised every once in a while about
how close we seem to be. Now, whether it's going to be this week or this century, I think that
that's, you know, kind of like the upper and lower bounds. But I think, I think it's possible that
some people born today might not ever have to die of old age. I think so. I think that, and that,
that wasn't true 100 years ago, right? Well, yeah. So obviously now we know that it wasn't
true 100 years ago, but it might have been stupidly optimistic to say, you know, I was born
like my, my grandma was born in a house without electricity. And I don't think they got electricity
in their house till she was in their teens. I don't think that her parents were saying my
kids are going to live forever, right? But I don't think that it's unreasonable to think that I,
rather I would say it is unreasonable to think that in 500 years, we won't have some of these
breakthroughs. And I'm, I think 500 years is like my super high upper bound, I think is probably way
closer. Aubrey de Grey talks about longevity, escape velocity, where if you can hit life extension,
life extension technology and live to be, have another 30 healthy quality years, by the time
those 30 years are up, we'll probably have more life extension technology, and then allow the
rinse repeat until you kind of hit this fume takeoff and you can just live as long as you want.
But he talks about the, the first able to hit that extension might be the first immortals,
right? They won't just live to be 150 and be healthy. They can, because by the time they're
aging again at 140, they found new better ways to make you revive your aging cells.
Exactly. And I mean, maybe there are upper limits on how much a human brain can handle
before it starts falling apart and going crazy, no matter what we do to it. And we'll find that out
if that is the case. And then we have to modify our biology and then we're a new thing, whether
that's a good or bad thing is up to you. Yeah. What other topics do we have? We had utilitarianism
overpopulation and net neutrality still. Overpopulation, I think was touched on. I think we
kind of, yeah. Utilitarianism I touched, but not really discussed. Was there more you wanted to
go into about my introducing myself to rationalism or anything like that? Or do you feel like that
got? I had a couple. I was curious, was there anything that you heard so far since you started
editing that was like, these guys are fucking nuts. I'm on board with half this stuff. Man,
that that thing I'm never going to be sold on. In terms of overall concepts, I'm sure one will
come to mind. I think overall, and there's a lot of pie in the sky that goes on says the guy who
just had a two hour conversation about pie in the sky immortality. So that's me. I guess I would
really be interested in seeing more ways in which this way of thinking could be a little more
practically based. I mean, it is obviously practical just by thinking about, hey, be less
wrong. I would, I think I would like to explore, you know, we talked about, oh, hey, a practical
thing is getting people to think rationally. That's pretty darn practical. I guess I would
like to say there are lots of problems that we can touch today versus immortality, which is going
to be a tomorrow thing. So what can we touch today more? And I know you guys have done that with
cryptocurrencies, you've done that with drugs, some other things. So I think that's more of my
overall, we keep trying to do spirituality, but it always gets derailed, in my opinion. Like,
one time I got derailed into rituals, last time I got derailed into drugs. I was like,
I'd like to do actual spirituality at some point. Well, not not to say that spirituality with drugs
isn't actual spirituality. But you know, careful Jenkins, we all put all up in your business.
Right, exactly. But I meant just the spiritual part without any any drugs involved. Yeah,
I wonder, but there that is, I mean, and that that is a very good point, especially when you
asked us off the top, like, how do you get people into rationality? And how do you, how do you
present this to someone and spread it in the world? Because the world really does need more
rationality in it. Yeah. And we could, we could stand to raise the sanity waterline. And talking
about, you know, future utopias and simulation arguments can be fun and all. But you're right,
I think we should hit that a little more often. That would personally appeal to me more. But
again, that's just my maybe my personal thingy, Bob. No, I think that's a good point. I like that.
I mean, it's one thing to have, you know, fun conversations that, you know, are engaging,
but ultimately kind of like, well, that was fun. And another thing to have a conversation where
you could walk away with like an actionable like, okay, cool, I should start doing this.
And I think you shouldn't divorce them entirely because like the whole future utopia thing is one
of the things that can get people excited. Gives him a goal. Yeah, I would also say that it's
also a really good brain workout. And that that is inherently beneficial, just by virtue of thinking,
oh, yeah, these utopian problems and, you know, immortality problems. That makes me think and
thinking about that kind of stuff is, I think, and just it's good. It makes you thinking about that
stuff increases your overall, I don't know, brain fitness. It's you gain XP and level up. That's
what it does. Nice. Yeah, it's been my brain fitness is quite down at the moment. Right.
So that that that is that is certainly advantageous. I guess I would like to,
I think it'd be cool to explore people who are, it would be great to have a non rash list on the
show. Someone who it was a very emotive, who someone who's a very emotive person, someone who
really lived in their gut and try to sell them on this thing, not even so much trying to sell it,
but just trying to understand. So it's sort of when you, you know, if you ever have a conversation
with someone who passionately feels and believes something and it kind of seems to come from a
totally different part of the human experience and it just goes way past you because you just,
you cannot, cannot get to where they are. And I feel like if you were able to interact with someone
like that and try to get them into a rationalist mindset just for a moment, they might be able
to make themselves clear to you and thus increase mutual understanding and that's always a good
thing. Oh yeah. This episode is sort of a dry run for me for that kind of experiment. But I'm already
in the headspace that you guys are in. Yeah, but A, I didn't really know that. And B, I think it's
easier to start with a slightly easier run because like I said, you didn't seek this stuff out. It
was kind of like, this is what I'm going to have to look at at the show. But that's interesting. I
don't know how we had put out a listing for that. Oh, come on. We both know people who are on the
other side of the how brains work spectrum. The second part is going to say people who'd be
interested in doing a show about that. I think you could be charming. You can finagle someone
into coming over to my place. Maybe you're charming.
I think that would be quite easy if you have a willing happy friend person and you have a list
of things that you find interesting to talk about that they also you could probably you could just
make a list of topics and let's we can talk about spirituality. If you've got a religious friend,
boom, there you go. Really? You want to talk about, you know, maybe cultural or stuff, which I know
you guys probably avoid because that gets very gut gut feelingy. That would be an easy way to bring
that out. It's not a good introductory topic, I think, but it is a fun one. And it's also kind
of important. I mean, that's one of the places you most need rationality, right? Is when culture
more stuff. Yeah, absolutely. That is the grabbing you by the gut and making your emotions do the
work instead of the thinking. Sure. Isn't that like explicitly super hard to do for entry level
critical thinking? Yes. You don't grab somebody and say, Hey, so the things that you care about
are really stupid. Let's let's have you defend them, right? Yeah, that's true. Well, that's why
you are nicer about it. That's really interesting. Tell me more about your feelings instead of you
sucking your wrong. Like that street epistemology person. Yeah. That's the hood about what? Street
epistemology was an earlier episode we had before we brought you on board where someone said that
basically outlined ways to talk to people that is non confrontational and do that sort of thing,
like try to draw them out and ask them questions and, you know, tell me more about your thing.
It was essentially Socratic method, which is like, ask them to clarify and be like,
that's really interesting. Do you mean this? And then they'll be like, Oh, no, wait, I guess I
mean this and kind of just, you know, I guess Socrates them into hating you. So I'm kidding.
Ask leading questions that both draw out their views, but make them think about their own views
in a slightly critical way. I don't know. And I was being funny, but maybe they will hate you,
because they made Socrates kill himself, right? Fuck you, get out of here. Didn't work great for
him. But you stop right before they try and poison you. So. Oh, the idea being that if you
did this with someone who was maybe more of an emotive thinker, it would make them not like
the things that they actually thought. And that would make them unhappy. And then they would not
like you. Or at least think more about the things that they have accepted very uncritically.
There was Oh, dear, I can't remember where I saw. Oh, yes. There I listened to something once about
what it meant to actually know something and how hard that really is. And part of
the theme of this was look into a claim of whatever it is, whether it be something as
simple as two plus two, or is voter fraud real, and really look into that. And somebody actually
started doing a few of these things and really looking into common accepted arguments of whatever
this. And of course, it's always much more complicated than anyone ever thinks. And the
reason why I thought, well, it was great that somebody did that, but it's so hard to really
know something, just because there's so much to know. And I have to trust my friend, and Yash,
who knows lots about accounting, because lots in quotes, he he has taken the time to do this,
and I just have to trust him because I don't possibly have the time to know everything myself.
Yeah, like I haven't personally verified the age of the universe, right?
But I'm not going to say it's right around 13.4 billion years old or whatever it is.
Right, because we all rationally trust other people who we think are smart to
know things for us. Yeah, I trust the enterprise of science to where like, if the scientific
consensus is this, well, there's a huge benefit in science to overthrowing a paradigm, right?
Right, not just because the person's smart, but because his peers will call him out if his reasoning
isn't good. Yeah, so that's, I mean, I'm still trying to think of people I know that would be
good candidates for this. We'll have to give it some thought. Okay, you gotta know someone,
like even people you're related to. Yeah, but I don't know if they would want to do a podcast.
They would have to drive all the way down. Or like even just want to talk, right? So I don't
know, this is this is tough. Maybe you know more people than I do. I mean, I try to keep the people
that I know fairly broad. I never thought that I would be dating an actual witch. But I was like,
I maintain that you're not. I now also agree. But for the first few weeks, I was like,
it's expanding my sphere of people. Let's give this a try. Yep. Well, I'm saying that I don't
think I think that she says that she thinks she's a witch. I don't think she actually thinks she's
a witch. She doesn't think she's, she says I'm doing spells and stuff, but you're not actually
doing stuff. You're meditating. And I feel like that's, and like I point out, I feel like that word
game is uselessly complicated and doesn't help anything other than a herd herd made a goal of
challenging social or challenging expectations. Well, it also does a pretty good job of filtering
out people who will not put up with that shit. Like even just a few years ago, I would have been
like, Oh, so you're a crazy person and not bothered. But you know, lately I was like, whatever,
everyone's crazy. Let's see what sort of crazy this crazy is. And if it's a fun kind of crazy,
that's cool. And it turned out to be not that crazy after all, just trying to filter out people,
you know? Yeah, I know a lot of people who wouldn't go to rational, who wouldn't go to a
rationalist meetup and, you know, who enjoy good conversation. I think so I'm not, I don't want to
give the impression that like I only have like 10 friends and I'll go to less wrong meetups.
But I only have 11 friends, 10 of them go to less wrong meetups. So,
and the 11th, I don't know if they'd want to do a podcast. I'm being somewhat facetious.
You can ask people. Yeah. And then ask them what, like, what's the topic? Do you want to talk about
like general or do you want to grab a list of topics? Okay, you'd probably have to start with
something you don't agree on. Probably to stimulate conversation. Oh my God, we might have to learn
this double crux thing people keep talking about. That's fun. I've been reading about it. Oh, good,
then you should do it. You should teach me about it on an episode. Because double crux. I thought
it'd be fun to do it like as an exercise on the air. So double crux is where I think quickly
paraphrasing, say Inyosh and I have different have a disagreement about a factual claim. We then say,
okay, well, I believe this claim because of this. And then I believe the opposite of that claim
because of this. And then that's our actual disagreement. We don't disagree about. Oh,
yes, you did cover this a little bit. This was, yes, I think this was covered at some point.
But I thought it'd be fun to like do an actual double crux game on the air. But
until you eventually get to a single belief that you guys both say,
this is a thing that this is I believe this. And if this certain thing were proved to be untrue,
I would change my mind. Exactly. And the other person believes the other way. And then you go and
try to find out what the actual truth about that claim is, right, which seems like a very
fucking hard thing to do. It is a lot of beliefs don't necessarily boil down to just one thing that
you can find, which is I guess part of the game, trying to find the one thing that's part of the
game. But it doesn't have to be one thing that like your entire belief depends on, I think.
It could be that just sufficient to change your mind. Yeah. So like,
like I don't know how you would double crux like abortion is good and bad because I think souls
exist. And I think they don't because you can't go empirically verify that claim. But you could
say like, I think gun, I think banning guns is a great idea because two people murder each other
with them. And then you could say, okay, well, let's compare that to other means to murder people
and other places that have have banned guns and what their murder rates look like. And at the end
of that, somebody should change their mind, right? In theory. I'm actually on a path of that exact
question. Are you? In regards to gun ownership. Okay. So I have a friend who is quite libertarian,
but as I would also say is probably would be or could be defined as a rationalist. He may not
use that term for himself. And we had a three hour discussion about gun ownership and gun rights
after Las Vegas. It was mostly me asking him questions just because that is not a headspace
I'm in. And I don't really understand a lot of the common pro gun arguments. And I was just
I was interested what he had to say because I'm quite anti gun. And he, you know, has his kind
of research and what he believes. And it was really well reasoned and really well argued.
Is he in the Denver area? He know he is in San Antonio, Texas, he's somewhere in Texas.
Although I'm sure we could find plenty of people in the Denver area that also hold that.
Oh, I'm sure you can find people everywhere. Just this is this is a guy who is extraordinarily well
read and smart and able to convey it in the able to convey it in a conversation. And there were,
you know, some fundamental things that I think we did come to that I just simply just couldn't
wrap my head around in terms of he firmly believes that it's good to have guns in case of
government takeover something. And I don't really know if I agree with that. But it really has spurred
me to start really critically thinking about some of these issues like what Steven just said about,
well, there's lots of way to kill lots of ways to kill people. And I have a lot of research that
I'm planning on doing to kind of really confront my own belief about it because I kind of haven't.
Dude, that's awesome. If you like modify your beliefs in any significant way, or even if you
do a lot of research and don't modify your beliefs, would you be willing to come back and
talk to us about it? Yes, I would. Fuck yeah. Hell yes. I would I would I would love to do that.
That sounds awesome. What else was it? Net neutrality left over? Yes. And since we're at about an
hour and 30, it's probably a good time to switch over to net neutrality unless we want to talk about
utilitarianism at all. Or if you remember any other things that you were like, these guys are
fucking crazy. I for I again, should have been keeping notes. Right. Because but you didn't know
that we were going to rope you in after after no, because I've been a year now that you've been
editing. Since Mario close, close to maybe we'll call it nine months. I think I can find out. I
can easily look it up. We did an episode that dove into different ethical systems. Back before
you started editing, I forget what it was called. But any questions you have about utilitarianism
might be might be addressed there just like about what the system talks about. At least I tried.
I recently read a really cool, I think it was a blog post by Ozzie. Maybe it was a Tumblr post
by unit of caring anyways, about the the four ethical schools based off Hufflepuff based off of
Hogwarts houses. And the question for if you're a Ravenclaw is does normative thinking on ethics
and ethical theories have anything at all to do with how you should act in real life? And if the
answer was yes, the the prognosis was congratulations, you're in house Hufflepuff, you're in house Ravenclaw.
I was like, what is that not 100% of humanity? Does not everyone think that actually looking
at an ethical system and judging it has some implications as to what your ethics should be?
And apparently no. That was one thing that I thought was true of all humans, which is apparently
not true of all humans, because a lot of people are not house Ravenclaw in terms of ethical systems.
It was one of those bizarre things that opened my mind. I'm like, there's some people that really
just don't care about that sort of calculation. And apparently there there is.
We might be in a bit of a self created bubble with our own house as it were.
I mean, yes, but just that it's like those people who are colorblind and don't realize that
they are colorblind until they're much older. Or apparently that this wasn't really anything person
who had no sense of smell didn't realize that there is a thing like a sense of smell until
their mid 20s. They always thought people were being like, I mean, they would literally hold
their nose and go pew and someone pulled out stinky socks. But just because they thought
that was a thing people did like a custom or a ritual, you know, and whenever someone says,
Oh, that rose smells really good. They thought it was a metaphorical thing, you know, to imply
how pretty it is and how well how nice it made them feel. And yes, this was one of those things
where I was like, Oh, I just did not know that some people didn't think about this sort of thing
and think that it was very important. Hmm. I mean, if if we were to run with the idea that
we're missing out on something analogous to smell or seeing colors, how would we ever be aware of
that through introspection, right? So that sounds like a rather tall problem. Let me really quickly
read what the actual I looked up what the actual question is. The infallible single question test
for identifying Ravenclaw primaries is is normative ethics boring and or completely disconnected
from any actual moral reasoning you do in your everyday life? And if your answer is no, welcome
to team Ravenclaw. Who does who thinks that normative ethics and moral reasoning is completely
disconnected from from? I would say people who don't know what normative ethics is. Okay. Or people
who don't care about it. I mean, if you explain it to them, then they would still say no, that's
disconnected to what I do when I do morality. Yeah, I don't understand the question either
than either. What would you define normative ethics? What would you say? If I said I don't
understand the question, the thinking of how things should be and actually having a formal
system for ethics that applies universally and preferably in all cases when possible,
but like a systemized ethics. And people will say I agree that that's a thing,
but that doesn't relate to how I actually conduct my good life. Yes. Pausing to think.
So much so that the people who don't say that are Ravenclaw.
So you could say, yes, that's all fun, hoity-toity conversation that people like Peter Stinger
have. But at the end of the day, we're going to just do whatever we want, right? Professor Quirrell
might be a good example. Professor Quirrell would probably be a Slytherin primary based on the
post that I'm going to, I guess, have to link now. That seems appropriate.
Right. Yeah. But no, they have other reasons like Gryffindor's do the right thing because it is right
because their emotions tell them it is right as opposed to because some stupid utilitarian
calculation that you did says that it's right. And what do you mean by utilitarian? The Ravenclaws
or the Hufflepuffs? The Ravenclaws would be utilitarians. Well, I could see them also being
Conteans, you know, if they have their ethical precepts. It doesn't have to be utilitarian
necessarily, but it has to be something like a deontological imperative.
Some sort of actual formal system that thinks about these things.
That's weird. Yeah. What criteria the Gryffindor is using to say this is?
The emotions that have been instilled in them about rightness and wrongness by their culture,
I would assume. So then they're like, yeah, okay, cool. On paper,
saving 10 people over one looks great, but at the end of the day, I'm going to save one because
it's more of a row way. Sure. Because it is the right thing to do. Like scoff.
Like they would say on paper, it may be better to kill 10 to kill one person, harvest his organs
to save 10. But that is an evil thing to do. So I won't. Whereas, you know, the Ravenclaw,
the utilitarian has to come up with reasons why it's actually worse to kill the one person to
save 10 within their system of ethics, be like, well, you shouldn't actually do that because
at least of these other bad effects, like people would no longer go to the doctor ever.
Right. And that's actually my biggest, as long as we're on the point, my biggest
annoyance with anti utilitarianism arguments is that people are like, yeah, but looking
up bad things would actually be, well, then you're not actually defending utilitarian position,
right? If like, if the idea like, oh, yeah, but society would fall apart if this,
well, then that's not what utilitarian would advocate. Right. Utilitarianism likes society
to keep going. Agreed. Okay. So I wanted to talk about net neutrality, because it has been going
around a lot in the social spheres that I, that I frequent. And I think with a very reflexive and
almost, this is going to betray my position, a reflexive and tribalist, really attitude,
where people take their position because it signals their loyalty to a group rather than
due to the actual matter at hand. Yeah, sure. They take the loyalty to the group of people
who advocate for freedom. Right. So that is why I wanted to talk about it. Okay. Because I had
seen that a lot from basically everyone I know, even last episode, when I said, we should talk
about this next time. And Stephen's like, what's there to talk about? Are you for against freedom?
Basically, I don't know if I came off quite that strong. Okay, quite that strong. And I may,
although I probably did something just like that now, maybe it was being something. It wasn't just
like that. But but the other thing that I thought was sort of futile about talking about it is that
we're past the point where like, the citizens can do anything because the board of private appointees
is voting on this. But I would still like my friends to not take positions based purely due
to the color of the politics and also to not be really upset about the internet being destroyed
if it isn't actually. Okay, so I'm curious what you guys think about this and found out before I
my spiel on it isn't I think as well researched as yours. I'm curious what you have to say. Well,
I mean, your spiel on it is like basically the standard spiel, including the John Oliver spiel
and what I see all over Reddit and basically everywhere where there is an internet that I
interact with. And just so did you want to quickly give the standard? Yeah, sure. I think the standard
spiel, so net neutrality is the idea that when you open up your browser, you can go to whatever
website you want. And your your ISP, your internet service provider can't say, Oh, you know what?
Facebook is free or excuse me, Facebook comes with your plan. But in order to go to
CNN.com or something, that's another $10 a month. So it's the idea that you get access to this
utility and people who are pro net neutrality, think of the internet, I think rightly as a utility,
in that your ISP shouldn't be allowed to dictate to charge you differently based on what you're
doing with it or where you want to go. An analogy might be like your electric company charges
you per kilowatt hour, they don't charge you if you're running refrigerators or servers or power
drills or whatever it is, they just they want they're just charging you for the internet or for
the electricity. Actually, they kind of do because if you choose to run more power consuming things,
then you will pay more money. You're paying per kilowatt hour, but like it doesn't they're not
you're not paying because of what you're doing with electricity, you're just paying for the
electricity. Okay, okay. So yeah, I think I think and that's the fair way that the internet works
now like you pay often with data caps or something, right? So yeah, you can't be using a terabyte a
day transferring data because they're you know, that's clogging up their infrastructure or the
infrastructure not theirs. That's kind of important. But the idea that they can't dictate what you're
doing or what you have access to without, you know, the other way to think about it, if you're
online at all on some circles, you know, there was this big explosion over EA, they put out Star Wars
Battlefront to this new video game that would take some what 2100 hours to unlock all the characters
organically using their in game gambling system that you get for you earn credits to gamble with
in game to try and unlock characters like Darth Vader. So as opposed to just unlocking different
lightsaber colors or cosmetic things, you're unlocking like key players with either having to
spend many hundreds of hours of in game time, or you can just spend micro you could spend money
on microtransactions and spend some many hundreds of doll I can't remember the numbers with some
hundreds of dollars to unlock everybody if you wanted maybe more. So people who are worried
about net neutrality going away are kind of worried about that's how the internet could work out.
You know, if you enjoy browsing Reddit or Facebook, or getting your news from whatever
news source you like, it could be that if your ISP safe, like Comcast, whatever for whatever
reason decides, you know what, Fox News, and Breitbart, and what's that other insane news channel
Info Wars all come with a standard package of 40 bucks a month. If you want access to partisan
news sources, or no, no, I mean, like, I just just throwing this out there as an example,
you know, that's going to be an additional 60 bucks a month or $2 for every minute you spend on
the page, like the idea that they could have those sorts of decisions that that be under
their control is kind of horrifying. And part of the other thing, another crux of this example is
that there is a basic monopoly on internet service providers. It's true that there in many places
there are competitors, but and I can't remember the numbers and I should have looked these up,
but in many parts of the country, you have one service provider if you want more than like
five megs a second. Can you define many to maybe three? No, no, no, can you define many parts of
the country? Oh, I think I can't without Colorado is one Colorado is definitely well, I mean, you
can have you have at least two options here. That's what he meant by two. Yeah. Only one of
them is actually a high is can be considered a proper high speed company. And that's Comcast.
The other one century link. It's high speed DSL, but it's not it's not nearly as robust.
They're getting to places with fiber and stuff too. So like there are competitors emerging,
but I can't remember what it is. I want to say the number 70% is in my head somewhere where they
I think it's between 70 and 75% people that have at least two. Well, I think I thought it was 70
that had access to one good internet service provider. I mean, good again depends on how you
define it, but I was 70 to 75% of people that had access to two or more providers that provided at
least 10 megabits per second. Okay, so 10 might be I mean, it's a little on the slow side, but it's
enough for most people. We might say being able to stream Netflix could be like the baseline.
Not everyone needs, you know, instant pings for online gaming or something. But if you internet
can't can't stream Netflix and each in high quality, that's not like the most important thing you
could do with the internet, but it might be a good baseline as to whether or not it's a good
plan, right? I find it very interesting that you brought up Netflix specifically. I meant just
for online streaming. No, no, no, I understand. There is a reason I find that very interesting
that I will get into later. Well, I guess the last point I'll make is that it's hard for it's
basically just I think more or less ubiquitous that utilities with a physical infrastructure
more or less always monopolize or essentially monopolize. Like if your water sucks, you don't
have six other water companies, you can ask to say I'm going to go to them instead. If you guys
don't up your game, right? It's not like there are six different water hoses connecting to your
house that you can pay to use one of them. So that's sort of how the internet works. And much of
that was put together with taxpayer money as well, which is another argument for it being
staying public and neutral. That's the quick version of the central argument, I think.
I'm curious as to what the argument against that the argument against that is that that is basically
the net neutrality debate is basically large corporations fighting with each other base
over who has to pay what in order to deliver content to us and getting the government involved in
that to support their side. And that this what you have been told is basically a load of horseshit
that it is theoretically possible just like it is theoretically possible that I could create a
nuclear bomb in my backyard, but it's not actually going to happen. And before you ask, yes, it is
theoretically possible for me to create a nuclear bomb in my backyard. Well, I think the comeback
that might be that making it legally legally barring you from doing so is still a good idea,
even if it's really hard, right, or really unlikely. Yes, but that is not what the so-called net
neutrality does. And whoever branded it net neutrality was a fucking genius, because it is it
is a great name. But basically what it is is regulation of the internet by the government.
And first of all, I am in general against the government being a highly regulatory thing. I
think they have screwed the pooch hardcore in most things they try to regulate the FDA kills a lot
more people than it saves. And it made the war on drugs possible, which has fucked much of our
society. There is there's so many examples of regulation being awful that I distrust it inherently.
And I think even more so in the fast moving quick changing tech sector, which governments cannot
keep up with. But to give the quick recap about what actually the issue comes down to is when
people say net neutrality, they kind of assume they have the vision of the internet as it was
back in the late 90s and early 2000s still, where there was just like a central net, and anyone
could connect to the net and get data from anyone else on the net, right? And that it like so you
would think that Netflix has their servers, where they have all their movies, and they connect to
the net to make them available to people. And your computer connects to the net, and you can go
wherever you want on the net. And if you want to, you go to Netflix, and you get their movie stream
to your computer over the internet, everything's great. And at some point, they have to go through
your ISP obviously, because your internet service provider is the company that provides the internet
to your house, which is not actually how it works anymore, due to the fact that there has been
much concentration of back in the 90s and 2000s, like, everyone was on the internet,
there were lots of small things, it was like mom and pop Wild West, there was no mega corporations
yet. Now on the internet, half of all, I think it was either 50 or 60% of all internet traffic
comes from 30 entities, Google, Netflix, Apple, Amazon, Amazon, Facebook, Facebook, yes. And
those companies have a problem with getting all their content to their various people that want
to use it fast enough. So they no longer connect to the internet and then route it to your house,
they go to your internet service providers and set direct pipelines from their computers
to the internet service providers. So you don't have to go through the, you know,
the wider net itself, you just get it directly from your ISP. In some cases, and the term here
is peering, they actually take their computers and install them in your ISP's building, so that
you can get directly the shortest path possible. And the ISP charges them for this. Well, sometimes.
At first, they didn't because it was a wonderful idea on everyone's behalf, it reduced the amount of
net traffic out there to have, and this is a reason like Netflix, there's not just one Netflix
server with their movies on it, they have in various ISPs across the country, their computers
set up in the, you know, in the same building connected to the ISP computers. So you get it
directly from there. Netflix, when it was getting really big, had a problem with one of their
providers, I believe it was Cogent, who sold them, they could give them all this bandwidth. And it
turned out they couldn't give them all that bandwidth. And so they started prioritizing
who got what data and some data was more important. So during high, high traffic peak times,
Netflix data was throttled back. Netflix was not very happy about this at all. They went and put
together peering agreements with Comcast and other ISPs. But Comcast wanted to charge them some money
for this, as they charged everyone else. And Netflix was like, we're huge, give us a break.
And Comcast said, no, we charge everyone for this. And Netflix said, oh, yeah. And then the net
neutrality debate began, where they said, you know what, this is an issue of free access to the
internet. Comcast is preventing us from having free access to the internet. This should not be
legal. And the really fun part is after they won that debate in 2014, and had the net neutrality,
quote unquote, rules passed that made it illegal for Comcast to charge them for this, they probably
dropped out of the net neutrality debate, and they are not doing anything about it nowadays,
because fuck, they got theirs. What do they care now? But it's not, it's not about getting to your
house and restricting what website sites you can and can't see. It's about corporations
charging each other for large data services. And the reason it's important was I grew up
back in the AOL days where there was not that much infrastructure, and you actually did pay by the
minute to connect to the internet, because there just wasn't enough ways to get to the internet
for everyone to be on it all of the time. And then the 2000 early 2000s late 90s happened,
huge investment bubble, greatly overbuilt the internet backbone. So there was more bandwidth
than anyone knew what to do with. And we just didn't have to bother with that sort of thing
anymore, everyone could get on all the time. And lately, we've started hitting up those limits
again. And now people do have to throttle traffic and decide that some data might be more important
than other data. And they do this actually right now already. Text data generally gets lower priority
over things like video streaming and music, because those things are much more sensitive
to interruptions. Whereas text data, you can wait an extra three to four seconds to get your email.
So there is already that sort of discrimination going on. And now there needs to be some sort of
way to fund the expansion of the infrastructure and charging the people who use more data like
Netflix, like Amazon, more for that is probably a logical way of doing it. And the reason I
dislike the term net neutrality quote unquote, is because when the internet first came to be,
there was basically no restrictions or regulations on it at all. And everyone is like,
things are going to become horrible, the various ISPs will will start, you know,
you have to pay extra if you want to go to non Fox websites, if your ISP is in bed with Fox.
But that never happened before the regulations that were played in place in 2015. And
everything worked fine before because generally private enterprise doesn't want to piss off its
customers like that. People would probably riot. They ride is a bad term. But that is a way for
ISPs to piss off their customers. And the thing that usually happens when that sort of thing
happens is people switch carriers to someone else. And you say that there aren't a lot of options for
a lot of people. But most people have at least two options, some that aren't great. But there is
the option out there. More importantly, there's more and more options being provided. Fiber is
being laid down in lots of municipal districts, Google is putting their own fiber programs in
place. Wireless is becoming much more reliable to the point where sometimes I go on my cell
network rather than my home Wi Fi because it is more reliable at times. And that is the that
having the government regulate the internet more makes it harder for newcomers to get in its
stifles competition. New ISPs don't show up as much. And so it locks the monopoly down for the
people that are already there like the Comcasts. And what we want is more providers, more competition
so that if they do start pulling shenanigans like that, we can jump ship to other people. I mean,
that's how the internet worked before 2015. When these net neutrality regulations were put into
place, the FTC enforced some transparency rules. And aside from that, it was the Wild West and
no one did do that to people. You didn't have your connections throttled.
So you've clearly no more about this than I do. Well, which makes it hard for me to,
like we talked about with that example from the guy Burning Man, the climate science guy.
I don't have the ammunition to challenge everything that you said. But you know,
that just shows that I didn't do enough homework. I think what we really need to do is talk to Chase.
I trust that Chase knows the right answer here.
Chase probably has some opinions.
I mean, so like there's a handful of things, like there was a big hub of that, I think 80%
of all net neutrality comments were sent by bots. And 95% of the actual humans who wrote in about it
were in favor of net neutrality. So that shows that the overwhelming majority of people who
actually are behind this and not the systematized distortion of the data aren't going to get what
they want. Yes, but I was also in favor of net neutrality after I saw the John Oliver piece.
And it was only in the last few weeks when some people pointed out, look, this is just corporations
fighting each other over who gets to pay who and getting the government involved. It has nothing
to do with my access that I was like, well, that sucks. I have bought into the propaganda really.
And that's when I started reading up on it. But I wonder if you bought into new propaganda.
I know that is possible homework. Yeah, I did quite a fair
bit of homework. And it's possible that I have bought into new propaganda, but it seems less
likely there's, I mean, I saw just this morning, even Tyler Cohen came out against the net neutrality
thing, where he said this is probably bad in the long run for the internet to have more government
regulation. Well, so I agree that like government regulation is hard to defend, right? And that's
why people who like small government and staying out of their business, you know, have a point.
Because how do you get some big monolith to like, especially a big monolith full of 70 year olds who,
you know, don't know how use the same password or everything on their phone or something, right?
Like these aren't the people you want making the calls on technology breakthroughs. But I guess
the comeback that I might think of would be the whole net neutrality thing for however you want
to brand it does make it illegal for say Comcast to like, if you wanted to start a YouTube competitor,
because people don't like YouTube for lots of reasons that make sense. But YouTube gives
Comcast, I don't know, a million dollars a month, not that's more than that, whatever.
Well, you can't do that if you're trying to build a startup, and they're just not going to connect
to your service, or they're going to extremely throttle it, because they get to decide the
priorities. Yeah, but that's already the case. YouTube is part of Google. They're one of the
people that put their servers in Comcast building. So you get faster. I mean, have you ever wondered
why it is that if your connection is bad, and you're not watching, and you can't stream the
daily show very well, you can go over to Netflix and watch their higher res stuff that streams just
fine. It's because Netflix has their servers in right there in Comcast and and Comedy Central
doesn't. And yeah, there are places like Vimeo or Daily Motion that are kind of YouTube competitors,
and they are slower because YouTube has their servers in Comcast and the current regulations
does don't change that. So where do people like John Oliver and the people who buy into the the
version that he sells? Why are they? Is this just seriously like a, a weight like a distraction that
people made this like a fake debate to keep people busy? Or like, well, they actually did they care
about something that's actually real? I mean, they care about something that they think is real,
but there are very good PR people on now on both sides, originally just on Netflix's side when
they said fuck you to Comcast and took it to the public, who are good at swaying people that this
is the way things are and that they will be harmed if the government doesn't come in and, you know,
support Netflix's side of the argument. I'm out of talking points. I think it'd be fun to talk
with Chase about this. And I hope that people don't just entirely believe me and look into it
themselves. But I want to at least get the view out there that, hey, this thing might be complete
bullshit. And don't just don't just believe that it is for a neutral internet. It's actually about
corporations. Please send me the stuff you read. Yeah, cool. I'll link it on the on our the basin
conspiracy.com as well. Cool. That sounds good. Did you have anything to add? Where are you on this?
I don't I don't have enough knowledge or opinion to really to really say it does. I do agree with
the New Yorkers argument that it is against the incentive of an ISP to charge people for things.
I would say the the only scenario in which that could be a case if there was some kind of a race
to the bottom in terms of pricing, where Comcast says if you only really want to like have Facebook
and like a couple other things will only charge you $9 a month. But of course, we sell our full
bundle, which doesn't has restrictions for whatever, you know, whatever absurd price they charge.
And you could conceivably have a price war between competitors. But that only works if you
have a diverse marketplace of competitors, which we don't have in most communities where two is
not enough. You would need New York City has quite a few options. I had Verizon Fios for a while.
Oh, my God, that was really nice. Oh, really? Verizon Fios was great. So, but I mean, for example,
in Colorado, Comcast has gotten much better in the past six, seven years. And I think it's very
much due to CenturyLink coming in and being a decent competitor. They're not as good as Comcast,
but they're also cheaper. Yeah, they're cheaper. My grandmother has CenturyLink and it's fine.
I got CenturyLink. It works for me. Yeah, it's fine. And Comcast also just became the butt of
jokes of everyone in many places because it's like we hate you. We desperately hate you because
you are the worst ISP in the world, but we don't have a choice. So that is a scenario in which I
see kind of the kind of pricing tiers that people are kind of raising. I think that is a
false fear. Because like you said, ISPs are incentivized to provide good access to people.
And I'm also not necessarily against that. My phone plan costs me about $12 a month because
I only have 500 megabytes of cell data a month. That's all I ever use. And I was like,
I don't want to pay $80 a month for unlimited cell when I don't use any of it. All I ever use my
phone for is texting and occasionally calling. And oh, and the GPS constantly doing that because
God, that thing is useful. Yes. And I'll check my email on it every now and then. But all of those
are not data intensive things. I can get by with $12 a month for 500 megabytes a month.
And I'm very happy to do that. If there's some people out there who's like, look,
the only thing I use the internet for is Facebook. Can I just get Facebook for five bucks a month?
Why the hell not? It's hard for me to argue with that. I feel like it opens the door to being
slippery slope. But I think that's still where I imagine people with draw contention is saying,
look, yeah, that sounds fine. But slippery slope arguments are where you say, if you grant this,
it opens the door for a whole bunch of bad things. And it's a fallacy to say, if you grant this thing,
all these bad things will happen. Right. Like if you allow men to marry other men,
then all of a sudden, where does it stop? Sure. But just because it's a fallacy to say it will
cause this or whatever, it doesn't mean that slippery slopes aren't real, right? I'm trying to
find how much data I use last month. And I think it was like 13 gigs. I use a lot of stuff,
but I just rolled over on the first. So I don't have, I can't find my previous months.
I use about between two and five months. But I pay all 80 bucks a month of Verizon for it.
And I could I could certainly get a much lower cost plan if I wanted to.
I mean, every now and then I'm like, oh, I can't watch YouTube out and about. But then I'm like,
oh, I saved $60. So I don't think it's necessary for one to be able to watch YouTube,
walking around. I don't that's not necessary. Yeah. The only thing it's necessary for is,
oh, look at this funny cat video that I'm just going to show my friend on the sidewalk. You don't
need to do that. Although I do appreciate that. Stephen does have that data plan because every
now and then he'll show me cool things on YouTube on his phone. Yeah. That's great. Thank you. That
is that is a cool service you've provided me. So basically you're a mooch in some cases.
He mooches off my good looks and interestingness. I'm currently on your Wi-Fi. So
this works out. But yeah, all the all the net neutrality was basically implemented in 2015.
There's been some various minor regulations going on since I think the mid 2000s. But
things were not this horrific hellscape that people paint them out to be before 2015. And
so I don't think net neutrality is really that big a deal. See, I found a list that I started
to dig up that was, I don't know, something like 20 cases of where it was this hellscape,
where people's stuff was being throttled and they were paying for stuff they couldn't get.
And that sort of thing. There were conflict of interests of ISPs who also provided a phone
service or other things like that. They would basically completely block VoIP services or
things like that. Right. I do remember AT&T doing something like that. Quite a few companies would
do things like that because it's like, well, we sell phone plans and we don't want people to use
Skype because it's free. So they have a natural incentive to not do that.
Right. And I believe some sort of case was brought against them, right?
I believe that in pretty much every case where things like that happen that a regulator said,
no, you can't do that. So government and a regulation did a useful thing.
It did. Every now and then it does. I just don't think the current debate is about that so much.
EFF and the ACLU are all of all just bought into this propaganda machine.
Are they in support of the current net neutrality rules?
Yes. So far as I can tell. According to net neutrality bought on Reddit,
they're one of the places that are linked to that you can give money to support net neutrality.
Well, I love the EFF and I will continue to give them money every year,
but I will read whatever statement they have put out as to why they are in support of the
2015 net neutrality over what is being proposed right now.
I would say getting, speaking of the conflict of interest problem,
I would say Comcast actually would be a great example of someone who has a huge conflict of
interest in that because they provide phone services and they charge a lot for it,
they also provide television bundles and charge a lot for them.
It is currently not in Comcast's interest to have all of this free TV online, Hulu,
Netflix nonsense, because that means that Comcast can't sell its TV packages.
I agree, but it's also not in their interest to throttle that sort of thing if there is a
competitor that will charge the same amount or less and give someone access to all that stuff
anyway. That is possible, but in the cases what seems to keep happening is that regional
monopolies do seem to keep cropping up. Yeah, and I think the main argument about the current
net neutrality rules is that it makes monopolies easier and more entrenched and if the changes
that are being proposed go through, it will make it easier for small ISPs to break it and provide
some more competition. And how exactly would a small ISP benefit under fewer rules than the
ones that are currently in price? This part I was not able to understand because I'm not an
economist. I just read Tyler Cohen coming out against everyone else and he gave various lists
and reasons why he thinks that this would be better for the internet and the long-term
encouraging competition. I was like, I generally trust Tyler Cohen.
And this is in line with other things I've heard about how regulation tends to make
starting up a new business hard. I've never heard of a regulation making it easier to start
a new business. And so it fits with my priors as well and therefore I think that is the case.
I also have priors against the current administration doing anything that benefits me.
So weigh those priors against each other. So the EFF has a thing here that says net neutrality,
the idea that all internet service providers should treat all data that travels over the
network fairly without improper discrimination in favor of particular apps, sites, or services
is a principle that must be upheld to protect the future of our open internet.
It has a principle that's faced many threats over the years such as ISPs forging packets to
tamper with certain kinds of traffic or slowing down or even outright blocking protocols or
applications. So the EFF does seem to be in favor of what's called net neutrality.
Are they in favor of the 2015 regulations over the current proposed ones?
This is written in 2017. I can only assume so I'm just giving this. Anyway, we'll check it out.
This will be fun. Maybe we can double crux this thing. But I think since we're not economists
and network designers, I don't know if we have the tools to do this quickly, but we can figure it
out. Cool. Awesome. So yeah, that is the two takes, hot takes on net neutrality. Do we have
anything else? Nope. Okay. My brain is fried. Yeah, mine too. Let's call it an episode. Sounds
good to me. Oh wait, we have to thank someone. Oh yeah. First of all, personal thanks to our
sound engineer Kyle Moore in all seriousness. I don't know if you check out the subreddit or
see some of the... No, I don't know. I should... Especially once like shortly after you started
and people weren't used to it, they were like, everything sounds better now. And the fact that,
you know, like I said, I do this, you know, over the airwaves instead of over coffee because I like
to disseminate these ideas. And I personally enjoy conversations like this and there weren't
enough podcasts like this. So I was like, fine, I'll do one. So making it palatable for people
your drums is very important part of that recipe. So thank you for making that happen.
My, my, thank you. My welcome. Thanks. You're gonna say my pleasure if we didn't want to lie to
us. Oh no. My thousand years of torture. Okay. Did you want it or should I this time?
Oh, go ahead. Okay. We can take turns. All right. This week, we would like to thank Beth Smith,
a supporter on Patreon for helping to make this possible and bring it to all of you guys. Thank
you, Beth. Thanks, Beth. Okay. That's it for me too. We'll do actual listener feedback from the
forums and stuff like that. Sounds good. Cool. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye.
