Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky.
I'm Jess Dickey.
I'm Stephen Zuber.
Son of a bitch.
Look at what you've started.
Yo, what's happening now?
I'm going to be a flying squirrel next time.
They're so cute.
They're really cute.
I can be Boris.
You can be what?
Boris.
Boris.
And someone has to be Natasha.
Oh, okay.
Because she's a flying squirrel.
Actually, we could get a moose.
Drake could be moose.
Did you really never watch Rocky and Bullwing go?
Oh, Rocky and Bullwing go.
Okay.
Was one of them a flying squirrel?
I thought it was just a squirrel.
Yeah.
He was like wearing a plate helmet because it was a flying squirrel.
Oh, great.
Yeah, this was slightly before my time.
Well, I mean, I think it was before my time, too, but it was just so fucking funny.
The fact that you were just railing against web apps or phone apps makes me think that
maybe it was exactly at your time.
You know what?
Screw you guys.
Sorry, buddy.
Okay.
So back on topic.
Yes.
Didn't take us too far to get or too long to get far field.
So yeah, we are sort of continuing.
We are not continuing the conversation last time, but we are continuing to talk about
gender stuffs because I just wanted to talk about some of the what gender is, I guess,
right?
Yeah.
I don't know.
I think we left off last time, but we don't have to.
I mean, if there's more things to be said, I will be more than willing to keep going
there.
And we're very smartly recording this the day before the first part of this episode
comes out, so we don't respond to anyone's thoughts on it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yet.
Yet.
We'll see if we even bother.
We'll see how it goes.
All right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Nervous.
I don't know.
Don't be able to grade.
The whole thing that really attracts me to rationality is this is a community of people
that don't taboo talking about pretty much anything.
It's true.
It doesn't mean that you're excited to talk about everything.
Yeah.
No.
Some people will still like, I don't know, like if you're talking, trying to think of
just some other, any other hot button topic, you know, like that Google memo a couple
years ago, right?
Or race.
It's like, yes, these are conversations and they're fun and et cetera, but like that
doesn't mean that like you're not trepidatious because especially in a public conversation
like this, that people are going to be like, well, now you need to address this because
you guys miss this important part or you mischaracterize this.
But that's the kind of, I don't know, like I actually want to receive that kind of feedback
because if they're right, then it's like, oh, then I need to update.
Like that's kind of what I'm looking for by doing this.
Like I have feelings of being non-binary or not having, you know, a binary gender identity.
And I'm kind of just viewing it through the lens of here's what I know about other people's
experiences and how they've expressed them.
And here's what I feel like I should be doing about this, but I have a lot of doubt myself.
I do.
Well, when gender stuff started happening to me, I was just like, oh, man, why?
I do also like the conversation in the back and forth and the listener feedback stuff.
I mean, at some point I do get tired of it.
I think there was one topic that we went on for three episodes with feedback.
And after that I was like, I just, I don't want to address this anymore.
Was that UBI or?
I don't remember.
More than once, actually, this sort of thing has happened.
Yes.
That's what I'm talking about.
I'm not saying I don't want criticism and feedback.
It's mainly just like, how vehement and how long is it going to be?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I believe, like, I don't know, with the hot button topics, people do tend to get really
emotional about them and then like, but that's the kind of stuff that I want to be able to
be better at talking about, if that makes sense.
I like the Rationalist Community Framework of let's look at what the facts show.
And then like, you can present both of your opinions and then we'll just evaluate them.
Facts.
Sorry.
Yeah.
You no longer believe in facts, Steven?
We're in a post-fact society.
You have your facts and I'll have my facts.
God, I can't even finish that sentence.
Okay.
Yes.
Yeah.
All right.
All righty.
So where would we like to embark today?
I was kind of trying to frame last post's discussion around doing a double crux on kind
of where you and I disagreed and I was actually editing the episode and going back and listening
to it, I realized that kind of, and I think we kind of realized this while we were talking
about it too, but I was kind of misunderstanding your argument.
It seemed like we were kind of making two separate arguments where you were kind of saying,
I just don't want to be forced to use pronouns that, you know, somebody else's pronouns for
like, do you want to actually phrase like what you're, I don't want to put words in
your mouth and I forget the exact way you phrased it.
The, what I was saying more or less is that I don't want to have to find out what everyone's
gender is and memorize it and then overrule what, I want to see like what my eyes are
seeing, which is not the right way to put it, but what just.
Your intuitions telling you?
Yeah, exactly.
Like I don't, I am, when I use pronouns, they are the pronouns as they correlate to perceived
sex or in some cases the, the target sex that someone, you know, wants is striving for.
And like, I don't, I don't care about all the other stuff and I hate how it interferes
with my thought process and how I feel like I'm constantly having to self-censor if I'm
trying to be very accommodating of my friends.
Yeah.
And I was kind of misunderstanding your argument as being against the validity of trans or
non-binary experiences or whether trans people's gender identity is quote unquote real, which
I, you know, after talking to you realize that wasn't what you were trying to say at
all.
It was really just about, I don't want to do these language things.
Right.
And yeah, and then we were kind of talking about there being like camp one versus camp
two where gender is either something that's projected by the viewer onto the Vee, or it's
the felt experience of the person to whom it's being applied.
And yeah, I don't really know if we can either, you know, support one or the other of those
with facts.
We can say how it's been used historically, but even that's very muddy because I think
that, you know, like sex and gender have just been used interchangeably for such a long
time. And I think it's only like, I forget, I think it was since the 60s, probably like
with the, you know, start of the new wave feminist movement, where they started trying
to separate it out and say, well, sex is anatomy and gender is psychology, which I do
like, like, I'm glad that there is that distinction.
And I wish people would actually use it that way, but they still don't.
And I think mostly it's because of squeamishness around people using the word sex, because
we're such a fucking puritanical society.
Yeah. I mean, it's like putting, which I guess this turns out to be a historical myth,
but like putting little pants on the legs of pianos, because can't be shown naked legs.
I've never heard that.
I had heard it a number of times about how crazy Puritans were.
And then later turned out not to be true.
That's not the reason they put the little, you know, clothing around the legs.
Well, I heard so much bullshit about, like, you know, with Albie on seat about how crazy
the Puritans were that, like, yeah, that's just kind of a drop in the bucket.
Right. But it's, it's believable.
Yeah, it's not the weirdest thing.
For my thought, just briefly on the etymology of, like, the uses of word
gender and sex, like, I, am I the only one who's intensely
uninterested in, like, the history of words?
Probably.
I think you're very interesting.
The phrase that I'm interested in, like, oh, this used to mean that.
That's interesting, like, in a, in a completely abstract sense, but never
from, like, what I'm, what we're talking about.
Like, if it, if it means this and it's meant this to everybody who's talking
about it for, like, the last generation, then, like, I don't care what people were
using 400 years ago to mean this or that.
Like, especially if someone's going to make an argument.
Well, because they used it this way 400 years ago, it's like, um, like the word
fag in British, that's a cigarette.
And in American English, that's a pejorative term for a, for a gay person.
But it's apparently also a bundle of sticks that you'd use to set somebody
a fire when you're burning them at the, at the stake or something.
And it's like, so if you say the word fag, you're really meaning this.
It's like, I'm not really meaning that.
And it's bullshit for you to pretend that I am, right?
If, if, if I'm, if I'm asking to bum a fag, it means I want a cigarette, right?
If I'm British, if I say it, if I say it in a correct accent, if I am an asshole
in America and I say that dude's a fag, it means that I'm an asshole.
It doesn't mean that I want to kill them, right?
So to point out that 300 years ago, it used to mean that, you know, this, the bundle
of sticks you'd use to set people on fire, like that doesn't.
I don't think it was a bundle of sticks used to set people on fire.
My understanding was just a faggot is a bundle of sticks.
So ha ha, gay people, right?
Bundle of sticks.
Oh, I guess I, I've definitely heard, I mean, not even the used to set people
on fire, but I've heard it mean, I've heard people at least in a parent
earnestness say, oh, because it used to mean, because you used to be able to use
a, a faggot or a fag or whatever it was called of sticks to, you know, you could
use that as a kindling for a fire or something.
Therefore.
Yeah, that's always something along the lines of the, since, you know, faggots
were small bundles of sticks often used to start fires.
They would use them to start the fires when they burned the witches and
beforehand they would like kill the gays.
And so the gays were like the faggots to warm up the fire for the witches or
something, I don't know, which I think was also bullshit.
But I'm very skeptical that that's the etymology, but much of a just so story,
but true or not, like that if someone's going to say, therefore you want your,
you're like, you know, this is like meeting that you want to kill them or
something, I'm going to call horseshit on that.
Another example that's maybe better illustrates my point.
I remember at some point, right when I stopped watching The Walking Dead was
when they brought on Negan, who was played by John Winchester's dad or John
Winchester from, forget his name as an actor.
He played the comedian and watchman.
And he did the whole, you know, Eenie Meenie, Mindy Mo, and then he beat
people to death with his barbed wire covered bat.
It was hilarious.
Well, and awful.
But it was, he was just a great psycho bad guy.
I have no idea how I made it that far into the series.
It wasn't fun.
But someone wore a shirt with like that said Eenie Meenie, Mindy Mo,
on it to school or something.
This is something I read about when that episode came out like five years ago.
And they either were told to take the shirt off or they got suspended or
something serious, because apparently historically it wasn't catch a tiger by
his toe, it was catch something else that ends in IGER by their toe.
And like, I didn't know that.
And I'm probably older than the kid wearing the shirt.
And I'm going to bet that the kid didn't know, the kid wearing the shirt
didn't know that probably people making the shirt didn't know that.
Quite possible that the people who wrote the Walking Dead comics and created
the character of Negan didn't know that.
But if it used to me, if it used to be mean, something much more sinister
than it's meant for at least 50 years, and someone's going to bring that up
and get somebody in trouble for it, then like, that seems really stupid.
Right.
You know, so anyway, etymology of words.
I bring up that long digression because I guess that's my bias coming into this
that if there's going to be, unless it's a compelling discussion of, well,
here's why it means this or something, I'm going to be skeptical.
But that doesn't mean that it'll be completely, it doesn't mean that it
you won't be able to break down our resistance to it.
It just means that you might encounter some that is there sort of just by
default, but is open to being, you know, obviously.
Yeah, I find etymology is very interesting.
It's just like, they're fascinating to read about, but I agree that they
shouldn't necessarily guide usage.
Thank you for very succinctly making the point that I tried to make, that I spent
five minutes not making.
That's exactly what I was trying to say.
Yeah, I also, I mean, I think it's really funny that you had said, am I the only
one not interested in etymology?
Cause I'm just remembering like all of my Philly last wrong meetups were sidetracked
at various points by discussions about the etymology of a certain word.
And then we're all just on Wikipedia on our phones.
And like people had, you know, studied Latin and Greek.
And don't get me wrong, in the academic sense, I think it's interesting.
And like you said, fun and interesting topic, but shouldn't guide usage and
shouldn't be, one should be able to condemn somebody for modern usage or
something that used to mean something bad.
That's, that's going to be my shorthand for it.
That's my long-winded way of, or a long-winded thing to, sorry, get us back on track.
Well, I don't even know.
Cause I kind of want to go on a tangent about the meaning of words.
I don't think it's a tangent either.
I think this is kind of what we're talking about.
Like I have heard, and while I was in my social justice phase, I've tried
really hard to not use ableist words.
And that means that people find the word stupid to be bad because originally it
meant somebody with like slow mentation.
Same thing with retired, which is now considered a slur, even though originally
that was the medical diagnosis.
And the word dumb is someone who can't speak, even though now we just mean again,
like someone who's acting like a fool.
Um, I forget how many others, there were a bunch of other words.
There are literally a zillion.
Oh, not literally a zillion.
There are a ton of things like that, right?
So did they literally excise all words that could be constituted as an insult
from the language?
Cause these are all just ways to insult people.
Well, I actually have a document where I had a bunch of non ableist swear words
that I kept and I would substitute them.
Okay.
Some of them are great.
I mean, I would have to pull it back up.
I don't know.
But just like saying something is abhorrent or this person is, you know, a
shit Lord, as opposed to something else that you might say.
Okay.
What else would you say?
Asshole?
Cause that's not an insult.
Some people don't have assholes.
I'm pretty sure everyone has an asshole or they would die.
Well, or they use a bag.
Yeah, there are some people in bags.
I mean, there's still a hole.
That's ableist of you.
That's ableist of you shit Lord.
God damn it.
Yeah.
And for like, kind of, we were joking about saying fuckers as a gender
inclusive, right?
You know, um, hey boys and girls and they're like, Hey, fuckers.
There was a book and I think I brought this up before, but I remember
Julia Galev had the author on not to talk so much.
They talked about the content of the book, but then they talked briefly
about the proposed title that I think that he then walked back on.
Um, it was, I forget the, the full title, but the subtitle was how to
think like a crazy philosopher, which I can't use the word crazy anymore.
That was another one, right?
Yeah.
And so like, I, but the thing is like in that usage, I totally get where
that, what the author was going for.
And it's like, here's how you think, you know, like a crazy philosopher
and you imagine somebody, you know, eccentric, whatever.
Right.
And they didn't go any of the old Greek dudes.
I don't think they were using it as a pejorative.
If anything, it actually kind of was praise.
They absolutely, that was exactly the intended usage that they were going
for, but because crazy is a, uh, it's a no, no word now.
It's a no, no word.
And I, it's one of those things, I know this isn't the topic where we're
really on, but I think it kind of is now.
Yeah, I guess.
Or at least for, for the moment, yeah, because this was relevant.
Yeah.
I guess for me, it's like, you can, you can make any basically anything super
mean and pejorative, right?
But there, if you're using a word like crazy, isn't that crazy, man?
Hey, don't, don't say crazy, man.
That's not really cool.
Yeah.
Um, like you're missing the, what I'm trying to say.
And you're, it seems like it's just someone's being pedantic, right?
Um, just likewise, I think this was a Louis C.K.
joke where he talked about how Jew was both the accepted and the pejorative
for a group of, for like a Jewish person, depending on how you said it.
Um, like, yeah, yeah.
So I mean, if you put, if you put a twist on it, it's like a pejorative, but
it's also the official okay word, right?
Yeah.
Interesting thing I just talked about with my parents last time I saw them for
dinner, uh, the word Pollock is literally the word for Polish person in the Polish
language.
Yeah.
Uh, so, I mean, Pollock is entirely correct.
And when people try to say poll around me, I always get really annoyed because
I'm like, no, I'm not a fucking wooden beam out there.
You hang things on.
I'm a fucking pollock.
That's the word.
Use it, but I'll show you a poll.
Yeah, right.
But I was talking with my parents and my parents were like, yeah, but you weren't
in Chicago in the early eighties when we immigrated here.
Cause apparently there was a big wave of immigration from Poland around that time.
And, uh, and Chicago was where almost all of them went.
Uh, and so there was a lot of racial prejudice against Polish people because,
you know, they were taking all the good jerbs and they're doing them for cheaper
and worked in harder and just making things tough for the American.
And so all these dumb Pollock jokes started going around because, you know,
if you can make the popular consciousness that Pollocks are dumb,
maybe they won't get the jobs.
If nothing else, at least you feel better, right?
Oh, so it became a pejorative because people are saying it in the mean voice.
My parents were actually kind of sensitive about the word.
And I mean, they're not really anymore, but, uh, they were like, yeah, I, I
still have weird feelings about that word, even though, even though it is the
correct word in the Polish language, like, well, I'm reclaiming it for us.
Damn it, because, because Poll sounds stupid.
Yeah.
I remember being a little kid and wondering why Negro wasn't considered cool anymore.
I was like, it literally just means black and black is okay.
Uh, in the, or in the eighties, when I was a kid, you couldn't say black.
Yeah.
And I've still heard some people say, oh, you should call them African-Americans.
And I was like, nobody calls themselves African-Americans.
I was really glad when in the mid late nineties, it swung back to black.
It's just so much simpler.
It's just one syllable.
Yeah.
I also.
African-American can be technically incorrect if they're British.
Yeah.
Or if they're, you know, not African.
Actually, Elon Musk.
What's up?
Elon Musk is African, right?
And my, my thing on this, before I even knew that this was the thing, which I'm,
I'm glad it landed on the right, right side just by history.
But I think of the black people who's like numbers I have, or like, you know,
that I've interacted with a lot, I think one of them is like what you would
call African-American, like one's Jamaican.
One's from Canada.
One's like one or two are Caribbean, something or other.
Like we don't, we don't talk a lot about their background, but I just knew
that one of them was Caribbean or Jamaican or something.
But it's like, I don't, I don't think I know anybody who hails from Africa.
Right.
Not, not personally, I know people who, you know, but like it African-American
makes it like, oh, your, your, your skin's dark.
You must be from Africa.
Right.
And it's like, maybe my family's been here for 350 years.
Like you don't fucking know.
Maybe for from the Middle East.
Well, pretty much every African-American has been here longer than my family.
Well, yeah, you guys got here, what, 81 or two?
82, I think.
Wait, no, could have been 83.
I have to ask my parents.
It's only a few years before I was born.
Yeah.
I don't know a lot about my ancestry.
I know that some of my family members were around at least as early as the Civil War.
I'm trying to think.
Oh, yeah.
I think I mentioned this.
Major Gilmore.
That was, that was my, oh yeah.
Where major was this first name?
Yeah, that was the first name, but I think he lost his left thumb.
I saw his gravestone.
And I think he lost his left thumb in the Civil War fighting for the north.
And it was either my great, great grandfather or four greats.
But yeah, anyway, sidetrack.
So we're talking about the definitions of words.
Right.
I see the first point here is how do you define gender versus sex?
Were you hitting on that or did you want to keep going with something else first?
Well, I'll get to the, like one last thing I wanted to say, kind of on.
The track that we were going was, I think that what a lot of people don't take into
account, and maybe this is hard because it's subjective, but the thing you were
talking about, about like the word Pollack or Jew being said in certain contexts,
being pejorative or actually just descriptive, I think that there's definitely
a difference between people intentionally misgendering people in a way that is
meant to be harmful or just because they slip up or because it's hard or they
don't know or whatever.
And so I think it's like common for people to kind of treat them as though they
were the same thing.
And again, the subjectiveness, maybe from one's internal experience, it feels
like the same thing, but it just feels like a lack of kind of analysis on the
part of the person.
Like I was having a hard time and I was kind of bouncing between feeling
sympathy for the people that are really triggered by people using the wrong
pronoun in the last episode.
And then also being like, yeah, but I don't think that justifies yelling at
somebody. I've seen people get way bent out of shape and scream at somebody and
like tarnish their reputation for being a transfer when like it was an honest
mistake.
That sucks.
And by I've seen, I mean like on Tumblr in real life, actually, like I've only
really had good experiences in real life where people tend to, I don't know, I'm
in a bubble of trans people if I all like are liberal and kind of cool.
So whatever.
This is where I put on my tinfoil hat about, especially online activity being
intentionally divisive by non-actual honest actors.
So like we talked about this at some point post Trump where like a large part of
the the online support was not American based and it was there to just like, you
know, stir controversy or like amp this up or, you know, whatever, whether it be
completely fake stories or just amplified through Twitter bots or whatever
operating out of Russia.
I'm pretty sure that a lot of the stuff that divides the left that you see
online comes from the same sort of farms.
And I'm kind of basing that off of just like my supposition of why wouldn't you
attack both sides?
And if your goal is to make your enemy divided, then you just you hit both
halves and make them fight each other.
Yeah, I don't think that they needed Russian bots to be able to do that though.
Like a lot of people live in bubbles.
I think one of the problems with the internet is that it forces people to
interact in spaces where they're not separated by their nationality or their
country of origin or their age group and everything.
So you do get these shockingly different views.
I think people that makes people really other people that they just haven't
really had any kind of experience with people who really believe these sorts of
things and in bad faith, they're kind of like, oh, they create this caricature of
like the evil Muslim who oppresses women and likes terrorism and stuff.
And like meanwhile, there's a really complicated set of scenarios that led
to this person having the beliefs they do.
Totally.
And that happens on every avenue online and probably, but like you said, less to
a green, less to a lesser degree in real life when you actually like see the
person and talk to them and like humanize them.
But I do think, for example, like the, the online website that, um, published
that whatever review of that bad date that that girl had with Aziz Ansari a
couple of years ago, that was apparently owned by a Russian, uh, corporation.
Right.
So like that got that got amplified.
And they're, they're only reason to seem that that really did anything was to
have the left eat its own tail, deciding whether or not this was bad.
Right.
Not going to even talk about the whole thing.
Um, but that, that seems to be me at least weak evidence that some of it,
this amplification is on purpose to make people hate each other.
Well, I mean, there's, it's been proven that some of it is from Russian.
Well, that's what I'm saying on the right for sure.
But well, that, that's all I was saying.
So these, these, I mean, it's undeniable that some of it is because we literally
have proof.
Well, I didn't.
So I, I just had, I had a couple of anecdotes and some, some, like I said,
tinfoil hat conspiracy.
Well, I think there was an article about a month ago.
I mean, it, this is, it's not a secret.
Cool.
Yeah.
Well, called it is a regular hat now.
It is no longer tinfoil.
Excellent.
Yeah.
But I mean, I think that without the trolls, there would still be these kinds
of discussions going on.
I don't know, um, well, like, I mean, I know some people, um, I've met in real life
that literally do this kind of thing.
And they're not Russians.
They're, they're here.
Yeah.
But I was even thinking just, you know, controversy and drama gets pushed,
like disproportionately to the front of news or to the front of people's minds.
Yeah.
Like that's kind of what drives Facebook and a lot of social media.
I remember also being like kind of addicted to the drama and the
outrage porn for a while.
Again, like the social justice area.
It was like, I was kind of like checking blogs daily and being like,
what do I have to be upset about today?
Oh man, look at this terrible thing.
This person said it's a, it's an emotional hit.
It's an angrily blog about it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I, I, yeah, I remember that too.
And, and it is kind of like a drug.
And that's why it keeps getting shared.
People feel good when they get this emotional outrage.
They're fighting the good fight.
Right.
Yeah.
I've, I, I still fail at this from time to time, but I try very hard to, uh, if
something outrages me, not share it.
And like I said, I still fail sometimes because fuck.
Well, yeah, but I mean, like, I, I forget what it was, but I saw something
recently that you posted on Facebook and some people in your comments feed said,
well, actually this is what happened and you edited the original post.
Right.
So the fact that I think it's fine to share stuff as long as, you know, you're
willing to update later, but like, oh, actually, like, you know, this turned out
to be false or.
Or more than once then I thought, yeah.
I think what it sounds like what you're trying to do.
Having not, since I don't really follow you on Facebook, um, is like, if you see
something and you have the impulse, like this pisses me off so much, people need
to be as pissed as I am.
You like check that impulse.
Yeah.
So that, that sounds awesome.
That's a bread flag that I should not share this.
That's cool.
And again, if, if something slips through the filter once in a while, I bet it's
after some consideration.
So sometimes it still sounds like you're trying to do it.
It's like, it's like a diet where it's like, yes, I'm, I'm good.
Most days I still, I'd still commendable, but most people when they feel their
diet's diets don't, you know, burn down all of civil society.
Not that I do that solo, but, you know, a hundred thousand matches altogether.
Where were we?
Yeah.
Um, I had a couple of counterarguments again, kind of where we left off.
I don't even know if I want to get into that though.
Um, something I did have was if we wanted to continue talking about why
gendered third person pronouns exist and whether they should continue to.
Hmm.
And not even just pronouns.
I was thinking about it and we've got he, she, they, uh, we've also got, what
did they call them?
Honorifics, mystery, misses, and then they've got Ms and mix or I don't know
if you pronounce it mixed, but mx, which is supposed to be the gender neutral one.
I think you pronounce it mixed.
Never heard of that.
That's new to me.
It's just the one that is, you know, like gender neutral.
Yeah.
No, I just, yeah, just new to you.
Okay.
Yeah, I think it's interesting, um, being non-binary and like interested in how
people use the language.
I've actually looked some of this stuff up or seeing other people talk about it.
Like, uh, you've got, this isn't even English, but or Latino, Latina.
I've seen some people writing that as Latinx as well.
Uh, I've seen responses on like whatever Twitter feeds or whatever Twitter replies.
All my stuff from Twitter comes from like copy pastes to Reddit or little
screencap it and someone's like, why don't you, why don't you?
Like, you know, white girl on this out of Starbucks.
Like, why don't you not tell me how to use my fucking language?
Um, apparently they're the, the push to, Oh, was it Italian?
Yeah.
Well, no, it was, it was a, it was a Latina person or a Latino person.
I'm not sure Latinx thing is they didn't like, so they didn't like some white
person from, from outside the country and outside the language saying, here's
how your language should work.
They, they thought that it was, uh, imperialistic and rude, um, and maybe condescending.
Yeah.
And that kind of brings another axis into play there.
Yeah.
It's tough cause I mean, that, that opens a whole can of worms.
I don't know how you treat the rest of the world about doing it.
Like you can't go through and, you know, gender neutralize every language that,
especially some of the really heavily gendered ones.
Like I know Spanish, for example, is crazily heavily gendered.
Spanish has genders on like inanimate objects.
Most of the romantic languages do.
Most of the romantic languages have at least the humans gendered and a lot of
them have all objects gendered too, which is weird.
Um, I, I agree entirely that there's absolutely no reason for that to be a thing.
Uh, but it has been for thousands of years in certain languages and changes very hard.
Well, and also I think there's just this idea of like, all right, cool.
So you Americans are now going to step in and tell me like how to use my language
is sort of like, might be the perceived reaction for some people.
And that might not be well received.
All right.
Yeah.
I mean, it might be a change worth making, but.
From the inside by convincing them it's a good idea by not by policing them
from the outside, maybe.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Maybe.
Yeah.
And I like wasn't even, I mean, I'm not surprised if it was something that was
invented by white people, but I was under the impression that actual, uh, Latino,
Latina Latinx people had come up with this.
For self-reference.
Oh, cool.
At least some of them do use it.
The, uh, the woke among them.
Do.
Latin.
At least online.
Yeah.
Woke is now a pronoun.
Yep.
Uh, yeah.
So like referring to groups where they've got ladies and gentlemen and boys and girls.
Uh, I heard somebody say that, um, a gender neutral alternative is like friends and guests.
And then, uh, homies, I like to just say comrades or yeah, homies.
I liked, um, I think that's how I remember Christopher Hitchens opening up a talk
like that and he's like, you know, brothers and sisters, ladies and gentlemen,
comrades.
And he had one other one or something, but in his delicious British accent, but I
like to do comrades in there.
Yeah.
I get the feeling that I really enjoy that one.
Hey, fuckers, here's my presentation on the third quarter profits.
Uh, yeah.
And then you've got mother, father, sister, brother, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew.
Yeah.
Those are really hard ones because those actually convey important information.
Hmm.
Yeah, like how important it is that, you know, you're talking to your
aunt or your uncle.
See, this, this is an interesting thing.
I think this came up on the discord is, uh, someone relate a quick story
about the mother, uh, their mother.
And then they realized that they said mother, which is a gendered word.
And they said, I don't know why I didn't just use parent.
And I said, I, I replied, this makes a material difference to me.
The, that story with the word mother is different than the word parent.
And they said, I feel the same way, but why?
I was actually part of that conversation.
That was, that was one of the, that was one of the very few
I'm there live for it.
Wasn't just reading about it two days later.
And it's not because it tells me anything about the parent because it
doesn't women vary so much and, you know, men vary so much.
And there's tons of overlap.
Uh, the information conveys is about the relationship between the parent and the
speaker.
People generally have different relationships with their mother than with their
father.
And, uh, I guess that was generally conceded, but also viewed as a unfortunate thing.
I think there's also for me, the fact that like, if I'd said, my parents said
this, because it's not a common way to refer to a parent, you would think that,
oh, they must have a really troubled relationship or some, some unatypical
relationship with their, with their parents to refer to them as parent rather
than mom or dad.
Well, and also like the relationship you have with the sibling of the same sex
is a different from the relationship you have with the sibling of the opposite
sex, especially after a puberty hits.
So that also conveys information.
If you say brother or sister, depending on what your sex is,
my brother and I call each other brother and bro a lot.
And, um, like, Hey, talk to you later, brother.
Um, and I remember Rachel, cause she's a single, my wife is a single child.
And she's like, I think that's just, she, she expressed at some point like that.
It's not that it was weird in a bad way.
She was confused by it.
And I'm like, it's a lot like how you call your mom, mom and not Laura.
Like it's a special moniker that only she gets from you.
Oh, uh, so like to me, calling my brother brother, he's the only person I get to
call that, right?
Unless it's like, you know, someone else like my bro or something, right?
We don't have that in English, but I know in Japanese and a few other Asian
languages, they have specific words for brother or sister that also refer to the age.
Yeah.
So you would say like eldest brother or younger sister.
All right.
I'm going to link, I'm going to reference and then link to this.
They have a lot of like social status pronouns and honorifics there.
Just because he mentioned older, older brother or older brother, they also don't
have as many gendered pronouns.
Yeah.
Um, I found this ridiculous YouTube video that I won't summarize, except for it's
Nick Offerman narrating what's happening in an old West saloon and the people in
the saloon can all hear him.
And it's, it was amazing and it's like eight minutes long.
I'm going to put that in the show notes because it's really funny and everyone
should see it.
So back to the show.
Completely unrelated.
Yeah.
Wait, can I, can I piggyback a tangent off that?
Yeah.
As a writer, I'm curious if you narrate in your head while you're like just going
about your everyday life.
No.
Really?
Not usually.
I have done this for like, I don't know, since I was a little kid and like it,
it's especially, it happens especially hard when I'm reading or writing really
intensely, but I'll be walking around and being like, and then I walked out the
door and I looked left and right and I saw a dog and I was like, that's a good dog.
Oh, you have that running in your head as well as those things.
Neat.
No, I have not had that.
I, I, there was a brief period in my life where I was reading so much that I
started to think in terms of the written words.
Like I saw parentheses in my head when I was not a parenthetical.
Um, but in general, no, I don't, I don't have the self-narration like in what is
it series of unfortunate events?
No.
Oh, there's a show.
Maybe it is that one that has the narrator that is, uh,
just the punchline to a lot of things is the narrator saying, no, he didn't.
Right after a character.
A recipe development.
Is that a recipe development?
They did that a lot.
Oh, it might not be the only one, but there'd be like, oh, I'll take care of that.
And then who was the narrator?
It was, um, I'm blanking on it, but he'd be like, he didn't.
Yeah.
Yeah.
For most people, they just walk around narrating what's not, not narrating in a,
like you could write this down since, but just like in a word vomit in their head,
but this is distinct that your version sounds much more interesting.
Like you could write it down.
Whereas with the rest of us just wrote down what the train of thought that's
going through our head because it will look out and like, you know, oh, look over
there.
Oh, I forgot my keys.
I should grab a coat.
Like just the random shit that's in your head all the time.
If you just wrote that down, you'd sound insane.
But it's in our heads in most of our heads all the time, right?
It's actually like, if you read stuff that's written by amateur writers, it
does tend to come off that way and it's pretty funny.
Well, that's, that's also just the, the insight that, especially Sam Harris
pushes a lot through just mindful attention, that this is the, you can,
you can step behind that sort of, that train of thought.
You could step out of the way of it and watch it go by and not get swept away
in it like all day and then have all of your thoughts just kind of be pulling
you around all day.
Yeah.
Yeah, you do that in meditation.
You do it in CBT.
It can be really useful to actually step back and watch what you're doing and
realize like it, it took me a really long time to realize I was doing negative
self-talk all the time.
And I would never want one of my friends to talk about themselves or like
to have someone be talked about the way I was talking about myself.
And I realized the double standard of that after a while of observing it and
being like, yeah, but well, it motivates me to like be like, oh, come on,
dumbass, get out of bed, worthless pieces of shit.
And like, it's like, haha, it's kind of funny.
But like, if you do that all day long, that I was thinking about like,
probably doesn't, that's probably not really good for your self-esteem.
That's first of all, awesome that you noticed that.
And second, differently awesome that like, you noticed it.
And you're like, no, I'm going to stick with it anyway and like,
talk to yourself and how good of an idea it was.
Well, that's how I've come to change my mind about a lot of things.
That's awesome.
Yeah, it's it's a gradual process.
Do you still do that?
It's in like, isn't that one of the points of CBT to stop?
Yeah, yeah, no, I still do it.
I mean, it's a lifelong habit, but much better now at catching it when it's
happening or sometimes I'll say stuff out loud and then kind of have to walk
back and be like, oh, wait, I just, I realized I just did that thing.
And actually, I'm going to rephrase that.
I've heard it said as if you were a character in a fantasy novel and this
thing was whispering these things to you, the reader would obviously go,
that's the evil sword you're holding, throw it and fire.
I like that.
I saw this summarized in a tweet on Reddit that was like, therapist, you know,
you should stop thinking about yourself in such harsh terms.
Me in my head.
Yeah, you dumb bitch, stop thinking about yourself that way.
I was like, relatable.
Uh, all right.
So we've got off topic again.
We're talking about pronouns and things that are not pronouns, but are gendered.
So what is the point of these?
I mean, like, I think we kind of got pretty close to it when we were talking
about the familial gendered words such as aunt or uncle that does actually help
differentiate who you're talking about, maybe even more so in Chinese.
If you were saying eldest brother, like, you know who that is.
Why not use their name?
Why use any pronouns at all?
I guess maybe I, these are, if you're posing it to me like a real question,
I can think of like quick answers, one of which might be like you use a, you know,
in it could be like a more formal thing to call somebody by their name.
Like, Hey, bud is way more like friendly or even Hey bro or Hey sis is more
congenial than like, you know, calling them by addressing them by their formality.
Well, there's different ways you can say someone's name too.
There totally is.
A lot of like conversational guides will tell you use people's names
that actually establishes intimacy.
I know why I use them.
I find it computationally expensive to constantly reference people's names.
Like, I don't think of people by their names.
I think of them as like the physical object I see and the feelings I have for them
and like our relationship and stuff.
So like kind of a subperson.
Well, not a subperson.
It's like, it's an entire like entity in my head, but the name is not part of that entity.
There's, there's the feelings and the history we have and all this.
But I have to like specifically call up a name and I fail sometimes,
even with people I've known for a long time.
But my mother once went through the all of my siblings and the dog before
finally getting to my name and trying to get my attention.
It's funny how often we were actually just talking about that at work.
We're like, if you have a bunch of kids, the parent will be like,
Joseph, Christine, Greg, where the hell you are?
You know, I'm talking about get in here.
I'm terrible with names.
I don't know exactly why that is.
I have my suspicions, but I.
And so like calling up someone's name to me does cost brain cycles
and it can be derailing.
And so I find pronouns much easier.
They're just like, boom, there, there, there.
And if I actually have to pull up someone's name, takes a little bit more time.
Usually it doesn't take that much time because like Steven, you're Steven.
I know that Steven, but if you keep calling me that, I'll think I've done
something wrong, but every now and then it's just, you know, faster.
Saves me that millisecond or whatever.
Yeah.
That kind of the thing with the intimacy too is like when you're
saying referring to someone by name every time, it can, I think promote that
feeling of intimacy or like, oh, they remember my name.
They care about me.
But then also, yeah, you do like, if you refer to someone by their entire name.
Whenever you were in trouble, you're in trouble.
Yeah, with your parents, if they'd say your full name, you're definitely in
trouble because now I don't even know how long it was 20 years ago.
That book came out that was like, Hey, you know, if you want to make friends,
if you want to influence people, use their names.
Del Carnegie.
I don't know if that was the actual book it was, but.
Yeah, that's how to win friends and influence people.
If you want to get more intimate with someone, you use their name
because people like hearing their names.
And so all salespeople use people's names now.
And at this point, when someone uses my name.
You know, associate it with marketing.
Yes.
I am instantly suspicious of them.
I'm like, even when my friend uses my name, I'm like, okay, you get that one today.
But, but use my name a lot more and I start getting suspicious.
We're trying to pull over on it.
Right. Exactly.
Man. Yeah, I do remember there was this kid that I was friends with in high
school, but it took a while because this kid would come and sit next to me.
I feel like, Hey, Jessica, how are you doing today?
Like, how was your day?
And I was just like, what the hell are you doing?
It was just such bizarre behavior for like someone that grew up in New Jersey.
But then like, it took me a while where I was like, Oh, he's not some creeper.
He's just like, actually, like being friendly.
What is this weird?
And then it was nice after I realized that like outside of the creepy bubble of
New Jersey that like, sometimes people are just nice and friendly and go out of
their way to like be nice because it's nice to be nice.
Who would have thought?
I think invoking someone's true name a lot during like conversation with them.
Like that's in chapter one of every like neuro linguistic programming book.
That's in if it's not in Carnegie's, how to win friends and influence people.
It might be an influence science and practice.
And that's that's exactly why I don't trust people who do that.
Now they they obviously want something from me.
It's funny.
Anyways, we have about a half hour left on this topic.
Yeah, let's um, I mean, we can cut it shorter if we have less to talk about,
but we don't want to go over.
I'm trying to actually just think of how to segue to the science part.
The science part. How about we just go to the science part?
All right, let's hear about some science.
All right.
Yeah, so we were starting with like how you define gender versus sex.
And nowadays the TLDR is sex is anatomy and gender psychology.
Can I ask about that real quick?
Sure.
My impression was that nowadays sex was about anatomy and gender was about social
role. Is that not the case?
Or is this a newer development or what's exactly going on here?
I've heard it referred to both ways.
And I think, hmm, yeah, I think that maybe
I'm not positive.
Maybe originally they started saying like social role when it was,
I think, started to it probably started being questioned by the feminist movement.
Who weren't even thinking in terms of being transgender, gender identity
being a thing at that point.
It was just let's, you know, break down the usage of these words.
Why do we need these gendered pronouns?
Well, it's so, you know, who to treat differently and like, oh, that's kind of fucked up.
But this is the one time every two years my psychology degree comes in handy.
I think I did taught us both, like in books throughout my years of doing that stuff.
I would see both definitions for gender is always the same for sex.
It was always plumbing or, you know, anatomy.
It's more than that.
But well, but yes, but as like as far as the, you know, quick definitions,
if you're going to go for, you know, sex is plumbing slash anatomy.
I like it was never plumbing in the books.
I like calling it plumbing.
And then gender was always either social role or psychology.
OK.
So I think the answer is yes.
It almost feels like we need three words now, because those are pretty different things.
I mean, you can be a cis girl and completely reject the social role of being a woman.
And I think that that should be an acceptable identity.
I mean, I think I just don't have an identity.
I've looked within. I've done drugs to look within.
There's just no one home.
I might be I might be I might be a P zombie.
Huh. But yeah, you are a meat popsicle.
Well, I feel like we should get into that another time, because that's super
interesting. Let's table that.
Yeah. In general terms, I pulled this quote from somewhere.
Medical news today says, in general terms, sex refers to the biological differences
between males and females, such as the genitalia and genetic differences.
Gender is more difficult to define, but it can refer to the role of a male or
female in society known as a gender role or an individual's concept of themselves
or gender identity. Yeah, that's confusing.
I'll link to this.
Just it means more than one thing, which is, I guess.
Yeah, it's easy to understand.
It's confusing in practice.
The point of words, which like is funny, because it's kind of the crux of some
of the arguments about the non-binary pronouns and inventing new pronouns.
But the point of having words and vocabulary is to be able to distinguish between ideas.
Yeah. And having that one word mean two distinct things is awkward.
Yeah, that can obfuscate what you're trying to talk about.
And yeah, I was going to link to, and I still will, there was this good breakdown
slash diagram from what is it?
GenderSanity.com.
I will still link to it, but we're going to get to user, yeah, listener feedback.
But a listener actually made a much better essay and a bunch of diagrams.
Well, no, we can link to both, but yeah.
But put the listener one up top.
Yeah, so like if you're having trouble trying to visualize this or if you're a
visual person or, I don't know.
So shout out to the wealth who sent this in on Patreon.
And I think they put it on the Discord server, too.
Or somebody did, because that was Comic Sans, wasn't it?
No, that's the font from the XKCD or...
No, it's the oatmeal.
Okay, never mind.
Somebody, oh, at the very least, it's not XKCD.
It was a...
No, they've got it.
It's a...
Unless it's possibly the what is XKCD.
No, it's the font in the diagrams is XKCD.
And then the main body text is this font called Playtime with Hot Totties.
In the diagram.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah, I was thinking of the main text font.
And I was thinking of somebody else who posted an article for review on the
Discord and someone's like, first feedback, don't use Comic Sans.
But yeah, wealth wrote their blog post in a, um, not aerial or times in a room
in font, which looked fine, but it was distinct.
In general, I don't care.
You know, you can, interesting fonts are fun and interesting.
Every now and then, like my sister will send an email in Comic Sans.
And I'm like, it's really hard to take your email seriously.
Please tell me you don't email your clients in Comic Sans.
Yeah.
I'm not a font Nazi, but I'm told that that and Papyrus are like the worst.
I don't know why Papyrus because Papyrus doesn't look.
I think it's one of the like, they had an original set of fonts that came with
early computers and the ones that looks distinct and interesting were
Comic Sans and Papyrus.
And there's like a couple of others.
Um, and now they're just kind of thought of as like, I don't know, outdated
and stupid.
There was that SNL sketch where Ryan Gosling's losing his shit because the
Avatar poster wasn't Papyrus.
That'd be my other comic relief for the show notes.
Yeah, that I actually do find that really funny.
But, um, I actually, I like the use of the handwritten font here because it
matches the handwritten style of the graphs.
And, and they used a sub font for the diagram text as a graphics designer.
I find this pleasing.
Cool.
Right.
So the diagram I was going to link to just shows that spectrum between biological sex,
male intersex or female, gender identity, being men, gender queer or woman, gender
expression, so masculine, androgynous, and feminine, and sexual orientation.
So attracted to women by asexual, attracted to men.
And those are all the spectrums that you can kind of fluctuate between.
And yeah, getting into what the differences are between the sexes.
I lost the attribution for this one.
I'll find it.
But, uh, someone said there's not a single biological sex marker found exclusively
in male bodies or female bodies.
So that's where I just wanted to get into how much, well, on one hand, um,
differentiating male and female is really simple.
And then, and then it's not.
Stephen looked like he was about to say, well, I, I, I think that's one of those
things that's like technically true, but, uh, imprint in practice is, uh, like
uselessly true.
Um, like, how was it phrased?
There's no one thing, genetic marker or something.
There's not a single biological sex marker.
Right.
So like that sounds, yeah, I'm, that's technically true because there's like
edge cases, but it is one of those things where it's like, it's true so often that
I'd bet you $1,000 in any like average case.
Um, like I made the, I had somebody, I think I mentioned this in the last episode.
I can't remember.
I talked to somebody once who had said there's no differences between men and women.
And I was like, if I went in for stomach pain to the doctor and they charge me
$400 to, uh, like an ultrasound of my ovaries, I'd be pissed and I wouldn't pay it.
Right.
Like if you went in for, you know, whatever issue and they, or if I got charged
for pregnancy test or something, like those, those are the things like there are,
there are differences that if I was a doctor and some patient comes in, presents
the stomach pain, whether or not they're a man or woman, excuse me, whether or not
they appear to be a man or woman, um, and they check whatever box on the sheet.
If they check female, then I'm not going to check for testicular cancer, right?
And I should probably get a big slap on the wrist.
If I charged them for a testicular cancer test.
Well, I think, um, in those cases, it is the responsibility of the person being
treated to disclose.
I mean, if they care about getting the correct medical treatment, I've also
heard that argument.
So like I kind of was gritting my teeth when he started saying that.
And then I realized you were saying a totally different thing, but a bunch of
other people who are anti-trans or whatever have made the argument that like, oh man,
what if you got rushed in for emergency medical care and then they like did the
wrong procedure on you because you look like the other Jen.
It's just like, yeah, okay.
You can invent whatever like wacky scenario you want, but happily, I wasn't
going there, but I mean, if it's a medical procedure dealing with those parts,
they'd probably discover pretty damn quick.
Yeah, I'm not sure how thorough surgeries look, but I bet a doctor could take
your clothes off right before they cut into you.
Well, and I'm not sure how, how thorough a gender reassignment surgery looks.
If it's really well done or something, but I'm betting a doctor could tell.
Maybe not.
I don't know.
It's, there's some that I think are good enough.
You would probably need a chromosome test.
Awesome.
And even then chromosomes.
So like, I would say like, not the way that that's phrased, that there's not a
single bio biological sex marker found exclusively in male and female bodies.
It's not saying that that's the norm either, but it's just the kind of yes,
generally you can probably be comfortable in 98% of cases based on site.
Is that the way it's phrased, it makes it sound like, well, you can't look at
someone's genes and know anything when in fact, you almost always can.
Well, I'll get into genes.
Yeah.
What's the complete androgen insensitivity thing that's called?
Yep.
Yeah.
I mean, that's the acronym CAIS.
Right.
And if you looked at someone's genes, you would get the wrong information from that.
But it's fairly rare.
And generally when you're confused, that kind of gene check will work.
Like just giving someone the impression that they can't get any information by
looking at someone's genetic information is wrong because you usually can.
Yeah.
I mean, you can get a lot of information, but you do actually have to look at those
things.
And I think that the point is that it's not necessarily good practice to assign
anyone biological marker as this is a definite sign that this person is
biologically this because you can change hormones and you can change everything.
Yeah.
At that point, if you're trying to like reduce it just to one thing anyway,
it starts to feel like you have an agenda.
Like why are you trying to reduce someone to just this one thing?
Well, kind of weirdly enough, I was just reminded of people trying to
figure out when a fetus becomes sentient.
I guess I was thinking of it because I keep seeing those horrible billboards
that has a picture of a fucking nine month old baby being all adorable and wearing
a onesie and making eye contact and all photoshopped to be photogenic.
It's always a white baby.
It's always a white baby.
Anyway, it's like, oh, I have a heartbeat after this many weeks or I can feel
pain starting at this stage.
And I'm like, show a picture of what they look like at that stage.
Fuckers, you look like a brainstem with like translucent gelatinous skin
the size of like a single cell.
I'm sorry.
I don't care.
I'm not sure what age, like human fetus starts to look like humans,
but my sister takes a while.
It does.
I'm not sure.
Let me see.
I bet it says in here.
I'm scrolling through texts from my sister.
They don't even look that human when they're first born.
Babies are.
No, they're weird.
I did see my niece when she was first born.
She looks a lot like Voldemort from the seventh Harry Potter book.
I was just going to say a lot of mythological monsters are based
on fetuses because we as a species find fetuses to be grotesque.
Like if you think of the gray aliens, they're just big fetuses.
If you think of a lot of like horror movie monsters that have that kind of
like baldness and the like big eyes and kind of melted look, I guess,
like like attack on Titan has the the big baby creepy things.
So all I know about fetal development is that this is what a baby
looks like at 12 weeks.
Yep.
So that seems to look vaguely human shaped.
So I guess a picture of an ultrasound will be my next niece.
I won $10 actually, because it's a niece, not a nephew.
So it or you're betting on the gender.
Well, they were betting on the sex.
That's right.
Yeah, we're I threw this out because for whatever reason, someone was like,
I bet it's a boy.
And I was like, I'll take that action.
So it is.
It does have a vaguely human outline at that point.
But I bet if it was pulled out and looked at, it would be not very human looking.
Yeah.
She said, I think in here, how big it was at this size, too.
Or yeah, in those pictures.
Oh, you know, she doesn't.
Who cares?
It's like the size of your thumb or something, right?
Yeah, size of a peanut, maybe.
It looks like the head is about a third of the or more of the total.
It's like twitty brood.
You know, anyway, where was I?
Yeah.
So we've got chromosomes.
Human embryos start out looking phenotypically female.
And I hear this a lot.
People say that everybody starts life as a girl that's not actually correct.
They have the male and female reproductive tracts.
So that's the wolfie induct and the malaria induct.
I'm not sure if I'm pronouncing those correctly, but those become the vagina or the penis.
Wait, what happens to the other one?
Does it shrivel away?
Men and women have the same organs.
They're just acted on by hormones, so they either protrude or don't.
But they just morph into the thing or the other thing.
It's not like two things.
It's like one thing that could turn into the one or the other.
More or less.
OK.
So why the tracts have different names?
I mean, they are different tracts, but I should have paid more attention in school.
Yeah, I believe, you know, it actually would be either the ovaries or the testicles
are the same thing, right?
Yeah, that's just the gonads or gonads.
I have a really bad case of readers, vocabulary or whatever they call it.
There's so many words.
Yeah, that I've only ever seen written anyway.
Yeah, the penis, the clitoris becomes is what the head of the penis would have been.
And then the shaft goes deeper into the body.
It's really interesting.
Oh, good stuff to know if you're going to make love to a woman.
Good thing to know if you're trans.
There's another tangent, but I just find this really entertaining.
There's a surgery that's an alternative to phalloplasty,
which is where they take the skin of your arm or leg or your side and use it
to construct a penis, huh?
But there's another thing called metodioplasty,
where they actually just release the clitoris from the clitoral hood,
take the skin that was the labia majora, like the inside of it
and wrap it around to make a shaft.
And then you can just take the like fatty deposits that are the, I guess,
like pubis and insert these little implants to make like a scrotum.
So you can just take the organ and make it into the other organ.
What about like erectile tissue?
Or is there some kind of implant that can become flaccid or?
Well, yeah, that's that's the thing that's fun about it.
Or like maybe not fun, but you have to choose between one or the other
if you want to get like bottom surgery as an FTM at this stage
of our medical knowledge and know how.
So if you get phalloplasty, it cannot become erect
because that's the one where they take skin from somewhere else.
So you have to insert this, like, basically a balloon that you inflate.
And sometimes one of the test uses the thing that you use to pump it out.
On the plus side, you can get hard on command and just stay that way.
On the downside, maybe Al.
Am I am I the one hearing about like all the surgery to that area?
And I'm thinking like, ouch.
Well, I'm assuming once it heals up, it'd be OK.
Totally. But until it heals up, it feels like someone's taking a hot poker
to your genitals. Yeah, but that's every surgery.
It's a that's a really intense procedure.
And I mean, like when I say they take a skin graft of the arm,
like your arm from your wrist up to like the elbow is just like the skin is gone.
And it takes a while to grow back and you usually have.
Yeah, I guess like that was the other thing that like is funny.
I don't know, like I've known a couple of people that have gone through this surgery
and they're like, so my doctor's like, how big do you want it to be?
And I'm like, oh, like just keep in mind that however big you want it to be,
we're going to have to take that much skin.
Yeah, that's such a trade off.
I mean, I guess I don't want to be able to wear pants.
I'll stick with a kilt.
Yeah. And then like the meta surgery, though,
since you're just using the clitoral tissue, then that actually can get erect.
But you can't make it very big because the clitoris is as big as it's
going to get on testosterone, which like kind of goes from like a few centimeters
to a few inches. Really? Yeah.
Like it varies. Even like after puberty, you can get a bit bigger.
OK. Yeah.
That's one of the effects that testosterone has on FTM.
Isn't testosterone like a little Megali?
Didn't we talk about it before?
It's like basically going through puberty again.
Yeah, there's some things that can't change anymore.
Your bones, they get done growing and then the growth plates fuse.
There's a trick to get around that that everyone is really horrified when I talk
about, I like, I don't know, I like biohacking and medical stuff.
So just like, hey, there's a surgery where you can actually like grow your arms
and legs by breaking the bones and stretching them out and then letting
the osseous tissue just grow back in.
Easy, they're bone saw.
Oh, yeah.
It's an inside reference to Worm and Ward fans.
What a good character.
But power.
I thought it would be such a cool power if used for good.
She's like a biotinker and like tinker is like make tech or something.
It's kind of vague.
And she makes tech, too.
She does, but specifically, yeah, biology stuff.
So like she, she just, you know, she wants, she can just hack two things,
two people together to give them, you know, weird new shit.
And she's a villain.
So she goes kind of balls of the wall with it and way worse ways than you're
imagining.
Awesome.
Yeah.
So much worse.
Thanks, Wild Bo.
Yeah.
So enough talking about creepy surgeries that I think are fascinating.
Let's see.
Yeah, we were talking about ducts.
The first five to six weeks of embryonic development are attributed to the
X chromosome alone, which is why men have nipples.
And females grow from an embryo to fully developed through the influence of
only the X chromosome.
Do you want to hear, I'm sorry, I'm going to take us on a tangent.
It's about time.
It's someone other than me.
Do you want to hear about the craziest creationist thing I've ever heard?
Is it enough to do with the rib?
With what?
Oh, I don't know.
I just assumed it was about like why, like men and women having different
numbers of ribs.
No, although interestingly, I thought they had different numbers of ribs until
I was in my teens.
I did too.
I was raised Catholic and everybody just said that as though it were like a
fact.
You would think that the speaking the 21st century people would like, I've
realized that that is not true.
Many of us have seen a chest actually of ourselves.
I mean, you can feel your own ribs as long as you aren't too obese and count them out.
Yeah.
All right.
Anyway, I'll count somebody else's later.
Okay.
So, uh, this, it was, this was actually a creationist that is, um, well-ish known.
He had, uh, like appeared on some Christian radio shows and he had a talk
circuit.
I want to say Ray Comfort, but I'm not sure.
Maybe it wasn't him.
The banana man.
That's what I call him to love it.
But, uh, at some point someone asked him, why do men have nipples?
The answer he came back with it was, well, you have all sorts of different
skin on your body, like your finger, the skin on your fingers is different from
the skin on your back and which is that's different from the skin on your
lips and the skin of your eyelids and like, how, how does the skin meet up
somewhere?
All the skin has to like turn into other skin.
So that is what the nipples are where the skins all touch and become a
different skin.
That's like, that's like the, the zipper where it's all ties.
That's the end of the bag that we tie it shut.
And I'm like, do, does Ray, does he have some kind of weird skin line that goes
from his lips down to his nipples?
Like, what the fuck?
It's funny because that's almost not wrong.
I mean, the nipples that has nothing to do with that, but there are these like,
uh, lines throughout our body that are divided by various genes.
That's like why you can get a calico cat.
Oh, yeah.
Or you can actually get a ginander morph.
That's where, uh, a organism is split left half to right half, uh, one side
being male, one side being female.
Really?
Yeah.
If you look, Google ginander morphic animals, you can find some really cool,
like half hen, half rooster, uh, a lobster that's blue on one half and black
on the other half, some really cool insects.
That's really cool.
Yeah.
The human body is not split up like that.
Our pieces are all scattered, but that's one of the things I was going to bring
up in the abnormal cases.
We can have chimerism.
So you can have a human that's got, uh, one testee and one ovary.
I like the pictures of cats where like they're faced right down the middle,
like it's like orange and stripes on one side and like solidly gray on the other.
Yeah.
Those are kind of cute.
Yeah.
And that, that has to do with that, um, chimerism.
Uh, let's see.
All right.
So around the second month, the fetal testes start producing enough
androgens to offset the maternal estrogens and that causes masculinization.
In normal cases, quote unquote, humans inherit 23 chromosomes from their parents.
One pair of chromosomes helps determine the baby's sex.
Uh, simplistically, two X chromosomes equals female and an X from the mother
and a Y from the father equals male.
Y makes you a guy.
That's how I remembered that.
Which yeah, gender stuff aside.
Right.
That's how you check it on a multiple choice test to remember which chromosome does what
and won't hold mnemonics against anyone.
I've actually heard that if you come up with intentionally, though, like funniest,
most bizarre, like meanest mnemonic, you're more likely to remember it.
So I use those when I'm trying to remember people's names.
Sometimes I'm pretty mean ones.
That's fantastic.
You have to share some of those later.
Uh, I don't know if I do.
You don't have to.
I would love it if you did.
I have to see if I can remember.
I don't want to know what mine is.
I desperately wonder what mine is.
Your name is very memorable.
Oh, okay.
Uh, and I didn't have one for you.
Fuck.
Feel less special.
So yeah, at the end of your Y chromosome, there's an S-R-Y gene, which is, uh, the gene
that helps send the embryo down the masculine pathway.
Uh, you need more than that S-R-Y for sex determination and differentiation.
Uh, so we were talking about the woman with case.
I don't know if anyone actually pronounces the acronym that way, but that's the androgen
sensitivity.
They have the S-R-Y gene, but they lack androgen receptors.
So in terms of hormone effects on their bodies, which includes the brain, uh, women
with case have much less masculinization than the average 46, uh, XX women, because
their cells don't respond to androgens.
So, um, just like, I guess, uh, cisgender women.
Yeah.
To each XX being the, okay.
That being the like, you know, normal woman.
So yeah, case women are actually more quote-unquote feminine.
Even though they have the XY.
Yep.
Okay.
Although something that is interesting is I have heard that case women tend to be
overrepresented in like science and engineering and mathematics.
So I don't know what that is going on there.
Uh, I'm not sure that's true either.
That's just here.
So that'd be interesting.
Yeah.
I'd like to look that up.
Uh, yeah, live, living organisms have a variety of sex determination chromosomes.
So we've got XY.
There's other species that have XO, ZW, Z0, haplodeploidy.
I probably pronounced that terribly, uh, temperature dependent.
That's a fun one.
Uh, meanwhile, many other organisms have only one sex or hermaphroditic or
change sex at a certain life phase or as needed.
Dude, that'd be pretty sweet if we had the temperature dependent sex.
We're like, today I want to be a girl.
Just got to get down to 50 degrees.
Now it changes like the, the gestational temperature will determine whether you
have male or female offspring, but it doesn't unfortunately happen throughout
the rest of your life.
Well, that's a bummer.
I'm no longer as impressed by biology.
No, but then they've got the ones that you just change sex either because
there's not enough of one, uh, sex in like your school of fish or just
because, Hey, what the hell?
The dinosaurs in Jurassic Park.
Yeah.
Which, you know, they had frog DNA.
I guess frogs also do that.
Yeah.
Which I make any goddamn sense.
I remember reading in one of Dan Dennett's books, he was complaining about
that cause like, that was why they had the frog DNA.
And he was like, we're more closely related to dinosaurs than frogs.
Or excuse me.
That yeah.
So really?
Yeah.
Oh, it's just that.
Oh, cause they're amphibians.
I don't know, but they're reptiles.
No, dinosaurs are your birds.
Right.
I guess birds split off less distantly than amphibians then.
According to Dennett.
Okay.
I'll take his word for it.
He did know.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So.
But they both are kind of like, lizardy looking to the human eye in the 90s.
So, and I think, and I think the sex swapping thing was something that they
wanted to incorporate in the plot.
They needed it for the story.
Well, I mean, somehow life would have, uh, found a way.
No, as a dinosaur fanatic, I have to, even though I know we're running late.
Oh, they're high fiving.
It's enjoyable.
Okay.
Dinosaurs, like the reason that we think of them as being lizardy looking is
because we found some bones and people just kind of like shrink wrapped them with
scaly skin and were like, yeah, I think it looks like an iguana.
But like, there's more accurate.
I mean, they found whole preserved dinosaurs and amber and.
That's the thing that really annoyed me about Jurassic World because Jurassic Park,
they went through like pains.
Oh, yeah.
No, that was really up to date.
Yeah, the information they had at the time that was really accurate.
They even, you know, said that like some, some scientists think that dinosaurs
might have had feathers in that movie.
That was the cutting edge at the time.
And then by the time Jurassic World came out, we knew that dinosaurs basically
had feathers, at least most of them.
You know, Jurassic World was garbage for a lot of reasons.
Update anything.
They're like, yeah, let's use the science that's 25 years old to to make this.
Didn't they even call it out in the movie?
Like they were like, oh, how come the dentists don't have feathers?
And like one of the scientists was like, well, we realize that people like it
better this way or something.
Or this is the, I don't know.
Oh, maybe.
I'm not sure if they did it or not.
I didn't actually see the movie because I saw it.
If they did hand wave it, which I don't remember if they did.
And then that actually totally excuses it for me.
As long as they acknowledge it.
And be like, you know what?
We know we're doing this.
Fuck you guys.
Then like then I'm all for it.
It's still slightly annoyed.
Yeah.
But but less annoyed than if they had just like gotten it wrong or didn't care.
Yeah.
We thought we're too dumb.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Anyway, I want to link to a picture of my favorite dinosaur, Thurtsinosaurus,
because I had this toy of it as a kid and it looked like this fucking badass
thing with like these long claws and this like cool, zooty snake head.
And then now like more recent drawings of it just showed us this big,
floofy sloth looking thing with like big poof of feathers.
It looks like a kiwi and I love it.
I saw a picture of what whales would look like if we just found their bones
and just wrapped them with some flesh.
Oh my God.
I need to see this link to that too.
Okay.
All right.
Oh man, this is such a tangent episode.
I got you.
Okay.
Right.
So let's see.
Female.
Yeah.
So XY is what we use.
And most other mammals also use this as well as some insects,
some snakes and some plants, notably Ginkgo, which is really old.
Ginkgo's been around since the dinosaurs.
In this system, the sex of the individuals determined by the sex chromosomes,
the females typically have two of the same kind of sex.
Chromosome, the XX, enter the homo-gamedic sex and males typically have two,
which are the XY and they're called the heterogamedic sex.
And then there's the other less common sex determining karyotypes,
which are XXY, XXXY, XXXX, XY, XXX, yeah, 4X is Y, XYY, XXX and X.
All of these develop differently from the XY and the XX karyotypes.
Missing or having an extra chromosome affects height, bone structure,
your arm and leg length, the size and shape of your hands and feet,
your muscle and fat distribution, your motor skills, your fertility,
your secondary sex characteristics, facial structure and temperament.
Although there's some controversy over that one, particularly,
there's actually this myth that XYY increases aggression and criminality.
You've probably heard that one.
I hadn't heard that one specifically.
Oh, yeah, there's this like, it's the hypermal, the XYY,
they're overrepresented in prison and then like actually
statistical analysis shows that that's not true.
They're actually much less likely to be.
I mean, oh, what it was, is if you separate for like poverty.
OK, if you take out like extraneous factors and that's interesting,
our control for that, then actually it shows that XYYs are less likely
to be criminal than the normal XY.
Does that mean that there is a disproportionate amount of XYY people
in poverty or below the poverty line in America?
Probably weird.
I wonder what caused that.
Oh, I mean, I mean, could it just been, you know, random genetic drift?
Did they have the platform saying full cognitive capacities if you're XYY?
No, that is one of the stereotypes that's associated with
mentation difficulty.
So that sort of explains the poverty thing.
They tend to be more, I think, on the ADD spectrum side of things,
more impulsive, yeah, the things associated with some learning disabilities.
Yeah, there's I was actually just going to say that the different
karyotypes can affect your IQ in interesting ways.
So you might see differences in executive function,
spatial reasoning, speech or language, but not in all the ways that you'd expect.
So, for example, people with a single X chromosome are shorter and
but like triple X chromosomes are taller than average,
but both are generally assigned female.
So you would associate normally like, OK,
the X gene is going to be associated with things like that are associated
with femininity and generally we tend to think of shorter height,
but not always the case.
And the prevalence that X, X, Y or that's a client filter syndrome
is actually fairly common.
Researchers estimate about one in five hundred would be XY.
People are born with an extra X.
And then on the other hand, the four X, Y is really rare.
And that only appears in about one of every a thousand births.
Does X, X, Y have any impact on anything?
Or do you really have to just get a genetic test to notice?
It can.
It's associated with some motor skill difficulties and I think some
kind of more autistic spectrum mentation difficulty.
But I think often it does go undiagnosed.
That one is, yeah, depending on how many more copies of one of the chromosomes
you have, it can be more debilitating.
I think that, um, yeah, X, X, Y or triple X or X, Y, Y, they tend to be
like pretty normal, or at least like not as a problematic.
Is it isn't normal ableist?
It probably is average.
You can actually hear me probably strongly with the worry,
but I'm just trying to think of.
I'm giving you a hard time.
Yeah.
I had another house reference from the TV show.
Oh, I actually haven't seen house.
I feel like I should watch it.
You might love it.
I probably would.
If you like medicine stuff that they had like medical people on on staff
to help make the stuff as out there as possible while still being possible.
And it's exactly an allegory.
It's it's I could go on for two minutes as to why it's Sherlock Holmes in a hospital.
But that's that's what it is.
Yeah, no, I'm familiar with it.
Um, the premise, I probably would enjoy it.
I just don't really watch TV that much.
I did try to watch Grey's Anatomy, though, and I found it to be like kind of
neat and then also just not nearly enough, like cool medical shit going on
way too much fucking who's sleeping with who.
And well, I mean, that's what it is.
It's a relationship drama that just happens to be in a hospital.
Wait, which one?
Grey's Anatomy.
Yeah, I never watched that.
I was watching Scrubs in House and I was all I remember at the time I was like,
yeah, I think I'm all maxed out in my medical based TV shows.
You know, basically just the other coin of that.
It's it's a friend sitcom that happens to be in a hospital.
Right, exactly.
But it was a it was a sitcom and then there was my detective show for medical stuff.
I didn't need a third one.
Right, right.
Only so much medicine you can take in your entertainment.
For what it's for what it's worth, I'm told that Scrubs is the most accurate
of working in a hospital for better or worse.
If you ask people in hospitals, what's the most accurate show of those three?
People said Scrubs.
Cool.
Yeah, I think it's weird that I actually feel like I could just go home
from working eight, nine hours at a hospital and then just probably watch
Scrubs or something like that and still be fine with it.
I remember not wanting to like play video games when I was working
in the video games industry, because I was just like, I've been dealing with
that all day, I could read a book.
Maybe it's just that I care more about medicine than video games or maybe
it just hasn't burned me out yet.
Anyway, it's different.
I mean, it's kind of like I'm not a front end developer, but if I I've done
some and then you're sitting there staring at clunky UIs and just being
really pissed because you know what the fuck's wrong with it.
Yeah.
So yeah, I can imagine being a game developer might actually take some
of the fun out of game developer game playing.
Yeah.
All right.
And then, yeah, I mentioned mosaic genetics where some of a person's
cells will have the XX chromosomes and some of them will have the XY.
So weird.
Intersexual chimerism is what that's called.
Or no, that's actually something different.
Intersexual chimerism, it might be the same thing, but this is particularly
when it's two embryos that have their unique DNA fused together and developed
as a single fetus, which results in an individual with two sets of DNA
in a single body.
And that's where you can actually get like the person who has one over
in one testicle.
All right.
We were running low on time.
I'm going to speed through some of this.
Or from that episode of Full Metal Alchemist.
What's up?
Did you watch Full Metal Alchemist?
I did.
I remember when he, the Chimera.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's a very gut wrenching moment.
He baited without, well, is it spoilering?
If it's been up ages?
If you're never going to see it, I felt like maybe.
It'll ruin some shock valley.
There's Chimera stuff in Full Metal Alchemist that is intense, so have fun.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay, that's good enough without spoiling things.
All right.
All right.
Let me speed through some more of this.
Yeah.
So I was just talking about your chromosomes and all the different
formations you can have.
Another sex determinant is your hormones.
So that's your fetal and your endogenous hormones.
Endogenous meaning?
Or the, I was going to define them, but uh.
Thank you.
Fetal being theorized to be what causes your like transgender orientation
and stuff because being exposed to more fetal testosterone or more fetal estrogen
can affect you developing one way or the other, regardless of how like your body
has decided to configure itself to some extent.
But um, yeah, fetal is just what is flowing through your mom's womb while you're in there.
And endogenous are like the hormones that your body creates.
And there's, you know, estrogen and testosterone, but those are, there's several of them.
There's estradiol and progesterone and a few different ones that do different stuff.
Morphology, we know that one.
Height being the archetypal example where you've got kind of the two intersecting U-curves.
So what is that that we're defining right now?
I was just saying height, like being kind of the archetypal example of how differences
are spread out between men and women where there's a lot of overlap in the middle.
But then you've got your two peaks on either side.
And you can apply that to all of these, I think.
Yeah, your gonads, your testes, your ovaries, your, uh, non-specific genitalia that's in
the middle, or no, uh, yeah, I wrapped that up with genitals, but gonads are the ones
that are inside and then genitals are the ones that are on the outside.
Your psychology and neurology and then there's some other weird physical differences that
I think probably have different evolutionary purposes, like for example, heat regulation.
Uh, your nerve sensitivity and your other senses, sensitivity, your digestion, your skin composition.
I'm okay, two things.
First of all, I just found out about the skin composition thing about six months ago.
Oh yeah.
My entire life, I thought men and women just had the same skin.
Turns out men's skin is about 25% thicker and is more dense in collagen.
Yeah, it's got like the overlapping collagen where it's more of a grid, whereas women's
is kind of more like stripes.
And I was, I was just really blown away by that.
I was, I had no idea that we had difference in.
Yeah, I would say a lot of that probably has evolutionary reasons that one in
particular, um, women have to stretch.
Uh, I was wondering digestion.
I didn't know about this.
What are the digestion differences if you know them?
Um, different metabolisms, uh, different dietary needs.
I mean, like, you know, that they have the men's and the women's multivitamins.
And I always thought that was weird bullshit.
No, actually, like there's slight dietary differences.
Oh, okay.
Um, so yeah, if you've got the regular XX or XY, um, thing going on, then you will
have one set of these or the other set of these, or kind of somewhere in the middle
of these two intersecting curves.
Uh, you can also be intersects where that's defined as people whose bodies
differ from the standard male or female, maybe standard is a better word.
It's like, what is it?
Less ableist, just because it hasn't been pejoratized yet.
That's not a word.
Um, intersex people about, we'll get there.
We can pejoratize standard as well.
Oh, I'm sure we can pejoratize anything.
Yeah.
About, um, 0.05% to 2% depending on what you're basing this on of the population
is born intersex.
So, um, I think the, the lower number comes from them only counting people
with ambiguous genitalia, uh, which would, you know, roll out like case women
or anybody else who has like hyper androgenism, which is where you just
have elevated naturally occurring testosterone.
I think, um, a lot of people are probably familiar with, there's like this Muslim
woman who I think has probably hyper, hyper androgenism.
So she has a really fantastic beard and just rocks it.
I will briefly enter, just throw in there because I was perusing random
skeptical episodes today, trying to find one doesn't matter, but I found one.
It was episode 463 transgender factor fiction.
And this one was hosted by, um, Alison Hudson, because there was like a year or
so hiatus that Brian took from the podcast.
Um, I don't know who that is.
Uh, there are, I guess not like they didn't have a Wikipedia page that I couldn't
find, so they're not that famous of a skeptic, but they're in the community.
Um, they are a male to female transgender person who was, um, they, anyway, they
did the episode, it was fun.
So you can't listen to it unless you're a subscriber to the podcast, but you can
read it on their website at sceptoid.com and you just search for transgender
factor fiction and there'll be a link to it in the show notes for this.
And before, or when it, before the episode goes up, I'll have just give it a
thumbs up or a thumbs down that I'll put next to it to see if it's accurate.
Well, I'm assuming it was written by a trans person who's in the, he's at the
rationalist community, skeptic, but skeptic community.
That's probably good.
Cool.
Yeah.
It's talking about intersex people.
Yeah.
And a few examples of, um, conditions that can cause someone to be intersex is the,
uh, androgen sensitivity syndrome, uh, the hyper androgenism, adrenal hyperplacia,
where, uh, that is just your adrenal glands are producing too much of their
chemicals in general, Ovo testes, uh, gonadal dysgenesis and.
Man, there's a bunch.
You can, I'll link to the Wikipedia.
It's fun.
And then I was going to talk about being transgender.
So that's where your birth sex assignment, which is, uh, usually based on your
genitalia is wrong.
Or so you say.
And then the opposite of that is cisgender, where trans being, I guess other and
cis being same.
So either you are in agreement with your, um, birth sex assignment or disagreement.
People who identify as transgender or transsexual, I think that that latter word,
people don't like as much anymore, are usually people who are born with typical
male or female anatomies, but feel like they've been born in the wrong body.
For example, a person who identifies as transgender or transsexual might have
typical female anatomy, but feel like a male and seek to become a male by
taking hormones or electing to have sex reassignment surgery.
Going back to our first half of the podcast discussion about words, meaning
things and things becoming pejoratized.
Like transsexual is technically more accurate, but not liked anymore.
Right?
Yeah.
And I think it again, really is just that it was used negatively for so long.
Okay.
It's hard to actually keep a term for it.
Like I think that maybe transgender is going to end up being the one that sticks,
which is kind of like, eh, cause it's not super accurate like you were just saying,
but like transvestite is super no-no, tranny is bad.
Like there's a lot of slang that's also considered bad because it's
associated with the porn industry and objectification, but like.
And it's a drag because transgender, I think at least you're right, as of yet,
it's not been slanderized in the way that transsexual has.
And yet it seems to me like a valuable distinction.
Like if you want to change your gender, both kind of how you identify with
yourself and how you want to be identified and not do anything to your sex parts,
right, to your plumbing or otherwise, like, so if you're not going to do anything
transsexual, you're just transgendered, right?
And then I realized that the words carry baggage, but if they didn't, that's
that might be, if we were building them from scratch, that might be how we had put it.
Yeah.
And that would be a useful differentiation too, because there's plenty of trans
people that don't actually want to change their bodies.
Yeah.
So it's, I wonder what the word will be that will be okay.
Or if they'll, if they're all just be a reclamation of transsexual or
who may just be stuck with crappy words.
Like we usually are.
Yeah.
We'll just transcend words and communicate via telepathy.
Ooh, that'd be fun.
Oh, yeah.
Another like jump back to the earlier conversation real quick.
I just remembered that I was thinking about the way American sign language will refer
to people like the use of pronouns in sign language is point to a person or kind
of point generally to a group of people and wave your finger around to show all of them.
Nice.
Which like is great.
That's the perfect way to do pronouns.
You can't do that with words as easily.
I guess you could say them singular or all of them, but yeah.
All y'all.
All y'all.
Such a fun way to say a word or a phrase.
All right.
Um, yeah.
And then there's a bunch of theories as to whether trans identity is first of all real
or people are making it out for attention.
I don't think anyone who's met a trans person actually believes that they're making
it up for attention.
Oh, plenty of people do.
You could have met trans people though.
Oh, yeah.
Okay.
Well, I mean, like, you know, dogmatists, I guess, but, or, you know, there's a lot
of people that will say, Oh yeah, like this is clearly something you're experiencing.
However, it's a mental illness and should be treated with like basically
deconversion therapy.
You could say that about almost anything though.
Yeah, you can.
And there is like a, a non assholeish way that that could have been like a supposition.
Right.
If you're saying doc, I feel terrible, you know, 70 years ago, if you had a psychiatrist,
which you probably didn't, um, I feel like I'm a man in a woman's body and they'd
be like, sounds like you're sick.
Right.
That wouldn't be that was 80 years ago.
They probably would have like diagnosed you with hysteria and then giving you a
vibrator.
Right.
Yeah.
So 50 years ago, um, but, but like I'm saying, so that there is a, there's a
way to view that where it's not necessarily mean, right?
Like if you went in presenting with that and it never happened to anybody else before,
it sounds like you're sick.
Um, not, not that anyone is and that that's not how it is.
But from, if you, from a, uh, from squinting, that, that doesn't seem outlandish.
Yeah.
Well, actually, I think that's kind of interesting.
Um, like you can pull trans people and ask if there was some medicine you could
take that would make you feel okay with the gender that you were born as, would
you take it?
And I feel like usually like it's close to half.
We'll say yes and half no.
We're like, some people actually really feel like their experiences with being
transgender really shaped them in a way that is integral to their personality and
that other people like I suffered so much, like no, give me the pill.
Or I would rather have not experienced that it was the worst.
I think Alicorn has, um, a fiction that deals with that.
Although the fact that I'm saying that is kind of a spoiler, but
Well, now you can't tell us what the story is.
I kind of wouldn't like to it anyway.
It was really, it was an interesting thought experiment that didn't quite
give away the plot twist.
Okay.
Uh, was there anything else that you all wanted to talk about on this topic?
Nothing that I can think of.
Not.
Yeah.
I mean, as far as like wrap up stuff, I do think that it's really, you know, I
could, if you had told me, Hey, one of the co-hosts to the show is currently in
the process of, um, of transitioning, I would give like 50, 50 odds as to whether
or not they wanted to talk all about it or they wanted to kind of be left alone
about it.
And I think it's really cool that not deriving anybody who wouldn't want to
talk about it, but I think it's, it's cool that you're like available and excited
to talk about stuff, um, rather than like leave me alone.
It's my business, which is a completely acceptable reply.
I would assume anyone that is on a podcast or YouTube channel or something
would be kind of person that would want to talk about it.
Cause they're already,
I think it depends.
Some people like to keep their professional, if to the extent that this is a
professional thing and they're, they're personal stuff separate, right?
Yeah.
And some of it's pretty personal.
Speaking of which, you've been on testosterone for three weeks.
Yeah.
How is that?
Do you feel different?
What's going on?
I feel different.
I'm taking the low dose and then like uptight trading, um, to a normal male dose
or at least kind of, I guess I'm going to uptight tight trade until I like,
it's at where I like it.
I like it right now though.
It felt different pretty immediately.
And it took me a while to be like, is this just placebo?
Um, but now it, it seems consistently to, and this matches with other people's
experience, uh, including just like men with a hypogonadism where you just have
more energy, um, I feel like I have like lower anxiety, a bit like better
self-esteem, self-confidence.
Do you have to from, from the testosterone, give you better self-esteem,
self-confidence and more energy.
Can I get some of this shit?
Just get diagnosed with, uh, hypogonadism, although you don't want to have too
much testosterone, maybe a bit more give you a heart attack to the extent that I
don't have like, I was thinking about this, you know, am I happy with my assigned
gender when he mentioned that 50% of people would say yes or no.
If they're transgender, um, I'm happy with whatever.
But like, if I get to, if I could pick, you know, if I was picking my body from
like a, you know, out of these, you know, pick out of the monster factory.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I picked somebody who looked more like Thor than who looked more like me, right?
And maybe cause he's my favorite superhero, maybe because he's the most
attractive guy on the planet.
Yeah, right.
Everyone would like to be more attractive and more powerful, right?
But like, I'm trans, I'm, I'm, then I started to think of like, is it just
attractiveness?
Cause then like, um,
masculine attractiveness, I was going to say, I'm more into Loki.
Well, yeah.
Loki or like a Legolas is like, you know, he's like not masculine, but male
attractive, right?
Yeah.
So like, but no, if I had to pick, I'd pick Thor over those two.
And I'm not sure if that's, you know, favorite hero in CBN or if that's, but
what I would prefer is maybe that is part of my, I don't know what you'd call
it, complex there.
Yeah.
Or like your preferred gender presentation.
I guess, but I guess my identity, I've got really, you know, other than like
everyone doesn't like how they look for the most part.
But other than like the generic stuff, I'm fine with what I've got.
Yeah.
That's, yeah, you suspect the fault.
I guess, uh, suspect the fault is kind of if you're like, yeah, I don't
really feel like really attached to my assigned gender, but I also don't feel
like I need to transition, like whatever.
Yeah.
Whatever, whatever they gave me, I think, I think I just abide.
Like in that, that's sort of my thing with most things, like whatever, man.
Like this is, this is what I got dealt.
Like, what am I going to do?
I could go to extreme lengths to try and change parts of it, but like it's not
what the cost right now.
Well, yeah.
And it, it, and maybe it's not, maybe it is within my like financial and
life scope to try and do something, but not even sure what I'd try and do.
Sometimes I was like, you know what, I'll just do what I'm doing.
And it really wasn't hard.
Uh, there's other states where you have to get diagnosed with gender dysphoria
and like have being seen as psychologists and a diagnosis.
And then there's even more extreme ones where I know, I'm not sure if this is the
case.
I think this is still the case in some states.
They make you present as the gender that you want to transition to, if you're
like, I heard about that.
Yeah.
But like pre hormones.
So like a lot of, you have to start dressing up as, yeah.
Oh my God.
Are you kidding me?
Yeah.
So it could go risk, like, you know, public harassment and violence and possible.
They have the right body type and look at everything.
Even without hormones, but a lot of people can't.
Yeah.
There's no way I could walk down the street and address.
Well, I mean, I could, but.
And be read as like a cis woman.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So, um, I heard from some people before that when they first started taking
testosterone, they got a lot more, um, almost like uncontrollable urges and like,
I don't know, just this desire that like you feel as a teenage boy, like, I want
to do this.
And is, have you gotten anything of that stuff?
No, um, I researched a lot before starting hormones to see what to expect.
And it kind of really varies based on the individual, um, which you would expect,
you know, having witnessed cis men and women having different personalities.
So if you're someone who would be predisposed to having anger issues and
like it runs in your family, then testosterone can definitely exacerbate that.
Um, also you could be on the wrong dose or I'm doing injections and I think I
might switch to a patch or a gel because a common, uh, issue some people had was
that when the testosterone is first injected, you have a lot of it.
And then you can get like the crankiness and whatnot.
And then when it dips towards the end, when you have to inject again, then you
can get that like hypogonadism, uh, weakness and dizziness and exhaustion.
I might check that out all those things all the time.
Maybe I'm just tired.
I don't know.
I mean, it's worth looking into.
Could be.
Levels.
That raises another question that's going to ask, are you aware of any cases
where with identical twins, one is transgender and one isn't?
Is that like something that comes up in the literature?
Cause that'd be interesting.
I haven't like specifically heard of that being the case.
I know like I've heard about cases where one transitioned first and then the
other one eventually did, but I've more often heard that usually or not usually,
but I've only heard of the cases where both twins transitioned.
That speaks to a genetic component then.
Oh yeah, definitely.
I mean, uh, it definitely runs a component while you're at some point because it
can be like people that aren't twins too.
It runs in families.
There's it's been linked to, uh, I think there's a, at least statistically
significant appearance of a genetic component.
I don't think the Wachowskis or Wachowskis on how you say their name, the
matrix directors, I don't think that they're twins, no, but they were brothers
and other sisters and they both transitioned.
I think, I think around the same time, if not at the same time.
No, there was a period of several years where, uh, we, we referred to them as
Wachowsky siblings because they were different genders.
Nice.
I think that was three, four years.
It must have been the few years where they weren't famous because after,
after matrix reloaded, then they kind of fell off my radar for like 10 years.
So it was, it was, uh, right about the time of the third matrix movie.
Right on.
You know, originally Switch was supposed to be female in the matrix, but male in
the real world.
Yeah.
I learned that from the amazing podcast, the Doofcast.
Oh, okay.
Wait, which character was Switch?
Switch was the, uh, everyone else wore black leather.
Switch was the, uh, the blonde girl with the short hair that wore white suits instead.
Oh, did she really have much of a, like, role?
No, she really was a tertiary character.
Yeah.
The only significant thing about her is that she says not like this just before
she's killed, uh, which was a really touching line.
Uh, but, um, no, she, I mean, she was just like, she said tertiary character, but
it would have been so much cooler.
And that's what they apparently wanted, but they got pushed back.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So apparently you couldn't do that in 1999.
Yeah.
But yeah, that would have been interesting.
Cause then I mean, certainly, uh, I tell you what, rather than me trying to
summarize it, check out Doof Media's, uh, podcast on the matrix.
They did a whole series on the Wachowski movies.
Yeah.
I was going to say more than just the matrix, I think.
Specifically the, the first one was on the matrix and it was amazing.
So I remember other than being like, so we're going to try to not view everything
they make through the lens of this is a coming out trans experience.
But there's a certain light where you could kind of like cast on this way.
It all looks a little bit like a coming out trans experience.
Well, certainly the matrix, I hadn't thought to even view it through that lens.
And I mean, no one did at the time.
Right.
I guess, but that was apparently one of the intended things behind it.
And I loved it when that was brought to my attention.
So anyway, yeah.
Let me take that back.
It probably wasn't no one.
There's always niche parts of the internet where someone is like, dude, this is
such an allegory for this thing.
But it wasn't on the radar, not in the popular consciousness at all.
Fair enough.
Yeah, I really wonder about that.
Like you can do literary analysis on a lot of things and show that it's all about,
you know, the hero's journey is everything.
Right.
And I wonder to what extent it's kind of people overreaching or maybe just,
just as likely as we, as humans do, all kind of have the same mentality
and experiences like on a deep level and make sense that everything would kind
of follow these same themes.
Like you do have to think about why nobody really likes utopian fiction
or peaceful video games, generally.
It's really hard to make a video game that's not combat like related.
Animal Crossing, I disagree.
It's not really hard.
It's just, it's just that it's really easy to make one that is combat related.
I guess.
Well, it's also harder to get people to want to continue playing something
that doesn't have some kind of, at least a competitive element.
Where, because you're not getting stronger and better than like, what's the point?
Well, yeah, but you can get stronger and better, like starting a valley
just by making a better farm or forming better social connections.
But like, totally, that tends not to be the mass market appeal.
You get like more niche audiences that like to play Animal Crossing
and remember Pokemon Snap, that was a good nonviolent game.
Well, it was kind of violent, but it didn't have anything like
the replay value of the regular Pokemon games.
Yeah.
I mean, if they had kept making more games of Pokemon Snap, though,
I think it would have continued to be popular because they came out with
all those new Pokemon that could have all different, you know, at any time.
Not to the pictures of these ones.
But yeah, I don't know.
I think this is, well, I guess on video games, I'll plug really quick.
I just played Link's Awakening, the remake, which is not like a remaster
where they just like made it look better.
They remade the whole game and it was a lot of fun.
It was, I played that game, I think it's 26 years old now.
So I didn't play it 26 years ago.
I played it something like 20 years ago on the Game Boy Pocket.
Actually, I remember this.
It was on the Pocket, the black and white one.
And then I played it on the Game Boy Color because there's a dungeon
that you can only beat if you can see the game in color.
Oh.
Because things are red and blue.
Did they design it that way to like sell the console?
They, well, I think it was to give her, I think it was to give an extra thing
to people who played it on the new console.
I don't know if the game had enough pull to like push people into buying the console for it,
but it could have.
The perk is the huge payoff.
You get to choose a red or blue tunic, which either the blue one doubles your,
or I guess halves the damage you take, and the red one doubles the damage you give.
So it's a huge benefit to be able to beat this dungeon.
So yeah.
And the black and white version, do you not have different tunics?
There would be no way to differentiate them unless they had different styles.
There were ones where you got different tunics.
I played a Link to the Past just before this one because
Switch lets you play the old games now.
And it was, it gave you the option to, I think you got like an upgraded defense or something,
but it looks maybe about the same, but it's still black and white-ish.
No, but in Link's Awakening, you only get the one tunic
unless you're playing through it the other way.
So with color.
Well, fuckers, I think we should wrap up.
Yeah.
All right.
Well, I got to give a big shout out this week to Richard Meadows for their support
up there for our podcast.
You can tell we're really distracted, but Richard, thank you very much.
This is awesome.
This is the thinking of the patron thing?
Yeah.
Okay, awesome.
I jumped right to it before you tried to, before you tried to wrap up.
Well, dude, rock on.
I snuck it in there.
And now we have to thank Richard.
You the bomb.
We've been forced to thank you.
But we, I would voluntarily thank you.
Yes.
If I had to take a pill where I could thank you or not thank you,
I'd take the one where I take, thank you.
All right.
We're falling asleep.
So goodnight.
Yes.
Sorry for not doing feedback and
there's less wrong stuff.
We'll get to that next time.
Promise.
Okay.
Bye.
Bye-bye.
Bye-bye.
