Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, I'm Jay Sticky,
and today we have a guest with us, Lucien Grieves from the Satanic Temple.
Yay.
Say hello, Lucien.
Hello, how are you?
I think we're doing all right.
Yeah.
Hanging in there.
Yeah.
It's shaping up to be a better, better year now for the past few days.
So far, so good.
Yes.
Fingers crossed.
Yeah.
It would be hard to be worse, but I don't want to attempt anything.
Oh, I mean, your wife got a vaccine, so.
Yep.
A little bit closer.
Frontline worker.
We're getting there.
Yeah.
Anyway, I don't really know where to start.
I think anything you want to tell us about yourself and how you came to be involved and
really if someone bumped into you and asked what do you do and what is the Satanic Temple?
I think a from the ground starting point would be really interesting.
Oh, yeah.
Well, sometimes I'm on flights or whatever and people will ask what I do and it's funny
how that one still catches me off guard.
Sometimes I tell them because that shuts them up more than anything else, but I also found
that if I tell people that I run a nonprofit, they tend not to ask what the nonprofit is
all about.
So, I guess that sounds sufficiently boring that people don't follow up with it.
But I'm co-founder of and spokesperson for the Satanic Temple.
I find that really interesting that people don't follow up because if someone was running
a nonprofit, my first question would be like, yeah.
I'd be so interested.
Like, oh, a kind like, you know.
I can't think of a time where somebody's asked what the nonprofit was all about.
I think it's good.
They must be just doing the thing of asking like, hey, how are you and they're not actually
they don't really care.
What do you do?
Oh, cool.
You know, maybe they think he just said a nonprofit.
He doesn't want to talk about it.
Oh, I suppose that could be.
Yeah, that's probably part of it.
So if I did follow up and say, well, what nonprofit do you run and what do you guys do?
Oh, I'd say the Satanic Temple and we fuck up theocrats.
So I'm assuming at least some portion of our listeners will already be familiar with this.
But for those who aren't, the Satanic Temple is, I'm a big fan, but you guys don't believe
in a literal Satan, which is so far the case.
I found in every sect of Satanism that I have had contact with none of them believe in a
literal Satan, but or or in your case, any supernatural powers at all.
My first question was going to be like, what, what do you like about the mythological Satan
so much that you named your organization after him?
Well, I think there's a real power in these fundamental myths, whether we believe in them
literally or not, we grow up steeped in this culture, where it kind of sets the framework,
I think, for some of our basic fundamental ideas, these, these archetypes stick with
us, you know, one way or the other, and it makes the imagery very powerful.
It makes the, the, the, the content of the mythological framework very powerful.
And it also has this kind of intuitive appeal because we have this kind of sense that
you know, the, the ultimate rebel against tyranny is Satan, you know, so people ask,
like, why, why Satan couldn't you pick something else?
And the answer just really is no, you know, nothing else could really take the place of
that for us, you know, it's, it's really entrenched in our consciousness.
And, you know, people either get that or they don't.
Some people never quite grasp why it would be important to us when we're non theistic.
And other people see it right away.
I guess it just comes from, it just depends on where you come from, you know, and how much
exposure one might have had with these things in their own lives.
But I think now currently seeing the overreach of Christian nationalists, at least in the United
States, a lot more people than otherwise would have, I think, do intuitively understand the
value in, in what we're doing and the, the, the, the power and the meaning behind the myth of Satan.
I think there's also probably like a lot of branding power there, too.
You know, if it was the, it was the church of Thor, like, I don't think it would make headlines
as much as the Satanic temple wants to put a statue in this courthouse or something, right?
Like,
That's true.
Yeah.
Yeah, the theocrats you're fighting are largely Christians.
So they, they already have to tacitly acknowledge the existence of Satan, right?
Right.
And I'm mystified about how many emails we get from people saying, wouldn't you get a lot further if it
wasn't Satan?
And I'm pretty sure we wouldn't.
You know, a lot of, a lot of the earlier attention we got was obviously because of the quick bait value
in saying, you know, Satanists are doing this or, you know, Satanists are objecting to, you know,
something some Christian Theocratic group was doing.
It's, it's something that people can read in like all of like five words.
Uh-oh.
I think we just lost him.
Oh, he'll be back probably, although we might have to start over.
Okay.
There we go.
I'm sorry.
I think the last thing you said was that you would, you don't think you would have had better
results for going with a different name?
No, you know, saying that Satanists are fighting for equal placement or whatever, you know, that's,
that's very given to click baity headlines that, that wouldn't be as effective if it were something else.
And, and of course, that, that's not to say that's the, the reason we're Satanists.
That's, that's not, it really has to do with that.
You know, fundamental basic, uh, power in these kinds of entrenched myths we have in our culture,
but also just, you know, people saying that we do better if, if we could just call ourselves
something else, I think is misguided as well.
I also think too, like the, um, there's, there's at least among some fringe, you know, in Theocratic
circles that, uh, like, oh yeah, you atheists are all Satan worshipers.
And it's like, all right, fine.
We'll fucking own it.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's funny.
I used to be accused of being, uh, being a Satanist before I, before I came out in the open as a
self-identified Satanist.
And now, uh, the detractors hardly say anything about that.
You know, they, they can't, they, they, they don't bother.
To, uh, to, to, uh, some of them don't bother anymore to try to tell people what Satanism
really means.
Um, it, uh, oddly, they'll, they'll claim that we're either not authentic Satanists or that
we're something else entirely.
We're working at the behest of George Soros or even at the computer, yeah, but there's also the
completely opposite end of the spectrum too, where it's like, we're secretly these crypto
fascist Nazis as well.
Oh, that's interesting.
If only one of those is true, you'd be getting bankrolled from somewhere, right?
Yeah, right.
Yeah.
So the, I'm kind of curious, is the name more like of an outward facing thing for the effect on
the public, or is it more of an internal identity sort of thing?
Or is it both?
I mean, I'm assuming it's both, but like which one, which one would be more important to you
personally?
Well, I think as a religious community, it's important.
Of course, that this has internal meaning to the people who are adherents of it.
And when you see our chapters, our membership, the events they do, and, you
know, journalists have noticed this and more academic authors who've explored new
religions and started growing interested in what's happening with the Satanic temple,
noticing that we actually do have this community that has these internal
activities, ceremonies, rituals and things like that, that aren't at all public
facing, and that this entire thing is acting as a religion should for anybody who
is a religious adherent.
It definitely takes the place of religion for the people who are practicing it
within the Satanic temple.
I have no reason why somebody would, you know, I have no reason to believe that
we're lacking anything as a religion, even though some people can't wrap their
head around non-theism.
So the, you know, the internal meaning it has for, for people who are adherents
of it, I think that's of primary importance.
But that being said, the outward appearance isn't something that troubles us
either.
And like I said before, you know, I feel like the fact that we're Satanists
really gives people this impression that they have some understanding of what
this is or makes them interested in where we're coming from.
So if, you know, the, if there's some motivation to draw eyes to news
stories or whatever, this certainly doesn't subtract from it either.
Did you have for?
I'm curious whether I guess any of your adherents or people that you've run
into on your saying, like on a flight have been genuine believers in Satan and
and what like that interaction was like?
Well, we don't, it doesn't take people long when they come to the
satanic temple to note that we're non-theistic and people are always really
quick to point that out if there's any, any mistake that anybody has there.
And we have sometimes gotten angry, theistic satanists getting, getting
outraged, saying we're, we're misrepresenting their beliefs or whatever,
which are based on nothing quite clear, you know, there, there, there isn't
really a, there isn't really a widely recognized theistic satanic Bible or,
or, or organization that I can really, really think of.
There is the, the temple of sat, which took a, took a theistic frame of mind on
things, not terribly large now, though, I don't know how, how active they are,
especially now that their, their founder is dead.
And that's the Egyptian set.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And that, that was a spin off from the church of satan, which was
quasi non theistic.
They seem to have very confusing mixed messages when it comes to magic and
supernaturalism and, and, you know, they, they claim, they claim to be atheistic,
but they also claim that, you know, they do rituals at harness super normal
powers and things like that.
So they seem to kind of, uh, have constructed their message to whatever
audience they're speaking to at the time, but I don't think any of those
movements are terribly large and it's always hard to know who's just a random
person on social media and who is actually representative of a community.
Yeah.
I sort of love the idea of just like a disappointed, like heavy metal dude
leaving like, I was supposed to get awesome
axe shredding powers.
I brought my dead baby and everything.
Well, a lot of that, a lot of those messages come from, uh, countries infested
by Western missionaries.
And we've been fed this idea that they can sell their soul for wealth
in the real world, wealth and fame.
And they're willing to do it because they're in a desperate state.
So we, we do often get emails, say from people offering to sell their soul
to the Illuminati for money and things like that.
Oh, damn.
That's like upsetting, but like, I'm hoping that like, you can actually point
them towards like genuine resources.
Okay.
Here's like, you know, yeah, but it is alarming to see how we're exporting
the worst elements of our, of our culture to other places.
Yeah.
Uh, what about like running into theists, you believe in Satan?
Like, have, has anyone ever like run away from you or like tried to pray at
you or anything strange like that?
Yeah, I've, you know, people recognize me.
Um, and that hasn't happened in some 10 months now because I've stayed in
through the course of the entire pandemic, but, uh, you know, people recognize
me and they're going to say anything that's typically because they approve
of what I'm doing and, you know, uh, are happy that they saw me.
So I probably don't notice, you know, the negative responses as much
because they're, they're quiet, but I, I went to the gym one time and Salem
and some guy really was insistent at, at praying for me and asking my
permission to pray for me.
And, and I was telling him like, you can do what you want to do, but I'm
not, I'm not having any, any part of this, you know, but he, but he was, he
was really pushy about it to the point where I had to tell him to fuck off.
And I, I feel like it was, uh, I feel like it was a case of him recognizing
who I was and things like that happened.
And I, you know, and I'm not clear as to whether it was because they
recognized me or just because they're deranged people.
That's the thing.
That's the thing about being somebody who could be recognized now.
Now, if somebody's staring at me really weird, I'm not just sure if they're
just a weird person or if they have some ideas that came to them from
having seen me in some other context.
So the thing, um, to, to move forward, this is the thing that got me
really interested in the, uh, satanic temple was when you funded the
boffamette statue, which I don't even remember how many years ago now that was.
But, uh, I jumped in on that Kickstarter and that was, I'm still like
really happy about that and sometimes talk about it, but the, the
boffamette statue, like really briefly is sort of a goat headed aspect of
Satan sitting on a throne with two kids on either side of him.
Kids is an adult, I mean, human children, not goat children.
Um, and, and, uh, it's, it's just kind of like a religious monument, right?
It's not overly evil or anything.
The kids look to be looking up to him.
He's, you know, got this wise sort of wise look on his face as far as you
can tell with a goat, but a very sage looking goat.
Yes.
But, uh, it was originally a response to the, I forget which city it was that
was allowing religious monuments in one of their, uh, public parks.
And it was all getting Christian monuments.
Is that correct?
Well, it was Oklahoma and Oklahoma had some of those, uh, spineless lackeys
in their, uh, in the house who, uh, were pushing through model legislation
penned by the congressional prayer caucus or some other arm of, uh, project blitz
where, you know, you have these, these well financed, well networked
theocratic groups throughout the United States and they'll pen model legislation.
And, uh, they'll, they'll give this model legislation to their mindless
pawns and other states who just, uh, fill in the blanks, sign off on it and
pass these laws.
So we saw a 10 commandments bill passed in Oklahoma where they made the argument
that, uh, putting a privately donated and financed 10 commandments monument on
the capital grounds wouldn't be a breach of the establishment clause because it's
privately financed and privately donated.
And it's not, uh, government speech at that point, but of course that means
they've opened those capital grounds to other private donations.
So we said, well, we'll, we'll donate a satanic monument on the capital
grounds and they can't engage in viewpoint discrimination and say, we're
not putting this up because it's satanic.
And the other one is, is Christian.
And the, this was very early on like 2013, um, when the satanic temple was
just getting started and at that point we're mostly just a couple of guys
trying to let people know the vision we have for this.
So when we jumped into the fray in Oklahoma, we weren't really ready.
We just sent a letter, uh, to the secretary of state's office, I think
it was in Oklahoma and said, we wanted to donate a monument.
And I think we were, it was an exploratory letter, I think, asking
for more information or the proper forms that we would, uh, fill out to do this.
And we didn't expect that just sending that letter was going to bring us media
attention, but the very idea struck people at the time.
You know, now I think more people do these kinds of things because we've
done them and we're expected to do these things now.
So it might not be as big of a news story, but just having sent that
letter drew this media attention.
So we had to hurry up and put together crowdfunding because we had no idea
how much this would cost when we sent that letter.
We didn't even have a monument design idea yet.
So we set up crowdfunding for like $20,000, which was, you know, ridiculously
lowballing it just because we didn't know at the time.
But we also were really desperate to raise that money because we, we
didn't have financing and, uh, you know, we, we didn't want to, we didn't
want to bluff with anything when we were, when we originally formed the
Satanic Temple, we wanted to be clear that we weren't going to send out
demand letters and things like that unless we intended on following through.
And we wanted to make it clear, uh, with everything we did that we, we
would follow through.
We wanted to gain that reputation because it was, we knew it would be way too
easy to think that this was just a prank and that we would, we would let
things stand at a letter itself, you know?
So we're desperately scrambling to get the, uh, the monument together.
And of course that included coming up with the monument design.
And really we wanted the design to address all the claims behind the
Ten Commandments Monument.
They were saying the Ten Commandments Monument served a secular purpose that
it, uh, it somehow, um, uh, stood for American values, judicial values,
because, uh, based on this erroneous idea that constitutional law was somehow
based on the, these biblical laws, the Ten Commandments.
Um, and you know,
no other gods before me just screams secularism.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And, and thou shall not speak the Lord's name in vain.
That's, that's, uh, that in no way contradicts the First Amendment, I guess.
You know, there's a, yeah, there, there was a lot of bad arguments there, but
we feel like we made a monument that actually could use those arguments.
You know, we said that this stands as homage to those who have been unjustly
persecuted and witch hunts that have helped inform the, the fundamental
basis of, uh, secular law, innocence, until proven guilty material evidence,
that kind of thing.
And also, you know, the binary elements of the Baphomet, Baphomet Monument,
the, uh, part animal, part human pointing above and below the inverted
pentagram and the, you know, in the pentacle straight up there, uh,
they were indicative of the reconciliation of opposites, pluralism, viewpoint,
neutrality, and diversity, these kinds of First Amendment values.
And, uh,
depicted as hermaphroditic and like, I guess the more not safer work, I like
you see on tarot, et cetera.
So the binary, uh, gender thing as well.
Oh, well, we, yeah, it would be hard to pull off on the statue.
Well, right.
And that was the subject of a lot of debate.
We knew people would, we knew we would get pushback and complaints
about taking off the breasts, but also working with the artists, working
with a covered chest, look terrible artistically.
And we just knew the baird breasts would have changed the entire argument.
They would have said it had nothing to do with religious discrimination.
They just weren't going to allow, you know, this pornography on the, on the
grounds.
And I feel like, you know, it is worth arguing that that's, there's
nothing pornographic about that, but we weren't going to allow that to become
the extra step into getting to the basic, the core argument that this was
a viewpoint discrimination.
They didn't want the monument there because of Satanism.
So we went with the Iggy Pop torso or the artist went, you know, molding
based on, based on Iggy Pop, the torso of this bathroom at Monument.
We also made it very clear that we did not want our monument there in isolation.
The money, our monument was meant to be there on grounds where the Ten Commandments
Monument was standing or other religious, uh, or other religious monuments
because we wanted it to be a monument to pluralism and to complete that picture.
There needed to be other viewpoints, right?
So at the point where the Supreme Court of Oklahoma decided that the Ten
Commandments Monument was in fact, uh, illegal and needed to come down.
Uh, we, and they took down the Ten Commandments Monument.
We withdrew our, uh, our demand to have the bathroom at Monument placed on those
grounds, and then we moved the fight directly over to Arkansas, where another
mindless clone of a, of a senator, uh, just signed off on model legislation.
Uh, Jason Rapert in Arkansas, uh, just acting as a tool for larger
theocratic organizations pushed through the same, the same model legislation
that was used in Oklahoma, same arguments, except in, uh, in the, in the case of
Oklahoma, they didn't deny our, our requests.
They just ignored them and Arkansas, they straight up, uh, they straight up
denied us any placement on the public grounds.
Uh, the senator there, Rapert has gone on these tirades about how it'll be a
cold day in hell before there's a satanic monument on the Capitol grounds.
Failing to mention now that we did a, uh, we, we did a rally and, and this is
kind of the climactic scene in the documentary Hail Satan, where we brought
the bathroom at Monument on the, on the Capitol grounds for a day and we had
a rally, we gave our speeches, um, we confronted, uh, people with Confederate
flags and, and, and shitheaded, uh, uh, neo-Nazis who called upon all white
Christians to show up and, and protest our events and that kind of thing.
And, uh, you know, it just, it's funny because when we did that, you had, uh,
these politicians in Arkansas saying that, yeah, we have a right to assemble.
We have a right to do this rally.
There's nothing we can do about it, but it'll be a cold day in hell before our
monument is on the Capitol grounds.
And it's like, what do they think is the legal distinction there between us
having the access to the Capitol grounds for a rally in us having, uh, access
to the Capitol grounds for that kind of free expression that they're allowing
for other private groups?
Is it, uh, I guess they just, to me, it kind of invalidates their claim that
they have a right at all to say that we don't have a right to put the monument
on the public grounds, but it just seems like they feel that they have some
kind of right to put limits where they feel appropriate.
And I just feel it's indicative of having people in public office who have
absolutely no understanding of either the letter or the spirit of the law.
I loved how it really pointed out the hypocrisy behind those sorts of movements
because this was still during the time of, you know, the atheism religious
conflicts and, and people would just say, look, no, it's just, it's privately funded.
We're just allowing people to exercise their free speech on, on the Capitol grounds,
you know, this, the government isn't getting involved at all.
And obviously they have tons of people with lots of money that want to put
up their Christian bullshit.
But then the second that someone comes over with a religion that they find,
you know, distasteful is like, oh, no, you can't do that.
And it just, it shows it was always about promoting their religion on the Capitol,
on the government property and nothing at all to do with just giving people
the freedom to speak.
Yeah.
And there's, there's so, so much, so many disingenuous arguments that came
through the course of this whole thing from Arkansas's side, side of this,
that the Senator, Raper, kept saying that because it was privately
donated and privately funded, that none of this was coming at any cost
to the taxpayers of Arkansas, and he knew he was full of shit from the start.
He knew that this was going to provoke various lawsuits, right?
And I kind of feel like there should be a smell test on these little individual
crusades put forth by senators and Congress people, lawmakers of any type,
where they want to push through something that gives exclusive preference
to their religious voice.
And I feel like if there is no real compelling state interest to do
something like this, and you can reasonably assume there's going to be
expensive litigation, constitutional claims against it, I feel like it really
should come at their cost somehow.
You know, there should be some kind of censure against them for, for pursuing
these kinds of agendas, because as it stands now, there's no, there's no
harm in it to them, and it's no cost to them either.
Raper made a ton of money off of crowdfunding for his tank
commandments monument.
He way overfunded for it.
That monument costs like 18 to $20,000.
He crowdfunded for $100,000.
The first one.
Rectangle with birds on it, too.
Yeah.
The first one was run over by a car.
So a born again Christian smashed into it.
I love that.
Right.
And he tried to blame us.
He tried to say that, you know, he was, he was publicly exploring the
options of using some kind of obscure anti-terrorism bill to say that we had,
we had promoted this idea that the, the tank mammoth monument should come down.
So we were some kind of, uh, terroristic overlords in this born again
Christian crashing into the tank commandments monument.
And, you know, I think by the standards, the secretary of state has in Arkansas,
that it should have been insured, right?
But he starts crowdfunding for it anyway.
So he's just, he's just rolling in the dough.
And then after it was run over, they put up these security bollards, you know,
these big kind of concrete pillars, uh, uh, on four points surrounding the
tank commandments monument so couldn't get taken out by a car again.
And I'm not sure, but I think that was paid for by the state, but I am sure
that the case is being defended by the secretaries or not the secretary
of state's office, but the attorney general's office in Arkansas.
So the people of Arkansas are paying for this meaningless litigation to put
forward pastor, Senator Raeper, it's little crusade in Arkansas.
And all the while he's profiting from it and there's going to be no
consequence for him at the point where the court say that the 10
commandments monument has to come down, which they almost certainly will.
Oh, I didn't realize that was still in litigation.
Yeah, it's still in litigation.
We were supposed to have a July, uh, hearing, um, and it got delayed due to
COVID and now they're just kind of sitting on, uh, some motions that the,
the judge needs to rule on.
And it's, it's taken a really long time now.
Uh, everything just kind of got, got held up by COVID and then just seemed
to grind to a halt, but, uh, but that case is still moving forward.
And I'm still, I'm still very confident about that one.
Uh, Raeper has been so stupid in the way he's presented his case.
And he's been so open about the religious purpose and meaning of the
10 commandments monument.
He hasn't displayed any of the savvy of somebody who's working, who's aware
of the legal angle he's trying to work in the bill he signed off on.
You know, he's sometimes throws in some, uh, some terminology about
heritage and history, the secular purpose of the monument and stuff like that.
But that doesn't work when, you know, on Sundays, you're at the pulpit as a
guest speaker in various churches talking about bringing the gospel to the
public square and making sure that we have godly leaders within the United
States and things like that.
I mean, you're not giving the courts anything to work with it, even if
they're inclined to find in your favor.
Yeah.
I like the idea of there should be a smell test required before the government
can endorse and Baphomet acting as that sort of smell test.
Yeah.
Well, it doesn't even have to be Baphomet.
Like I said, I think it's simple enough that, you know, if there's no
compelling state interest and you can reasonably expect these kinds of
constitutional claims, I really don't think, uh, I really don't think law makers
should get away with, with pushing that kind of agenda then.
Yeah.
Chase, did you have some?
Um, I was just honestly wondering if like some Hindu church wanted to put a
statue of Ganesh, whether they would have fought back against it as virulently.
Like, you know, it's, I think that's on one hand, it's like, I sort of, I think
that's sort of almost like sort of attacking it from two angles.
If you could, it would be fun to see if you could like partner with some
genuine church that wanted to put like, I don't know, a Buddha statue or something.
Well, interestingly, there was a Hindu church, uh, that made its presence known
during the Oklahoma thing.
And they might have sent a letter during Arkansas as well, but their problem
is they, they didn't follow up and it appears that they didn't intend to.
It seems like they, they took the tactic of writing the letter and thinking
that that would be enough and it's not in Oklahoma.
They were ignored like we were, but, uh, the fact that they had put in the
request, generated interest, support, and, uh, in media attention as well.
Um, the next time they came around, I think people were aware that they
hadn't followed through before there wasn't a monument to show for this, or
it was overshadowed by the fact that we clearly could be counted on to, to show
up and, and see it through because everybody knows we have our monument
and it's on the move and we're, we're ready to, we're ready to plant it on
the Capitol grounds.
I think that's one of the big advantages of being, um, the church of Satan or
the satanic temple rather than some other religion is that a lot of
Christians just find it inherently offensive.
And so they're going to push back in a way that they wouldn't against like Hindus.
And like, I, I've been really awkward though, watching them try to push back
against a genuine church.
Like, I just, I'm like really curious about the counterfactual or like the,
you know, alternate universe where there's, Oh, okay.
We'll, we'll, we'll put our Buddha here and we'll have Ganesh over here.
And then we can have a some Islamic thing over here.
Like, uh, we, I think there's, there's some news for you though.
We, we are a genuine church.
We're, we're federally recognized.
We are, I recognize, we, uh, you know, we, we tick all the boxes and, uh, when
we took a case to, uh, the court in, in Scottsdale, um, uh, we were arguing
about, uh, city council meeting prayers in, uh, in Scottsdale, we had offered
to give an invocation before a city council meeting where usually they
open up with a Christian prayer and they, they wouldn't let us do it.
They, they rescinded the offer.
You know, we, we had put in to, to do it and, and they signed off on it
because that's what they're supposed to do, you know, and they're not supposed
to, uh, evaluate whether they want a certain religious group or not.
They opened that door, right?
And instead, uh, you know, the city council got all pissed off.
They rescinded the offer to have us, have us give the invocation.
And it was very clearly based on religious animus.
So we, we, we pursued this lawsuit.
We took it to trial in, uh, in Scottsdale.
In Scottsdale was trying to argue the entire time, even though we
recognized by the IRS as a, as a church tax exempt, uh, Scottsdale was
trying to argue that we're not, you know, that, uh, that this is something
other than a religious or whatever it was.
So just that we, we didn't deserve to be called a, an actual religion or church.
And therefore our claim of religious discrimination had no merit.
And, uh, the court found in our favor then too and said, you know, they,
they very clearly are an actual religion by legal standards, but the court
also went on to say that we hadn't, uh, sufficiently proven that it was
a religious animus that drove the decision to rescind our invitation to
give the invocation at Scottsdale.
And that we had some, some further burden of proof to meet that it wasn't
just some kind of, um, administrative, administrative, uh, decision based on,
I don't know, it was a really bad decision in any case in that part.
And we're appealing it.
Um, but even in that case, they, they, they didn't care to hear arguments
that were not a legitimate religion.
Yeah.
I think that is some extreme bullshit.
Like I, I personally, in my feeling, like the Satanism feels like a real
religion, like genuine or whatever, but I also think that the, the, the religious
animus is kind of the whole point, right?
Like the, you are being discriminated against because of religious animus.
And the thing is like, they don't have that animus for things like Hinduism
or Buddhism.
And so they don't get like, there are people that have been genuinely harmed
by Christianity and that seeing those 10 commandments or having a Christian
prayer forced on you before a Senate, uh, meeting, like is infuriating.
And I wouldn't say like harmful because that's the bullshit term, but it's,
it's infuriating and it's damaging to democracy and it divides the population.
And I think like letting them see that from the other side, like, what's it
like when a religion that you have great distaste for is pushed by the government?
Oh, this is a bad thing.
We shouldn't do it in a democracy is, uh, it's an important message in my
opinion to, to get through to people.
And so like, I think you're doing great work in, in helping people see that and
helping to keep the separation of church and state strong by showing people why
it's important to keep them separate.
Well, I think it is, uh, it, from the perspective of the public
understanding of what it means to live in a pluralistic democracy,
it is harmful for them to be putting forward their religious message,
to the exclusion of other religious messages.
And you can see that harm, what that, what harm has been done in the mainstream
reactions to what the satanic temple does.
When people are outraged and say that it's ludicrous, that we should expect
to have the right to do the things we're doing.
When we're just asking for equal access, it shows that people have lost all sense
of what religious liberty means, of what the constitution is and, and, and those,
those kind of guiding ethics of pluralism and democratic ideals.
It shows that people really feel that we're a Christian nation and that they
do have some kind of exclusive licensing over the, the public domain.
And that I think is, that I think is dangerous.
And I think that's, that's contributed in part to some of the worst elements
we've seen of the past four years, you know, up to and including this
seizure of the capital, which was in no small part in, in, in effort of
theocratic militants.
Stephen, you had something?
Um, it goes back a bit, but, uh, like the idea of having this, this
bulwark to raise up as a, a legal and, um, it's symbolic and ideological.
Yeah.
Counterpoint to, you know, the, let's raise up our, our, this one religion.
Let's put this one above in, in whatever context, whether it's, uh, you know,
afterschool programs or public monuments or whatever.
It sort of brings to mind the, uh, the, the flying spaghetti monster, which
was, that might've come out right around when I was in high school.
I can't quite remember, but the, the, the satanic temple is, you said 2013,
2014 was when it was getting off the ground.
Yes, correct.
So in, in the last, I guess half decade or so has, has, has there been a move
to like, I mean, I don't know any high schoolers.
Is this, is this the kind of thing that is, as, uh, as, is this known about
like as well as I have no idea how popular the flying spaghetti monster was either.
But at least I still see it on card, like bumper stickers.
I see bumper stickers.
I wasn't the only kid in my school with the book.
Um, is there, I know that you guys do some, some community outreach, especially
with kids, is this, uh, being brought up like more and more now, or do you have
any feedback on from, from current young people?
Uh, the, when I first started speaking to undergrads, I was,
like any time I was first doing public lectures or whatever, I expected a lot
of pushback in a lot of people to just think of satanism in terms of what they
learned during the satanic panic, you know, this idea that there's infant
sacrifice and blood orgies and that kind of thing.
And, uh, what I found from the undergraduate crowd is that they would hear
what I was saying and they would assimilate that.
And they would think, and they would just respond like, okay, now I know
something about this that sounds great.
You know, they, they didn't have, I don't think a lot of them, that background
understanding of the satanic panic, they didn't have generally those, those
prejudices about what satanism is supposed to be in their minds.
So they're hearing a satanist speak for the first time.
So they were just saying, okay, that sounds great.
That's what this is about.
Sign me up.
And I was, I was, uh, you know, kind of, uh, I was kind of shocked by that, you
know, people, the people who would just, uh, who would just understand what we
were on our own terms and be willing to accept that, that, that, that was, that
was an initial shock for me.
And I think, uh, uh, you know, in that crowd also, we didn't have a whole
lot of people saying, okay, I get the joke, which is sometimes something we get
to, you know, people coming to us and saying like, Hey, I get it.
This is hilarious because I think that misses the mark too.
You know, we, we, we genuinely view this as, as, uh, you know, a non-theistic
religion and people, you know, our membership of ours really identify with
this and it's not like once they get away from the, the cameras or the public
or something, they, they take off their horns and say, okay, now I can back get
back to who I really am or something like that, you know, and I feel like, uh,
the flying spaghetti monster in people's minds, you know, has that element to it
where it's like, okay, obviously these things are being done all in satire,
whatever, and not to say that that doesn't develop into a real genuine
community and that the values they're advocating for aren't things that
they're advocating for because they genuinely believe in those values, just
the symbolic structure and things like that genuinely do seem arbitrary, you
know, and in that way it's different.
I do think, uh, the flying spaghetti monster did have some legal rulings
against their authenticity, if I remember correctly.
That brings a bell.
I, I, you know, I don't remember any real value judgments or, or, uh,
proposals that they made.
I just remember it being the, uh, you know, anti-intelligent design in the
biology classroom argument.
Um, if they had a moral thesis, I mean, like you guys have seven
commandments are, are tight and like that, those are, those are rules to live by.
If the flying spaghetti monster, uh, monsterism or church of the flying
spaghetti monster, whatever, if they had any value statements like that, they
didn't hit my radar.
Um, but yeah, like the, uh, I know you had a couple of things on some of the,
the, um, the seven commandments, so I'll let you jump in.
You know, I should have felt like it, but I just, I like all of them.
I mean, this, this is, you know, there's, I don't, I don't want to, we can't
just read them, but anyone can go to the satanic temple.com and check them out.
But, um, I mean rule number one, if I, and then like, I'll, then I'll make my,
I won't, I won't let myself read all of them.
But I mean, if, if I was writing a list of rules for guiding humans, uh, through,
uh, you know, giving them a good moral foundation, you know, I think that the
first one makes perfect sense.
One shouldn't, one shouldn't strive to act with compassion and empathy towards
all creatures in accordance with reason.
Like that, if I could give one moral virtue to humanity, that, that sounds
like it in a nutshell, right?
That's awesome.
Yeah.
Uh, there's, to explore the philosophy of the subintendents deeper, it's, it's
interesting to, to look around and see some of the, uh, commentary about them.
Recently, there was a Catholic podcast that went through finding faults with,
uh, with his seven tenants and, uh, and I think they were doing that, you
know, trying to find like the hidden meaning, you know, and, and in
no, in a lot of ways they were, they were fairly fair, you know, um, but
still there's this notion that there's something deeper behind this here in
that, uh, you know, a certain reading of one or the other gives you license
to, uh, commit the worst kind of acts possible.
And you really kind of have to stretch to find that meaning.
But we don't ask at the first one, you know, oh, in accordance with reason,
you mean an exclusion to love?
That's bullshit, man.
And I, and I, I meant, I got apologized for something.
I said seven commandments.
These are different.
These are seven tenants and tenants are, are not, should not be
considered being commanded to do something.
This is the, I find it hilarious that a Catholic would go on.
Like they have the 10 commandments.
Like what better example of pull the rafter out of your own eye before you
go after the spec and someone else's do you need?
Well, it's, it's funny because in some ways they're not dishonest.
They'll, they'll openly talk about the, uh, how the lack of subservience
and in these tenants is indicative of a lack of moral foundation because to
their minds you have to be subservient to a divine power, which acts as the
ultimate moral authority, or else they're just floating free from any ethical
framework and you're going to run out and in rape and murder with mindless
abandon, unless you have, uh, some punishing supernatural entity to tell you
otherwise.
Yeah.
Make their own choices, develop their own ethical frameworks.
I want to, well, in a second, just a moment, I want to pivot to, uh, a next
thing, but before that, um, I kind of get the impression that like doing all this,
you sort of have to play like the bad guys and the public eye, but it also
kind of feels that with a name like Satanism, that's sort of your jam.
Is this like, uh, is this as fun and fulfilling as it looks?
Cause I think I would be having a blast if I was doing that, but I don't know.
I wanted your opinion.
Uh, it's, it's hard to say.
I mean, sometimes, sometimes it feels really good.
It's, it's great.
Now, you know, especially when you feel like, well, like with anything, it
feels like you're making progress or whatever.
But other times it's been really, uh, really stressful and really a nightmare.
And in some ways it's unnecessary what a, what a nightmare it's been.
It's just part of my character that, you know, especially early on, I had no
interest being on TV, having articles written, being an interview subject,
that kind of thing.
I'm a pretty private person and pretty introverted by nature as well.
So that whole part of it was a really hard adjustment for me.
And then when you, when you're just controversial, right?
I had a real, uh, I had a real background in investigating the
satanic panic of the eighties and nineties.
So I was well aware of how accusations of satanism leveled against people who
had nothing to do with satanism nonetheless ruin those people's lives.
So it felt like suicide to publicly be a face of satanism, you know, it felt
like any moment now, the bizarre accusations are going to roll in.
Somebody's going to try to find me and shoot me and stuff like that.
And that's never quite gone away either.
But, uh, but otherwise I feel like in a lot of ways this has kind of played
out to the best case scenario, you know, it would have been hard to imagine, uh,
back in 2013 that now we would have some like quarter of a million members in
this kind of general recognition that we have and that CNN would have
done a 45 minute documentary that fairly presented us in that a Sundance
documentary that did well in 2019 would, would, uh, you know, accurately
portray the satanic temple as well.
That's all, that's all very good stuff.
Where, where can we see that documentary, Hail Satan?
Damn, you know, at this point, I'm not sure.
I think it's still on Hulu, um, but it's also available for rent or purchase
on YouTube and other streaming sites.
It's, uh, it's distributed by Magnolia Films.
And I'm, I'm hoping we get it on, uh, TSTTV.
We have our own streaming platform.
Also, that's awesome.
Well, I know I'm watching tonight.
So the next thing that I wanted to move to was, um, long time listeners of the
podcast will know that I am like on the extreme, far fringe of pro-choice, um,
beyond most people.
And so this was something that like was of intense interest to me.
Uh, you recently, I think last year introduced a satanic, uh, rich satanic
abortion ritual, uh, in order to hopefully, um, help circumvent some of the
really restrictive state laws on getting abortions.
Uh, I believe that, what was it?
Uh, this is based on the Supreme court's hobby lobby decision that affirms an
individual's right to object to laws that violate the religious beliefs.
And, uh, the, the fact that the third of the seven tenants states that one's
body is inviolable and subject to one's will alone.
Uh, could you briefly explain the, uh, ritual and what, what this entails, what
it is?
Yeah, sure.
Uh, first and foremost, the ritual was meant to, uh, give a type of emotional
support to somebody seeking to terminate their pregnancy.
And to that end, we put together a formal ritual, which involves reciting the
relevant tenants and going over things with a, uh, with another participant,
uh, who's taking the ministerial role of putting the, the pregnant person through
this kind of counseling session and, uh, affirming that this was done with, you
know, the individual's best scientific understanding and, uh, and in no way
contradictory to our tenants and, uh, reaffirming that the body's inviolable
subject to one's own will alone.
And, you know, our perspective at the fetus, the non viable fetus is, is a part
of the woman and it's her choice to do as she will.
And part of that, uh, ritual, um, is having the procedure done itself.
Of course, the people performing the procedure, uh, aren't asked to change
any of their behavior, recite any lines that, uh, that coincide with, with the
ritual, it's just part of the process of the person who's terminating their
pregnancy, who's a member of the satanic temple.
And then there is a kind of exit counseling session after the procedure is done.
But because the process of, uh, terminating the fetus is part of the
ritual itself, it would be a violation of our religious liberty to ask us to
have any, uh, any roadblocks placed, uh, between the ritual being carried out as
it's supposed to be by our standards and, uh, and, and, and getting it done.
The, uh, uh, that's, that's really the, the core of the argument, right?
We think they can't tell us that we have to wait, you know, 72 hours or whatever
else, any of these, any of these weasel restrictions, they keep trying to, to force
in, uh, to make it more prohibitive to be able to get, uh, an abortion done.
Um, we feel like we have a really good legal argument here and we're, we're
willing to pursue that, of course.
I, I also see that again, model legislation being put forth by, uh, by
pawns to, uh, outside theocratic organizations, they're doing the, uh,
the burial bills like they passed it in Ohio recently where they're saying that
a fetus must be given a proper burial in, uh, these are, this adds, uh, another
prohibitive expense to getting the abortion done.
And that's the point, you know, they, they want to make it really difficult
for an abortion to happen.
They, they want to prevent as many abortions as they can from happening.
And to that end, they're doing things like insisting that a fetus be, uh, be,
be buried, um, be given a proper burial.
And that I think in, in Ohio, at least it says that if, uh, if the person
who terminate the pregnancy isn't willing to pay for the proper burial, then
the facility that performed the action needs to be willing to do that.
And I feel like we have a very strong legal argument here as a religion also
because I hard press to find a time where burial rights didn't fall in with
the purview of religious belief perspective and, and, and need.
And, you know, to our end, on our end, you know, being made to acknowledge
this Christian viewpoint that the fetus is, uh, unique individual human life,
one that, uh, one deserving a proper burial rather than being disposed of as biological waste.
Uh, I feel like that's a real intrusion into our, into our own religious rights.
And I feel like that's a very strong lawsuit waiting to happen.
Yeah, is there even, is there a law that an adult needs to have a proper burial?
Like, where is this coming from?
Yeah, I don't, that, that is a, that is a good question.
I, I haven't looked at that, but I would think that if you were, you know,
if, uh, your grandfather died or something in the family was to say, can you just dispose
of them as you would dispose of any other biohazardous waste that they would shovel
them into a cream, you know, a crematorium, right?
I don't know.
It does seem like they're, they're making, uh, they're making standards up.
Just to, uh, fight this abortion battle.
I don't, I don't, I only have like a cursory understanding of the Hobby Lobby decision.
And I know you're not a lawyer, but do you, do you know, like how that, um, interacts here?
Well, the, the Hobby Lobby ruling, uh, did, did us some good, um, when it came to these
arguments, because previously we felt like, uh, you know, we, we could be going through some
very expensive litigation that came down to, uh, the court's understanding of, of science.
And that, that, that would mean that we would need to play this game in which we had to have
dueling expert witnesses, which would get very costly.
And in the case of Hobby Lobby, they did a couple of things.
For one thing, the court essentially, uh, abdicated any, uh, any reasoning on which they
would, uh, in which they would judge the authenticity of a religious claim.
You know, I mean, it's very questionable that a corporate entity can say that they hold religious
beliefs, you know, in, in that the, the, that the, uh, and that how they treat their employees
who might not subscribe to those beliefs need to somehow fall in line with that.
But the, the, the key thing that Hobby Lobby did was that it said that Hobby Lobby's claim
that certain drugs, certain contraceptive drugs that were not abortifacients, in fact,
were abortifacients because they believed them to be abortifacients was just,
was a matter of belief in that, uh, they, they were free to believe that and act upon those
beliefs. And the court wasn't going to, wasn't going to question that. So science didn't matter.
So even while we feel we have science on our side, it's a relief to know that we don't even
have to fight that battle at all, but can walk in and say it's a matter of belief on our part.
And that's the end of the story.
So I, I was following, um, the, uh, satanic abortion ritual because I'm really interested
in that. And it seems like the courts in general are treating this one different, like the, uh,
the other two cases, Scottsdale and the boffamette stuff and the, um, the, uh,
memorial for the, the, uh, war dead. Those were all like, seem to have good legal standing
like people argued over it. And, uh, and the abortion ritual seems to have been more or less
just denied out of hand. Like a lot of courts wouldn't even, uh, look at it. The Supreme Court
turned it down. I was wondering, it almost seems something you said earlier struck me that, uh,
that the state doesn't have any compelling interest to, uh, to promo one religion over another.
And I think maybe this is being treated differently because a lot of people do feel that
the state has a compelling interest in regulating abortion, even outside of a religious context.
But I don't know. That's just kind of like my gut feeling. Do you, do you have any
ideas as to why this seems to be being treated differently than the other, uh, movements?
Yeah. But first let me say we haven't litigated the, the abortion ritual. Um,
what we were litigating previously was in Missouri, they had a 72 hour waiting period.
Um, before somebody could get an abortion that, uh, required that the person wanting to get an
abortion would go into the clinic, receive materials that state that they, that, uh, they
understand that the act of getting an abortion is going to kill a unique individual human life.
And so somebody's supposed to get these materials and then ponder them for like 72 hours
before, uh, before going back and getting this, this done. And in Missouri, there was like one
clinic and sometimes people would travel like upward to six hours to get there, you know,
have to miss work, pay for the travel, get lodging or whatever. So that 72 hours was not,
was not a small burden, um, in certain cases. And you know, it turns out a lot of people getting
abortions already have kids. You know, I think that's something a lot of the conservators don't
understand is people generally aren't just using it as, as birth control as they like to think.
Um, so there's, so there's a lot of factors here that made the 72 hours a really prohibitive
weasel bill against abortion. So we put together an exemption form for members of
the satanic temple seeking an abortion saying that, you know, because the, this statement
in these materials regarding an individual and unique human life contradicts our own
religious viewpoints, that the, the non viable fetus is tissue and that it's up to the person
who is pregnant to decide the, the, the meaning of this tissue and whether they're going to bring
it to, uh, to term or whether it's, you know, whether it's going to be, whether it's going to
be expunged, that's, that's up to the person carrying it. That's our, our religious viewpoint
to try to push another one by state mandate upon us is just unconscionable. So we took that to the
court and through the first round of the court hearings, the dickhead judge waited over nine
months and then said, because she can't be pregnant anymore, this is a moot case. So I'm
dismissing it. Okay. So I mean, that, that's, that's the level of assholeism we're dealing with
here. And I feel like there's really no recourse, you know, I mean, there should be some process
by which a judge gets pulled off the bench for something like that. And then, uh, all the way
down the line, we had judges misruling on technicalities and it never got to the point in all of this,
you know, like, like he said, we took it to the Supreme court and the Supreme court didn't take
the case. We never got a judge to rule upon the actual merits of our legal claim. It was all quibbling
over technicalities. And it was all for the most part, radically off base quibbling over
technicalities. Like we can't say like, if only our lawyer had done a little better, no, they were
really stretching. And as to the reason they're doing this, it's because we're satanists. And
that's the really uncomfortable part here. You know, justice is supposed to be blind,
but we know fucking well, if it were any other religious group putting up with this kind of
open, blatant religious discrimination, the case would be treated a whole lot differently.
It just, I mean, what comes to mind is like, you know, if you're a Muslim and you want to pray
during work hours, you know, I think it's the five times a day towards Mecca,
like your employer is required to allocate you that time, right? Like, and that, that seems
super straightforward. And if they were to say, you know, no, wait till your lunch break, wait
till after work, they get in trouble for that shit. Like, I, man, I, I don't get angry that often,
but that judge waiting nine months and saying, Oh, you know what, moot point dismissed, like,
man, that, that, that grinds my gears. Yeah, it's even worse than that too, because,
you know, the courts have found before that, that if something is, I forget the terminology they,
they use, I believe it's capable of repetition yet evading review. And that's not something the
courts are supposed to do. They're not supposed to take something in isolation and say, well,
because in this instance, she can't be pregnant anymore, it's a moot case. She's capable of
repetition of this, they should review the case. And it's like, you would have, you'd be amazed to
know how astonishingly high our legal bills were just to get to that point, just to get a non-secretary
ruling from a judge who decided he didn't want to hear the case. So this is, this, this was the
response we were going to get. And it's, it's, it's disturbing that that, that, you know, that
we're in a, we're in a position now where we have judges willing to do that more, I think, than they
were in previous times. And that's, and that's an outgrowth of the incompetent presidencies we've
had in the past. You know, George W. Bush was, I thought, as bad as we were going to get back
at the time he was in office. We never thought we could dive as low as Donald Trump. And Donald
Trump put a lot of really stupid fucking judges on benches. Now, we're going to have to deal with
that for a long time. And they don't even care about looking like they're following the law anymore.
And that's the real dangerous part. You know, before there was some kind of decorum, you know,
there was some kind of, there was some kind of compelling need in the minds of the judges, it
seemed to act like they understood the law and that they were going to abide by it. And I don't,
I don't think we're going to have that kind of etiquette on the bench anymore.
I mean, even Bush had to pay lip service to the Constitution and to democracy.
And when Trump was able to wipe his ass with all that, of course, that it changed the norms
for the worse across the board. You had something, Chase?
I was going to reply to the abortion thing a while ago. Just like when I heard about like the
abortion ritual, I kind of thought that it was just a troll thing. But when you actually described
it as being largely this counseling and affirmation ritual, that sounds amazing because
like you mentioned the thing of like women getting abortions often already have children. I mean,
women getting abortions have like sometimes they are, you know, counseled that this is going to
be a nonviable pregnancy or like they're carrying an already dead fetus and like they've been forced
to like carry it to term knowing that it's dead without being a wanted child. And like just that
there's all these, you know, it's and then they make it like, okay, so imagine that there's like
this couple that's their first kid they've got. And then they're told that like this child's going
to be born with an encephaly, like what is it, micro encephaly or something and die within like
three weeks. And then so they're okay, like, do you carry this to term? And having to make that
decision then having to walk into an abortion clinic that's being like protested with people
with signs calling you horrible things and then like requiring that you have the waiting period.
There's other ones that require that you get an ultrasound and look at it, which like imagine
if you've been raped. Oh, right. That was the one victory we got in Missouri. Before in Missouri,
it seemed apparent that getting an ultrasound was required, a fetal ultrasound
when during that 72 hour period. But the state abdicated that immediately in oral arguments.
And when our lawyer brought up the requirement to the ultrasound, the state of Missouri,
right away chimed in and said that it's not a requirement that's voluntary. And it was like,
well, well, okay, so he gave that up. And, you know, the best we could do then is
propagandize the fact that it wasn't required in that, you know, if anybody felt it was,
they should be quite aware of this precedent that was set. But we knew it would cause controversy,
the idea of an abortion ritual. Right. But it's also important that we recognize
that there's a real effort to make people who are getting an abortion feel guilty about it and
to feel ashamed of it. And there's this mandatory counseling in some places that's
exclusive to just like guilting you. And again, we're not going to feel guilty or raped or something
like God. Right. And we wanted to, we wanted to address that and be very open to our membership
that, you know, this is, this is your decision. And it's not that we're glorifying abortion or
preferencing it over live birth, of course, but we're not going to think more or less of you
for doing this. And you made this decision. And, and, and that's, that's, that's yours,
you know, and we accept that as a community. And you can talk openly about it. And nobody's going
to give you any, any guilt or shame. And of course, we got pushback from people who are like, well,
imagine, imagine what, what they think the other side, you know, and they see you've gotten abortion
ritual. And I get sick of that. I mean, fuck them and what they think, you know, it's like,
the more hysterical they get, the more we're supposed to concede and back down and not mention
certain topics or whatever. And fuck that. It's, it's well past that point where we should stop
worrying about the feelings of these people who are crying that anything we do in our lives is in
a front to their values somehow. We have gone a little past the hour. I still wanted to pick
your brain on some things. Are you okay staying longer with us? Or should we wrap this up? Yeah,
no, go ahead. Okay. So this is going to be a slight gear, switch it. Any of you guys want
to say any more on this before we switched? No. Okay. So I personally think it's a really good
idea to protect one's rights and to use the tools available to protect them. And one of those tools
is to be a protected class, like a religion in the eyes of the government. And for a long time,
I felt like our personal little movement here, the rationalist group, I mean, we have sort of a
ideal, sort of a guiding ideology and ethos, we have our own community we're building,
and that it's been my opinion, maybe it would be good to look into, like, incorporating as a religion.
So I was wondering, like, do you think getting recognition, religious recognition was an effective
tool in defending your rights? And is I, let's start with that.
Well, I do see a disparity in how we're treated, as opposed to how other religions are treated. But
I mean, on the bright side, it's a disparity that people don't want to admit to, and they don't
want to know exists. So you can assume that the more we push this, and the more we expose it,
you know, the more headway we'll make in equaling out the playing field. But I think
a real mistake in atheist and secular communities has been to denigrate religion,
making it indistinguishable from supernaturalism. Because on a legal level, your values don't mean
anything unless they're attached to a religion. They're certainly not protected at all. And it's
a weird kind of backwards notion that somebody's values are only meaningful or worthy of protection
if they're not based upon any rational input whatsoever, but are based entirely upon
received wisdom and divine fiat. We reject that notion entirely, obviously. It's
premise of what we do. And we've been very clear about how we don't endorse supernaturalism. And
we value science as the arbiter of truth claims. But, you know, Satanism also does have that kind
of ceremonial aspect. And people push back on that too. They say, Well, how can you have
rituals and ceremonies without supernaturalism? And it's very easy. Think of, think of going to
a wedding, you know, there's atheistic weddings, funerals, these types of things. They're moments
anchored in time. They give you a memory to kind of mark an important occasion, you know,
or commemorate a new beginning or an end or whatever. It has some kind of emotional,
psychological closure or catharsis. You know, people like that. And there's a real sense of
community behind it. And I feel like you have that component too, that really goes a long way
into, you know, ticking the boxes that are required for having a religious organization.
But if you have your own affirmative values as well, I would think rationalist values
that try to look at some empirical evidence are far more meaningful than any superstitious values
that anybody might hold. And I really feel like, you know, if you look at this, you know, if you're
considering this for the rationalist movement, I would encourage you not to look at it as,
you know, trying to pull one over on the system, but considering maybe in which ways you really
are a religion and why you should assume that you're not, you know, and what are you yielding
to superstitious organizations when you say that you're not and that they are,
what makes them important and special and what gives their values higher value than yours.
I think you start contextualizing it that way, you'll see what an outrage it is
that, you know, that you have so many people claiming that only religions of superstition
should have these legal avenues available to them for protection.
Yeah, I really like that. I think that, I mean, you know, I'm less allergic to the idea of
religious incorporation than I once was. Like when you mentioned, you know, the ritual of a wedding,
for my wedding, my aunt was our officiant, and it was easiest in my state to officiate through
some vague church, and it could be anything, but we went with the church of the dude. And
like the idea that, I mean, it was doable without some sort of religious efficiency,
but it was more hoops to jump through. And when you mentioned, like, it does really put a fine
point on it when you can say, oh, no, my value was religious based, then the system
has to say, oh, sorry, okay, you bet. You know, like, if you were going to be drafted into Vietnam,
you could be a moral philosopher with a, you know, a PhD on nonviolence or non, you know,
aggression or something, and they would draft you anyway. But if your grandfather was a Quaker,
you were just, you could just say that and you'd be off the list. That blows my mind. And that, yeah.
Right. I think it was in the UK, where the church of the Jedi was trying to get official
recognition. And there was a ruling that said something like, they weren't going to be recognized
as a church because, you know, they were just entirely based on a work of fiction, the irony,
you know, but I was considering, but consider further, like, what would it take for the church
of the Jedi to be legitimate? By those kinds of standards, we could assume that if a sects broke
off from the church of the Jedi and decided that George Lucas, you know, unbeknownst to George
Lucas himself, was channeling a higher truth and essentially made a reenacted documentary of things
that had actually happened a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away, that this kind of message
was beamed into his mind by some superior intelligence or by the force itself.
Then I guess maybe they would be willing to consider that this was an actual religion
when in actuality, you should just consider that those people are fucking insane.
Yeah, that's that's always bothered me that values reached through any sort of legitimate
rational process are not protected. You have to be a it's almost like it feels to me like the
government's felt held hostage by religions because people would get so irrationally angry
about their religious beliefs that they would commit violence to protect them. And so that's
why that got carved out. And I don't want to, you know, threaten any sort of violence because I hate
that shit. But on the other hand, I think if their rights get to be protected, there's no reason that
our values and rights shouldn't be protected as well.
Well, in a really, a really kind of disturbing dysfunction here is that sexual orientation,
you know, transgenderism, the LGBTQIA plus community, none of that, none of that falls
within a protected class. So you have on the one side, this protected class, intentionally
and constantly beating up on it on a non protected class, and trying to diminish their
rights, you should see a an interview I did with Tucker, Tucker Carlson, it was the second one I
did on his show, where he had me on to argue about a press release we had put out, where we
were saying that in regards to the, to the bakeries refusing to make gay wedding cakes or whatever,
we put our press release pointing out that, you know, bakeries can turn down gay couples, but
you know, they, religions are a protected class. So you can order always order a really,
a really bombastic type of design for a satanic cake, you know, and they'll have to make that for
you. And of course, that got that idea got Tucker Carlson all hot and bothered that we were going
to try to compel businesses to do things that they didn't want to do. So he had me on and I was
arguing, okay, fine, you know, I don't want to make businesses do something they don't want to do
either. So, you know, if you have the theocrat coming in to a gay business, you know, they,
they shouldn't, they should be denied service if the, if the proprietor wants to deny them
service as well, you know, some, some gay business owners should be able to say no Christians allowed,
whatever, you know, so I was saying that, you know, if you really wanted an equal playing field here,
we would either make sexual orientation and identity a protected class, or let's take away
the protected class status for religions. And Tucker Carlson, again, second time I was two for
two with him, really had no, no comeback argument for that and just, just melted down and fell to
pieces and cut the interview off.
I'm a braver man than I to go argue with Tucker Carlson and I mean, I, I, I can keep my cool,
but I think that I have a limit that way I would, I would quickly make a fool of myself
engaging with him for more than 60 seconds tops. I, yeah, I, there are links on the,
I was looking at the Wikipedia page for the satanic temple. And at the bottom, there's a link to
what is it, the, the Lucian Greaves archive or something? Oh yeah, yeah. Yeah. So on the top
of that was the Tucker Carlson interview and there's a transcript as well. And I, I haven't
read the whole thing, but yeah, I mean, it, all I could say is major props to you.
I was really gratifying because he likes to do that condescending arrogant laugh where, you know,
he, once he feels like he's back, somebody into a corner, he just laughs like a, like a moronic
idiot and assumes the whole world is laughing along with him. In my interviews, I was the one
laughing and he was the one getting beat red and pounding on the table. And it's like, yeah.
So are there anything that you think someone who is contemplating making the jump to filing for
religious status, anything that they should absolutely know beforehand, things to watch out for
whatever? I would say, I mean, people look at us and they feel like we played a really clever game
and that we've, you know, kept on, on message, but, but I think they still feel that we've just
manufactured it that way. You know what I mean? That we were meeting very kind of specific goals
and that in certain ways this all still is a prank. And we've, we've kind of massaged that
message to fit the, the need, the legal needs. That's not the case. And I don't think you'll
get very far if that is the case. You have to be exactly what you claim to be. If you're going
to do this and you're going to do it long term, you know, if you want to be a religion and you
want this to be a religion to the membership, you know, that's what it's got to be. And you've got
to be available to that. And you've got to be able to, to, to maintain those congregations,
that, that kind of internal structure. You've got to be willing to see a community genuinely
identify with that and not have a separate message, you know, in the background for membership
that's different from the one that you're putting out forward publicly, or it's all going to become
undone very soon. And if we were as disingenuous as, you know, a lot of people think we were,
we would have never lasted outside, you know, the first six months.
Okay. That is really good to know.
I'm about out of questions. I, I, this was enlightening and awesome. I don't, I don't
know what else to say. I mean, I, you know, I, I think I had, I definitely had some misconceptions.
I, I, having not, having done very little primary research or preliminary research before this
conversation, you know, I, I sort of got the vibe that this was a, a more sophisticated church,
the flying spaghetti monster. And this is, this is so much more, it seems just awesome.
And I don't know if this is an overdone joke, but you're doing the Lord's work. I mean,
like the, the, just, you know, going, going to the mat, I mean, you guys are, are, are fighting
legal battles that need to be fought and on the terrain that the, the, on the turf that has been
set for you and you have to play by those rules. It's like, all right, well, then fine.
Um, I mean, I, I look forward to seeing the, the progress and successes, eventual successes.
I'm confident it'll work out with, uh, you know, the, the protection of ones, uh, guiding one's
body as one wants and the abortion ritual. Um, I, it'll probably be, you know, it'll still be
a fight, but I, I can't imagine that, that won't eventually work out. Well, I can imagine. I hope
it does. I hope it works out. Yeah, we'll see. But it's been great being on and check in with
me anytime. Happy to chat. Awesome. Thank you. Yeah. Thanks a lot. It's, yeah. Uh, can't really
say anything better than Stephen has, but I also kind of came into this thinking that this was just
like sophisticated trolling and it's so much more than that. Yeah. This is great. Um, any
upcoming projects that the satanic temple is working on or, um, anything, uh, yeah. I encourage
everybody to check out gray affection. It's, it's one of our lesser known campaigns, but we keep
fighting back against people who propagate the satanic panic and that's, you know, that's really
grown in urgency now with the rise of QAnon and other conspiracies movements, but we're fighting
back against people who propagate satanic panic within the mental health profession by using
recovered memory therapies to come up with bizarre narratives of satanic ritual abuse,
similar to recovered memory narratives of alien abduction and past lives. It's a whole other
topic, but I really encourage people to check it out because I do think it's really important.
Having been barred from playing D&D as a child because of the satanic panic, because I'm old
enough that I was, I have some memory of the 80s. Like, holy crap, I can't believe that's actually
come back through the QAnon stuff. It's nutty. I've written quite a bit about it on my Patreon
and I'll let people know my Patreon is open and available to the public so you can read that
material for free. So, you know, generally it's good to just find me on Twitter at Lucian Grieves
and see whatever I have pinned there. It's usually my latest Patreon post and, you know,
find us on social media to find out what's going on. Awesome. Yeah, we'll definitely link to everything.
I don't have good graceful ways to end the conversations. Once again, thank you so much
for coming on. This was great and enlightening and I hope everyone learned something and does
check out your guys' website and checks out the Patreon, the Twitter and everything and
gets a good grasp on this. I feel like this is, you know, really important work and keep fighting
the good fight. This is great. Yeah, you guys rock. Yeah, thank you for coming on and for everything
you do. Thank you. All right, we are back. This episode, we are going to be doing the
Less Strong Sequences after rather than before just because that's how things worked out with Lucian.
But before we even get to that, I have a bit of feedback from, I think, two episodes ago. Okay,
I will read it. This was concerning the Less Strong Sequence post where we were talking about the
writing your bottom line when the salesman is trying to convince you that a box has a diamond
or not and you don't know what his algorithm for presenting evidence to you is. Does he
only tell you the stuff that's pro-diamonds in the box or is there, does he only tell you
points of evidence for seven and nine regardless of what they are? This was a piece of feedback
that said, actually, you can still take his feedback into consideration to adjust your
beliefs on how likely the box is to contain the diamond and it's, in theory, straightforward
what he says or what they say. I don't remember who exactly posted this. Damn it. I usually write
down the name of the person who posted this. Anyways, so he says that they say, God damn it,
I'm going to edit this. They say that if you know the salesman is trying to get you to believe
there's a diamond in the box, then the evidence they give you is evidence of how strong the evidence
that they have is. For example, if he tells you that it has a blue sticker on it as evidence
that there is a diamond in the box, that is evidence that he doesn't have any stronger evidence
than that. So before you see what you know is going to be a filtered argument, you should consider
how strong do I expect the argument they provide to be and then update on the difference between
what you expect and what you see, assuming that they want to give only really strong arguments
that you agree with. I like that. So I'm trying to think of other extraordinary claims that
require extraordinary evidence. I think one of the most common ones is belief about God.
That's what I was going to say. So if someone said, oh yeah, the universe is 10,000 years old
and God made it and you can tell because you can feel love. And it's like, oh, okay. So you have
no, that's your evidence. Okay, great. So I can fairly dismiss your claim basically because that
is not compelling whatsoever, right? Yeah. Okay. Yeah, I think that makes a lot of sense. I like
that. Yeah. I watched my parents get hurt sold on like a timeshare. Did they fall for it? Yes.
That was actually the funny thing. I mean, like good sort of early lesson on making commitments
and then sticking to them or just be wary generally, I think was the main takeaway I got
because that was what like eight or nine or something. But my parents were like, oh,
we're going to get this free vacation basically. And we just have to listen to these pitches from
a timeshare. And they were like, but we're definitely not going to take it. We're just
going to go do this free vacation. And I remember having to sit in the like, was it hour or two hour
long session of sales pitch where the salesman was just like, this is going to improve your
quality of life. This is going to be so great. There's no downsides. And I'm like just watching
my parents kind of like, Oh, yeah. Oh, okay. Like looking at each other being like, huh.
And there was this idea that you could, it was in Orlando, but you could trade the timeshare
with other people that had the same timeshare. So like if somebody had one in Bali or something
and like, they're like, Hey, do you want to come to Orlando? And we will do Bali that you could
orchestrate that trade. But the person, yeah, they didn't like ask for more details about that. And
it turned out like, actually, it was like just really not worth the amount of effort you would
have to put in like you as the person. It wasn't like the timeshare company helped facilitate
those trades or anything. It was like, you would have to go find this other person. And
I don't know. It just seems like if they had a compelling reason, they wouldn't have to fall
back on these weird ones, right? Yeah. But like, I think that's kind of what I was trying to get
this is going to improve your quality of life. Well, why? And it's like, well, you could trade
this timeshare or you could like switch the time that you could come to the timeshare or like
just like things that sounded like if you're just sitting there nodding and going, Oh, that's cool.
But like, if you think about is this really like going to be, I don't know, is this the strongest
argument you have? Like, it was a lot of money. My parents didn't have a lot of money. And we
never went to the timeshare either. Like we that was the other funny thing was just, you know,
they both ran their own businesses and they had kids and we had school and it was, we never
actually like set aside the time to go take this free quote unquote vacation thing that we had
that we were just paying into. That's a bummer. That's a bummer. But it was also sort of like,
I remember being like, why did you say yes? I thought you said you're going to say no. And
they're like, well, you know, there's there's some cool things in there. And I was like,
hmm. I think the main thing that I learned is just don't talk to persuasive salespeople though.
Yes. Yeah, they're master manipulators. I read the account of somebody who went to one of these
and when they said no, because they're pre committed, like they brought them into like a
separate room and like, tried to explain how dumb they were for turning this down. And like,
they it was not as straightforward as, you know, come to our seminar, get free tickets to the show.
Like they really dig at home. Yeah. The other like thing that I learned, not really from that,
but like I had a couple of other experiences of people trying to hard sell me things and
or just like, I don't know, other like instances of people trying to like get something from you
like a beggar that keeps following you. And if you actually engage with them, it makes it a lot
harder. But if you just say no, no, thank you. No, no, I said no, no, regardless of what they say.
They can't argue with that. Right. And if they say why not, you just, you just keep going.
What about yes. Yeah. That's like the best I can say against no.
When I did the same kind of thing where they tried to pitch me on a, on a time share,
I actually just didn't go. There was like, here's your two hour block. I was like, great,
I'll see you there. And then I was like, I'm at the beach. Smart man. All right, should we get into
the sequence posts? All right. Our first one, excuse me. Our first one is a rational argument
where Eleazar considers the question, how can I construct an impeccable rational argument
that Mortimer Q. Snodgrass is the best candidate for mayor of Haleyburg. Shout out for Mortimer
Q. Snodgrass. That's a good name. And the answer is it can't be done. You defeated yourself the
instant you specified your argument's conclusion in advance. He then points out that Snodgrass did
really well on a questionnaire that unfortunately never got published, but you have access to.
And you're thinking, but yeah, maybe I should publish this questionnaire because
pulled really well with people. And you crossed the line. Eleazar says you crossed the line at
the point where you considered whether the questionnaire was favorable or unfavorable to
your candidate before deciding whether to publish it.
Wait, can I, I just, this is like an aside just to how much I love Eleazar's writing, but I love
his construction of these like examples. This year, the Haleyburg trumpet sent out a 16-item
questionnaire to all mayoral candidates with questions like, can you paint all the colors of
the wind? And did you inhale, alas, the trumpet's offices are destroyed by a meteorite before
publication? Oh, what was the one that he did badly on one of the questions? Do you remember
which one? I think it was a question 11. Are you now or have you ever been a supervillain?
Couldn't answer that one with a straight face, I guess. Yeah. Yeah. Eleazar says put yourself
in the shoes of a voter still trying to select a candidate. Why would you censor useful information?
You wouldn't if you were genuinely curious if you were flowing forward from the evidence
rather than flowing backwards from a fixed candidate. Yeah. It's, this is a just a good
illustration, I think with examples of what it's like to reason from the bottom line. Yeah. And
I think it's, it's indispensable and it's hard not to do this. You know, this is also confirmation
bias. This is everything, right? Knowing how to filter evidence that you're getting from other
people, like we were talking about with the time share and stuff. Like the person selling
you the time share isn't going to tell you all the reasons that you shouldn't get a time share,
right? So you need to do that research on your own because you want to know should I get a time
share? Maybe it's a good deal, but you're not going to hear that from, you're not going to know
whether or not it's a good deal from the salesperson. I want to hear like, what are the
downsides? Like they're like, oh, you can, you know, you can trade with anybody all over the
world and you're like, okay, is that easy? So in here he says, a logical argument's one that
follows from its purposes, thus the following argument's illogical. All rectangles are quadrilaterals,
all squares are quadrilaterals. Therefore, all squares are rectangles. This syllogism is not
rescued from illogic by the truth of its premises or even the truth of its conclusion. So that's
a really good, yeah. Yeah, he said maybe this principle here. Maybe all squares are rectangles,
but if so, it's not because they are both quadrilaterals. So always refuse to accept
illogical deductions. Yeah, he also says there's just like, it was just a line from here where he
says, also, sloppiness is habit farming, where I sort of just wanted to pull that one out, where
it's like, just you don't accept bad arguments, even for positions you like. Well, I was also
just thinking of, I've had the most success with like, I'm thinking again about like,
failing to be hard sold, or to give somebody 20 bucks or whatever on the street. When I,
you know, I was just tired and forgot to like, use the principles of, okay, like, you know,
I'm getting into this kind of situation now, I need to pre-commit to saying no,
or I need to not get into the arguments, I need to not, you know, it's hard. But it is also sort
of important to remember, okay, sloppiness is habit farming. So the more you like, let your guard down,
or yeah. And this was, you know, both, this is pretty relevant considering the election we just
had. There are lots of reasons, you know, people gave to vote for Biden. But ultimately, I think
the main reason was he's not Trump. And really, you don't have to say anything else but that.
He ends- It's not Trump and he's not worse than Trump. It's hard to imagine a person who would
have been worse than Trump. But that was sort of earlier on in the interview, where he was saying
it was hard to imagine someone could be worse than George Bush. And it was just like, don't even say
that. We were so naive. I mean, over the last four years, I've looked back fondly on the Bush era
and be like, man, those were simpler times. Everyone, that was all we had to deal with.
I mean, just incompetence. And you mentioned like, that was one of the questionnaire items was, did
you inhale? Like, that was the, you know, the video from, well, Clinton and Obama, both had
both had videos from their college days of, well, like, yes, I held the joint, but I didn't inhale
or whatever. Well, no, I mean, Clinton literally said that under O. Oh, then I guess that's why
the joke became I didn't inhale. And then there's no way then Obama's Obama was riffing on it. Oh,
okay. Obama's like, I didn't know. Yeah, there was a key and peel sketch about that too. And
it was funny. But yeah, apparently when when Clinton was running for president, it was still a
big deal whether or not you had done marijuana as a kid. Yeah, can I just I as dumb as that was,
I yearn for those days when those were scandals. And those those were, you know, front page
headlines for a week. Yeah, I, you know, I'm confident. And we're not talking about the
election and stuff, but I'm confident about the Biden era. I think that he seems competent. He
seems like he's a chill dude who will put together a successful cabinet. He's promoting,
like, scientists to cabinet positions, people who are actually qualified to make decisions on
climate change, for example, being the ones in charge of making the decisions sounds pretty cool
to me. And you know, the push for unity and all that. Granted, it's going to be
politicking and all this nonsense. But damn, that sounds relaxing. I haven't heard
shit coming out of the White House in the last week. It's been great. He's been president for
four days, and I haven't heard anything. I am all confident he's going to be so much better than
Trump. Yep. I'll give you that. Yeah. My hopes are for just a boring few years. That would be
nice. Stuff happening. I no longer want to live in interesting times. Yes. Yeah.
When you're talking about, I remember when that made headlines or like,
I keep seeing this headline this last week, and it's this clickbait headline, it just says,
like, these cocaine hippos have got to go. And I don't, I've resisted clicking. I was like,
I can't, I can't click on that. I'm like, just don't do it. No, like, I don't even know why.
Have you clicked on it? No, I don't know. All I can see is from the sub headline that
it's something to do with Columbia and cocaine, and I guess they've got those.
They're smuggling their cocaine and hippos. The thing is that the world makes no sense anymore,
and it's going to be hard to come up with clickbait headlines that surprise you.
If I was a Colombian drunk lord, having coked out hippos as part of my defensive line would be,
I think, not the worst strategy. They're ferocious. They are. Yeah. Oh my God.
I think they sweat blood. No, that's not true. They have pink sweat.
That's weird that they have pink sweat. It's something to do with some enzyme.
Hey, there's a thing near the end of the post, which I find interesting. He says,
whatever actually decides your bottom line is the only thing you can honestly write on the lines
above it, which absolutely true. Definitely something we should keep in mind as rationalists.
But does this mean you cannot be an honest salesman? Because as a salesman,
your bottom, what actually is your bottom line is, if you buy this product, I will get some money.
I think that the way to shove that square peg into that circle, into that circular hole,
is if you actually believe in the product you're selling. And so, granted, you can't tell.
I mean, that's a thing. Your mom was my realtor when I bought my house,
and she was straight up, we did not buy the most expensive place because she didn't push for that
one. And she didn't really push for anything because she's dope and anyone who wants to buy a
place in the greater Denver area should contact Inyash. But she would come in and say, yeah,
no, this is no good. This would need work. You guys don't want to, if you're going to make an
offer, tell them to take off money for this. So, I mean, maybe she's not a perfect case for the
salesman, but if she talked to us to find that they're your representative, right?
In theory, yeah. In practice, not always. At the end of the day, she doesn't get paid unless
we buy something. So, it was in her personal self-interest to get us to buy a home and her
very self-impersonal interest, exactly, to get the most expensive one.
Yeah, but long-term, I'm not, you could also argue, long-term best interest is to get a
reputation as a realtor who is a genuine advocate for you, the buyer.
Exactly. I recommended her to my friends who are buying homes in the area because
she was great. And if she shoehorned us into buying some shithole, I would tell them to
avoid her like the plague. I think that if you believed in what you're selling,
I think you can get around that. Yes, your goal is to sell it, but if you believe you're
helping them, it's like, yeah, man, I actually have a solution to this problem you're presenting
and this is it. Every now and then we do recommend things on the podcast and we don't get paid for
it, but even if we did get paid for it, I don't know. The only time I've ever recommended
something on this podcast, anyway, is something that I really thought was awesome and that other
people would get value out of. What was that? I mean, the most recent thing I can remember
is when we talked about the video game slash, what's the girl with the voice?
I guess that's literally all of them, but no, Billie Eilish. Oh, yeah, the singer?
Yes, the human that can make noises with their throat.
We were trying to think of just positive things we've been doing lately. You weren't selling
your own book, right? When you do, you have solicited your stuff before. Speaking of which,
I have written a book everyone can buy called What Lies Dreaming, available at WhatLiesDreaming.com.
And the thing is, it's like you're pitching it because you actually think people have fun
reading it. Yes, you make a buck. I'm going to hawk right now. This is the first time we've
hung out together since the beginning of December, maybe earlier. You guys haven't seen the phone
case. I got to show it off today. We have a merch line with phone cases. Even if you don't get ours,
go to whatisitredbubble.com or something. I think that's it. Yeah. And pick a pattern you like.
The snap case, like the thin one, is like just, I don't know, a millimeter thick and it is big
enough to cover the screen. I'm selling this thing, whether it goes in our pocket or not.
This case is tight. If you like the picture, go for it. If you don't get... There's everything
on there. There's Marvel stuff. There's like trippy-dippy space stuff. There's Marvel stuff
at Redbubble. Yeah, like fan art. Oh, okay. Yeah. Well, that's okay. They're probably pushing the
line. Yeah, yeah. That's Marvel, if they wanted to. Well, Disney, I guess, if they wanted to,
I guess could crack down on them. But that would get them some bad press. Yeah. Well,
I mean, they don't mind the bad press. I remember there was the thing, and then it were far afield,
but they gave some dad who was burying his dead son that wouldn't let him use a Spider-Man
headstone. Really? Oh, no. And so, yes, bad press. They're clearly not afraid of it.
I think it was just... It was not just about on-license use of our stuff. It's just like,
we don't want gravestones of our things. So, I get where they're coming from. I disagree with it.
There's also a legal precedent. If you don't defend your copyright, you lose your copyright.
That's US law. So, anything that got enough newsworthiness that a lot of people
knew about it, they'd probably have to say something about it. That's wild. The fan art
probably goes under the radar because there isn't anything in the news like, oh, you can get this
phone case that someone made up, drew their own picture of Thor on. But if it went into the news,
then they probably... You have to pursue that. Or the US government says, well,
obviously, you don't care about your copyright. Now you don't have copyright on Spider-Man anymore.
It's a fucked up system. That sounds insane. Yeah. Love it. All right. So,
I can't think of a segue into... We change our minds less often than we think.
That's a de facto. Yeah, I mean, you don't need a segue.
Next post on? By the way, next post. There's not much. I mean, I think... Go ahead.
Okay. He started with a quote from a study where a number of people over a few years
discreetly approached colleagues faced with the choice of different job offers and asked them to
estimate the probability that they will choose one job over the other. The average confidence in
the predicted choice was 66%, but only one out of the 24 respondents chose the option which he
initially assigned a lower probability to, yielding an overall accuracy rate of 96%,
meaning that people were wildly underconfident in how likely they were to choose their more
attractive option and that people, even when they only thought it was 60% likely,
were much less likely to change their minds than they actually thought.
What's cool about that is... And I guess I should keep this in mind because I've
recently assigned a probability to whether or not I'll change jobs. And I need more data
before I can put a pin in it for sure. But if I say 85, it means 100 basically.
And that's a nice shortcut. Once I'm pretty sure I'm leaning this way, I can just stop
thinking about it. Now, granted, you shouldn't, if it's important, you should realize that you're
making that error and actually try and reassess, make sure you're weighing the cost and benefits
and stuff. But I guess I wouldn't... You shouldn't kick yourself for saying, well, I was only 60%
sure. It's like, yeah, but you were leaning that way. There's a couple brands of appliances,
which I've heard you just should avoid. And last time I went out shopping for an appliance,
like I looked at them briefly, but then I thought, why am I even looking at them? I've heard I
should avoid them. I'm not even going to bother. So that's how I went forward, even though they
were the cheaper ones. Smart. Eliezer says, once I could guess what my answer would be,
once I could assign a higher probability deciding one way than the other,
then I had an all probability already decided. And realizing that can really save a lot of
time and stress in your life. I saw Robin Hansen once post something similar where he said,
whenever you are really, really torn between two decisions, it's often the case that they
aren't very different. That's the reason you're torn. Like if one was obviously superior than the
other, you wouldn't be torn. You'd be like, I'm obviously going for the much better option.
But if they're really close, then which one you go with doesn't make that much a difference,
because there isn't that much difference between them anyway. So don't stress about it so much.
That's a clear stick. I think it's cool to see this formalized. I had just this
very weird epistemology as a kid. I used to write what I thought were these deep truth
things in my journals. I go back and laugh at them occasionally. But I do remember
kind of starting from really black and white thinking as a kid where I was kind of watching
the behavior of people around me and tried to decide what I thought was good or ethical or
whatever. And for a while, I had this sense that you should be stubborn and stick to your...
I noticed though that people respect people who stick to their guns or make a choice and then
defend it. And then I remember I think I was in... It's probably middle school. We were doing some
fake debate thing. And I had been thinking before about... I guess about... Well, but it actually
seems like regardless of whether people respect you more, you might make a better decision if
you're willing to change your mind about things. And it's obvious. If the other side makes a better
argument, it makes you look stupid if you just stand there going, well, yeah, but that's the one
I picked. So I remember just playing with this in this debate by arguing my hardest for the one side
and then halfway through getting up and then walking over to the other side and being like,
you know what? I've changed my mind and I'm going to join this side. And no one else did that. And
it was just like... I don't know. Teachers were always like, they found me really weird because
a lot of this was stuff I'd been chewing on and writing in my journals and in my own head and
the actual behavioral outcome would be something that was like, why... I wouldn't talk to anybody
about it. I was just like, haha, I did that. They're just like, okay, you're weird.
Writing stuff down really helps you process it. I've come through many, I don't know,
insights, decisions, whatever by writing a blog post or just chatting with people on Discord.
Just getting it out in a physical format helps. Sometimes I just write something up and I find
that things have changed while I was writing it in my mind. And so I delete it. Just having your
thoughts... Writing it in your mind? No, no, no, writing it like a blog post.
Oh, you're saying the thing in your mind changed? Yeah, yeah, the thing in my mind
changed and then I delete the post. No, no. That's the thing. It doesn't work if you don't have it
on a paper or on a screen or something. You actually need to get it out there in words,
which is interesting. Yeah, and then I've seen interesting studies about... I think it's more
about committing things to memory, but I wonder if processing might work that way as well, but
manually writing things on paper with a pen or pencil. Yeah, at least, yeah.
You retain it better. Yeah, it makes you retain it better. I think there's something about...
I gotta look into that again, but I have noticed just... I used to journal obsessively. I do it
less obsessively now, but I still get a lot of value out of it in an introspective sense.
I, largely for a while, just went away from paper because it's inconvenient. If you have a
laptop or a phone, you just have infinite paper sort of and then there's the... You can backspace
things and you can... But yeah, they have a different feeling in a way that's hard to
describe and it is kind of interesting where... I think I remember when I was journaling by hand
in a notebook, there was something about the... I was much less... Just because it's difficult or
like a mild inconvenience to cross things out or erase things, I didn't edit.
I would write a thought and then I would see my thought sort of, like you were saying,
change as I was writing it rather than... But if I was journaling and just text edit,
I could write a thought, be like, and then delete it. So if I go back and reread my journals
about... I don't know, that we're in text edit, they sound more coherent, but you're
recording less of your own thought process, which is just random thoughts.
I think one of the interesting things that Eliezer comes to with this post is he says,
you might think that you can arrive at a belief or a decision by non-rational means
and then try to justify it. And if you found you couldn't justify it, you reject it.
But we change our minds less often, much less often than we think. So kind of a...
What is it when you tell someone to be... A warning, there we go. A warning, maybe not
to do that kind of thing. Maybe not to make up your mind too fast. Well, not even... Not just
make up your mind, but even arrive at a decision before you've really looked into things. Like,
again, deciding to vote for Biden, I still think was probably the best thing for society,
because we got rid of Trump, which is great. But then trying to justify it and saying like,
oh, no, I have these other good rational reasons for it, I think was necessarily...
Necessary? Yeah, not just necessary, but I think that would be somewhat dishonest. If you're like,
well, I'm actually voting for Biden because of all these other good reasons, and you don't need
those, and those probably aren't entirely true. They wouldn't end up changing your mind anyway.
You should have considered all that before you decided to vote for him, if that was going to
be the case. And I think that it's one of those things too. You want people to be able to say,
I've changed my mind, I feel like this... You can't say, well, no, you're just reasoning backwards
now in every case. Obviously, that's why this is an art that needs refinement and practice. Otherwise,
you're just throwing techniques around and doing it wrong. But you don't have to have been campaigning
for Biden since 2018 to say, I think I would have voted for him anyway. So you can update,
and yet if your honest reason is the simple, lame-sounding one, which is I like him more than
the current president, hey, own it, that's fine. I don't feel like in this case, you don't have
to defend yourself with better reasons. It's like, no, I have my reason, that's it. Is that
the best reason that I would use in every case? Not necessarily, no. But is that simple here?
Sure. Yeah. I think that's a similar reasoning for people who voted for Trump, that maybe they
have justifications for why they did it, but ultimately they decided before all those other
justifications. Yeah, and then they come up with things like, oh, but it's keeping the parties
balanced or trying to undermine the strength of the federal regulations or whatever.
Right. He's just joking or something. And this isn't the anti-Trump podcast, although we are
all feeling that way. But I was just thinking, I couldn't get this out of my head when,
so I saw that key and peel sketch with Obama inhaling marijuana. And that was the big thing
eight years ago. And it's like, no one gave a shit. Oh, God, yeah, 12. Fuck, we're old. In any
case, the Obama. Yeah. But there's that video of Rudy Giuliani dressing in drag and Trump
motorboating his tits. Why is this? Yeah. Did this happen IRL or? Yeah, this was a real thing.
They were doing some stupid thing in the 90s, whatever. But this wasn't the Obama
inhale moment, right? Nobody cared because there was no such thing as I just I needed to draw
attention to that hypocrisy. All right, I got to push past it. Otherwise, I can't
be dissuaded from talking about it more. Yeah. So I like the end of this post.
I'm sure you can think of at least one occasion in your life when you've changed your mind. We all
can. How about occasions in your life when you didn't change your mind? Like, that's obviously
harder because we don't keep a list of things that I still believe today that I believe yesterday.
But like the in brackets that you put, can each of us think of an occasion when we could have
changed our minds but didn't? I was going to say I wish I had time to think about it. So please,
go ahead. The first thing that jumped into my mind was the first time I did mushrooms. I remember,
I think this was because I had read Gorn's post about doing LSD. He did, I think, a
self-analysis or end-of-one study that said whether or not LSD microdosing had any positive
cognitive effects like people claimed. But back when, what was it? What was that dark web?
Silk Road? Yeah, he got it off Silk Road back when he was like, so I got two
LSD units from Silk Road. One did it do my experiments on and one to use for a
in-scare quotes trip, which was just adorable. And then beforehand, he wrote a bunch of predictions
and put percentages on them. And one of them was that he would become religious or believe in
supernatural things afterward. And so I sort of, and he did not actually, it sounded like the trip
was pretty uneventful, at least from his perspective. And I had never done any kind of psychedelic
smoke marijuana like once or twice. Later, I found that that can also be psychedelic.
Or I had had alcohol. And so I was pretty, I was like, okay, there are a bunch of people who
claim to have had these spiritual, that was the thing that worried me is that I would lose my
beliefs in science and rationality after taking this thing because there's quite a few people
who do take psychedelics and then change religions or say they'd been an atheist before and they
find religion or believe in aliens or something. But then, yeah, I remember actually while being
on mushrooms, I was like, oh my God, magic's real. Or not really that, but I sort of do remember
having a few moments of, oh man, maybe magic is real. Because my perception of reality was so
distorted that I saw things that seemed to defy physics. And then once I was sober again,
I thought back over those experiences. And then I was like, nope, that was drugs.
That's weird.
And it was this relief where I was like, okay, you go back to normal afterwards.
Unless you probably didn't have very solid foundations for your beliefs to begin with.
Maybe it's because I'm on SSRIs or something. But I've never, even while really high on acid,
I've never had anything like that. I've, on more than one occasion,
like, communed with God while on acid.
That sounds like something like that.
But even at the time, I knew it wasn't really God. I was like, I'm high, this is great,
hey, God. I knew it was the drugs.
Okay.
That's because your mind is mighty. Mine, I get thrown.
I might be the SSRIs.
Yeah, a little column A, a little column B. I get thrown to the ringer. I haven't had any of
those transcendent experiences where they're internally substantial and significant.
But I've never talked with something that wasn't in the room.
I didn't do talking.
Well, even in my head.
Yeah. I mean, it was more of an understanding than any sort of verbal.
I had those with different parts of myself, I think. But I don't know. That's describing drugs.
Sounds insane. People haven't tried it.
Yeah, I know. And it's probably really boring.
Probably. Yeah, I can't think.
That was really interesting.
Before I tried any drugs, when people talked about it, I was like,
there's no fucking way that anyone can experience anything like that. And yet, yeah, you can.
I'm trying to think of a good example of when I failed to update sooner.
And I know I was just thinking about this earlier this week or last week.
And I'm failing to pull stuff to mind. That's not because I've always been right,
it's because I'm doing a poor job retrieving it.
Maybe it was just because I'd already gone through the whole really,
truly believing in the supernatural and God when I was a kid and then rejected it.
Yeah, maybe if you haven't had that.
Yeah. No, I mean, like a small example, like I should have believed this sooner.
Oh, yeah.
I was going to say, for my example of an occasion when I could have changed my mind,
but didn't, like two or three days ago, I ordered a new phone.
And I kind of figured I was going to buy the cheapest one available for various reasons,
which I've mentioned already. But I went online, I looked at some,
looked at the phones that were available, and I clicked on one of the more expensive ones,
or just a step up, right? And I thought real quickly about it.
And then I was like, no, I'm going to go with the cheapest one.
So that's, that's a recent occasion where I could have changed my mind, but I didn't.
Yeah, I guess I'm trying to think of the only, the only way that I'll know that this actually
matters is if I could have changed my mind and didn't, and then subsequently changed it later.
Like, because I mean, I could have changed my mind, you know, I got,
was it not last night of the night before I got Q Doba?
Like I could have gotten something else. Like that's not interesting, right?
Well, I mean, I think that's part of what he's saying that a lot, most of times when you change
your mind, where you don't change your mind, it's not interesting. It's just something you
were going to do and you go and do it. I'm trying to think of interesting example where like,
I should have been faster to pick this up and then got to it later in life.
And I'm sure that there are examples, but I can't think of one.
I have an example for myself. It's going to sound bad for rationalists. But when I,
it took me a long time after getting into rationality to update in the direction or to
change my beliefs that a brain could be emulated. And that was from having just like
read PZ Myers blog for so long and being like really coming into like my first and like main love
in the scientific fields of biology. And it was, I had seen so many arguments against Ray
Kurzweil's claims that were like, that there were, you know, the typical like sort of transhuman
futurist like over excitement that was like in the next 50 years, we'll have a perfectly
emulated brain. And it was a biologist saying like that there's, there was actually, okay,
that the title of the post we could probably find it was Ray Kurzweil doesn't understand the brain.
I still remember that. And I remember reading all these things and being like, these make perfect
sense. And then I, when I went to my first rationalist meeting, and people were talking about
I think it was Robin Hansen talking about brain emulation, I was just like, oh, that's
bullshit. And they were like, why would that be bullshit? And I like, I felt completely embarrassed
because I was like, this was an argument that like it was from like five years ago. And I just
never re examined it and updated on it. And it was based on not even the claim of can you ever
emulate a brain? Is it possible? Is it going to be possible like for humans to do maybe?
But like, no, it's, it is possible. And like, actually, I've like updated much more towards
it being a thing to, I mean, I really hope it happens in my lifetime.
Like it's, it's, you know, assuming we don't like devolve into the Middle Ages, because of various
political things or destroy ourselves with nukes or whatever, it's gonna happen, I think.
I really like PZ's blog too. I, one of the posts that like has most stuck with me, which I think
most people don't even remember is the one where he said why it's okay to eat chickens.
Justifying it from a biological standpoint, I was like, cool, I'm gonna eat some chickens.
And then I did. And, you know, nowadays that is like the, the almost taboo food for
the EA side of the rationalist since that's the highest suffering to pound of meat ratio
animal. I've heard both ways. And I know we're, we're, this is probably the least interesting
part of the episode for people when we're not even talking about the posts. But so for me,
I feel like chickens are the better choice to eat because they can suffer less than cows.
Granted, you eat more chickens per year than you could cows per year, but cows are also
worse for the environment. So I don't know which side of the fence to come down on if you're
going to pick between one or the other. I mean, I still fall back on which animal is the, the most
conscious, most, you know, intelligent and chickens are really low on that scale. So that's why
I'm okay with chickens. And I try to, that's where I think that actually they're not as low on that
scale. They probably think, but they're lower than cows. Are they literally like 2000 times lower
or however many cows per chicken it takes to, you know, how many chickens are there per cow?
Right. It's not 2000, but it's got to be on the order of hundreds. Right. Well, I mean,
the PZ article that I'm referencing was specifically one that said,
that argued that chickens are basically little meat production robots that have,
you know, very little going on. I mean, if you zoom out and chicken biologists, so,
but if you zoom out and squint, so are people. Right. Yeah. We're just,
we're just vehicles for, for genes. We're, we're much better at defending ourselves from humans
in front of us than chickens are. All right. So this is insert segue,
avoiding your beliefs, real weak points. Yes. This might actually, if I were feeling more
creative, I could have thought of something about, you know, this, this might be a weak point
against, you know, someone who's just against eating animals entirely or something.
Well, I realized that eating meat is one of my weak points, but I also am not in a position to
not eat meat at all right now. So that's sort of where I'm at. Like I eat a lot less meat than I
used to. And I buy, as far as I can tell, ethically sourced eggs, like other than growing them or
whatever, harvesting them myself, I feel like I'm buying ethically sourced eggs. And so, like,
I, I feel like this is, and I know that I'm not even touching the post yet, but I don't like the,
like you're either doing it right or you're doing it wrong. I feel like you can be doing it
better and, or you can be doing it less wrong. And like, if you're, if you're doing better,
then it's like, that's still, that's still good. I think Scott Alexander made that great post about
like, if you, if you do vegan one day a week, you're still doing better than basically everybody.
And so, like, you know, if you're donating half of a percent of your income a year, you're still
doing better than basically everybody. Like, sure, could you, could you half a percent enough to do
better than basically everybody? Probably, because almost, almost everybody does nothing.
You just aren't doing it. A lot of people do some little bits, either around Christmas time or,
you know, giving to their church, which I think should count as an anti. I don't count tithing.
Yeah. So, I mean, I mean, whatever it is, like, you know, if, if you,
That cancels out a contribution. Right. But I do feel like, and so half a, what,
the number aside, like, you don't have to be living, you know, Will McCaskill style to be,
to be living an ethical life. You can be, you can still live very comfortably in a nice house
and say, yeah, I still give 10% of my income to charity and I am able to buy a new car or something.
As long as you do better than average, the average will slowly creep up and the human race
will keep getting better. Yeah. And that's not to say, like, you know,
give yourself a pass if you want to do better. But like, I guess, don't beat yourself up for
not doing perfect. Right. All right. Sorry. So avoiding your beliefs, real weak points. This
is fun. Yes. He uses it in the context of religious example at first. And it, but you can use this
everywhere. Like he talked about when his, what was it, his great grandmother died or something.
And his grand uncle attributed her, he attributed it to the, to the will of God. And that, like,
he says, even as a kid, it seems like I noticed that it violated the rules of self, of religious
self deception as I understood them. And if I'd noticed my confusion, I could have made a successful
surprising prediction. Not long afterward, my grand uncle left the Jewish religion.
Like the, I guess we can read more of the post before we talk about like other examples of it,
but the, you go ahead and summarize. I'm bad at it. Okay. In, I guess, in summary, it's that
the modern Orthodox Judaism encourages people to be doubtful and inspect the scriptures and,
you know, see where conflicts with science, but only in places where they're going to win.
That like, I think the example he gives is that it wouldn't be surprising to hear Rabbi in his
weekly sermon point out the conflict between the seven days of creation and the 13.7 billion
years since the Big Bang. But he has a clever explanation for it involving three other biblical
references, a midrash and a half understood article in Scientific American. In Orthodox
Judaism, you're allowed to notice inconsistencies and contradictions, but only for the purposes
of explaining them away. And whoever comes up with the most complicated explanation gets a prize.
It doesn't have an emphasis on the virtues of blind faith. You are allowed to doubt. You're
just not allowed to successfully doubt. I've heard people push back on that that successfully
doubting is supposed to be something that you're doing, but that's like, that's also
the Jesuits. It's the same thing where you're supposed to successfully doubt, but it's always to
ultimately show how God is smarter than humans. And just from like the memetic survivability
of that idea, it's like if one of the virtues of it was to disenfranchise yourself of it,
the memes wouldn't survive, right? Yeah, it's like its ultimate purpose is to
show that my religion is stronger than doubt. Yeah. I mean, the Jehovah's Witnesses had kind
of a thing just not nearly to this extent. It was like, maybe baby modern Orthodox Judaism,
and in a thousand years, maybe they'll get to there. But they also, they would teach critical
thought and debate in church every Thursday. One hour was devoted to that for the purposes of
destroying other people's religions and their religious beliefs to convert them to Jehovah's
Witnesses. And like the vast sounds like such a bad idea for their from like, right, their
own survivability. The crazy thing is like the vast majority of witnesses like stayed in the
religion anyway. But I like started using those tools on my own religion. I was like, hold up a
minute. Why doesn't this argument work against us as well? And that, that was part of the reason
I left. They taught me how to critically think about religions. And so yeah, I'm assuming that
people who really internalize this. Yeah. Well, I would, I would hope that people that really
internalize their lessons would leave the religion, but I guess either they don't internalize it or
they're really good at doing the same thing here. There's a lot of secular Jews. Yes. Yes, there are.
And the ones that are religious tend to be like smarter about it and for want of like better
words there. But like, I don't know, man, like the crazy Orthodox ones that you can find there.
Okay. Yeah. I think that I think that Judaism is a hard example there because there's there's a huge
cultural component to it that is is non. Yeah. I mean, we had a discussion with a very wide spread
of Judaism. Yeah, I mean, we, like we just talked with Lucian about like, does, you know,
does a religion mean spirit, you know, anything spiritual or supernatural, not necessarily,
right? So like, I think that when you say the Jewish religion, I think that there's,
there's definitely some equivocating there. And there's, there's plenty of, of room for
Martin Bailey. Like, there's the John Stuart Jew, who literally does not believe in the supernatural.
And then there's like the Orthodox deep, deep, God, I don't know where in New York they are yet,
deep entrenched ones, where like, the women aren't allowed to speak to the men when they're in synagogue,
because that would be against God's law. And just really, some of the crazy stuff that the
fanatics believe is nuts. You're like, wow, okay, that's like, like any other crazy hardcore religious
person. So the trick here then is to attack your beliefs that they're actual weak points. Yeah.
And this is, this is a painful exercise, right? Yeah.
And it's, it becomes easier. Well, it's easier to practice on, on targets that you're not super
attached to, you know, like, I, I bet we could reason you and unstressfully into like, why it
might be worthwhile to buy a good phone rather than the next generation shitty one. Right. But
like, that's not something that you are really attached to, right? Yeah. So like, those, maybe
practice on soft targets, but like, it shouldn't feel like a fun practice, you know, like, oh,
great, I had this, you know, engaging internal or external dialogue with somebody about this,
engaging with my, my doubt here. It's actually scary. There's a real chance that you could,
you could lose something important, you could feel like it loses something important to you.
He says, people don't think about the real weak points for their beliefs for the same reason
they don't touch a oven's red hot burners. It's painful to do better when you're doubting one
of your most cherished beliefs, close your eyes, empty your mind, grit your teeth, and deliberately
think about whatever hurts the most. And it's, I remember doing this early. No, not early. I was
like, I don't know, like halfway through the amount of time I'd been into rationality and
turned down against feminism and like, stopped self identifying as a feminist. And that sucked.
It still sucks. But like,
that was a big point of pride for me back in the day, which being a feminist.
Oh, yeah. Well, it was, yeah, I mean,
I mean, it's one of those things like that. That's why I just like a lot of labels in the
first place, like I vote blue on everything, but I don't, I'm a registered independent, right?
Like, because if the blue started saying something stupid, I don't have to fight my tribe on it.
So like, it's, yeah, just I avoid a lot of that by avoiding labels. Like I remember,
well, I'm, I don't, I want to avoid more digressions on it.
That's the like, keep your identities small. Yeah.
He says, continuing on what you were saying about the thinking what hurts the most,
he says, don't rehearse standard objections whose standard counters make you feel better.
Ask yourself what smart people who disagree would say to your first reply and your second reply.
Whenever you catch yourself flinching away from an objection you fleetingly thought of,
drag it out into the forefront of your mind. And I want to point out that the rationalist
community is where the term steelmaning first became a thing. And I think it was right around
the time of this post where he said things like, ask yourself what smart people who disagree with
you would say to your reply. And I think that's a wonderful thing that the rationalist community
has brought to the world. And I also love the fact that nowadays, like it's been 13 years since this,
it's a common term that I hear all over the place by people who, you know, some of them
aren't even aware of what the rationalist movement is. Yeah. And I hear dropped in,
in just random political podcasts now. Yeah, it's definitely common vernacular,
which I like. And, you know, it's like, I don't think that the rationalist community
invented steelmaning, but what they did was attach a handy label to something that was easily
identifiable. You know, like there's a long practice in like philosophy or even science,
you know, principle of charity, I think they called it. Yeah. And where you engage what you
think your enemy, your enemy, your opponent would say, like, in the origin of species, you know,
Darwin argued with people that he both don't want in the room about, you might think this, well,
here's my response to your, my, my anticipation of your objection. Like, that's just called
good thinking. But, but when you put a good handle on the specific thing that they're doing there,
and you can summarize it in a sentence, which is like, build up a strong version of the opponent's
argument and then see if you can stand up to that. Yeah. Steelman, opposite of strawman. Exactly.
But, but so that's what I'm saying. There's, there's tons of value in being able to shorthand it.
And now it's, like you said, common vernacular. I was just thinking,
Martin Bailey seems kind of be similar thing. Like Martin Bailey is almost like a modified
version of moving the goalposts, which has been, you know, a thing that's been around for
decades at least, I don't know, maybe the term is centuries old in other languages. But
like, it seems to capture more nuance than just moving the goalposts. And I heard it just a
couple of weeks ago on the skeptics guide to the universe, who I know they're familiar with the
Rationalist movement, but I'm not sure that the, I think atheists have been using Martin Bailey.
Since, you know, like a lot of atheism ended up being about like debating creationists and
finding logical fallacies. Yeah. But the term for it was always like moving goalposts or something
or some other fallacy. I think I remember the use of Martin Bailey. I don't know. I could be wrong.
In either case, the most recent time. It was coined by Scott Alexander. Yeah, I think you're
right. Yeah. In a Slate Star Code exposed a few years ago.
Okay. At the very least, the most recent time I read this was this morning in the wise words of
Enya's context aside, it said, that's the biggest Martin Bailey ratio I've seen since God is Love.
And I appreciated the succinctness of delivering that point.
Martin Bailey ratio. Right. Sorry. Yeah.
Let's see. This one ends, and I think that this also has its own page somewhere unless
wrong for sure. But the litany of Gendolin. Can we all say it at once?
Gendolin. Can we all say it at once? Would that be weird? Let's try.
Three, two, one. What is true is already so weird. Nope. Nope. Can't do it. It seems too cultish.
Yep. I'm out. I kind of loved it, but whatever. I'm glad you're having fun, but I couldn't.
All right. What is true is already so owning up to it doesn't make it worse. Not being open about
it doesn't make it go away because it's true and it is what's there to be interacted with.
Anything untrue isn't there to be lived. People can stand what is true for they're already enduring
it. Yes. First said by Gendolin. I didn't write down his first name here, but it's become one of
those litanies in the community similar to the litany against fear from Dune. I was actually
just going to bring up the litany against fear. I got to hear it. I didn't read Dune. Oh. I must
not fear. Fear is the mind killer. Fear is the little death that brings total obliteration.
I will face my fear. I will let it pass over me and through me. And when the fear is gone past,
I will turn the inner eye to see its path. Where the fear is gone, there will be nothing.
Only I will remain. Nice. Awesome. See, that's why I wanted to do that together. I feel like this is
okay. So I don't know. I actually recite the litany against fear kind of the way like
Catholics would recite Hail Mary's. And then there's even like a thing of like praying the
rosary where like it's this mantra. Yeah. I like just sort of the idea of having a
rationalist mantra is like this where... I do too. And we have several of them,
but the chanting them in unison thing was too far. Yeah, I didn't enjoy it. But I do see the
value. I mean, I think of the litany of Tarski frequently. It basically comes to mind without
intention, which is the whole point. The point of doing the, I mean, of articulating and practicing
rationality is that the techniques become flinch reactions, right? You want it to be,
like, we all have our shitty heuristics that are easy to trick people into believing or
saying stupid things. The idea is to build in groove as that catch those before you get there.
Yeah, like martial arts. Exactly. Making something muscle memory.
Yeah. Krav Maga style. If I find myself scared of a thought, I'm like, no, hold on.
If it's true, I want to believe it. And if it's, so like that's... I don't usually have to go
through the rest of it, but like, I just, because I already know, like, hold on, you just flinched
away from that. Let's pull that back in and say, look, is this true? If so, this is what you want
to believe. Is litany of Tarski the one that I want to believe snow is white if and only if snow is
white? Yeah, or insert whatever. Yeah. I want to believe that magic is going away from whatever,
yeah, methods of rationality. Yeah, that magic is seeping out of the world if and only if magic
is seeping out of the world. Right. Yeah. I kind of like to reframe it as, because
there's something that's weird about saying that, like, I want to believe this thing.
If it's a bad thing, I mean, like, I would say I want to believe it because
then I will, then I can point my efforts towards, like, doing something about it, right? Yeah,
but you have to believe that it's a problem before you can do something about it. Yeah,
I just like adding that there because, like, if you just say, I want to believe bad things,
it's a weird thing to convince yourself of. I have a good example, and I think it's a good
note to end on. But first, for next time, be sure to read Meditation on Curiosity and Single Think.
And my note to end on with the litany of Tarski is I think that it's an easy example for many
people to think of, especially people with, you know, raised on stupid ideas of masculinity is,
like, if you're sick, you know, a lot of people put off going to the doctor, oh, I'll be fine,
or maybe it's nothing, right? Instead, if you think this might be a problem,
instead of thinking, instead of being scared away from, like, oh, man, if it's something I don't
want to, people think, I've caught myself thinking, I don't want that to be true. And so, like,
if it's true, it already is. I don't want to face if this is, like, cancer. Exactly. And,
but if it is, you want to know, you want to believe it before, you know, well, you want to
believe it as soon as possible. If it's cancer, it is cancer, whether or not I believe it.
Exactly. I want to believe it. And you want to catch cancer early,
right, and do something about it before it becomes to size.
Yeah, to that effect. I have a friend who he's, so if you're, if you're pitching this, I've got
a request to everybody, I put this out in the Bayesian Conspiracy Discord yesterday or the day
before. And I figured, hey, let's hit a slightly larger audience. I have a friend who has a grade
four high grade glioma, which is a brain tumor, they went and operated about, operated out about
85% of it. But basically, a short version, the prognosis isn't good. This is not one of the
good cancers to get, even as far as brain cancers go. So I, if anyone works and, you know, we've
talked to a lot of interesting people on this show. You know, we talked with, you know, Robert
McIntyre, you know, who is like the only person in the world doing what he does. We hit some,
we hit some fringe audiences with, like, the edge of science. And while I realize that the odds of,
you know, anyone listening, knowing the cure for brain cancer is small, if anyone has any ideas or
knows anybody who's working on some cutting edge, you know, like, you know, fringe science almost
sounds like pseudo science. But I mean, like, you know, clinical trial stuff, anything that's
about to accept humans and isn't yet, because it's that early, anything at all, or knows anyone who
might, please shoot me an email at, is it Bayesian Conspiracy podcast at gmail.com?
Yeah. And I'll get back to you. I really appreciate it. And I can't think of a more succinct way to
put it. So anyway, yeah, indeed. All right. Well, on a happier note, we'll be back. Actually,
I've got a quick question before our next episode, because we both read the same article and came
to different conclusions on it. What, and this will be a teaser for people to think about going
into the next episode. How do you think about and define hate? Because I feel like that's really
important to our interpretations of this article. I define hate as an emotion that you feel that is
similar to anger, but with more loathing and impetus to do something mixed in.
Okay. All right. Do we want to tell people what we're reading for next week, what the post is
called? All right, let's not let them think about it until we tell them what to think about it.
That's exactly, this should be a one way channel of information from us to the listener.
Perfect. Oh, we've got a patron to thank. We do have a patron to thank. Our patron this week is
Daniel Nadal... Nadalni? Yeah. Okay, Daniel Nadalni. Thank you very much for supporting us,
for helping everybody bring the good news of Satan to our listeners.
We hope that we have spent your donation in a good way.
I hope he agrees too. Thanks, Daniel. You rock.
Thank you. All right. We'll be back in two weeks to talk about hate. I'm very excited.
Yeah, me too. All right. Okay, bye. Bye, bye, everybody.
