Okay, everyone ready? I'm ready. All right. Welcome to The Basin Conspiracy. I'm Enya
Ashbrotsky. I'm Steven Zuber. I'm Jess Dickey. And today we're going to be doing a bunch
of listener feedback is going to take up most of it, but we didn't want to do just
listener feedback for a full episode because I don't know that gets to be
tiresome. So we're I'm also going to be kicking around a thing that I personally
think is like a consequence of thinking about living in a simulation kind of
stuff. I related it back to our Cyber Christianity episode when I was bitching
it to my two co-hosts here. But really, I think it's just a, now that I think about
it, I think it's more of a revealing my own neuroses and mental issues. So I guess
this might be an embarrassing episode for me or we'll confirm or deny your neuroses.
So, so yeah, I was I was thinking of calling this episode. Are you Jesus or
Hitler? Which is basically what it comes down to sounds like a loaded question.
The simulation argument being to go over again really quickly. If it's possible
to simulate humans in the future, and if computing power gets much cheaper and
more available, then it's going to be entirely likely that our far future
ancestors may make a lot of simulations of the past to see how humanity evolved to
relive things like right now, we don't actually know how ancient battle battles
were fought. Like we have some ideas and people try to reenact them, but
ultimately no one wrote down like, this is what happens when two armies meet
each other on a field. They just say, the armies met and this many people were
slaughtered, right? So it's really hard to say like, go ahead. I was going to say,
I remember in 2016, when the results in the last election came in, that I think
was previous guest on the show, Patrick Shepin said that that increased his
probability that we're living in a simulation, right? Because it struck him
as so unlikely that now I'm paraphrasing, but that reality TV show host and like
confident rapist or 20 time alleged rapist, Donald Trump, would take his
first debut into public service as president of the United States. And he's
like, that's fucking crazy. If I was going to make a simulation, I'd be like,
let's see what happens if we just put Donald Trump in the White House. Now
that I've already derailed this, I haven't read any of the books in simulation
hypothesis, mainly because it doesn't, I don't lose any sleep over it. But my
main thing about it, like, again, having never, like, addressed the arguments
properly is this is assuming that like, so that the, to finish the argument is
that if it seems likely, as you laid out, that our, and our descendants may
create simulations, then they'll be more, if they make more than one, then some
of the universes has more simulated universes than real ones. And so we're
more likely than not in a simulation. Exactly. But that's, that's like assuming
you're to make simulations, like exactly like this one or exactly like with the
same laws of physics. And I, well, if you wanted to like see how people do
things, you would do that. Like the, the battle thing, for example, you'd have
to have both realistic physics and realistic psychology. Yeah. Like a lot of
historians not knowing, you know, do people charge at each other in blood
less? Do they stay like at arm's reach and try not to get hurt? Like, where
does that tip over? What exactly happened? So and I think it's, I'm just, I'm
trying to remember where I thought of this from. And it was much more eloquent
when I first thought of it. Now it's not coming to me. But like the idea,
someone pointed out like, Oh, that would take too much computing power or
something. And it's like, sure, in this physics, yeah, right. Yeah, you couldn't
run our universe on your laptop. And you probably won't be able to run it on a
laptop in 1000 years. But like, that's, I don't know. The other thing too is that
you don't simulate the whole thing. Yeah, you can simulate, you can kind of do
like what, what the Young Earth creationists do where it's like, Oh, sure,
the photons from distant, from distant stars, we're just like, generated in the
CP in the, in the, in the simulation in, in route to Earth. Right, right. A few
hundred meters above the atmosphere. Exactly. You know, you don't actually
have to simulate the quantum foam, except for the few times where scientists
are literally trying to figure out how the quantum, how quantum physics works.
And then all you have to do is fuck with their results or their brains or
something, right? Or maybe you like realistically simulate that and the
simulation slows down for a few minutes while they crank through those heavy
processes. And then people stop looking then. So you go back to gross
generalizations. Now I just remembered. It's like when you're playing a first
person shooter, it doesn't rend the entire world. It only rends the part that
you can see on your screen. Yeah, there's no sense in rendering the, you know, like
in Skyrim rendering everything down to the atom. Like, like things are just
tables. Like there's, you can't even break them into smaller bits. I think I
remembered, now we talked about simulation hypothesis at some point in the
distant past on the show, because I'm remembering when I brought up Rick and
Morty, how when the one where they're in a simulation, and then Rick's tearing
apart that rat in the garage. And he's just like, this is such sloppy work. And
it could just be him being a drunk crazy person. But the way that I kind of
read that was like, Oh, he's, he's saying that this isn't even a good
simulation. Because on the inside, this rat isn't, isn't made properly. Like real
rats look different. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So I have been talking a long time, and I
still don't know what we're talking about.
Oh, it's okay. Jess, do you have anything to add before we?
Not really. I was kind of thinking about the computing power thing. And then I
was like, what if somebody's just simulating a whole bunch of consciousnesses and
we're all just vividly dreaming?
Definitely Legend of Zelda, Link's Awakening. And they're also remaking that
for the Switch. I think at the end of the summer or something. So that's kind of
like that game. I haven't played it since the early nine or maybe roughly when
it was new, like mid to late 90s. So it's been like 20 years. But I remember
that was that being the plot. And as a kid, it was, you know, trippy. So I'm
curious it'll be as as a, you know, an adult.
Yeah. Okay, so moving forward, as we were, that was a perfect segue. Because as
we were just talking about how like, you don't necessarily want to simulate
everything in total fidelity all the time, right? One of the things that might
be very computationally expensive to simulate is humans. I'm not sure how
true that is. A lot of time we just fall back on heuristics and clutches and
don't think through things very much. But it's possible that if you're trying
to really get into the mind of like Julius Caesar, and see how he was
running, then you're going to do your best to make sure like the individual
neural connections are all simulated as faithfully as possible, right? And you're
not like just you're running a few large rules, you're like, let's get this
brain as detailed as you can, right? But you probably wouldn't be doing that for,
I don't know, some of the Norsemen that he ran into and some of his earlier
campaigns, like those will just, they're not rendered for most of the time when
he goes up there, you have a few of them running simple basic rules, you know how
the battles resulted. So they just have to be the NPCs that run in and fight Julius
Caesar. I can see both of you know where I'm going now.
I actually don't. I was distracted. Can I, given that an example of broad rule AI
stuff in Elder Scrolls Oblivion, you could get, if you finished the Dark
Brotherhood questline and get these poison apples that make it somewhat
easy to assassinate people, right? And reverse pickpocketing is still like a
challenge, unless you train pickpocketing, which no way to do that is to get in
trouble a lot for stealing from people. So I never did that. What you can do
instead is you can go into someone's house when they're out, because people
like everyone in the game has, all the NPCs have like schedules. They go out and
wander the town from like, you know, six to five or something, right?
Going to the fields or whatever.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah. So when they're out during the thing, you sneak into their
house and you can just steal all their food and put a poison apple like on the
table and then leave. And when they get back, they all, you know, whatever that
NPC schedule is like I eat at 830. So it looks around the house finds a thing
tagged food and picks up eats it and dies, which is a hilarious way to kill
somebody in this game. Again, that's the like low level NPC, like I'm following
super, super basic rules, because a regular person would walk in and be like,
my house has been ransacked and there's a shiny apple on the table. I'm not that
hungry.
It's going on here, right? This looks slightly suspicious.
Alright, so I still don't actually know where we're going. I'm excited. You've
got me on the edge of my seat.
Alright, well, the thing is, those people who are only kind of barely simulated
in the background wouldn't be conscious. This is on the one hand, possibly a good
thing. It might mean that people that are suffering terribly across the on the
other side of the world don't actually exist. They're just being, you know,
numbers and database so that we all get the impression that they're there. But
they the suffering is not really there. So that's that's a relief. Oh, now I see
where we're going. Uh huh. But the other thing is that I at least feel like I
exist. I am conscious. I don't know about any of my listeners. Maybe y'all be some
crazy simulated zombies or whatever. But for anyone who also feels like they
have conscious existence. And if there's a good chance that you're being
simulated, you got to ask yourself, why am I being simulated to this high level
of fidelity? What is going to happen in my life that the far future descendants
are going to be interested in doing this? And uh, and so the question comes down
to, so are you going to be doing something momentous later in your life? And
are you going to be a good guy like Jesus or a bad guy like Hitler? And they
wanted to just see what would happen. Let's plug in Yashin, but let's give
them slightly different starting parameters and press play. Maybe even
the same, honestly, maybe even the same starting parameters. They just like if
you wanted to see how William Shakespeare wrote his plays, you would just
kind of do everything you can to get it as, you know, good as possible, get him
up through teenage hood, maybe early childhood, depending on how soon you
think you got to start the simulation and then run it and see. And you're like,
Oh, look, right now he's riding Hamlet. That's awesome. That's what he was
thinking while he was riding Hamlet. Um, so it takes a lot of masturbation
breaks. It's so weird. So I don't want to pull the rug out from under this
before it gets going, but like, Oh, I had something for this. Oh, okay. Wait, I
got it. So this is the crux of it is that this is a like a constraint on the
simulation hypothesis that like, in fact, it might be easier to simulate more
universes with less computing power, with less engine people. Yeah. So this is
like just a epistheical within the simulated universe thing. Right. There
will be the ones with fully sentient, all everybody will be a smaller number
than the ones with just a handful of selected people. And because we know
where conscious, presumably each of each of us individually, I mean, we have to
think, Okay, why are they simulating me and not somebody else? Right. Okay. And
you know, the older I get where I haven't done anything momentous yet, the
more I'm thinking maybe this is the root universe, because I have less time to
do things. But on the other hand, maybe there's going to be something really
crazy not in my control happening later, because a lot of people do much more
momentous things later in their life. I don't know. The whole thing is kind of
scary. It makes you paranoid. It also like, if I know, in my family, the delusions
grander thing kind of runs, we've all talked about it like with my brothers.
But this is definitely a delusions of grandeur kind of thing that like, Oh, I
am destined to do something awesome. Why else would they be simulating me if I
wasn't destined to do something amazing? But also, you start to worry if you
already have like kind of imposter syndrome issues. And every now and then I'm
going to take my coworkers an example. I got a new coworker several months ago. He
like comes by my cube every day to chat for a while. And sure, he could just be a
chatty guy. But every now and then I'm like, why is he interested in me? What the
hell is going on here? And then I think, maybe he's a person from the far future
kind of like hijacking a body for a little bit to get to talk with me. And
then he can go back and tell his friends, dude, I got to talk to Enya
Sbrodsky. Like they all take turns jacking into this guy. Maybe. You don't know.
Anytime anyone in the world like notices me and pays attention to me for any
reason, I'm like, why? Why are you doing that? And it makes more sense when it's
someone who listens to the podcast, but when it's just someone randomly that
I've met at the bar or at the store or something. It's like I said, a revelation
of my neuroses. There's a reason we're here hanging out with you. And it wasn't
because there. If we look, if we go too far down that will never come out. But
like it, I mean, on some level, you're, you're engaging enough to attract people
at a distance, right? So like there were a time when we didn't know each other,
right? And so like, we were able to like kind of bridge that because it was like,
oh, you're cool. I want to get to know you better. If you were less cool, I
wouldn't have wanted to pursue that, right? Yeah. So like this guy is doing
that. He think I'm assuming, right? Your coworker thinks you're interesting. And
enough so that don't want to talk to you for a few minutes today. Or I hope
it could be something else equally mundane where they're just like, Oh, if
I'm standing over here talking to a coworker, it could give me the impression
could give a bystander the impression of working and I'm getting paid to do
whatever, right? Right. Right. The other thing I was thinking of earlier was
that there's no sense really in like coming back to now, like if you're
simulating, like this isn't like Shakespeare writing plays time, time
period, right? Well, this is the time period of populist uprising in America.
Right. But if they're going, but to not to say you're not a person who's going
to achieve grand things, but just, but your, your life is already documented in
such a way that we can accurately portray almost all of that in a hundred
years, you know, barring some disaster of technology, right?
Maybe like you blog, you record a podcast, like a lot of your thinking is
already public enough that it wouldn't be worth probably simulating a whole
universe just to see what you get up to in your off hours.
I don't know, man. Like Trump, he's got a lot of his life on record too, but I
could totally see someone even if the, if it was available a hundred years
from now, going back and resiming his life, like what the hell created this
person? I think that's at the forefront of this crazy moment in U.S.
history. Well, it's more, that's almost like evidence against the like
simulating a conscious person with like, it doesn't follow super generic AI rules.
It's like the rest of us do.
What would be evidence against it?
Donald Trump. Oh, it just exists as a person in general.
Like his, cause like his reaction to things is the kind of thing that like
anybody who like follows him on Twitter can guess 99% of the time.
And it's just like, oh, what looks good for me?
Oh, um, what can I put my name on?
What can I play in gold?
Yeah. But is that really his thought process or is that his public persona,
which he's gotten really good at playing?
I mean, I just, I mean, I just feel like if,
how could you know what, aside from simulating him?
I was approaching the question from a different direction.
Like that, that's the kind of person I can simulate with simple rules.
Like if I dedicated the next year of my life to learning how to build
video game AIs, I could build a character who just did that, right?
But I could, it would be harder to do that for somebody who's like more complicated.
I think it would be hard for anyone.
If you're simulating Julius Caesar, where are you getting the scan of his neurons?
I don't think we have, I don't think we have a cast of his brain or do we have his DNA?
Like, no, I don't think so.
And just stories about him.
Brains still are kind of, what is that word that everyone likes to use?
Confusing, complex, squishy, pink.
No, squishy.
I'm frustrated.
It's the one that means that something that grows kind of chaotically.
Oh, emergent.
Emergent.
Okay.
Yeah.
That's like the new code word for here's a process we don't understand.
Right.
A lot of people use that for AI.
But to some extent, I mean, you have your genes that build you and then you also
have your experiences in the womb and your early life experiences.
So how much of that could we even realistically simulate?
I think that you could simulate a universe, but like, I don't think that you
could re-simulate a universe in high fidelity.
I also think too, we already kind of do this with stories and whether
historical fiction or like complete fantasies, right?
Yeah.
So like, I've never written a book and I don't, you, I mean, you've
written book length books.
At least one.
Right.
So in, in, in your writing process, when, uh, like Joa is three fourths
the way through the book and you're like, trying to think of the next thing to do.
Do you ever ask yourself, what would Joa do in the situation?
Or are you kind of driving the, like every step?
Um, it's, it's sort of a, a mix where you can't like make a character do
something that just is not true to their character.
It, the whole story goes wrong.
It feels fake.
If you're just having people do things to advance the storyline, right?
All the, if they, you do that for every step, right?
Well, if you do that for any step, really, but I mean, there's a few
things that happen to them to get the story started or to complicate things.
But ultimately, if I want a character to do something, I don't just like have
them do it because then you get like on YouTube videos, mocking your terrible
movie writing skills or whatever.
And, and rightly so it's, it's shitty writing.
It takes people out of the story.
You, but since you control the entire world, you just manipulate the
events around them to put them into a situation where they would do the
thing that you want them to do.
Yeah.
And, um, speaking as someone who also writes, I have been surprised by some
of my character's actions, like they do run away from you.
Sometimes they kind of develop their own personalities.
That's what I was, that's more what I imagined it kind of being like was,
I mean, you're right.
Like you can't just be, you know, uh, kind of autocomplete for this character.
But I, I'm at, I wonder if in the writing process, anyone was ever like,
um, I don't know, uh, I'm trying to think, I mean, all of my examples will
be specific because it's the only things that I've read, but like the wheel
of time is this gigantic, like encapsulate in encompassing universe.
It could have been a small story.
It could have been contained to one small thing.
It's, it takes it like a continent.
There's different groups of demographics and, and traditions and all that stuff.
And then like all the characters, many of them are really strongly written.
And I wonder if there's ever a point where, where Jordan was writing this
and he was just like, man, I wonder, you know, how am I going to complete this?
And it's like, Oh, you know what?
That's totally something Perrin would do.
I'm going to have him do that.
Um, and like just thinking of like, no, no, that, that's, that's very much
what he would do rather than, yeah.
I'm pretty sure that that's how a wild boar writes.
That's gotta be how wild over.
I mean, he said that he designs these characters and then he designs a scenario
and then he just lets it play out.
I mean, in general, any good character writer is going to do that.
You create a character and then they do things according to who they are, right?
Yeah.
And so that all sounds like a tangent, but the reason I brought that up is
because that sounds like a lot easier than trying to stimulate the universe.
We are making up Julius Caesar from scratch anyway.
Right.
So you just, you read everything you can about Caesar in real life and then.
You know, right.
Just make the closest approximation to Caesar.
Yeah.
And Pete, we do that now with books, right?
So I'm assuming there's historical fiction from the point of view of Julius
Caesar, floating around out there.
Yes.
Um, lots.
Yeah.
So he was popular dude, right?
Yeah.
Um, so like the, it's not going to get any more, any more higher
fidelity than current author's imaginations, right?
I don't know.
Maybe it could be.
I have no idea.
Like we would need some like into the past viewing tech, but I guess the
difference is that what we can't do with an author writing this is like you said,
describe what a battle looks like IRL, um, because they didn't see them either.
Right.
Yeah.
So did I ever tell you about a Steve fever?
It was very interesting short story, which, oh God, was it Charles
Strauss that wrote it?
It sounds like a Strauss kind of story.
Uh, but Steve fever fever fever.
I like a fever that you get and it's named after Steve.
Uh, so I kind of myself catching that one's in a while.
Wait, I don't know if I do yet or not.
Let me hear the story.
Okay.
Uh, so Steve is basically Steve Jobs stand in.
Okay.
Uh, and he created like, you know, cutting edge tech guy.
He made these nanites and, uh, he was signed up for cryonics and he had in his
company's, uh, basic AI software, the root directive of, Hey, if I ever die, do
everything in your power to bring me back.
Uh, unfortunately he dies in a fiery car accident and his brain is burnt to a
crisp and there's nothing that can be cryopreserved, but that doesn't stop the
nanites.
Uh, they have a record of his in, you know, of his life.
Basically he blogged a lot, a lot of his stuff was recorded.
There's lots of interviews of out and out there where he record retails with
things that happened in his childhood, right?
So the story takes a place, uh, in the protagonist is this kid on a farm who at
one point is possessed by the nanites and runs off to a facility where a bunch of
other people who've been possessed by nanites all come together and they basically
run the best approximation they have of, uh, either his brain or one of Steve's
friends on his body and they put him in a scenario that Steve, uh, once told about
his childhood, right?
Uh, it was something about like riding bikes down a hill to get to a store.
Really short thing, but ultimately this fails.
The reactions of their virtual Steve are not the same as the reactions recorded in
Steve's history.
So the nanites are like, Oh, okay, gotta keep working on our brain algorithm.
They let everybody free and they tinker with their things to more.
And that's basically the name of the Steve fever.
Everyone on planet earth knows that they basically can't do anything about this
every now and then young men or men of various ages that have, you know, Steve
jobs his age, run off, replay out these simulations.
And, uh, if it doesn't work, the nanites keep trying until they get a brain
simulation that perfectly recap, recap, recapitulates every single thing that
Steve jobs did in his life perfectly.
And then they'll be like, Mwaha, this is the perfect Steve brain.
Now we put it in a body and he's back.
So wait, they're hijacking people who already exist in this world and making
them behave like Steve.
Yeah, they're hijacking them and then loading Steve's neurology into the
brains because apparently this is like before whatever, you still need human
brains to run this software.
Yeah.
And this is a short story.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I want to read this.
This sounds fun.
It's really cool.
Yeah.
That sounds fantastic.
And the premise sounds from the, I loved every second of it.
That was really cool.
That's also, I think, how Ray Kurzweil talks about wanting to, in a manner,
resurrect his dad.
Wait, is that, he wants to do that, that way?
Because there's no, well, excuse me, not necessarily the bodyjackings, but, but,
but building a model of him based on his written work and, and his presumably
how people remember him or something, right?
Yeah, I think Neuromancer had, what was it called?
Dixie's flatline, which was kind of the recorded personality of the main
character's friend.
Cool.
So it was a long time since I read that.
I don't remember much.
That's the main thing that's like, one of the main things that stuck
with me from that story is kind of like carrying around a ghost in your pocket.
Cause like, he's talking to Dixie and he responds the way he would have in life.
But like, everyone knows that this isn't really him.
It's just like an echo.
It's like a living diary or something.
That's super creepy and kind of cool.
And that's another thing.
If like, I'm conscious right now, but I'm almost 40, haven't done anything
super noteworthy with my life yet.
Am I one of the failed versions of Enios?
That's going to be terminated when I don't like take over the world at 50
or whatever the hell it is Enios prime did.
I mean, it's also, I guess it's not clear why you'd have to be conscious to do this.
But like the works that you've done, you know, like the, I mean, actually, we,
we got somebody who commented on the, I think via Patreon and we'll, we'll
mention that later if we want at more length, but he mentioned that like he got
out of Mormonism listening to this podcast, right?
Oh yeah.
Maybe he takes over the world.
Yeah.
And so although there's no reason for us to have been sentient to like produce
this content or us to even be real, right?
Right.
So like that, that's not quite the case, but I guess it's not clear to me.
Like we don't have to be the, like I said, it's a half baked idea.
That's more about my own mental issues than about things.
So I'm just, we should probably preface this episode with a, um, a medic hazard
warning, like if you're prone to delusions of grandeur, you probably shouldn't
listen to this or solipsism.
Or solipsism.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, I, I don't know why, like, I guess I've had some vague diagnosis of what
do you call it?
Depersonalization disorder, where it's like you've kind of feel like you're,
like watching TV instead of like being alive.
Yeah.
Um, I mean, I, I had this association, right?
There's disassociative identity.
There's a different depersonalization, derealization.
I think it was depersonalization or derealization.
It wasn't as severe as deeper disassociative identity disorder, but like,
and I mean, this is just the sort of thing where like, a lot of the times
things don't feel real.
And I think that like everybody's used to this when you're really tired.
Like you made, I'm assuming, I guess I've only ever been the one person.
No, I mean, I could get it, I guess I've had this before.
I don't know if I was really tired at the time though.
And or depressed is another big, this is another big part of it.
But like, I think certainly I noticed a lot when I'm tired, like I'll go down
and like, Oh, I forgot to like lock the deadbolt or something.
So I'll go down and do that.
And like, none of that like feels like it's actually happening or like even
like getting out to my car to go to work first thing in the morning.
Like I'm not quite awake yet.
Yeah.
So like that kind of thing, why don't I bring that up?
Oh, so like, I already have occasional periods where like things don't feel real.
And yet I've never been troubled with solipsism or with, with a simulation concerns.
Like, I guess that all strikes me as so improbable.
Like it makes much more sense to me just to take the kind of like
naive, realist point of view that like, yeah, all the stuff out there is the
stuff that's actually out there.
And I'm perceiving it with my eyes that are, are translating that information
to my brain and like, so is everybody else.
Like to me, the idea that other people aren't, and I get like, that's
the point of the simulation hypothesis.
But to me, the, the, the idea that other people aren't also conscious
and you know, aren't experiencing things the way that I am.
Cause like they came from the same roots that I did.
That strikes me as like an extra layer of comp, of complexity.
But the point of the simulation is starting with different priors.
Well, and strictly speaking, yes, it's absolutely an extra layer of complexity.
I think it's just one of those things that some brains throw errors out.
And my brain is one of those brains.
It's not quite functioning exactly right enough to function.
But you know, are, are not exactly right.
Things don't make us interesting.
And I think, I think everybody has those, right?
And as long as people are managing okay, then like, you know, maybe that's
what we're all being simulated to test our weird brain malfunctions.
That strikes me as distinctly plausible.
Like everybody in the future is like, we were talking before we got on about like,
oh yeah, in the, in the distant transhumanist future where everything's all nice
and pain free, people are going to be, you know, trying to explain like what
physical pain felt like or something.
Oh, I have a, I have a fun story recommendation for that, but I want you
to finish your thought first.
Oh, it's just the last part of it is like, they'll also all be like
perfectly mentally adjusted.
So like, I wonder it'll happen if like we made people just like sad for no reason.
Or if we made people like, you know, sad and then crazy happy and then
really sad again, or like they can't sleep or they need lots of sleep or
like random shit like that.
So that could be like, all right, let's run a simulation where we just like,
you know, roll a 50 sided die and hit everybody with at least one of these
things and just see how the world goes.
Yeah, I really want to recommend a short story by Scott Westerfield called
Stupid Perfect World.
Okay.
This is in the transhumanist utopian future.
Everybody is living in this post scarcity world where there's really high
technology and as part of a school project, kids have to take a scarcity class
and they have to choose one element to have inflicted upon themselves for a
week and then do a report on it.
And so the main character decides that he's going to sleep because people are
kind of just like, I think they just recharge.
Nobody needs to sleep.
Another character decides that she wants to have hormones.
Everyone has hormone balancers.
She's like, I want to experience real puberty.
It's just a nightmare.
Yeah, it's really funny.
That sounds like it'd be a great man.
Could you imagine if, you know, we weren't all super like, I think having
everyone being exactly of like the same perfect level of mental cloth all the
time would be super boring.
Like you said, dumb, perfect future or whatever it was called.
A stupid, perfect world.
It's not that fun to me.
I mean, well, I think, no, no, the, the premise of being able to pick
something wrong sounds outstanding.
That's the part I was going to get at.
The, the idea of like, oh yeah, no, I don't get stressed because I don't have
enough, I never get enough cortisol or I never have a shortage, whatever
causes stress, right?
Like, no, I'm, I'm always happy and relaxed.
Like, I think having thrills and scares and excitements to the point sometimes
where it's even like above and beyond of like, I'm not sure what a healthy
range of experience is, but like, you know, to the point where it's not going
to give you PTSD.
Yeah.
Or like the point where you're like, you're like literally like
squeeing with joy, right?
But so I feel like having those range of experiences is super valuable.
But how cool would the world be if that was a requirement that we could do
that, you know, hopefully wouldn't damage, you know, you did in a way that
wouldn't permanently damage people.
But I was like, Hey, why don't you try a week, um, you know, with bipolar
disorder or fuck, try a week as a black woman, you know, try a week as a person
in a wheelchair, just the, like, I think about wheelchair stuff a lot
because the sidewalks near my place aren't great.
And like it, I, I, I could get over them.
I've been, I've sat in wheelchairs before my grandma, we made her a ramp
when she broke her leg, I don't know, 10 years ago.
And then she's, she's out of the wheelchair now, but, um, she's in it
for, I don't know, half a year.
And it was pretty amazing.
The ramp had to be really long for her to be able to get up the, up her stairs.
And it's like three steps under her own power.
Granted, she was in her mid 70s.
So like it would take a lot of power or, you know, she didn't have a lot
of power to put into it anyway, but you would think, Oh, okay.
Yeah.
You just put a board on it and they can wheel themselves up that is like kind
of like the naive, naive thought it's like, no, it's got to be crazy long
ramp to be able to push a chair up without it sliding back with you being
able to do it with, you know, weakish arms.
Yeah.
There's a lot of stuff that is involved with accessibility that I guess
abled people don't really think about.
Exactly.
So I mean, how eye-opening would it be to be in a wheelchair for a week?
Where you know the option of getting out, right?
I mean, I think you could do that now.
Like you could just be in a wheelchair for a week.
There, you could not give yourself bipolar for a week, probably.
Yeah.
At least not in a way that would be safe and irreversible.
Right.
Um, I mean, so you could sit in a wheelchair, but I think there's, and that
would be eye-opening and maybe they're cost prohibitive and stuff.
I want to go through the experiment, but just, you know, you couldn't like say,
change your, I mean, you couldn't easily change your skin color for a week in a
way that people wouldn't notice or whatever.
Right.
Or like accuse you of black facing.
Exactly.
Um, I wonder if that would be, you know, it would be okay to black face.
If you were doing it to better understand the experience of living as a black
person, probably not.
I'll settle this.
Yes.
Yeah, I don't, I mean, black face is a specific thing where it was at least a
specific thing where people would get up in black face in order to mock black
people to like, look at how dumb and primitive these people are.
They're so funny.
Haha.
But now you can't do it because that like is what that reminds people of, even
if, um, you cosplay a character with dark skin and you paint your skin to be that
character, that's considered a huge no-no because it is reminiscent of black
face that was done to mock black people.
I think it's considered a huge no-no by dumb people who I don't care about their
opinion on this subject about, right?
But I get like, where are they coming from?
But like, I guess ask somebody who would be affected by this.
And if like the answer is literally nobody or people who do care, don't care, then
it's up to them, right?
The people I know have wildly different opinions ranging from like, well, I don't
care too, that would be the worst thing ever.
I've slapped that person in the face.
I, this is completely tangential, but that's where we're at right now.
Um, like, I remember was it, I think Indian headdresses or something, American
Indian headdresses, where like, it's a dick move to like wear one of those around
and, you know, uh, like, or.
I think they have some kind of like the, the ones that you see worn most often have
some kind of specific significance to an Indian tribe.
I can't remember the details, but.
And so I was talking with somebody once and it's like, let's pretend, you know,
for example, it was say a headdress and like 98% of American Indians were fine
out there, like, we don't care, do whatever you want.
Like as long as you're not being a dick or mocking us or whatever.
But like, if you think, or if you're wearing like a style of fashion for your
wedding, that's un-traditional or something, or not your tradition, whatever,
because you're, you're too white to wear a, a sorry or something, right?
Um, if nobody cares, except for like one blogger, are you obligated to change
your behavior because one person doesn't care?
Is it enough that 99% of people don't care?
You know, I, I personally think it doesn't really matter.
Uh, if you're using it to like be little or mock people, that's not, that,
that's an asshole thing to do when you shouldn't do that.
You shouldn't do that for any, you shouldn't do that for anything.
Right.
Whether you're, whether you're wearing an Indian headdress or something, or I'm
willing to say that on the Indian headdress thing, just due to.
America's history of, you know, murdering and subjugating all the Native
Americans that we, uh, we're like, we should give them, we should be like, okay,
our bad, we won't wear a headdress because of these horrible things we've done,
you know, but your family got here 30 years ago.
Yeah, I know.
So like you didn't do shit to, you know, I know, but I am living in this culture.
I just, the fact that they were shit on so much, it's like, all right, fine.
No headdress, you know.
Now, but what if they all said it was okay, except for one of them?
And I realized this is totally not.
Well, then fuck that one guy.
So what's the critical mass of people where you can't say fuck them?
I don't know.
I, I, I, four percent of like, you know, they look pretty.
And as a fashion statement in general, I think it should be okay.
And certainly for anyone outside of the US, it's probably fine.
But for Americans specifically, because of their history, uh, I, I think it's
okay for Native American people to be like, no, don't do that.
And not just okay, but like that American people should respect that.
And to be clear, that's my position is like, don't, if someone's, you know,
offended by what you're doing, seriously reconsider about what you're doing.
And like,
Yeah, at least ask, why does this offend you?
Right.
Um, some people do have good reasons and some of them, I think are ridiculous.
Yeah.
I, I don't have a lot of patients, people who are offended on behalf of other people.
Right.
Like if you're a white person wearing a kimono in Japan, despite the fact
that they have shops open to rent these to tourists, um, you can find somebody
when you share pictures on Facebook, like, and can't believe you're doing that.
Man.
And it's like, that's their livelihood.
The business owner there decided that they wanted to sell this to me and make
money off of it.
Are you calling them like too stupid?
Like, are you saying that you're more enlightened about the subjugation
of their culture than they are?
I remember this article, um, where a Japanese shopkeeper, right about social
justice warriors telling white people that they weren't allowed to wear a
kimono and she didn't understand the social justice mindset and assumed that
they must have just been anti-Japanese racists.
Because why else would they be saying that white people can't wear a
kimono?
Yeah, I think that's like, well, I want everyone to wear my kimono.
I think they're great.
I'm selling them.
It is very much a cultural segregationist mindset to say that people
cannot borrow from other cultures, especially if they're saying, please,
let me sell you this.
Right.
Yeah, there's a lot of, I don't know, like a lot of cultural appropriation bothers
me because it does prohibit sharing ideas between cultures, sharing art, music,
culture.
And then, uh, and then also, yeah, like there's Native Americans who sell
handicraft goods and dream catchers, et cetera.
Like, yeah, so like people sell those and some of them probably come from, you
know, from authentic American Indians, right?
I think there's so much scaremongering about like, don't buy things that belong
to this culture, but it's like, what if you're buying handicrafts made by a
person of that culture with the intent of selling them for their livelihood?
Well, then you're a racist.
Yeah, it's just complicated.
You get too deep, especially until, like you said, the, um, the social justice,
what was it?
What was the word you used?
Uh, cultural appropriation thing where like the rhetoric sounds almost exactly
like white supremacists, like, no, no, we got to keep them separated.
You can't, you can't borrow from them.
It's wrong.
You know, sure it's wrong for different reasons, but it's, it's, it's weird.
Anyway, I, before we rip ourselves out of this complete tangent, I, I do think
that like, if someone's feelings are hurt, take it very seriously.
And especially if they're, they're hurt for themselves, not for other people.
And I don't know why I was anchored.
Oh, I was thinking of the headdresses, but speaking of American Indians, I do
think it's complete fuckery that there are like two football teams.
Um, oh my God.
And there are protesters from American Indian tribes outside of every game saying
hey, you know, what is a racist term?
Well, oh my God, red skin and, and well, it's racist, but it's also, it's
like the other mascots are animals, like all of them.
Well, most of them, Eagles, Broncos, I can only name like five.
Oh, wait, Patriots isn't an animal.
Giants aren't an animal.
All right.
But, but the theme, the theme right is like, I think the theme are things
that your opponent would be scared of or things that project power.
So the second one sounds flattering.
The first one is kind of derivative of, you know, of conveying power.
But anyway, so there's, there's a, there's a heavy animal theme, I guess.
Well, they're not, it's even, you know, no one calls themselves the woodchucks.
At least not professional jokingly, maybe, but yeah, but anyway.
So yeah, I don't think that calling, I can't imagine being on the red skins
in a football team.
Oh God, that's just weird.
Like I imagine just, I don't know, like what's the equivalent being on like the,
I can try to think of other racial slurs, but I'm realizing I probably
shouldn't have to.
All right.
Also, wow.
All I wanted to do was talk about with people are Jesus or Hitler in the
simulation universe.
And now we get into the culture wars.
Why is it always the culture wars, man?
Well, it's fun to talk about.
They are fun to talk about.
And I can't remember, I'm sure maybe, maybe there's some
version and pressure if we played this back about how it made sense that we got here.
But to get back, to, to, to climb back out of this, like certainly, I guess
if you're, if you're solipsistic and you think that, Oh no, I'm the only
conscious mind, whether or not they're all simulations or they're all like just
tricks of the devil or tricks of the, the robots or aliens or whatever.
No, there might be thousands of conscious minds.
Sure.
But they, you know, you wouldn't be able to identify them.
Right.
So like the most likely to be the people that you interact with often.
Yeah, probably.
Yeah.
And I liked your idea, your thought of like the tourist coming in to visit a
young and young.
I think that's, you know, that's a fun way to think about it.
I think this was sparked because Robin Hansen once a long time ago said,
what if we take the simulation idea seriously?
And he also proposed that you'd probably only simulate people that were
historically significant in some way.
So in that case, if you want to maximize the amount of time that you are
simulated should try to hang out with very important people as much as you can.
Like if you know the president is going to be in your town, go to his rallies and
stuff, you know, those are the times where you will be simulated in the highest
fidelity.
Well, I don't know, simulating crowds and like NASCAR games and stuff.
I never play them, but I see the trailers like they're not doing much.
No, you know, they're just, they're paint.
Yeah.
So like the, what I think you should, I mean, I think that was his advice.
Close to people who make history or better yet, make history.
And so I think what you should do, if you're believe, well, you know what?
What I think you absolutely shouldn't do is like, take any of this seriously,
take any of this seriously.
But for the sake of argument, you would make more simulations if you, you
know, successfully pulled off like a, you know, um, unabomber style catastrophe.
I think the future should have a very strict, no simulating important people policy.
So therefore none of us are Hitler, right?
I suppose so.
Yeah.
Yeah, good point.
Yeah, they'd, they'd, yeah, I guess they'd never simulate Hitler.
They'd never simulate like, uh, school shooters and shit.
Why are you saying that they should have that rule?
Because otherwise it is an encouragement to do those things.
Come again.
If you, if you want to be simulated, you, and they're going to simulate
interesting people, make yourself interesting by killing lots of people
or doing lots of crazy terrible shit, right?
Like Jeffrey Dahmer's mind is probably fascinating from like a purely abstract,
like, I want to know what's going on in this person's head kind of thing.
Right.
But we should never, ever simulate it.
I think this is the same as we shouldn't publicize school shooters or like serial
killers, but that never works because the media wants to sensationalize this person.
The most recent two, they've done a very good job of not saying any names and
just calling them the shooter.
And the one that happened yesterday, the one that was a few months ago, like it
was amazing when I was listening to the various newscasts about it, like everyone
was on board.
They were not named at all.
I didn't even know with a gender of this person.
Glad to know.
I didn't even hear about the one, you're talking about the one in California.
Uh, yeah, yeah, yeah, that happened yesterday, right?
Or the day before, or the day before.
I can't remember, but I, I didn't even hear about it.
So the fact maybe that they didn't talk about this person enough also
cups off my desk, but I guess I wasn't really on Reddit that much this week.
So like we're also going to hear about things.
Yeah.
I think I saw something recently where someone was like, oh, look, uh, we
haven't had a school shooting in a while.
Things are going pretty good.
It's like, it's been summer, dude.
Like we take, we take school off in the summer in the United States.
There are, could be a lot of people at schools to shoot right now.
Um, all right.
Shall we move on?
Uh, trying to think of five, anything else?
Hmm.
I can't take the simulation thing seriously.
How come?
I don't know.
It just, it just seems like I can't prove it.
So I can't prove string theory either.
So I'm not really like putting any weight into either of those ideas.
The things that you can't prove are the ones that bother me the most.
I mean, they, I guess they bother me, but I can't prove it.
I can't do anything about it.
So there's, there's other things I could be using my brain space for.
Yeah.
Is it weird that I care like extremely little about like which fundamental, at least
right now, like which fundamental theory of physics turns out to be true?
Not really.
It wouldn't impact your life in any way.
Neither would simulation theory then, right?
Like, I, so like, I guess you can take it both ways, right?
Like either you're not in a simulation in which case you should be nice to people
and live a good life because like, you know, live healthfully and happily
because that makes like you healthy and happy and you can help the other people
around you flourish and that makes like the universe a better place or the universe
is just you in which case, like, who knows what the rules are, but being a good
person, like in Bioshock, if you don't harvest the little sisters, you know, you
get the happy ending, right?
So you, you maybe want to do that.
Go for the happy ending, even if you think this is a simulation.
Um, that's actually a good segue into user feedback.
If we want to, do we want to go there?
Do we want to do sequences next?
I would love to go to the user feedback.
Unless you guys want to start with the sequences.
No, let's do it.
All right.
Well, really quick, I was just going to say, while, while we're all pulling our
notes out for feedback, there hasn't been anything at Steven's video game
corner in a while because I haven't been playing anything lately.
I've been, I've been playing Hand of Fate two on the switch, which is like a, I
think I talked about it very briefly before it's, it's all right.
It's like, it's just a little game.
It's not fun.
I've been playing anything since Red Dead Redemption two really like as far, oh,
wait, no, I played Securo.
Securo?
Yeah.
That was the new game from from software where like it's way faster and
depending on your flavor, better combat, but it's people who made Dark Souls, but
they made a new game.
That's cool.
Not Dark Soulsie.
Um, I've been playing Beat Saber.
Oh, really?
That looks awesome.
Yeah.
One of my friends has it.
It is really fun.
God, I want to play that.
That sounds awesome.
Raymond Arnold posted, um, should I wear wrist weights while playing beat Saber
to like maximize my, uh, exercise?
And then there was a whole thread about wearing weighted with vests and the
fact that like you want to avoid getting tennis elbow.
It's just like really happy that, that like threads like that exist.
It's funny because my immediate answer to that would have been like, no,
because a lightsaber doesn't weigh that much.
And why also are you playing beat Saber?
Unless you're practicing your lightsaber skills.
Awesome.
All right.
Um, yeah.
So we can just segue right into Graham Moro's, uh, email.
Uh, Graham says in your latest episode, while discussing the third alternatives
to afterlife ism, just brought up that even if we believe in afterlives, we
don't all ourselves, I think they made off ourselves because heaven is so great.
I think it's worth pointing out that while most modern afterlife vests
indeed don't do this, early Christianity had a big enough problem with
marriage or dim colts, trying to sidestep the Old Testament suicide
prohibition and fast track themselves to heaven that it became a serious problem.
And in the decades following, Tertrullian's praise for such a cult whose
members submitted to execution in mass, Christian authorities had to establish
a norm that voluntary marriage or dim counted as suicide and would exclude you
from heaven to channel Orwell.
Modern Christians don't appear to believe in the existence of an afterlife as
strongly as they believe in the existence of Australia, but it's worth
remembering that there was a time when many did.
And that's like upsetting.
Actually.
Oh, that's upsetting.
I, is it not upsetting the idea that, you know, there's a religious cult that
says, Hey, there's, you know, if you die and you're a good Christian and you
do these things, you're going to go to this magic place and then people are
just killing themselves.
Well, okay.
I mean, to get there.
Yes, that's upsetting.
I, I personally thought it was awesome that there's someone in history who
actually took their beliefs seriously, but, um, you know, the whole fact that
they were killing themselves for no reason is, is pretty shitty.
Yeah.
Yeah.
They had to, I guess, make the whole law that suicide prevents you from
getting into heaven in order to circumvent this like exact, this exact thing
happening.
It just, it seems, it's so rare in human, anything history, psychology,
whatever, it's just so rare to find humans who actually really believe what
they say they believe that this was kind of inspiring.
I think people pretty often believe what they say that they believe.
Yeah.
Maybe it's just that the cultures had enough time to evolve the anti-suicide
memetics that people can believe what they believe, but not kill themselves.
Was it like the heavens gate people or which one?
What was the?
Oh, Cooley cult was the, um, heavens gate.
Did the, the, uh, they were the ones that weren't like the sneakers.
Yeah.
Believed in the UFO thing.
Uh, they went down.
It was in, it was in Guyana, James, no, Jones.
That was Jonestown.
Yeah.
Jonestown.
What was the name of the, the religion though?
Um, it was, was it James Jones?
The people's temple movement.
Okay.
Sounds religious, but Jeffrey Jones is some guy whose first name also started with a
J. I think it was John James Jones.
That's Jim Jones, Jim Jones.
There we go.
Like, I guess in any case, I, my understanding is that some people were forced,
fed the Kool-Aid, but like a lot of them were there like, oh, I'm all over it.
Let's do this.
Yeah.
I think like when Jess said that, I think a lot of people like believe or many
people believe what they say they believe, I guess maybe belief, maybe the word
believe there is doing too much work because they certainly say this, right?
But I guess, and what does it like mean to believe?
Um, no, that's not the right approach to take to this.
I feel like if you really believed in an afterlife, like I brought this up before,
but like death wouldn't be so traumatic as many people find it to be.
Um, and I get like, you miss the person, but like, I think people feel like, oh,
no, they're gone forever.
Um, but I think I'm, I'm believing points I made before.
What I was going to say is that I think it's, there's like a confidence level
where it's like, sure, I believe it.
I bet 50 bucks, but I wouldn't bet thousand to one odds, right?
Like, I think people just compartmentalize probably.
I also think that there's actually a lot of sadness to losing someone.
I now have someone that I have basically lost in my life, but they're not dead,
but it's still really sucks.
And I'm, guess I'm going through a whole grieving process or whatever.
And I can see how even if you believed in heaven, you still don't have that person
in your life anymore.
And so there's still a lot of pain.
That's true.
I think I'm drawing this from one example.
This is where like I had this realization when I was like 14 and it was this
younger, the creationist who was a friend of mine's mom.
And I think her sister died.
I don't know, I've told this before, but she, she was distraught and distressed
over this for months.
And I'm like, I totally got it because I didn't think that there was an afterlife,
but it's like she was in her fifties.
And it's like, you're going to see her in 40 years and you'll get to spend
the next two trillion years together.
Like I get that you miss them, but they're like not gone.
They're just like away and they're really happy and they're like, they're not
dying or whatever killed them.
Right.
Yeah.
Like, so 40 years is still a long time for someone that you love that you
have to wait.
It is, but I got the impression that that wasn't the nature of her suffering.
Not that like I want to see, it was, I want to see her again.
It was like she's gone, not like she's over there and I can't talk to her.
Right.
I think it was methods of rationality where he says like, they would treat the
afterlife like, you know, emigrating to Australia in the days of sailing ships
where it's like, yes, you're technically reachable, but it's way too much trouble,
but I'll be there eventually.
Right.
Can't you like communicate with people in the afterlife?
Depends on what you believe.
A lot of people seem to think that, yeah, you can send your prayers to them and
they'll answer.
Yeah.
I don't know, maybe not myself out with this topic.
No, that's actually a good point.
Maybe part of what distress this woman and maybe I'm not giving her enough credit.
I think I have a poor mental model of her because I met her during my like at
the beginning of my cynical skeptic age and she was like an anti-vaxxer,
younger, great, like all the things, checked all the boxes.
And now that I think about it, maybe she tried, you know, maybe she prayed to her
sister every night and never heard anything back.
And maybe that was part of what made her so distressing, you know, when I put it
that way, much more humanized her, which actually is relevant to the
last long post that we're not too yet.
So, but yeah, anyway, religion is weird, man.
And sometimes people believe it all the way to the end of the bullet.
So.
To brighten up the mood, can I read like a couple of sentences from the Wikipedia
drinking the Kool-Aid article?
Oh my God, let's lighten this mood up.
Just, I just happened to see this as a point of fact regarding the phrase
itself, it is not known with certainty which of two great powdered flavor
mixes, flavor aid, Kool-Aid, or both were used to concoct the poison in
Jonestown, the commune had both among their supplies.
Most sources surmise that flavor aid was the primary flavor ingredient used.
And there are two links.
Shortly after the tragedy, manufacturers of both products addressed the matter
by pointing out whether their company's particular drink mix was or was not
used, was irrelevant.
A cyanide-laced poison have been created and used to kill people.
And there were either respective product was misused as the vehicle to do so.
That's like when Tiki had to come out with like a, we didn't know they were
going to do that with our Tiki torches thing after that Nazi rally.
That was, that was actually surprisingly entertaining for, for something
relating to mass suicide.
I've got a quick feedback, which I alluded to before, but I don't know
how to attribute this because in your email here, or in your message, it's
a private message on Patreon.
So, which actually related to an email, a couple of emails from 2017, which I
hope we replied to.
If we didn't, we suck.
I'm really sorry.
Uh, you could say we can repeat this, but you didn't say anything about your
name, so I'll leave you off the air just in case.
Um, but we had somebody write in and basically the, the summed up version,
this is from the Patreon message, quote, the summed up version is that you,
your work helped me escape Mormonism.
So you rock.
The updated version is that my wife also escaped and now we have a second child.
I also graduated with my BS in CS and got a job at Google.
So this is rationalist winning.
That's awesome.
And I think that's fantastic.
And I think I remember that email.
It was sent to the HP more podcast email.
If I recall correctly, the first one in 2017, maybe I can't get any of these
links open on my phone.
So I can't confirm, but, uh, the.
And yeah, I remember that like, it was a very heartwarming email to receive.
I thank you for sharing that.
Yeah.
And it's so cool.
It is.
And it's weird.
Like I had a conversation with somebody, um, who actually fuck it.
He's been on the show, uh, Zeke, he's the guy who got me into programming,
got me out of my last job and like now I'm on this career path that I really
enjoy my life trajectory is completely altered.
And he did it from like a 10 minute conversation.
And he sent me an email with a link to automate the boring stuff.
And I told him that like a year later and he kind of like looked at me like
kind of scared and he's like, that's kind of horrifying.
I didn't want, I don't mean to have that big of an impact.
And it's like, I thought about it.
And I think that's just what like what life is, like, you don't know what
things you're going to do that are going to ripple out and change, change things.
Right.
Yeah.
Like I'm, I'm a much heavier person.
And who knows what else I would have found if, if you hadn't got me into, into
computer science, but like, um, or into programming, not computer science, not to,
I don't want to belittle computer scientists by pretending to be one.
Um, but my, you know, I can't remember how I found the Skeptoid podcast, for example,
but I'm listening to that since it sends some of the first few dozen episodes.
And, um, like stuff from there, I found like rationally speaking at some point,
found HPMOR because Julia mentioned it in the, like what I've been reading lately
section that's like a quick throwaway.
And I think I remember distinctly, I happened to be at a stoplight or something
that was able to put that in my phone because it sounded interesting.
Oh wow.
And if I hadn't been at a stoplight or if I had stepped out of the car during
that part of the podcast, I would never have found the right, I might, I may have
taken, may have never, may have been years later, found the rationalist community,
probably wouldn't have connected with you.
Like, so the littlest things make a big difference for people.
And so I guess I'm doing all of this really to, to minimize the fact of any
grandiosity that like, I feel like I'm doing anything important.
So while I'm overjoyed that, um, that you have earned your rightful place
in the simulated future.
No, I, I, well, I'm overjoyed that our, our listeners, um, had his, had a, you
know, a positive impact from this.
Um, it's, I think it's just like things that happen.
And this is something maybe a thing to take forward.
Like, you know, if somebody, you do nice things for somebody, maybe that's
like the nice thing that turned their day around and that could turn their,
their whole life around.
Right.
I really side saw small side thing.
I know we're sidetracked.
Um, when I was leaving, I spent the first week of my new job in
Detroit, uh, training at the office there.
And on the flight back, um, at the airport, the like person shepherding
the people like us into the line to go through security was like clearly having
a really hard time and I don't know what had stressed her out.
But as soon as like the person, like the group in front of us that she
flagged along, she just like put her hands in her face and started crying.
Oh, sure.
Or wait, is it like a TSA person?
Yeah.
Oh yeah.
I'm sorry, the TSA person.
And I, I walked past cause I think I was already a little pastor at this point.
And, but there wasn't like a crowd behind me.
I could have made it back and I thought about it for like the next five minutes
of like, I could still go back there and like give her a hug and I didn't.
And I felt bad or like at least offered.
You know, who knows if she'd want some stranger at the airport touching her
germs are everywhere and, you know, airports are disgusting.
But like, I could have asked like, can I give you a hug?
Um, but somebody from, you know, one of her copers came along and did something
and she, she chipped up.
I kept an eye on her, but like, uh, if, you know, who knows, if I'd been less
cowardice at that moment and you know, it helped her maybe that made her day
better or something.
But my point is, is like, do nice things for people and nice thing in,
try and put stuff out there, put positive things into the universe and positive
things happen.
It's about the most, uh,
it'd be thing you can say.
I was trying to think of who's that crack that has always cranked.
That's always on like Oprah and Deepak Chopra.
It's very Chopra s thing to say, but I mean it in a way that I hope everybody
followed over my 10 minute fucking ramble.
I think you need more quantum's in there to make it Deepak Chopra s.
Right.
Thank you.
Yes.
I gotta do quantum good things.
So who else wants feedback?
Uh, well, I can read one from economic model who I believe is actually, um,
our David guest, the anarchist economist, David, from a few episodes back.
Anyways, he says, uh, we, this is when we had the, uh, talk about his
rationalism being taken over by the alt-right or co-opted by the alt-right or
whatever, uh, David says, so here's my beef with your suggested solution.
If we start arguing with rationalizer reds, we risk becoming a wing of the blue team,
which would be a catastrophic distraction from our core project.
We can counteract this effect by equally vociferously arguing against
rationalizer in blues, anti-nuclear advocates, anti-vaccine advocates, et cetera.
But then we'll basically just be right where we are now, except we'll spend
way more time arguing with trolls and morons online instead of doing cool things
like aligning AI, uh, which first of all, I would like to interject.
Some of us enjoy arguing with trolls and morons online.
So this is a pastime, uh, but a much better solution, in my opinion, this
is him continuing, is just to cut color politics out of the Bayesian
rationalist spaces altogether.
You're allowed to be a blue or a red or a green or a yellow and be a Bayesian,
but you're to check your color at the door as best you can.
Policy discussions can be undertaken, but only with great caution
and with a grand master presiding.
They should be as much as possible but facts and not about values.
I basically agree.
It's really hard not to get caught up in this thing, though.
Like politics is the mind killer for a reason, right?
All the instincts and emotions say, Hey, let's talk about how stupid this thing is.
And I think like based on our last episode about culture, I, I actually
do think culture is important.
I just hate the culture war because it feels to be very zero sum, constantly
going back and forth and killing everything you love to stay exactly where you are.
I don't think those things are mutually exclusive.
Like culture, culture can be super important and like the current
climate of like quote, culture wars can be super unproductive and in fact,
like harmful and unhelpful, right?
So, um, and, you know, as far as leaving politics at the door and stuff,
whenever I bring stuff up, I'm always doing it in a self aware way.
And I'm hoping that like I'm not like, I don't know.
I feel like if you make it this thing that you can't talk about, then it if it's
like off the table and whatever, I mean, there have been subjects.
You know, we had an episode recently about something that was politically
climate relevant.
Well, I mean, even the UBI episode, I did appreciate the fact that we managed
to stick on UBI and not get sidetracked into his anarchism, a decent form of
government, because we could have gone on that for hours as well.
But we had a topic and it was nice to stick to it.
Yeah.
Not a thing we do often on this podcast.
Um, yeah, I think like the, I guess, I don't know.
I'm, I'm torn because you're right.
Politics is a, is a high level subject to talk about as far as like being able
to do it with rational, with any hopes of, of being rational about it.
Right.
Um, and that's why generally when I talk about it, it's mainly flippant
comments and I realized that that doesn't exactly like, that doesn't absolve me,
but it doesn't mean that like I'm not making like, this is my case and I've
come to it, you know, as an empirical, empirical rationalist.
And this is my, my best Bayesian conclusion.
I'm mainly just pointing out like, isn't that stupid or isn't that funny?
Um, or wouldn't that be cool?
I'm, so I'm hoping like my lack of pretension is, is there.
Like I'm not, this isn't like, oh no, I'm strongly convicted in this.
There are things I'm strongly convicted in and it's hard not to, you know, like
the, um, like that punching Nazis episode that we did a couple of years ago, like
that was topical and it was politically related, but it was mainly tied to like
the is oppressing terrible free speech with violence, a cool thing to do or not.
I'm also kind of reminded of Stalin's old quote that you may not be
interested in war, but war is interested in you, you know, yeah, just because you
aren't willing to fight, it doesn't mean it isn't going to come for you.
Just do you have opinions on this?
Um, just going back to the politics is the mind killer sequence.
The idea behind it wasn't never talk about politics.
It was don't talk about politics as a beginner rationalist, especially not one
trying to make points about something not at all related to politics.
And yeah, I do think that I think, uh, David actually said this, um, focus on the
facts, basically, yeah, you can talk about policy discussions, but make them empirical.
And, um, I'm interested in what he means by only with great caution and with a
grand master presiding.
I don't think that we have that designation yet.
I would love for that to exist.
I love the idea, um, from Eleazar's story, three worlds collide.
They had like the confessor, wasn't he called?
There was someone who was a professional rationalist who was supposed to be present
in order to point out cognitive biases and distortions and whatnot.
God, that'd be an awesome world.
First of all, I want that to be my job.
Secondly, I want these people to exist.
I would be absolutely awful at that job, but I want someone like that around to help me.
There was one just like at every, uh, like business meeting at your company.
There's just a dude in a black robe there that's like, uh, that was, uh, you're,
you're, I don't know, um, not even business meetings.
I would like one of those people to be around every time.
I'd like one of those people to be around every time.
I'm like having a conversation with someone that I love because those are the worst.
I think, uh, at the very least, you know, actually, if you're going to say
you'd make a terrible confessor, but you want one around, I think that's huge
points in your favor anyway.
Okay.
Like, I mean, someone, if I think a lot of people would be like, no,
I don't want some asshole in my ear telling me like if I'm thinking wrong, right?
So to say I would like, you know, someone in my ear, helping with my thinking is,
is, you know, I'd like that too.
I think.
Well, I know that I often do get sucked into these things.
Like I, I legitimately do enjoy arguing sometimes just for the sake of it.
And I get carried away and I really need someone like that to be around.
Be like, Hey, you're just being dumb right now.
Oh, I wanted to draw a minor contention with you completed trolls and morons
earlier and they're very different.
Yes, they are.
Yeah.
The very bad wizards, uh, a couple of us had to go, had a great dive into kind
of the difference there.
I just heard that one.
Yeah.
But they brought up my favorite troll.
I mean, I guess I don't have a long list of trolls, but I am on the Ken M subreddit.
And the whole thing is, you know, just doubling down on whatever crazy bullshit
comment that he just had.
And so I won't get into it, but if you're interested, just go to like R slash, I
think Ken underscore M, um, to see examples.
Let me confirm, but he's just, he's just a professional troll.
And you can tell.
And they're also professional in that he gets paid for it, but he's a professional
level of troll, right?
And it is just Ken, capital K, capital M, no underscore.
Okay.
Um, yeah, like it, the other thing that I really like about it is it's not mean
spirit, it's not, you know, going in and, and messing with groups.
It's just throwing in like a crazy comment, you know, like, or commenting on like, I
don't know, some food sites or some food company's Facebook page and like, oh,
look, we're making your casserole and like, like a picture of it and like inside
the oven is just also a bunch of magazines and it's like, Oh, that's great.
Ken, you could probably take those out of there.
It's like, no, let's just talk about how I'm gonna use to make them.
And it's like, you know, no one's getting hurt from that kind of trolling.
Right.
It's just hilarious.
Anyway, that's
Trolls can be funny.
Yes.
Usually my experience with them is that they're not.
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah.
There's the difference to like trolling as a harmless game and trolling to be a
dick.
So, um, I'd like to follow up with a comment, uh, on the same topic.
Yeah.
This is a good one.
So architect of ages, uh, notes.
It's interesting to note the philosophical history of this phenomenon.
And by this phenomenon, let me back up.
We're still talking about the whole, uh, alt-right, um, rationalism.
Are they commingling too much or whatever architect of ages says, in short, the
continental analytic divide after the continental slash analytic divide after
the enlightenment produced competing worldviews, one in which the scientific
slash analytic approach was the last word with respect to what counted as truth.
EG, science, ism, skeptic ish movements, et cetera, and one which continued the
enlightenment's program of deconstruction of such grand narratives.
EG, postmodernism, critical theory.
The upshot of all this is that two relatively isolated philosophical
traditions are dictating rhetorical bedfellows in the pre-
are dictating rhetorical bedfellows in the present day.
Shapiro, atheists and rationalists can be seen as descendants of the analytic
tradition, asserting that if it can't be resolved by experiment or analysis, it's
either bullshit or not even worth debating.
Feminist and social justice movements could be seen as descendants of the
continental tradition, asserting that science and logic are great and all, but
they're always interpreted through a cultural or contextual lens.
So there's no such thing as purely objective interpretation of findings.
TLDR, echoes of a post-enlightenment split in philosophy are why the alt-right,
atheists, rationalists, et cetera, use similar rhetorical techniques.
It's not really co-opting so much as parallel evolution.
That's a fun spin on it.
That is kind of awesome.
I wonder if people in those camps would agree with that.
Well, I'm in one of those camps.
I'm happy to agree with it, but I don't really know that much about the history
of the two thinking movements.
Yeah, I've heard things like continental philosophy thrown around and stuff.
And the level of philosophy that I studied was always more just like specific ideas.
I'm sure those came up and like, oh yeah, the continental people thought this and
whatever.
I, so I don't have anything to weigh in there, I guess, other than like, yep,
those are big movements and cultures within the history of those fields, but
not anything that I know anything about.
I know a little bit about post-modernism and what I do know pretty much lines up
with the idea that the facts don't really matter.
It's what, um, how people on the ground interpret it.
And it's all about like the cultural context, which you hear a lot from, you
know, the, those other sides that we, God damn it.
You can just say Jordan Peterson.
I don't think you'd mind.
Okay.
Yeah.
I mean, so that, that's this thing.
I'm sure his thing would take 40 hours to explain, but like there are people who
would say, yeah, no, that's fine.
Truth is cult is culturally lensed, right?
And while I think I can see what that position means, I can see where it
implies in some cases, I think people are too quick to Mott and Bailey that and
say, therefore, like, whatever, like truth, your truth as a white oppressor is
not the same as my truth as a oppressed minority or whatever.
And like, then I've heard somebody say like, oh yeah.
And because, um, you know, science was mostly white guys in the past.
That means it's all white bullshit.
I'm like, mm, you go, you go to the top of a building and drop something and
tell me how fast it falls.
Like, you know, you don't have to be, you can do this wearing a blindfold.
You can do this being, you know, a three legged Martian.
Like it doesn't matter.
Right.
I saw someone arguing against vaccines using that very thing that this all old
white dudes, which we can't trust because it's old white, um, facts or whatever.
It, it conflates like my last job.
I was working on vaccines.
That's awesome.
Just saying I am white.
That's true, but not old.
Right.
You're not an old guy.
Um, we're back in culture.
Worst stuff.
Yeah.
No, no, no, it's totally fine.
But I guess all I will say is that like, there are definitely things to wear statements
of, of proposed fact of purported fact can be completely obscured by cultural
lensing and others in which they completely really can't.
Like again, the, the, the speed of gravitational acceleration on earth, it
doesn't matter who's measuring that.
Um, if it did turn out that for whatever reason, if, if you had a black scientist
and a white scientist drop things off of a building, they dropped 10 pound bowling
balls and they felt at different rates, that would be a bizarre scientific finding
on its own, right?
Dude, that would be awesome.
Yeah.
Manipulate the loss of physics based on the color of the person.
Right.
It's like, it's like easier, like faster than light travels possible, but only if
you're, if you're of Asian descent or something seriously.
Um, so yeah, since, since, so there's, there's like statements of like physics
that are unchallengeable, but I mean,
I think this is more kind of, um, there's a lot of drug safety tests that have
only been done in healthy white males.
Right.
Yeah.
No, that's a good point.
And, um, so that's, that's, I think a good mid-level example of on this kind
of scale I'm picturing in my head.
And at the other end, it could just be like, you know, the fact that like, oh,
no, you should call the cops if you're in trouble or if there's an emergency.
Like that's, I mean, the, the long version of that fact has a bunch of
contingencies that are implicit for the person making that statement, but for
other people, it's like, I'm never going to call the cops come to my house.
Right.
Um, so, and for, for good reason, and that's just like, no, that's, and it's
not just like culture.
It's just also like, no, my, the lived experience of, of me and everybody I
know says that's a terrible idea.
Um, there are less inflammatory examples, but anyway, whatever.
So yeah, man, who's next?
Okay.
So that's, um, the one that says David talked about something related to a debt
to society.
And in Yash's answer, it reminded me of one of my treasured SSC post burdens.
Sorry.
Can I interject?
And he's, he kind of mumbled the name.
You said, just reply this shit.
It's not like you were saying, just reply that shit.
Like, oh, the Reddit, the Reddit username of this person was just to
reply, or just to reply this shit.
That is all one word.
And that, yeah, that is the person's name.
So just to reply this shit says David talked about something related to a debt
to society.
And in Yash's answer reminded me of one of my treasured SSC posts burdens.
There's something else I've never said because it's too deeply tied in with my
own politics and not something I would expect anybody else to understand.
This is a quote from a burdens, by the way, and that is humans don't owe society
anything.
We were here first.
If my patient were back in the environment of evolutionary adaptedness in a nice
tribe with Dunbar's number of people, there would be no problem.
Maybe his cognitive problems would make him a slightly less proficient
hunter than someone else, but whatever, he could always gather.
But society came and paved over the place where all the roots and berry plants
grew and killed the buffalo and dynamited the caves and declared the tribal
bonding rituals problematic.
Society got where it is by systematically destroying everything that could have
supported him and replacing it with things that required skills he didn't have.
Of course it owes him when he suddenly can't support himself.
Think of it as the ultimate use of eminent domain.
A power beyond your control has seized everything in the world.
It had some good economic reasons for doing so, but at least owes you compensation.
In the end, it's a disagreement of values.
Very good post.
Yeah, I haven't read that one and I loved every passage of it.
And can I just interject?
Jesse read that like eloquently and articulately.
Oh, thanks.
I was reading along with you and I wasn't reading it as smoothly as you were
saying it, so you've got quite a skill.
Yay, I've been working on.
It's good.
Reading aloud.
Well, props.
I'm noticing.
Um, I, yeah, I also really enjoy burdens.
And, uh, something that bugged me since I was a kid is the idea that you can't
actually decide to just go back to being a hunter gather.
There's no land that you can go live on.
Like kind of society has come along in strong arm do you?
And it's like, all right, you have to live by the rules of our system, go to
school and obey the laws of whatever country you happen to have been born in.
And like, you don't really get the chance to opt out of that.
It kind of sucks.
Yeah, like they're even like just miles of open field and like basically
prairie, uh, environment between like here or between like four
Collins and Cheyenne about a 75 miles north of where we are.
And there are Buffalo.
There are, there are antelope, like presumably if you wanted to go out there,
you could, you could carve out a living for yourself, but that's somebody's
property that the land belongs to somebody.
It's behind a fence.
I'm assuming the animals, not the, not the antelope, but the Buffalo
belonged to people or they're like protected.
Right.
Yeah.
Like everything's somebody's property.
Yeah.
You, so you're right.
Like it, even like if nature's even calling to you and you can see it, it's
like, but I can't cause I'll go to jail.
You can just look at it from this side of the fence.
Man, when I was a, in college and I was working and going to school, commuting
an hour, both ways, and that was just my entire life.
I had these fantasies about just walking off into the pine barrens with a
camping tent and a bowie knife.
And I read a lot of survival, like, you know, a hatchet and whatnot.
And I was just like, I would be so tempting to just leave all this
bullshit behind and just like go live in the woods.
Probably be able to for a while.
For a while.
Yeah.
You might be able to, like there's, there's a lot of pine barrens.
Yeah.
To have any serious life, though, I think, like you said, you'd need a tribe
of hundred-ish people.
You need culture too.
And that'd be harder to hide from people when you're living on their land.
And it's also hard to get 99 other people together that want to do this
because, you know, at least to stop them from infighting.
And yeah, well, then there's also, you know, the disease and all the other
things that people generally, and the lack of Netflix, that after a while,
people are going to be like, I'm going back to society.
I heard season four of Stranger Things was really good.
So maybe it's because like, physically that option's been off the table
for me for ages, but like, I don't know.
I always kind of find the, you mentioned like camping and like, you know, cooking
stuff over a fire.
Like that sounds like a lot of fun.
I want to try that and get, you know, get a taste of what it was like to live
as an ancestor.
Of course.
Well, it's good camping.
Yeah.
It's amazing.
Like the jokes you're making about TV, you actually like, you're in the woods
for a couple of days.
You don't miss any like books, TV, any of that.
It's so like, I forget who said this.
There's someone who was a explorer.
No, I can't remember the name.
It was somewhat famous, but he said that like the only time in my life I wasn't
bored was living in a cave.
It's the only time that I've ever experienced like no boredom ever.
That's fun.
I, it depends on your, I guess a lot of your set and setting there for yourself
too.
I remember when Sam Harris described his first like silent retreat for
medication, he was just like inundated with like crazy, like crushing boredom.
Yeah.
But he wasn't, well, I don't think he was a camping and like gathering food and
trying to build a shelter.
I think he was at a retreat that stuff was taking care of.
Yeah.
That's a good point.
If you're, if you're busy do building a shelter all day, that sounds not boring at
all.
It's so fun.
Yeah.
It's so satisfying.
Um, I went camping a little while ago and one of the, I don't know, I just was
like, I'm going to make a daisy chain.
I'm going to make everybody a daisy chain for hours.
I just gathered flowers of different colors and made different daisy chains.
And it was, I was like, kind of in like bliss, I was in like a bliss state.
It just occurred to me that daisy chain can be a literal thing and not, not just
a sex act, a sex act.
Oh, I'm sorry.
What were you thinking?
I was thinking like where you lay like a series of steps along for like an
argument or like, I'm going to explain to you like there were days I was thinking
about Wi-Fi, but what is this sex act?
Yeah.
I mean, I'm sure you can imagine.
Yeah.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Is all right.
Sorry.
No, no, you're good.
Anyway, I'm picturing it.
It's a lot of people doing things.
Yeah.
But sorry.
No, you're good.
Can I just plug in really quick then that I think anybody who thinks this sounds
like fun or sounds terrible, uh, really, anybody should check this out.
If you have 15 free minutes, check out, um, there's YouTube channel called
primitive technology where there's no voiceover.
There's no narration.
There's no music, just the sound of him working.
And it starts with him building crazy, simple stuff like a hatchet or starting a fire.
Like not even a hatchet.
Like a stone, uh, sharpened stone on a stick.
Yeah.
It's a primitive.
Most people have to think like metal, you know, that's right.
Yeah.
A hacking tool to make cutting branches easier for further work.
And, um, if you enjoy what it's, it's all, it's, it's oddly tranquil to watch
cause it's calming.
It's there's, like I said, there's just the ambient noise of, of the work in
the woods that he's doing.
Um, but if you want to take another level, he put on closed captions and he
describes all the stuff that he's doing in there.
And then they get to be really complicated where he built like a house
with like, um, or like a hut.
Yeah.
Was that the guy that built the mud hut that had plumbing and everything?
I didn't, I don't know about the plumbing.
It probably, that he probably has definitely done that at some point, but it
also had the, uh, like thermal heating from underneath.
Or yeah, that's what I'm thinking of.
Yeah, that guy.
Yeah.
He, he built, uh, like the whole thing out of clay cubes that he baked him.
Like the roof shackling out of everything that he, you know, baked in his own little
kiln that he built by hand.
All of it's really cool.
Um, so yeah, that's, that's one way to do it.
I think, I think this is all from stuff in the area that he's working to.
I don't think he goes and gets any of the equipment for it.
Like, cause all the equipment, it looked like it was just stuff that was on
site, yeah, it was building with, but I'm wondering like, if, you know, if, if
the environment that he's in didn't have, you know, clay hot enough to build a
kiln to, to cook these ceiling or what do you call them roof tiles or whatever.
But I think it did.
So whatever it is, it's really cool.
And if living in nature is your kind of thing, it sounds like fun.
I have a friend who has, he's big into camping and outdoorsy stuff.
And I was telling him about this.
And he was like, I'm kind of wary to watch that.
Cause I feel like I might just go do that.
And he, he has some reported back.
He just enjoyed watching the program.
He didn't, he so far hasn't left society behind.
So far.
Yeah.
Operative.
Anyway, the post burdens, um, if you haven't read it, the idea behind it was
somebody had written in to Scott saying that they felt like a burden on society
because they weren't able to do all the cool stuff other rationalists are doing,
like a line AI or make cool scientific discoveries.
And Scott's reply was this, um, society doesn't owe you anything explanation.
Like, I think that this is actually very comforting for people that do feel like,
what, what, what is my purpose?
It's like, well, you know, you don't have to have a purpose.
You were here first.
We did this thing to society.
If you have to collect welfare because you're disabled or if you're, you know,
going through hard times, that's like kind of society's fault and society can take
care of you, you don't have to feel bad about this.
I really think the search for purpose is more a search for being meaningful to other
people.
Like the fact that other people would notice if you weren't there and rely on you
for certain things is very comforting.
And when you don't have anyone that relies on you for anything, anyone who knows
you as the person to go to for X or Y, it's alienating and your life feels empty.
And I think that's most everyone in modern society.
I think of the like three or four, like philosophers, I know who make their
living doing philosophy as like professors.
I think a lot of them struggle with like nihilism and like, how do I find meaning?
Cause I've been, you know, I spent my entire undergrad degree or, you know,
uh, years reading about how life is pointless because all these philosophers
said so and they all have kind of different approaches.
Um, one guy who I like the most is also just really charismatic and fun.
The fun thing is important because I think that's, he never said this, but
I think that was his answer is like, fun is how I make life meaningful.
When I'm having fun, I'm in a flow state thing.
Like, I'm, you know, it, it's just fun.
So he plays a lot of games.
He does, uh, like, you know, volleyball, um, but a lot, you know, team
activities and stuff too.
So there's, there's the social component to it as well.
Like rarely am I as happy as when I'm helping somebody move.
Cause it just, you're useful to someone.
Do you, you are meaningful to them.
You're also good at it.
I've helped you a few times and you move with efficiency.
Oh, well, yeah.
I saw, I, it doesn't matter.
It was like a picture on Reddit of like a perfectly packed, uh, U-Haul and the
guy standing in it made me think of Drake because Drake is the conductor
for your moves and he's so good at it.
Oh yeah.
Oh, could I pay him to help me move?
Sure.
I think he would be very happy to do that.
Yeah.
And the, I don't know.
I just, I suddenly had a flash to the original world of Warcraft, which is
re-releasing in just a few weeks.
That yeah, it's a great game for giving you that sort of feeling of
meaningfulness to other people since they rely on you to be there, to get
their game stuff done.
But like I said, it's, it's not true meaning.
It's a simulated one.
Well, are they real people or are they NPCs?
They're real people.
Okay.
They're real people that really need your help to do this dungeon.
Like you need 40 people all together at once working together.
I think you get some meaning out of that.
You do.
I definitely got some meaning out of it, but it's, and I think they get the
feeling of being helped.
Like, I mean, having somebody show you the ropes and, you know, or
take you through a tough challenge.
Well, don't, don't get me wrong.
It feels really good.
I'm going to play the fuck out of Warcraft Classic when it releases.
I just am now cognizant that it is eventually the game is going to go away.
Whereas in the real world, if you were helpful to people, they're still there
as long as they're alive, you know?
Yeah.
But it's always like the, and I'm, maybe I'm overstating this too much, but
like so is the imprint of them.
Like, oh, that really nice person helped me do this.
And like that, that feeling, you know, carved into their brain a little bit,
made them a better person, you know?
Yeah, I still, I still know some people not know.
I still have grooves in my mind from some people in my guild.
And like, I don't know any of these people's real names.
I have no idea how to contact them.
But I'm like, man, big round was just an awesome paladin.
So, uh, can we get to this Jay Thomas Morris comment?
Uh, yes.
Can I, is it okay if we hit these two as well?
Oh yeah, go for it.
Okay.
This was also from, uh, just to reply this shit, uh, mentioned that I believe
that's who posted this because I don't have any breaks.
Okay.
In one of Scott's posts, a commenter argues they, uh, they expect almost everybody
on a basic income would quit, but then Ozzy brings up that there are various
ways that skilled workers can work part time to make 10,000 per year.
The easiest way is to work a hundred thousand K per year job one year and 10,
which honestly, probably a lot of better programmers could do.
Uh, since almost nobody does that, it seems unlikely that these people would
really quit their job in exchange for basic income.
And, uh, I don't remember who wrote this next part, but they say I'm glad Ozzy
showed up because I used to think the same thing.
And Ozzy reminded me that I wasn't taking any of the opportunities to work much
less in exchange for much less money either.
So I thought that was an interesting point.
Yeah, I believe that they were quoting that was Scott talking about something
Ozzy had said, being quoted by this commenter, but, um, yeah, uh,
there's, yeah, there's the common, uh, argument against UBI that if, you know,
we institute UBI, lots of people are going to just quit their jobs.
And I think some people will, and they're probably the people that maybe
are not working a job that's super important anyway, or, uh, I don't know,
maybe aren't contributing as much as, oh, this is coming off badly.
What I mean is they're bullshit jobs.
Yeah, I worked at McDonald's for six weeks.
I hope that in five years, no one's doing that job.
Most of the time I spent as what they called in the store, fry bitch, or fry guy.
Where you sent over the fryer and you're constantly putting out fries.
If you're at McDonald's, they're supposed to be in cooked no more than
seven minutes before they're handed out the window or to the person.
So there's always somebody standing over this grill or this grease
mesh bucket, putting in fries and standing there, getting all the hot
waves of it in their face.
And, uh, that's, that's, that's a job that like I, I outsource that to robots,
please.
Yeah.
And I can imagine somebody enjoys that, like, but there are other things
that they could do that they'd enjoy more, like maybe doing it at their house
for their friends, rather than doing it under the high pressure environment
where all the machines are screaming at them.
For eight hours a day, five days a week.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Or for slightly under that, so these don't get paid benefits.
God.
Um, yeah, for 34 hours a week.
But, um, I remember as this is tangential, as in a conversation with
somebody for like 30 minutes about UBI and how people wouldn't find
leave meaning without jobs and stuff.
And it, this was over like messenger.
So we weren't like this would have been handled in under two minutes,
probably in real life, but because this was back and forth over a text chain.
I finally just was like, wait a minute, why are we talking about it?
Like it's the end of like productivity or jobs.
Like if you're going to, like, if you're going to be miserable without work,
then like keep working.
Yeah.
You know, and also were you chatting over messenger while you were at work?
No.
Oh, okay.
I think that would have been a beautiful ironic twist.
That would have been nice.
No, um, I'm happy to say it.
Certainly at this job, I tend like, I, I've rarely been on Reddit this week
and it sounds like I have a problem.
Um, but I mean, like when I'm at this job, I try to be productive the entire time
and I'm usually busy today was kind of annoying because I was basically stuck
on something for the second half of the day.
So, um, I couldn't be productive and I didn't even really have the energy
to like, like develop myself.
Like, oh no, I, but I've got right now 30 something tabs open on different
Chrome windows.
Like I'm going to get around to reading these eventually.
I didn't read any of those.
Like I was just, so that was, that was my bad.
But anyway, yeah, productivity, work stuff, total side, side point.
So.
Yeah.
I think the other point is that 10k a year is not living large.
Right.
I mean, it's not really, it's barely living.
You could live on it, but a lot of people probably will take that 10k and then
also work maybe not 40 hours, but maybe 30 or 20.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But you put that 10k on top of the 17k year you're making from McDonald's and
boom, you're suddenly living at almost twice the capacity that you're living
up before, you know, you're able to like buy groceries and go out to eat
once a week or something.
If your boss is a sexually harassing asshole, you can tell him to stuff it.
Right.
Yeah.
That's the other thing.
You have mobility now, 10k that you can go take somewhere else or you can go
back to school.
Like it opens up a lot of opportunities for you.
Yeah.
I think it would make a lot of employers have to act a lot better.
Which would be great.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
Okay.
Uh, you said you wanted the J.
Thomas Morris.
Yeah.
This was another one about UBI.
I wanted to read this because I think I agree with all of it.
Uh, J.
Thomas Morris says several points that I would have liked to hear brought up that
weren't one, humans are generally bad at managing uneven income, a single check at
the end of the year when you file your taxes and get an NIT tax payment could be
much worse for low income people than a monthly check.
I can attest to that from personal experience or personal observation of
people who come from like low income or like low financial stability households.
Um, I watched somebody getting it like a modest inheritance of like, I think maybe
15 or $20,000 from a, from a grandparent or something.
And they bought a new car and it's like, that's great.
And they were driving around a clunker before that.
I'm like, just buy a better clunker and put $15,000 away.
You'll be in a better, a lot more money than your parents combined savings.
Like, uh, and, but there's, there's the problem that like, when you grow up in a
scarcity environment, it's like, this resource could go away.
I need to, I need to utilize it.
Right.
I think we've talked about this a bit before.
And I mean, that's a problem that's often does.
If you have loved ones that need money, what are you going to do?
Not give it to them.
Right.
Yeah.
So if you don't spend it right away, it could very well be gone before you
can spend it at all.
Yeah.
And if you put it in a new car, it's still there.
You could liquefy it again.
Yeah, it's not a good investment, but it is.
And it's something that you got out of it.
It's not just gone.
Yeah.
Um, and I mean, I'm assuming this person still has this car.
If they took care of it, right?
It'll last them for 15 years, you know?
So like they've, they've got a safe and sound thing out of it.
So.
So to consider people who don't expect to receive an NIT payment this year, but
then have a sudden drop loss under UBI, this person will automatically
receive their UBI payment on time on the expected date next month.
They can count on it.
They don't have to do anything to get it.
An NIT may not pay out until the end of the year.
This would be disastrous for the many Americans with no savings.
That's a damn good point.
And two great reasons, I think, to have a UBI rather than an NIT.
Yeah.
I suppose my, my mental model of David Spearman would say that implementing
an NIT on like the monthly basis would increase the overhead cost, which would
decrease the amount that you get.
Or increase the amount that you'd have to pay and that other people have to pay
into it or something.
So I think that would be the counter argument, but I don't know what they
would say or what he would say rather about those particular objections.
That, because those, yeah, I agree.
Those are good points.
And then they go on to say, while I am a fan of UBI, I have some concerns about
how it would play out in practice.
One, a UBI should really replace many government welfare programs.
Exceptions include services for mentally handicapped and others.
This replacement is what would enable the UBI to save money and eliminate
disincentives to marginal income that exist in the current program.
However, it seems very unrealistic to me that the American political system
will ever be able to achieve this.
Damn shame.
For the record, I think that's Yang's idea.
Andrew Yang, the president of the candidate.
To replace?
Yeah.
Oh.
So if you're getting Social Security, or excuse me, it's, it's a, you get to pick.
Yeah.
If you're on Social Security and your total benefits are 1200 a month, then you
don't get UBI.
Right.
If they're 800 a month, hey, scrap your crappy Social Security and grab UBI.
You're making another 200 bucks a month.
Yeah.
So I do agree with the caveats or people, you know, using them for additional
services, that kind of thing.
So.
Right.
Yeah.
And then the second concern was setting the level of UBI is very problematic.
First, it's hard to know what a good level to set it to is.
Worse than that, though, adjusting it will be a political issue that the
politicians can argue over and mess up.
Look at minimum wage laws.
In many localities, the minimum wage isn't indexed to anything.
It stays constant, eroding the spending power of those making minimum wage year
after year until the politicians finally decide to change it.
Then they may raise it too much or too little.
I think indexing is avoided because the politicians want to be able to argue over
it.
Even if it's indexed, it's subject to change by the politicians at any time.
UBI should be a basis for financial stability.
It isn't clear to me that this would be the case, which, uh, the government is
that it's run by people in the government.
And I, yeah, I agree.
I still would rather have it than not and have it be argued over.
But yeah, I mean, I'm not saying that there aren't going to be problems with it.
There certainly are just, I think fewer problems than.
The amazing thing is that, um, Social Security is basically a UBI for people
over 65 and yet it still works.
Like all these issues also apply to Social Security, but people seem to think
it is not terrible, right?
Well, at least like morally, it seems like people think that people over 65
have earned it, which some of them have.
But I mean, more to the, more to the point, like that also has the same problem
of eroding spending power, not being indexed to anything.
Politicians can change it at any time, but they don't.
It's like this third rail of politics that if you try to touch it, you get lynched.
Yeah.
Well, the over 65 crowd has power.
Yeah.
I mean, that's a big voting block.
They, and they, they have nothing, they have all the time in the world to vote,
which is kind of, I think it was John Mulaney joke about like, they also vote
on things that like definitely won't impact them.
Like electing people who don't care about climate change or something.
And he's like, that's bullshit.
You don't get to order for the table and then leave.
But yeah, certainly, uh, that is interesting.
That, that's a good point.
That does stay pretty solid.
And, but per the point of the commenter, like, I think if you're, if you're
dependent on your UBI, like to pay your bills and it could fluctuate based on
the outcomes of the midterm election down to 500 bucks a month or something,
like that could devastate you financially.
But there, there are a number of issues which politicians, some politicians
are even scared to touch because they know if they, if they do anything wrong
on the subject, the people in their district will out them in a hot second.
Yeah.
I could become like that if everyone counts on their UBI.
I could easily see that person if it drops 500, like rioting.
That would have happened to a bunch of people in that county and then they're
going to be on the governor's ass or whoever's.
I wonder that might be something that politicians are hesitant to touch.
And then also the politicians themselves would be getting it too.
Like kind of the joke I was going to make was that also the above 65 crowd
probably is a lot of the politicians as well.
They're not collecting Social Security though.
If they're active politicians, aren't they?
Well, their families maybe.
And yeah, I don't, I think they, they're not prohibited from
collecting it, are they?
I don't think so.
Maybe it depends on them.
As long as they're over 65, I think they can take it.
They probably can take it.
But I mean, if you're, I'm assuming if you're making, if you're, I don't know
how much a congressperson makes, but I imagine.
Jackshit, really?
Really?
Oh yeah, they don't make very much at all.
Well, per, on their paychecks.
Maybe that's why they're so incentivized to take bribes and all that sort of stuff.
I think that was, I don't remember who proposed it.
Probably Brian Kaplan or, or Robin Hanson, one of those crowd, but someone
who proposed, you know, we really should, uh, make it illegal to take jobs after
you've served in, in the public sector and also jack up these guys's wages by
at least 10 times more than they're making right now.
Cause it's really crap all compared to basically anyone working in the private
sector at a comparable level.
I did find that since 1984, all members of Congress have paid into social
security and are eligible for the same benefits that all participants receive.
Nice.
I'm curious what the, the history is behind social security about how, how
it retained that kind of holy status.
Um, cause I could imagine it being highly contested at the time.
And can you, I feel like respect for elders is, I mean, we're going back to
the, uh, cultural evolution essay, like we as a species, uh, have this
reverence for elders and particularly, you know, if you consider someone who's
been in the system working for 65 years or probably not the entire 65, but.
Yeah, I guess, but I mean, as far as the, the sanctity of like not adjusting
the numbers or something, um, or like not, not saying, let's give it a 5%
less to do this or whatever.
Cause that there could be a reasonable claim about why they might
have a good idea or something, but nobody makes them that I hear about.
I don't follow, I guess all the proposed legislation that closely, but yeah,
you make a good point though, Jess.
Maybe it is, maybe it did pass fairly, fairly easily, but I, I, yeah.
And I would also suspect just that being a large member of the voting block,
like would be the reason that that's, that's
stretchable to mess with it.
Yeah.
I mean, like there's also, I mean, people are supposed to care about kids
and stuff, but arguing about school funding is something that people are
more than willing to do when it comes to like saying how we're going to
spend government money.
Um, even people are, even people who will say, like, why should I care?
None of my kids are going to school.
That's like saying, Nope, I, I'm not collecting social security.
So why should I care if anyone's getting it?
Um, it, I get like, maybe there's more reverence for old people than children,
but I feel like our society kind of values both.
Maybe it just is that old people are such a powerful voting block.
That's, that's what I'm thinking.
Yeah.
I think everybody in the US, that would be a pretty big voting block too.
Well, if people got, got out and did stuff.
I mean, if everyone gets UBI, if it is you.
Oh yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
If, if that's a good point, if this is out there and then like the vote to change
it comes to the public and say, all right guys, you want to vote to lower the
how much money you're getting a month, everyone's going to say fuck no.
I think we need to start wrapping up.
Do we want to get one more comment in?
Oh, there's this one about deathists.
I, I was thinking that one.
All right.
Well, we can do that one, but I want to plug this.
Maybe you guys can at least respond to it on Reddit.
Somebody wrote in, uh, cause we talk about EA a lot and they were like, Hey,
I kind of want to do this.
How do I give the charity effectively?
Oh yeah.
And we had a whole EA episode.
Um, and like my, my two cents that I tried to print in
the, in the post earned my reply was like, you know, you can find the most
effective charities through give well.
Um, if you're, if your metric is increasing the number of like quality
adjusted life years of humans.
Um, yeah, that's give well.org.
Right.
And my other like, I don't think that this, this isn't like me as an EA person
because I'm not sure what their lingo is for this, but like whatever cause it is
that you care about, there are charities that are doing it better and worse.
Right.
If you care about feeding hungry people in the United States or, uh,
curing a certain disease or whatever, I think I use the breast cancer,
pin gribbin example.
Um, like all, all the, the, uh, what is it?
Susan B something.
Susan B Anthony.
Yeah.
The, the pin gribbin breast.
Susan B.
Common.
Common.
Oh, oh, yes.
Thank you.
Yes.
What's a very different person.
Um, that other Susan B.
Yeah.
Why did Susan B Anthony sound familiar?
Who's that?
She was almost on the quarter cause she was one of the first women that ran for
president, right?
Among other things, she was a, uh, a suffragist.
Is that how you pronounce it?
Uh, yeah.
Okay.
Yes.
I knew I knew the name and I'm glad that I saw like it dinged a bell in my head
and I didn't bother to check which one.
Um, but yeah, I'm not sure what the numbers are, but most of their money goes to more
ribbons.
So like to the extent that that increases awareness and awareness is a good thing
cause that goes towards actual research, that's probably a good thing.
But at the end of the day, that's big business.
Breast cancer already is close to maximally funded.
Right.
Like more money getting put into that is not going to bring about a cure to breast
cancer any sooner.
Probably not.
Right.
One of the, not enough to that where you're really going to make a difference.
I mean, going to the effective altruist forums, uh, or discussion areas is not a
bad idea because one of the things they do often take into consideration is how
well funded is this cause area.
Like, is it something that could use more funding very well?
Or would the additional dollar not have that much additional, uh, impact?
There's, there's quite a few things to consider when, uh, when making these
decisions, I will say that effective altruists often focus on things like
existential risk, like things that could wipe out the human race, because those
are considered, uh, especially big and important.
Yeah.
If you cure malaria, but everyone dies in 50 years from a meter, a meter, right
impact, it doesn't make, it makes a very small difference.
And they also tend to focus on things in developing countries a lot because it's
just due to the economics of the situation, it's a lot easier to save one
life in a developing world nation than it is to, uh, save a life in America where
most people are not going to be dying of simple, easy to solve with money problems.
What I should have pointed out too is there's a great exploration of a lot of
this stuff in, um, Peter Singer's works on altruism.
And, you know, a few hundred dollars in the developing world can, can give a
corrective surgery for, um, you know, uh, problems that would either drastically
hamper your life through like physical ailment or through like social stigma.
Um, there are apparently some common causes of blindness that are very
treatable for a few hundred dollars, um, that, so like you consider like, all right,
well, what would it cost me to get like Lasik versus being a, how many people
could I help with that money doing something else or something, right?
Um, so yeah, just the, the, your money goes further where money's more valuable.
Um, there's the other thing that he points out.
Uh, so I guess, yeah, you can check out Peter Singer's website.
I think it is just Peter Singer.org or something.
But, um, his recent book, Doing Good Better, or was that, um, uh, Will, Will
McCaskill, you know, I forget one of them did, oh wait, Peter Singer's book was
The Life You Can Save, Will McCaskill's book was Doing Good Better.
If this is a subject you're really interested in, I'd recommend those books.
All right.
I realized it took up some of our time.
And because I'm sure I'm going to forget, I got to plug something that's
completely unrelated to anything.
I've been reading the hell out of a crossover fanfiction called, uh, A Wand
for Skitter, I'm on chapter 61 of 61 right now and I started like two weeks ago.
They're really short chapters.
Like I can read them in 10 minutes sometimes.
So they go by fast.
Um, it is kind of full of typos that I want to, I'm going to ask the author
if I can screen their chapters for them and fix them if they'll let me, maybe
even like just take them all, put them through like Microsoft Word and let them
fix the, the obviously broken ones.
Like this isn't just like the wrong there.
This is big mistakes, but they're, they're not so much that it ruins the story.
But I've talked to at least one person who says that does ruin reading for them.
So sorry, this might not be your book, but, um, it's, the premise is, well, this
is a gigantic worm spoiler.
So skipping that, the protagonist from worm wakes up in the body of a recently
attempted assassinated mudblood girl in, uh, whatever the first year of Hogwarts
for the skit, the kids, right?
In 1991, the first year of, um, the original Harry Potter books.
Totally.
And so she eventually regained some control of her bugs that she had from, from
worm, um, and she's also learning magic really well.
And it, it's weird because I'm having to remember like the difference.
This isn't methods of rationality crossover.
This is regular Harry Potter crossover.
So like there's not like a, like fatigue that you get from using magic or anything
like that.
So I'm trying to, so I, I'm watching this.
I'm like, how is she doing all this?
Oh, right.
She's not getting tired.
She just has to keep saying words.
Um, but it's a lot of fun.
My only gripe is that like the character never loses like this level of savagery that
I feel like would be loseable, but it sets it up in a way that makes a lot of sense.
This, the other like, uh, crop break point from original Harry Potter is that, uh,
Voldemort is having his lieutenants kill, uh, mudbloods before they start because
before they start at Hogwarts, just like to thin the herd of them so they can start
taking care of this problem before they're educated.
And so she's constantly on her guard for that because her, her like parents that
she doesn't remember were just killed and she wakes up in an alley in the middle
of London or something.
And, um, so her, her level of like vigilance and like kind of savagery kind of
makes sense because people are constantly on the lookout to like kill
Muggle-born people, but it was, it was fun.
It was a quick read and it seems to be being updated like a couple of times
a week at least.
So I've been having fun with that.
The, the story is called a wand for skitter on fanfiction.net by author, uh,
Shane T. So I had to plug that because I spent a lot of time with the last
couple of weeks reading it.
Okay.
Back to your regularly scheduled podcast.
Okay.
Yeah.
I think if we have time for one more, um, commenter delined, delineated, I don't
know, says, um, I don't want to disappoint, but death is, do actually exist.
If you want your transhumanist self to be a part, take a look at the
Ask a Mortician, uh, which is a channel with almost 800,000 subscribers by
Caitlin Dottie.
I have actually seen this.
They literally promote death positivity and death acceptance.
They believe death gives life meaning.
They're concerned about people who pursue radical life extension.
Yeah.
I knew those people existed in there.
You know, what's weird is I did too.
And somehow I completely like forgot about that when I was like, no one's
really a deathist.
Um, and yet I think it's just, yeah, I'll have to maybe actually check out
some of these, these, the subreddit and stuff to see what they're saying.
But I know these people are out there and it's weird, but I think they're
just, they're not really considering the alternative in a way that's like,
well, of course I would say that, right?
I was going to say they're not considering the alternative, honestly.
Otherwise they would agree with me.
That's what everybody says about every position they have ever.
So now I, I could actually imagine if somebody discovers the cure for death
tomorrow, most of the world, I think is immediately going to be on board.
And I think there's going to be a huge backlash of people that have grown
up and are very stuck in the mindset of death is good and natural and playing
God, doing weird things, it's bad and unnatural.
And it's again, the whole, you know, cultural evolution.
I would like to point out that this is a very, very common trope in science
fiction and fantasy.
And it really annoys me to know.
And a lot of evil villains are evil specifically because they don't want to
die.
And that's like almost the entirety of their motivation.
Voldemort, to take the example we're just talking about.
His evilness is that he doesn't want to die.
And that is what is behind everything.
That it happens so freaking often that I'm like, Oh, look, there's a villain
in this piece.
I wonder if he's a villain because he doesn't want to die.
And they like make fun of them.
They're like, Oh, he's weak.
He's afraid of death.
Like, yeah, so am I.
So are all, aren't we all?
No, at least the rationality gave gave Voldemort like more fleshed out
villainy than just like, I don't want to die.
Yeah.
Um, yeah.
I remembered that being Voldemort's whole thing in the original version, I
had to kind of like think back after red methods to like, what was O.G.
Voldemort's, uh, motivation.
And like you could be in, you know, a magical non-death list without being a
complete dick, right?
Right.
I would assume.
I mean, one of the nice things about Thanos is that he wasn't like, I'm
evil because I wanted mortality.
Right.
Yeah, there was some other motivation for once.
It's like, thank you.
He was a good, he was a good villain.
I even think an end game where he updates his preferences a little bit.
I don't know if it's, it doesn't come out until on Blue Ray for another
couple of weeks.
So I think it might still be too early for spoilers, but, um, like I would
argue that if you see in the movie, his change in motivation, even like it makes
sense even for him and it's not him being like just promoted to like the level
of like, I am a bad guy now.
I think, I think it's perfectly in character for who Thanos was developed
to be in the first, uh, Infinity War movie.
Spoiler, Thanos isn't an end game, I guess.
Was he in the trailer?
So I don't know, probably.
Maybe not actually.
He was still alive at the end of, um, the first one.
So obviously he was going to be in the sequel.
That's a good point.
Yeah.
Okay, cool.
All right.
Uh, God, we are going to have to burn through the last wrong posts.
Sorry.
I know I, and I got here late.
So we're, we're not able to, this is on me that we're, we're rushing through these.
I, I think it's okay.
Cause they're not that, um, they're not super deep.
No, they're not super deep and they're not super long.
So that's all right.
But yeah, let's get through them quickly.
All right.
We've got, are your enemies innately evil?
Spoiler, no.
So this is, by the way, a great example of the, oh, what is it?
The Betridge law, I think, uh, which, not raw, they call it the law, but you know,
these are generally rules, uh, that any headline that ends with a question can be
answered by the word no.
Yes.
And honestly, our last episode fell prey to that, I think, when we said, uh, is
rationalism being co-opted by the alt-right and didn't a question mark, um, we
should have put more capitalization in it and made you, we should have made a
five hour episode before we got to that subject to just make a true clickbaity
fashion.
Oh, yeah, a little, uh, subtext scientists are baffled.
But, uh, yeah, uh, basically are your, this post, the senior enemies are not
innately evil.
Uh, the first quote I pulled is there seems to be a very strong tendency to
blame evil deeds on the enemy's mutant evil disposition.
Not as a moral point, but as a strict question of prior probability, we
should ask what the enemy might believe about their situation that would reduce
the seemingly busy, the seeming bizarreity of their behavior.
This would allow us to hypothesize a less exceptional disposition and thereby
shoulder a lesser burden of improbability.
And I would just like to say, I also consider this a mark of good fiction.
Um, I kind of understand that lots of times when people are reading fiction,
they want escapism.
They want the Nazi or the zombie, the enemy who is irredeemably evil and you
can cheer for the hero, punching them and killing them because they are evil
mutants and they need to be killed.
And that's what people want to see.
That's fun, right?
But I just, I don't think it's great writing because in the real world,
there's no one like that.
And you can demonize people to make them look like, uh, evil mutants, but they
aren't in reality.
Yeah.
Thinking of like wheel of time, which is the biggest fantasy thing I've ever read.
I've never had, had you talk about fiction and not mention wheel of time.
Maybe because I don't read enough.
Okay.
Um, and definitely per page count.
It's the biggest thing.
Well, maybe I'm not sure how big it compares to worm and ward, but maybe it's
getting close.
I think worm is bigger.
It might be.
Well, it's definitely, I don't know.
Maybe.
We'll come to numbers later.
But in any case, well, certainly in worm, the bad guys with the possible exception
of like the head of the slaughterhouse nine, um, he's just a psychopath, but he's,
he's like the Joker in the sense that he's interesting.
Like he, and he's not trying to end the world because he's a bad guy.
He's just like, I just like fucking things up.
And, uh, there's, there's other fuckery going on there that causes that stuff.
But, um, and wheel of time, the big baddie is the dark one who's like literally
like the embodiment, although not even like quite physically instantiated
version of like the dark side of the force, but his lieutenants are basically
the people that are the antagonists throughout the book series.
And they all have their motivations and they're, they're conniving and interesting
and, and all that sort of stuff.
So I like that.
I like this post too, because there's like a watered down version of it where
like, and I know we're, we're belaboring it, but this is a good time to inject it.
Like I've complained about like previous coworkers, like, oh yeah, this guy
was always late.
This guy didn't care about his job.
I think of the day, like these are people who are doing what they can.
And like, I had, I had, I might have mentioned this on the show before, but
like one of the, it was the senior guy that like never came to work and was
honestly a terrible role model.
I didn't really get along with him, like we had nothing in common.
And then shortly after he started, we started working together.
One of his cats died and he was like distraught over it.
And I was like, dude, I can relate.
And we talked about it a lot because, uh, he was dealing with it.
And, you know, um, it, and like, I remember having this kind of wake up moment
where I was like, you know what, I don't have to like like this guy.
He's, you know, I, but I get him, at least on this level.
He's just another guy who like loved his cat.
And like, I really was like, that, that, that sounds shallow, but the, the
deeper thing behind it was like, I think that's the way it is at everybody
that you're disagreeing with.
Like there are people who are just leeches and are going to be mean
like at work or something, right?
But like everybody, nobody's innately, very people are innately evil.
And I think there's always a way to like empathize with the person on a way
that you can at least connect with them.
Right.
So yeah, I won't dig into that too much, but it's, it's important for like
not, not walking around hating people, right?
Yeah.
I think, uh, Elis makes a good point that, uh, if the enemy did have
an evil disposition, that would be an argument in favor of your side.
So any argument that favors your side must be supported no matter how silly.
Soon the enemy has horns.
And if you deny any aspect of this on merely factual grounds, you are arguing
the enemy side and you are a traitor.
Merely factual grounds, which yeah, I see sometimes.
And that is very disheartening.
Yeah, very few people will understand that you aren't defending
the enemy, just defending the truth.
I've had this happen.
It's very frustrating.
Like, um, I think Steven, you have brought up people making up lies about
Trump and then you point out, like that's actually completely, actually incorrect.
Why are you defending Trump?
Some kind of Trump support.
It's like, no man, let's just point to all the real crazy shit.
Cause every time that we lie and conflate, then that's, that's, you know,
and that's specifically for this kind of example.
But like then they can point to like, Oh, see, they lied about this.
They can prove it.
Therefore I don't believe any other stuff they're saying, but you know, the
real short version is like, and this was written what, 12 years ago.
So 9-11 is a lot fresher in everybody's heads.
He mentions like the, the, the hijackers weren't like these
deranged psychopaths who just wanted to kill America because we're
beacon of freedom and their mutants who hate freedom.
They did it for what felt to them like very good reasons.
And they were, uh, like they're protecting their people.
Yeah.
And they were, they were martyrs in their minds and in the minds of their
supporters.
Like, so, but to say, could you imagine somebody going on the news on
September 15th, like, you know, a couple of days, like while the
dust is still settling and being like, look guys, they weren't monsters.
But, and I think, I think the climate of the time people are okay with
the person being dragged off camera and beaten, right?
So, yeah.
People like outright give that explanation.
They're like, yeah, well, you know, terrorists, they hate freedom.
Yeah.
That was, that was, I remember being a child and hearing that and being like,
I don't think that's how humans work.
I was also a child.
I remember hearing that and I didn't have that thought.
I just, I was still at the age where I was just absorbing stuff and like,
well, if you say so.
Yeah.
It's a great, it's a great post.
I wish there's, there's not, I don't know.
Yeah.
We're, we're in a time crunch and once again, to reiterate, that's my fault.
I was late.
Okay.
Can I just read the last paragraph?
Cause it's really punchy.
Yeah.
That was when you accurately estimate the enemy's psychology.
When you know what is really in the enemy's mind, that knowledge won't feel
like landing a delicious punch on the opposing side.
It won't give you a warm feeling of righteous indignation.
If your estimate makes you feel unbearably sad, you may be seeing the world
as it really is.
It's good shit, man.
That's good.
Yeah.
Everybody that you've ever hated could be somebody that you like would have loved
who things have been a little different.
This is why we read, we read, he's good at those.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's, it's, I think, how did you put it?
Like the best, like the highest, like insight to word ratio or something?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Or yeah.
I love that.
Next post is two more things to unlearn from school.
More things to unlearn.
And I think there's only one in here, but I don't know.
Maybe I was counting two, conflating two together.
Anyways, I'm already had to be hard to forgot most of everything I learned in
school.
Jack, mate, you're a cow.
Yeah.
Eleazar says, I suspect the most dangerous habit of thought taught in schools is
that even if you don't really understand something, you should parent it back anyway.
One of the most fundamental life skills is realizing when you are confused and
school actively destroys this ability.
Many students who have gone through this process no longer even realize when
something confuses them or notice gaps in their understanding.
They have been trained out of pausing to think.
And he also proposes a possible solution.
Maybe you could avoid handing students knowledge on a silver platter instead show
students different versions of physics equations that look plausible and ask them
to figure out which was the correct one or invent experiments which would
distinguish between alternatives.
I didn't get exercises like that until college and it was never physics.
I studied a squishy science like psychology.
But I remember in high school or in college level biology or something that
asked you design an experiment that would confirm or deny this claim or something.
And it kind of sucks that you're that you have to be in your 20s taking
electives to get to that level.
Yeah.
Or at least an elective level of education.
In most of high school, I had a few good teachers, I will say.
And I think my parents were pretty good at just at being encouraging and that sort
of thing too.
But most of the things that I wanted to find out, it was like myself thinking,
why is that?
And then following up with questions or or trying to read about it as opposed
to being taught that in school.
I think that may have worked out well, but the one thing I really, really
remember to this day was in physics in high school.
I had this amazing physics teacher.
I was in the AP physics.
So this wasn't like given to everyone, but he started us out.
He started us out on Einstein's, oh God, photoelectric effects.
That's what it was.
And we thought we were just learning like, you know, electricity and
magnetism and and basically that that level of stuff.
And he walked us through, like we did the experiments ourselves,
rederiving how, how to get equals mc squared.
And like, by the time you're getting to the end and you're on the last few
steps before the final line, you realize what's happening.
And you're like, oh, holy shit, this is amazing.
I have just rederived the most famous equation in physics.
And I see how it happened.
And obviously it's not, it's not nearly as hard as having to come up with it
on your own from the beginning and like, why is this happening?
How could this possibly work?
Like we had, we had to kind of laid out for us in a garden path, but going
down that path the first time and not knowing what we were getting at the end
was really neat.
And I wish more people would have experience like that.
Yeah, I can't think of any examples like that off hand, but they probably happened,
I hope, but that sounds wonderful.
And that sounds like the way it should be taught.
The downside of doing it the way that you do it in schools now is like,
there's no time to do it that way because we've got to teach these 70
things for the exam that the state issued for us.
And you guys are only in here this number of hours.
So we can't spend 20 hours doing this one thing.
But yeah, you still remember that, you know, and that, that's how impactful it was.
And that sounds fantastic.
Yeah, I think that's the right way to do it.
I don't have anything else to say.
I mean, you could do something similar, like you could do this with it.
Just this is what the book, The Greatest Show on Earth does.
Richard Dawkins book for evolution is way belabored because he rambles a bit.
But like in a way that if you like the artful way that he does stuff.
Yeah, I found it like just really enjoyable to read because I liked his tone.
Same here. Yeah.
It's so I guess I'm getting is it's way less direct than like a than you would
do in a college or in a classroom setting of like trying to teach the same thing.
But he has this poetry of of and this passion and writing that I really liked.
But that's what he does.
He takes it the slow way.
And so by the end, you're like, oh, I've seen all the things not firsthand.
But, you know, I've read all, you know, enough of the observations that were
made to put this together, now I get it.
And it's not just like some knowledge that someone told me about.
And they're like, you're told basically take this on faith.
It's like, no, I can follow the whole the whole thing now.
Yeah, it's a short post, but has a neat point.
And I agree.
I'm really hoping that future school systems incorporate VR or just like
really good simulations and are actually structured in such a way
where students can do their own experiments.
That would be cool.
OK, for next week, we will cover the less wrong posts, making beliefs,
pay rent in anticipated experiences, belief in belief and Bayesian judo.
So we'll have three.
Those first two are ones that we've referenced maybe a hundred times total
on the podcast so far.
So yeah, yeah, these are some weighty ones.
Yeah, last part of the show, but definitely not least most important,
not least important part of the show.
Yes, one of the most important parts of the show.
That's right.
We've got a patron to thank this week, our patron of the episode.
I know we say weak and we say that we do that all the time, but it's by week.
Right.
Anyway, of the fortnight.
Yes, this time on the Bayesian conspiracy.
Our favorite patron of the of the episode is wealth.
So thank you so much for your support.
Yay, well, standing.
You are the bomb.
And yeah, we really do appreciate it.
Yeah, I made a fist pump and you couldn't see it, but anyway.
Yes, thank you so much.
Thank you. Oh, oh, I had a thing to point out.
We mentioned in the last episode that like we met on Discord to chat and
like someone asked in subreddit, where is the link to this discord?
And David Youssef, who was our the person we interviewed over Discord,
just posted the link on the subreddit.
I was like, oh, shit, nothing was ready.
What the hell just happened here?
And people started like showing up and chatting and stuff.
And so I worked real quickly.
Stephen promoted me to moderator.
I put in a few channels.
So now it's now it's an actual, I guess, Discord server.
But yeah, man, that thing blew up fast.
Like there's a bunch of people and they're talking a lot.
And I'm super enjoying it.
Yeah, yeah.
And a handful of our previous guests.
So if you ever wanted to pick a bone with David Youssef, he's on there a lot.
Alexander Wales was on there day one.
David Youssef is on there is David Darklord of the Memes.
No, no, that's the other day.
There's the other David.
Yeah. So what's David is they keep changing their names.
DN Youssef, I think.
Is he still? No, I thought that was.
I know. He's still DN Youssef.
Both of the David's are on there.
Good luck telling them apart.
Especially because Youssef talks about memes a lot.
Right. He wanted the meme channel.
So it makes sense that they have the memey name.
Yeah. And he posts there constantly.
Yeah. OK.
But yeah, no, the bunch of people there, it's really cool.
I'm having a great time.
So thank you guys for that.
We now have a Discord.
So we'll post the link to the Discord in this episode, show notes as well.
And of course, on the subreddit.
And we also have a subreddit, so that's another thing.
I've lately been arguing with people on subreddit
because I haven't been able to sleep, which has been fun.
I need to be on the subreddit more.
Yeah. It's like, you know, if you want to argue with a sleep deprived enniosh,
that's the place to go.
And I'll be active on Discord as soon as I can figure out
how to let that server alone send push notifications to my phone
and not everyone that I'm on.
I can show you. Oh, OK.
Then I will push notifications turned off.
I just look it up every, you know, a few times a day.
I need a ping to remind me to get in there.
So like the only thing I need is the dopamine
that I'm not getting by not being on it.
All right. Thank you.
OK. Yes. On that note.
And thank you, wealth again.
You are also a ping of dopamine every time we do this.
This thinking of patron, please feel happy.
And wealth is such a good name.
Well, yay.
All right, everybody, this is great.
See you in two weeks.
All right. Bye bye.
