Spoiler warning, today's episode contains spoilers for the web fiction worm and the movie Pulp Fiction.
Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Eniasz Brodsky, I'm Steven Zuber, I'm Jay Sticky, and I'm David.
David is back with us because last time we were talking about libertarianism and we got a whole lot of David,
but we didn't actually get to ask most of the questions and I guess there's going to be like a part two now
where we grill him on why his philosophy is so terrible and how he can possibly defend himself.
Last time was us learning stuff, now is defending the thesis against us.
Yes, quite.
Sounds fun.
Alright, but first we start as always with Steven talking about TVs and movies.
As always.
Wouldn't be an episode of the Basin Conspiracy without it.
Thank you, I'm glad you get the brand.
Alright, so we went two years without Marvel stuff, as you guys recall, 2019, April was when Endgame came out.
If you're about to talk WandaVision, I haven't seen it yet.
I won't say anything other than you should see it and it's amazing and I loved it.
Okay.
And so that was on for nine weeks, or whatever many weeks it was, then we had a week off,
and then on Friday Falcon and the Witcher Soldier came out.
Oh, cool.
And it was great.
Was it?
Yep.
I really enjoyed it.
There's a part that's supposed to make you feel mad and it made me feel very mad and it worked
and I'm like, I'm super into it, I love it.
Okay, great.
We were playing two different kind of stories at the same time.
Like, anyway, love it.
Alright, so that's the end of Marvel stuff.
Wait, were you going to say something?
Huh?
No, I was saying I'm looking forward to it.
Oh yeah.
Speaking of looking forward to stuff that's superhero related, the Snyder Cut came out on Thursday of Justice League.
Okay.
Everyone in the audience, raise your hand if you saw Justice League.
Okay, I saw about 60% of hands go up.
Leave your hand up if you liked it.
Wait, wait, wait.
Where did you see 60% of hands go up?
I can just see the audience.
You can't see them?
Oh, oh.
If 60% of our audience saw the Justice League, I would be very surprised.
I'd be surprised if it was, I bet that's about right.
Really?
A little over one in two people.
I want to put out a survey now because I think our audience has better taste than that.
Okay, well, if you like taste and you like DC, might I recommend the four hour Snyder Cut?
Oh my God.
It was actually, it brought the movie from crap to great.
Really?
Yeah.
It did.
So the reason it sucked is because it gave us five characters, I guess six, three of which
we'd never really seen before, cared about.
It tried to do the Avengers movie without doing the six year build up where you get to see
all the heroes first.
Yeah.
You don't get to skip without...
You don't get to skip doing the heavy lifting.
And so the two main people that you don't know anything about yet are Cyborg and Flash,
right?
Because Aquaman gets his own movie after this, I guess, but whatever.
Wonder Woman had hers, Batman, Superman, we all know.
Cyborg and Flash play a big part in the Snyder Cut.
And the main thing that made that movie rough was that Snyder did like 300, right?
The movie's supposed to feel kind of like that.
And then Joss Whedon did the Avengers and Buffy and it's hilarious and fun and great.
But they're great in different dimensions and when you mash them together, you're mixing
together like Pumpkin Spice and Funfetti Cake, right?
Like this is not...
Sure, they're great desserts, but together they suck.
So this is all pure unfiltered uncut Snyder and it's awesome.
Flash and Cyborg actually get arcs or at least they get stories.
They don't really have...
They have some arc, whatever.
But there's some character stuff, but all of the disjointedness where you get a joke
thrown in where it feels really inappropriate because that's when Whedon had a chance to
shoot stuff.
All that's gone.
There's still funny moments, but it's no longer like the off-brand humor.
So I just finished it this morning.
It was great.
I strongly recommend the Snyder Cut.
It was a lot of fun.
Okay.
I watched it this morning.
I watched it starting Friday.
I watched it in three sittings.
I did not sit through a four-hour movie.
Yeah.
Okay.
That is a lot of sittings for a movie, but four hours, I guess.
It's nice enough to give you breaks.
I think there's six chapters and an epilogue.
I mean, one edition is like a four-hour movie, basically.
But I watched it one week at a time.
So how similar in style is I'm assuming not at all Falcon and Winter Soldier to compare
to WandaVision?
It's delightful without giving anything away.
I just like Rachel.
I turned to Rachel ten minutes in.
I'm like, compare this to the first and she finished like to the first ten minutes of
WandaVision.
I'm like, exactly.
I'm assuming it's more of an action movie as opposed to like a psychological thing.
So far, so good.
Yeah.
Actually, there's tons of psychological stuff too because it's, I mean, we'll get there.
But yeah, it opens with a badass action scene.
The first three episodes of WandaVision have like existential horror woven in.
Right.
Yeah.
I was a good shit.
But there was no fighting.
Right.
This one starts off as badass fighting.
It's great.
Okay.
Existential horror is my favorite kind of horror.
Yeah.
Me too.
God, I loved it so much.
I think you're going to love WandaVision.
All right.
So that saves our movie digression.
I'm trying not to leave it too long, but I just had to share because I just finished
Snyder Cut that it was, like I said, a breath of movie from bad to great.
I at least as good as the middle tier Marvel movies.
So that is genuinely surprising.
I wasn't all that into the middle tier Marvel movies either.
This one's fun is gritty and dark, like the way that it was supposed to be.
I mean, I like gritty and dark, but I just, I don't, I don't know, man.
After, after basically everything that the DCU has shit out.
I just don't have much faith.
I think if you watch this and you're like, if you're like, you remember
Justice League, you're like, oh, I remember the movie that did this.
And you're like, oh, wait, they're not even doing that part.
Oh, I didn't even watch the Justice League.
Oh, well, maybe I mean, I saw Batman for Superman.
And I was like, that's all that I'm ever going to watch.
There's there's no saving that movie yet.
I don't have these plans to try and try and hack together a good version of that.
But this was fun.
I had a good time with it.
All right. All right.
You still with us, Dave?
Yep.
Everyone else has checked out.
Yeah.
But, you know, Marvel with me is always like a, this is bad segue.
Cash thought I was going to show that in.
That was a terrible segue.
Yeah, I dare you.
I can do better.
Yes, don't don't lower yourself to that one.
So cash thoughts, he brings it up because of the first let's
wrong sequence this week is called cash thoughts.
And this is a really famous one.
It's also, I love how the beginning of it is just.
Ellie, as you're complaining about how poorly designed the brain is and
like he would, he would make something like this.
We're kind of just talking about that before the episode about like how we
humans as a species are just like terribly designed.
Yeah, our meat suits suck.
But, you know, people say like, oh, the brain sucks.
It'd be nice to remember stuff.
It'd be nice if, you know, I didn't get tired.
Those are all like easy complaints.
He's like, no, no, look, look at just how badly it performs objectively
to any other like substrate of information processing.
Yeah.
This is, it's a joke.
It starts with, so one of the single greatest puzzles about the human brain
is how the damn thing works at all with most neurons fired 10 to 20 times
per second or 200 Hertz tops in neurology.
The hundred step rule is that any postulated operation has to
complete at most 100 sequential steps.
You can be as parallel as you like, but you can't postulate more than 100,
preferably fewer neural spikes one after the other.
Can you imagine having to program music?
100 Hertz CPUs, no matter how many of them you had, you need a hundred
billion processors just to get anything done in real time, which is great.
Cause that's about how many brain cells there are.
Right.
Like that's what we're operating off of where we're a collage job.
I read that and like, I read 200 mega Hertz because I'm just used to seeing mega
Hertz and you read it out and it was Hertz and I was like, Oh my God.
But he does say that if you were stuck using such horrible, horrible hardware,
one trick you'd use as heavily as possible is cashing.
That's when you figure something out once you, you do the mathematical
operation once and you store the results so that you can just look them up later,
which is heavily done when doing things with Pi and any large complex numbers.
You usually have a lookup table.
At least you did back when I learned programming.
Maybe nowadays computers are fast enough to do it on the fly.
Now they've got a whole service that's dedicated just to cash.
So like, or, you know, you cash it so that you remember, all right, I'm going to put
this in the queue when the queue opens up, that sort of stuff.
But yeah, I mean, you know, Hey, I've got this.
Let me work on it while I've got it before we're ready to send it off and then
you hold it and then you can free up the thing that's doing the working to do
other stuff, but the thing holds it.
Yeah.
So that there's still totally a heavy feature.
Okay.
Yeah.
Uh, the article says it's a good guess.
The actual majority of human cognition consists of cash lookups.
And, uh, and then this, this thought does tend to go through my mind at certain times.
Do you do, uh, so he gives, he gives an example of someone being told by his
neighbor that you can knock out a chimney by, you can remove a chimney from
house by knocking out the fireplace, letting the bricks drop and then knocking
out those bricks, et cetera.
And it did not go well.
When years later, he tried it.
Uh, I'm assuming he saw that the person told him that saw that in a cartoon.
It must have been.
Yeah.
Or maybe he saw in the cartoon and just, I don't know.
Um, and said, yeah, if you, if you'd question that idea, you'd
realize it's a stupid one and, uh, you should have recomputed that, but you just
didn't.
Do we have examples of common cash dots that we use?
I had a bunch that I thought of when I read these the other day and I'll try
to think of some over the next minute or two and try to remember some.
I mean, yeah, even sounded what sounded like you were about to say something.
Yeah.
Uh, so I guess my cached thought when talking about caching in the context
of not computers is that the chapter on caching in algorithms to live by is
probably the best in the book.
What is algorithms to live by?
Oh, you haven't heard of it.
Um, I've heard of it, but, uh, pretend that I am a new listener.
Okay.
Fair.
Uh, so it's a book, uh, basically taking a bunch of concepts that are commonly
used in computer science and programming and talking about how you can use them
to improve your daily life.
Uh, talks about sorting, caching, et cetera.
Uh, it's quite good.
It was by Tom Griffiths and Brian Christian.
They were on episode 161 of rationally speaking.
So if you like not reading, but still learning about books, that's the
way to go, or it's a good starting point.
They were also on an episode of the 80,000 hours podcast.
I don't know the number offhand stone cold badass like Steven.
Yeah, I'll pretend like I remembered the number.
He just has all the episodes of rationally speaking cached in his brain.
That's right.
I have no room for important stuff like birthdays or, uh, I don't know how to get home.
Uh, I think one of my cached thoughts is generally conspiracy theories are ridiculous.
Yeah.
I mean, I'm trying to think of like specific, complete the pattern ones.
And I had some, cause like it's easy enough to think of the like, you know,
derisive ones that I disagree with this.
Right.
Um, but like, what do I automatically fill, uh, the response with when I hear
something and I'm sure there's, you know, literally hundreds.
And I'm just, that's not, it's the thing is about these.
It's not labeled in a box in your head called fake shit.
Right.
So like, I can't just go look at that box and see what's in there.
Um, and like not all cash thoughts are fake.
Right.
Most of them are great.
Like that's why they're there.
You know, they're, they're, they're reliable.
Um,
As this pointed out in the post.
Oh, go ahead.
So this is a, uh, terrible segue cause we're not going to the main segment,
but I'm pretty sure I have cashed, uh, government programs are bad.
Yes.
Um, yeah, I, yeah.
Like I, I definitely need to, uh, when I immediately hear of a government
program, like my reflex thought is to try to figure out how it's terrible.
And then, uh, I usually do, um, and then sometimes I don't.
And then I have to actually think about things.
I mean, I related to, uh, that, I mean, it's a, I see it all the time
where people are like, I don't know, whatever situation, um, you know,
Bezos made what he forexed his money in the last year or something.
Oh, the capitalism is terrible.
And like, you know, this is why or something.
And it's like, it might be, but like you need to just be able to articulate
the entire thought, right?
Uh, struck a good friend yesterday and I forget, it might have actually just
been me talking about what we were about to talk about today on the podcast,
but they just said, uh, billionaires shouldn't exist.
Oh God, I heard them say that a few times where they're just like, nobody
should have a billion dollars.
And I was just like, like kind of asked a couple of follow up questions.
Like, what do you mean by that basically?
Or like, what about this scenario?
And they, like, they hadn't actually thought about the thought.
America is the worst.
I hear a lot too.
Oh yeah.
Like, oh yeah, this country is the worst.
And it's like, don't get wrong.
I'm not, you know, a flag swinging patriot, but we do some things pretty good.
And we do things, we do lots of things a lot better than the worst.
Yeah, we're not the worst.
Stop the literal worst.
I mean, have you seen South Korea?
I mean, North Korea, yeah, best Korea.
He, uh, Eleazar does point out in the tribe that the vast majority
of our computations are probably cash thoughts because, uh, he says, no one
can think fast enough even to, ah, he didn't say even, no one can think fast
enough to recapitulate the wisdom of a hunter gatherer tribe in one lifetime
starting from scratch.
As for the wisdom of a literate civilization, forget it.
And I think that's true, which is part of the reason why it took humanity
so long to get from, you know, hunter gatherers to where we are now.
Cause it, you know, it's hard figuring out even what shit you can eat that won't
poison you.
Yeah.
I mean, as you recently learned, yes.
Well, and then, I mean, this relates to cashing, but like record keeping
was one of the major breakthroughs in that, right?
And that's essentially his, you know, a cash record of like, by the way,
don't eat this and we've got a list of poisonous foods in the region.
And now that people can write them down and read them, it saves everybody
the time of rediscovering that or having to go to a meeting, you know,
with the town elders to learn about it.
Well, that's the thing that people usually pick up because it's local
knowledge that's very important that the record keeping was much more for
keeping track of how many bales of grain were.
I was going to bring that up next.
Yeah.
Like, I mean, so it allowed you to, uh, just the idea of saving data, right?
I'm having to wait, like granted, you can save it sort of kind of in your head.
Actually, um, pre record keeping and cultures were very good at oral history.
Like, uh, I think very good is a relative term.
I've heard this, but, uh, they were very much better than us.
Yeah.
I heard that they were very passed down very accurately.
I would be surprised to learn that, um, even, uh, that they were good at like,
uh, accounting.
Yeah.
Like, uh, they, they certainly had a much better memory than we do for like
narrative stuff, but for things where like, you need to keep a four or five digit
number in your head and then you need to do that like 200 times.
Yeah.
Actually, I'm, I'm not saying it's impossible, but I would need to see some
really, really good evidence that that would actually be the case.
There's people that can memorize how many digits of Pi have people memorized.
We're going to look that up for them.
Oh yeah.
No, it's, it's crazy what you can do.
Actually, the, I don't need to look it up.
We'll figure it out later.
But, uh, the memorization techniques involved, I've like looked those up because
it's really fascinating are building a narrative on top of it.
Like, yeah, we as humans like use storytelling as a memorization technique
because we're sort of built for it.
Yeah.
The memory palace thing is very much a, you're walking through when you're
telling a story to yourself, remember things.
Yeah.
You can, people can memorize an entire deck of cards and, you know, random
order, what order each card comes in by, uh, by doing those.
But those are like professional memorizers.
You can do a deck of cards and Pi, but that's right.
I mean, like, you can do it with enough, right?
Yeah.
But, but that, that's what I mean.
If you have an invented writing, the marginal product of a professional
memorizer will be much, much higher than it is after you invent writing.
Right.
So, uh, requiring it to be a professional memorizer is, uh, actually
a fairly low bar for, I'm just thinking like civilizations.
It saves a lot of time.
You know, if I'm doing, if I'm farming 18 hours a day, I don't have time
to like dedicate training my mind palace.
So like, I might, you know, I might know somebody who's like the town
accountant or makeshift thing, but then I need to just trust that they
remember everything correctly, right?
Yeah.
And I mean, the thing is the normally when I hear the stories about, uh, pre
liter cultures had an amazing oral tradition.
That was incredibly accurate and et cetera.
It's from religious people trying to justify why their, um, religious
tradition is, uh, infallible and accurate and accurate doesn't mean true.
Yeah.
But I, I, I don't believe that, uh, their narrative hasn't changed because
sometimes we do find old ancient records and they contradict.
Uh, it's even if people can memorize those things and I don't doubt that they
can, uh, there are other pressures in life, uh, specifically political
pressures often, which will cause the narrative to change, uh, over generations.
Even if, um, people could have memorized it perfectly because there's
damn good reason for small things to be changed at the margins.
Yeah.
Especially like if your civilization gets taken over by the Babylonians and
all of a sudden you need to reboot, uh, everything and explain how this happened.
Yeah.
All kind of, yes.
It does become all part of God's plan.
It's, it's wonderful that way.
I've always, I remember, uh, like as a child hearing that like, you know, things
are part of God's plan.
I was kind of like, I was thinking about that recently too.
I was always very confused by why that made it good.
It's like, don't worry, it's all part of God's plan.
And then I'm like, what is, what is the plan though?
Because so far, like all the history I've read seems very random and
capricious and like kind of cruel, which I guess is the synonym for capricious.
I would strongly recommend, I know I've recommended Ted Cheng before because
he's just an amazing short story writer and he writes things that
rationalists would love, but he wrote a short story called the truth of fact and
the truth of feeling.
And in that is a wonderful example of this sort of narrative, um, that changes
for political reasons.
And when one particularly percocious young kid, uh, finds out that the history
has changed and gets upset about it, the elders are like, kid, this is the actual
truth, because this is the truth of the world as it, as it is, because that's,
that's the truth they needed it to be in order for things to progress so that the
tribe could survive.
It was a really interesting story.
Yeah.
The truth of fact and the truth of feeling.
Okay, cool.
And so I continually see people who aspire to be critical or who aspire
to critical thinking, repeating back cash thoughts, which were not invented
by critical thinkers.
Ah, this is from the post.
Yeah.
And so I figured we could try a few of these, you know, complete the pattern.
And so death gives meaning to life for, um, and he gives all the examples
that like would be easy for me to think of, you know, like over, you know, um,
immortality is a good thing.
And then you get ideas like, well, overpopulation, you know, all these,
all these nonsense things.
And I've met people like this and I've actually rejoined, I don't know,
probably after I've read these, uh, or, you know, around the time, but like,
you mean like people just defending their cash thought?
Yeah.
We're like, so they have the thought.
And then because they like, they have it, their inner, uh, PR person is like,
well, hold on, that must be, that must be what I actually believe.
Let's defend it.
And so like, but I've met people and like, like he talks about in the post who
are like, you know, when you talk about existential risk or something, well,
you know, maybe humans suck.
You want to read the actual quote?
Oh, sure.
I figured I could summarize it well enough, but it's frustrating to think
that good and decent folk, people would never in a thousand years spontaneously
think of wiping out the human species, raising the topic of existential risk
and hearing them say, well, maybe humans don't just, maybe the human
species doesn't deserve to survive.
They would never in a thousand years shoot their own child.
It was part of the human species, but the brain completes the pattern.
And so like I've, I've had those conversations and I asked them like,
you know, like, and they'll be like, they'll be sitting there with their,
with their spouse.
I'm like, so you would shoot your partner in the face.
Like you would throw them into the sun or whatever it is, right?
And they're like, well, no.
And like, where do you think they live?
What species are you?
Yeah, I've had that, you know, there was this ex co-worker of mine
that was always talking about how humans suck.
Just like, okay, I, but like, but you, but you're like, maybe it's not humans.
Maybe just you, man.
Um, I like, you know, Carl Sagan, just to go, go, go out of another way.
He had just this great way of, you know, talking and thinking about it.
It's like we humans are capable of greatness.
I think that's the way to properly frame it.
Like we, we, yes, we fail all the time.
We do nasty shit as a species, but we, as a species are also capable of such
greatness that the rest of the planet is, is not even comparable to.
And that's, that's the real beauty.
I will say that self-loathing is a hell of a drug.
I was married to someone who was of the human, should be extinct mindset.
And she didn't kill herself.
Yeah, it's just that it was a human that you were married to.
Yes.
And she didn't kill herself, but you know, she was kind of trying to do the best
she could for all the other species on the planet because she knew that she
couldn't wipe out the human species.
But it was one of those things were like, if she had the option to, she probably
would have, I mean, maybe, but then you kind of wonder, like, I don't know
about, you know, this person's psychology in particular, but it's like, I, I
don't, I think the people who just say that are just saying rehearsed thoughts.
Like, I think you give them a button and be like, by the way, this will also
kill your parents, your kids, your, your partners.
Like the person would press that button's a monster.
Hey, I don't want to use the word monster, but, um,
anyone who's really troubled, anyone who's willing to kill me and every baby on
earth, it's hard, you know, it's hard to say that I would call them anything but
a monster.
I get where they're coming from in a way that, like, I get where, um,
I, you know, the self-consistency.
I suppose, like, I die too, but that's okay.
But I totally get the where someone's coming from if they were to go, you
know, like, uh, kill an abortion doctor or, um, I mean, hell, even like, uh,
kill a Democrat, yeah, kill a Democrat or, or like, lynch a witch or something.
Right.
Like, I get where you're coming from.
You believe these crazy things, but the idea that you're out doing this, like,
I don't know, I, I, I, I think that's maybe again, I won't, I won't fight the
definition of monster, but I'm like, I want that to change.
I don't want you to, I don't want you to be that way anymore.
I think, I think you would be happier if you weren't even weren't that way anymore.
Right.
It's a good thing that it's really hard to wipe out the human species.
Thank God.
And we have to worry about the, uh, mad genius correlate to, um, what was the,
the fuck, fuck, it's just slipped my mind.
The law that computing power doubles every 16 months.
Moore's law.
Yes.
The, the mad genius corollary to Moore's law is troubling.
That's a great cash thought.
I like this one, uh, rationality, complete the pattern.
Love isn't rational.
I mean, we could probably think of just like, you know, corollary versions of
that that make us sound all high and mighty, right?
Well, like, oh, we're such clear thinkers.
Shall we complete the pattern?
Love isn't rational.
Well, I thought that it was, oh yeah, yeah, I mean, I mean, he argues against it,
but the first thing I think is like, yeah, yeah, that, that, that shit makes me crazy.
Yeah, I guess, uh, it makes me do stupid stuff that I wish I didn't do.
I don't, the love isn't rational with somebody like, it's supposed to be
somebody arguing against rationality as, as a good thing, you know, like.
Oh, oh, that if you can't love, motherfucker, or I encounter those arguments
back in the day with religious people, like, oh, no, I, I believe in love
because I believe, you know, universe has meaning.
And it's like, well, I believe in love too.
And yeah, I don't feel that way.
So clearly we're, we're, we're at an impasse with our communication here.
Um, yeah, I, I don't have like a, um, a quick cash thought to rejoin to somebody
who's like, uh, what that they say.
So love isn't rational.
It's like, okay, so, yeah, like that, that's my cash response.
I guess if I have one, like, well, but you're not a real rational Steven.
I guess, yeah, I'll, I'll bite that bullet if, if that means that I think
love is cool or real, um, or that I, what makes me not a rationalist?
That I think those things are that I don't have a quick response.
Yeah.
Yeah.
No, I'm going, I'm going to take the other side of this.
I think love is rational.
I know.
It's yeah.
That's what, what's irrational about love?
Like sometimes love makes you behave irrationally, but that's not because of love.
It's because of the stupid monkey brains.
I think it's because of love, but I think love is a thing that evolved for
very rational reasons.
Like evolution wants you to act irrational sometimes in the defense of your
mating partner.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Like I, I think love is a, um, I think love is a comorbidity.
With irrationality, uh, so to speak, but, um, like it's not inherently irrational.
Right.
So put it, put it that way.
I mean, like the fact that I love my wife means that I, I share in her
happiness and I want her to be happy.
And like, well, I mean, even if you just distill it down to her
happiness makes me happy, like then of course, uh, you know, I want her to be
happy because all's makes me happy.
There's nothing necessarily.
There's, that's a perfectly, as far as I'm concerned, straight line of thinking.
I think like people might say it's irrational in that I would let a
thousand people die before I let her die.
And yet the math doesn't check out, right?
Right.
Um, so, you know, it is what it is.
Like I, I'm, I'm prepared to just bite that, but I, I, I defend that.
That's like a kind of, um, I, I like comorbid comorbid with irrationality.
Um, that, that, that's a kind of, uh, like flaw in robot thinking that I
think is understandable given our, uh, heritage, right?
Um, like you said, where we're wired this way and it just, it doesn't make
sense that like if I cared about her as little as I care about third world
people who I care about, um, but like just because they're distant, both
in time and space and, and, uh, psychology, um, you know, like it's,
it's, it's rational and game theoretic terms, like the impulse to exact
revenge on someone who has, you know, hurt you in some way, even far beyond,
uh, the costs that would rationally make sense, uh, prevents people from
hurting you in the first place and therefore, even though it is irrational
to pay a lot of money to hurt someone more than it's worth, it, uh, in the
long run, it stops the hurt happening in the first place.
I like that way of framing it.
It's actually a very sure destruction.
Personal level.
People are less inclined to mess with you if they know that you'll throw
away literally everything to ruin their life, they mess with you.
I will sell my house and hire Hitman left and right to come after you.
If you come up in traffic again.
All right.
Are we, uh, so, so what I'm hearing, Steven, is that you think Taylor was right?
Uh, Taylor did nothing wrong.
I think I actually haven't read it.
So I'm just repeating a phrase that I see.
I, I, you know, about the nothing wrong part, like, I don't know.
I, that's a longer conversation, but like, was she right?
Like at the end, spoiler alert for worm, she basically mind rapes everybody
into following her will.
So she can guide, she can command all of them as like some of them as meat shields
or as, as, uh, as distractions and others as just big guns to fight the big bad
that's trying to destroy the universe.
Like I, I, I would be obviously irked if I was grabbed by Taylor and thrown
into the meat cannon that to be shot at this monster.
And yet I'd be like, my, my last thoughts.
If I had a chance to reflect on them, it might be, I understand.
Like, you know, given the choice, I would like to have cooperated freely, but
given that this, there wasn't time to do that and people weren't playing along.
If you had to, if you had to do it by force, like, I mean, it's one of those
things like what's worse, like being violated that way or being, having
your, your planet be extinguished and anyone who says my personal freedom is
more important than that, they don't realize that if planets extinguished,
your personal freedom is also gone.
Well, maybe they do realize that and that's just the hill they're willing
to die on literally literally willing to die on that hill and drag the rest of
their species with them, including their, their, their friends and children.
Right.
So that too would have made a great segue to the main topic if we didn't have
another sequence post to get through.
Okay.
Let's, let's finish this one up.
Um, he ends it with try to keep your mind from completing the pattern in the
standard unsurprising already known way.
It may be that there was no better answer than the standard one, but you
can't think about the answer until you can stop your brain from filling in the
answer automatically.
I like how he says that, like it's easy.
He doesn't say like, he makes a very big point in the post about how hard it is.
I didn't copy at all.
But it's, but it's like, even, even the big way he's, there's, there's no,
sort of like, don't think of a pink elephant.
Well, I've never had a problem with that.
It's, see, I pictured a pink elephant the second you described it.
Um, but like, it's, it's more just like, all right.
So here's how you, here's, here's a common failure pattern.
Try not to do that.
It's like, sure, I'll try.
Like, and I, and granted, he goes on more at length about it.
And this, like, obviously that's like a large point of the
sequence is how to think originally, but to deliver that sentence is like
delivering instructions on how to tightrope walk.
It's like, yep, put one foot in front of the other, try not to fall.
Like, like that's the instructions.
Sure, it sounds easy when you write it down, but it's hard.
So I have a question about this, uh, before we move on to the next thing.
Isn't this basically what all conspiracy theory and flat earth people are doing?
They're not just accepting the cash thoughts the society has given them.
I disagree.
I think that they're accepting a new cash thought.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think they have the cash thought everything you hear from official sources is a lie.
And like, that's definitely an interestingly different cash thought, but I
still think it's a cash thought.
Like I, I have, with the exception of some people like David Yusuf, I haven't
met anyone who's like, yeah, 9-11 probably was done by al-Qaeda, but
Kennedy definitely not, uh, killed by what's his name?
Oswald.
Yes.
Hmm.
I, although I did recently hear by far the best alternative to, uh, Oswald killed
Kennedy from David Yusuf.
Uh, so shout out to him.
What?
Was it a suicide?
Uh, no, it was an accident, uh, basically the, so the, the, according to Yusuf, which
I have not independently confirmed this, but I doubt he'd just make it up.
Uh, the secret service and other law enforcement agencies weren't trained to
keep their fingers off the triggers until after, until like, uh, several decades
after the Kennedy assassination.
So they accidentally killed the president.
Yeah.
So the, so the idea is, um, the first two shots are from Oswald.
Secret serviceman draws his pistol with a finger on the trigger, driver slams on
the brakes, and the secret serviceman accidentally shoots Kennedy in the back of the head.
I have two quick thoughts on that.
One is that I feel like his head blew up in the fashion of a rifle shot, not a,
not a handgun.
And it exited out the back of his head.
That too.
But the other, the other thing about the back of the head makes you think that this,
this theory suggests that, that, and it's not impossible, but that Kennedy died
like Marvin in Pulp Fiction.
They're living back.
What do you think about this?
Oh shit, I shot Marvin in the face.
The thing is, I'm more excited to believe, I'm more inclined to believe, you know,
what's the, I'm trying to remember the, the phrase where it's like not attributing
things to malice or hand lens razor, never attribute to malice that, which is
adequately explained by stupidity.
Yeah.
So like, I'm totally inclined to believe a conspiracy theory that's like, okay,
the official thing is wrong.
Actually, this other stupid, like random thing happened.
And I'm just like, yeah, sure.
They're trying to, they're trying to fly the planes to Cuba, but they hit the
towers on accident.
Yeah, that, that's definitely the way to convince me of a conspiracy too.
Just like, if it, if, so if the Benny Hill theme is more appropriately played
over the conspiracy theory than it is over the official story, I'm much more
likely to believe it.
I think that your point of like conspiracy theories as a whole is interesting, but
I think that's a larger phenomenon than just rehearsing bad cash thoughts because
rehearsing the correct answer as cash thoughts is a similar problem.
You know, again, you're, you have to be correct.
You know, how old's the universe?
You know, about 14 billion years.
Yeah.
And that's just like an answer that you heard and vaguely right.
I have no idea how to verify that.
Right.
And like, I, you know, I've read books that explain how we know that, but I
didn't check like, so I mean, I don't know how much exactly how primary research
is demanded to be fully justified in my belief.
But it's like, I'm right.
I'd be willing to bet, you know, all my money that I'm right, that the universe
is somewhere between 10 and 15 billion years old.
But like, that's not the, I don't know, if I, if I believe that it was 10,000
years old, because I'm a young and creationist, I'm still just rehearsing
things that I've heard, you know, granted, I'm rehearsing better things that
I've heard from better places because I'm smart and I'm right and they're wrong.
But, but yeah,
I think it's a, it's a hard, it's a hard thing to do an easy trap to fall into
when you try to critically examine something.
David, you have the loudest keyboard I think I've ever heard.
You're welcome to mute.
Sorry.
No, you're good.
I'm just letting you know you're welcome to mute.
You need to slam the keyboard.
That was a great segue by Jace though.
Sorry, I couldn't hear it over the keyboard.
Really?
No, segue again.
I couldn't hear it over the keyboard.
Sorry.
No, I don't want to do it again.
Okay.
What was the same?
By the way, if you guys have never typed on a mechanical keyboard, definitely try
it. It is the most oddly so.
Oh, we just lost you.
All right, we are now recording.
All right, the second less wrong post after that slight technical issue, which
we're have, we have now recovered from is the outside the box box in which
Eliezer points out that whenever someone extorts you to think outside the box,
they usually for your convenience point out exactly where outside the box is
located.
Isn't it funny how nonconformists all dress the same?
Yeah.
If you don't wear black, how will people know you're a tortured artist?
How will people recognize uniqueness if you don't fit the standard pattern for
what uniqueness is supposed to look like?
I feel like he's painting with too, too broad a brush here.
I don't like, I mean, I, I guess tortured artists might be a very niche thing,
but like, you know, tortured person also has like the, oh, I wear long, drapey
clothing and I, you know, like, but a lot of people are tortured and sad and
dressed perfectly normally.
Yes, but they should not dress perfectly normally.
So other people can tell that they're tortured and sad.
Yeah.
That's why we have also, I, I feel like there's a difference between a
tortured sad person, lowercase t, lowercase s, lowercase p, and a tortured
capital T, sad capital S person, capital P, T, M.
I just got my whole life.
I never like considered myself to be tortured or sad.
I just like this that I.
Yeah, I really love you there, but I really, yeah.
And artificial intelligence, everyone outside the field has a cash
result for a brilliant new revolutionary AI idea.
No networks, which were just like the human brain.
New AI idea, complete the pattern.
Logical AIs, despite all the big promises have failed to provide real
intelligence for decades, what we need now are neural networks.
I feel like there's probably a new one now.
Is it a GPT thing at the time?
Is the GPT and open AI basically neural network architectures?
Whoops.
We got there eventually.
But are those AIs?
Yeah, it's a good one.
I don't know.
Are they, are they intelligent?
They're the next step along the way.
They're getting there.
There's something.
And as someone who is vaguely approximating a subject matter expert in
something that has very little to do with AI, I can confirm that this
isn't exclusive to AI.
It happens for pretty much everything.
Yeah, I've heard, gosh darn it.
I'm trying to remember.
I had a perfect example of one.
Well, the thinking outside the box on Econ is always like, oh, people aren't
perfect, you know, utility maximizers.
And that's why we have this brilliant revolutionary new behavioral economics,
which has been around for like 30 years now.
It's actually been around for, oh, God, like,
uh, 250 years or so.
See, that's the definition area.
Fun fact, literally 100% of modern economics can be found in Adam Smith,
except for demand curves.
That, that is literally the only innovation that's happened in economics in
the last 250 years.
I will have to take your word for it.
Sounds like a really riveting field.
If it's been, if it's been a solved problem for a quarter of a millennia.
Was that just a dig at your profession?
I'm sorry.
Uh, kind of.
I meant to, I meant it in a good natured way, but I realized that it could have
come off, I meant to, as a complete joke, that was supposed to be a fun jab.
But yeah, yeah, no, that's how I took it.
Um, yeah, you're looking for the cool new shit that hasn't been found yet.
Yeah, basically, like, so there's demand curves.
And then there's a lot of people trying and failing to refute Smith's claims.
And then, like, basically, there's just a bunch of footnotes to Adam Smith.
Well, there's also implementation, right?
Um, he was pretty good about that.
Oh, well then.
Yeah, he was, he was actually a, he actually married theory and practice in a
much better, healthier way than a lot of modern economists.
I do like that.
Eliezer points out subversive literature because, you know, literature is a thing
that I have a hard on for and asks, uh, that, that it's, uh, has any of the subversive
literature you've read cause you to modify any of your political beliefs points
out that most of it is taught to you by English teachers in high school.
And, uh, yeah, I would just, I, in my opinion, anything that's actually subversive
is censored.
So nowadays the subversive stuff would be like, I guess what you find on 4chan.
Yeah, or QAnon or QAnon, Captain Underpants.
Captain Underpants is like the most banned book.
What?
Because parents don't like that it's very naughty.
Oh, wow.
Okay.
I, when I worked at a library, we had banned books day.
It was great.
Nice.
Like we display them prominently with like little placards explaining why this
book was banned, like, and encouraging people to check it out and read it.
So, so I, I'm going to ask this question, even though I'm almost sure I know the answer.
Did you ever put, uh, Mein Kampf in that display?
Yes.
Really?
Did Mein Kampf ever banned?
Yes.
Uh, yes.
Yes.
Apparently banned in Germany, I think.
Well, yeah.
Germany's got its, its whole thing.
I just, I figured kind of over here, like can't I go to Amazon and buy a copy of
Mein Kampf?
Yeah, I, here you can.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You can buy a copy of Mein Kampf in America.
Well, except for Dr. Seuss books.
Well, you can still buy those.
Well, not on Amazon or eBay.
Oh, yeah, but that's because of their stupid bullshit.
Right.
So I mean, if they're still selling Mein Kampf, like that's, that's my thing.
I guess that's, in my mind, it's not, I guess who banned it?
Like schools or like, uh, yeah, primarily schools, uh, libraries.
I mean, like they have tried and succeeded at banning books from libraries before,
but libraries like generally dislike that.
I've tried to keep, you know, open access to information for everyone.
Are all the good, important historical books that are racy, like banned now,
like Huck Finn and, uh, to kill a mockingbird and stuff.
I don't think they're, I, I can't remember the exact details,
but I'm pretty sure, uh, that, uh, either middle school or high school
teacher got canceled because they said the N word because they were reading
Huck Finn aloud.
I heard about that.
But I wonder, I mean, also, and that was also like 10 years ago.
It was like an old recording, right?
Uh, maybe, I don't know.
Uh, Jason, is that library still open?
Cause I feel like I need to donate to them.
Oh, yeah.
Uh, I guess like, I don't know what, for some reason, I feel weird
saying it on the air.
It's the auto brings public library of Northfield.
Okay.
Cool.
Definitely donate to them.
They're great.
That was the same one where we had the hijab day.
Oh, nice.
The, like, stupid, uh, controversy over that.
Was that where you encourage people to wear hijabs if they wanted to?
Or, uh, well, we had, um, we had a local author come in who was a black
Muslim who wrote a book about like her life story of being a black
Muslim in Atlantic city.
And we got to talking with her after she did her book presentation and
realized that it was like national hijab day coming up.
And we're like, Oh, cool.
We can like, have you come back?
Cause she wanted to like, you know, it was a great time.
She wanted to like come back and do more stuff.
So like, I'll like talk to some of, I have like a friend who owns a store
that sells hijab and they can come in.
We'll like talk about the different styles that they wear in different countries.
And, uh, and just then like people could like try them on.
And to, uh, advertise it, the library director posted a picture of herself
on like social media wearing one of the hijab that she'd been given by
this woman who makes them and was like, you know, come to the library for hijab
day.
We have these books about these like Muslim women and their experiences,
et cetera, et cetera.
And the internet blew up because it was like white lady in a hijab of
cultural appropriation.
And then like one, one side and the other side was, how dare you wear that
terrorist garb in our nice little library?
So like, yeah.
Well, like they got the internet wanted.
So, uh, what we're swapping fun library stories.
Do you guys remember that story about the, um, uh, library that was trying
to do a drag queen story hour, uh, and it was so emphatically protested
that they ended up canceling it.
Oh, I didn't realize they canceled it.
Yeah, they did.
Uh, and that is the library that I go to when I want to go to a good library.
Yeah, cool.
Not really.
Would have been a lot cooler if they hadn't caved.
Oh, yeah, yeah, that's true.
I mean, they get some points for trying, but, uh, yeah.
So back to thinking outside the box, those are thinking outside the box ideas.
I like it.
Uh, what else do we have to say about this?
Eliezer has a cool example.
Um, apparently at this, uh, startup funding place, Draper Fisher,
Jerviston, if only two, oh, only two partners need to agree in order to
fund any startup up to 1.5 million.
And if all the partners agree that something sounds like a good idea,
they won't do it because yeah, that's thinking outside the box.
Exactly.
I love that idea so much.
Yeah, did say how many partners there also, uh, real quick, you did, um, you did
skip the best part of this post, or at least the most topical, uh, which is
the block quote, uh, from lizard, uh, revolution has already been televised.
Revolution has been merchandise.
Revolution is a commodity, a packaged lifestyle available at your local mall.
1995 gets you the black mask, the spray can, the crush, the fascist protest
sign, and access to your blog where you can write about the police brutality
you suffered when you changed yourself to a fire hydrant.
Capitalism has learned how to sell anti-capitalism.
And I could do an entire podcast episode on this concept alone, but, um, for
now, I'll just leave it at, uh, I once saw a, um, like T-shirt with a Chibi
version of the famous photo of Shay Guvera, and that was the most late
capitalism ass thing I have ever seen in my life.
I kind of want that T-shirt.
Oh, and who's lizard?
Uh, I assume some, uh, poster on whatever this blog or whatever it is.
Observes and it links to journalism.berkeley.eu and I, it's just like the main page.
And yeah, does anyone know who lizard is?
Help us listeners.
Yes, it's on the ground because now the lizard people don't rule us over.
All right.
He ends it with every improvement is a change, but not every change is an
improvement.
The one who says, I want to build an original mousetrap and not I want to
build an optimal mousetrap nearly always wishes to be perceived as original.
Originality in this sense is inherently social because it can only be determined
by comparison to other people.
And that actually was not the end, but that is the last note I pulled and is
another example of how hard it can be to actually be, uh, thinking outside of the
actual box, not using cash thoughts, because then if you're just trying to
optimize looking original, you're not necessarily looking for the actual
correct best solution.
Yeah.
And like, I mean, especially in a place where like, if it's a job, like, hey, I
did this thing and it's an original me and I, I'm the one who put it together.
Like that gives you job security and like street cred among your co-workers and
bosses, right?
At the downside is that like, sure, you did it only, but the, the packaged
version that you can get for free does that better and cleaner and more
maintainably, um, like,
Why did you spend 200 hours on this?
Right.
And, and now it's a, now it's this convoluted mess that only you know how
to work with job security.
Yeah.
Then the downside is then when you leave, other people, it's other people's
mess to work with.
So, um, yeah, I, uh, it's, I don't know if I ever hear people say, I want to
build an original mousetrap.
I get what plenty is making, but I always see, I want to make, I want to
build a better mousetrap, which is the, the, the canned phrase.
Right.
I have heard, um, things like, uh, you're trying to build a new
mousetrap or, um, reinvent the wheel.
Yeah.
Reinvent the wheel is something that I mentioned at least once every two weeks
at my job.
Like, you know, hey, before you do this, make sure you're not just trying to
reinvent the wheel.
Like there's probably a way that already exists to do this problem, to solve
this problem.
And lo and behold, there always is, because, you know, there's no, there's
no problem in general that you're facing working with computers that someone
else already hasn't worked on.
If you could reinvent the wheel and patent the reinvention and then convince
everyone else to give up the old wheels, highly lucrative, hard to do on a computer,
but it would be nice to do it in some other way.
Right.
Very easy to do in pharmacology, apparently.
Right.
God, don't get me started.
Big pharma.
So for next time, we will be reading original seeing and how to seem and be deep.
Can't wait.
All right.
And now we are going to start grilling, um, David on why libertarianism is the
best and or the worst.
Yes.
All right.
Uh, insert, insert the audio, uh, from the dark night of the Joker saying,
come on, hit me, hit me.
We're going to try to keep this more of a Q and a thing.
Uh, if any of David's a's go for more than three minutes, then we start tapping
on the microphone, doing something to get his attention.
So try to keep it snappy because we're going to have lots of follow ups.
Right.
I did not realize that that was the rule, but I'll do my best.
I didn't either.
I'll say a soft, you know, limit.
I don't know.
Like, I guess if I asked a good question and it's the answer takes 30 minutes,
then just say, here's the crappy short answer.
The longer answer takes 30 minutes or something.
But if you want to hit me with follow ups, I'll elaborate.
So I also, I had a meta note to bring up to this.
And, uh, at the beginning of the last episode, we caveated that.
Okay.
Look, hit Steven or anyone who's, who uses commits this, this, uh, fallacy or thought
trap, um, gets, gets a bonk with the bonk stick.
If you're comparing ideal capitalism and saying, well, this would be better than
this proposed libertarian solution, you get the bonk.
No, ideal government versus practical.
Yeah, I mean, I mean, it is a symmetrical rule, but I very rarely see people
making the other mistake.
And I'm pretty sure I don't, uh, but yes, uh, if you're comparing ideal stuff
to real stuff, then you're doing it wrong.
Well, so I think that's just what I wanted to keep in mind for a lot of my
questions, cause like, you know, we, we had like a long back and forth about, you
know, well, what if, uh, this asshole wants to do donuts in the, the intersection
near your house and you don't want them to, cause it's keeping up at night.
Like, I feel like the, the answer of, well, they just go door to door and offer
the money in exchange for you.
So that thing, like that is not how the real world works or will ever work.
I maintain.
And so like, I think that's the reverse of that fallacy where it's like, well, sure.
And this perfect libertarian utopia of Homo economicus is then, of course,
that's a good way to work.
So, so people have paid people to do pretty weird stuff on Fiverr.
Yes.
But that's different.
You're on Fiverr.
Uh, yeah.
So, yeah.
So, uh, the answer I gave you was, uh, shortened for the sake of time.
Uh, someone actually asked about that on the subreddit.
So, uh, we, and I asked them whether they wanted me to respond on the reddit
or on this podcast.
And they said on the reddit, uh, I have not gotten around to that yet, but I
will try to do that, uh, shortly after we stop recording, assuming I still have
any neurons left and then we can, uh, put a link to that in the, uh, show notes.
And then we can continue the discussion on that specific topic there.
Does that sound like a plan?
Sounds good to me.
Just one last thing about that before we move on, uh, I will remind you that the
governmental outcome was a couple of people got run over and maimed.
So, uh, you don't like, even if the outcome you get under real capitalism is just
like a bunch of people get really, really annoyed and get a bad night's sleep,
that's still probably better.
Right.
And, and I laughed not because that's funny.
I laughed because, uh, it's a, it's a great example.
Right.
Mine is the actual human suffering.
It's hilarious.
And so like, you're right.
Like, hey, you realize what really happened is people got, you know, run over by cars,
right?
Like, okay, yeah, that's a compelling counterargument.
But I guess what I want to keep in mind is that like doing, like proposing a system
that's better than what we have now is so easy.
Anyone can do it, you know, more or less.
You're not wrong.
No one should be billionaires.
Right.
No one should be billionaires.
No one, uh, you know, should, whatever, insert problem, right?
But like, uh, so I guess what I, I wonder.
I also think David is really downplaying the badness of having a lot of people kept
up all night, especially if it keeps happening over and over.
Like someone with insomnia, I agree.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, so like, I, I have had some, uh, involuntary staying up all nights myself.
I don't think I'm downplaying it though, because a guy got his legs crushed.
I know that's definitely worse.
I agree with you.
But on the other hand, if my past year of being almost unable to live my life due
to unable inability to sleep was due to one guy, I might consider crushing
his legs to get that year back.
Well, and we can also move away from this specific example.
The most, most of the, most of the time that someone makes a huge ruckus in a
neighborhood, nothing happens to them, right?
People drive through my, uh, townhome complex parking lot once a week,
blaring music loud enough to shake the windows for everybody in the complex.
There's this asshole who lives across from my apartment who has a like DJ quality speaker.
I think he told this story.
Yeah, I think I probably did say this last time.
So I think it happened right before that.
And so like, I'm just saying, like, for the most part, you know, violating the, uh,
the rules that people would like you to follow has no consequences.
Like, you know, well, I mean, yeah, granted, we don't want the consequences
to be you get run over, but it would sure be nice if you got a ticket.
All right.
So I've got a question that probably sounds like it'd be fast to ask, but too long
to answer how in general, how, how would like, um,
not just norms, but like agreed upon systems, like what, you know, what we call laws,
how would that work without, uh, like a state police?
So are we talking libertarianism here, or are we talking anarcho capitalism?
Because I can talk both, but, uh, one can easily be a libertarian
without being an anarcho capitalist.
So we should keep the distinction in mind.
Yeah, that was going to be my first question, because a lot of the things
you brought up seem to be like the subscription model of government,
which is great, but that seems like anarcho capitalism, as opposed to like
what the libertarian party actually wants when they run people for president.
I'm more interested in hearing about anarcho capitalism.
I say we hear both.
Okay.
Well, yeah, if we have time, we could do both for sure.
It's libertarian.
If you're going to, if you're going to force them into three minute answers,
I bet we can just do sticks because I'm curious how both of these work.
So yeah.
All right.
So, uh, the, the short version is, or the, uh, standard moderate
libertarian version is definitely the short version.
Uh, so I'll start with that.
Uh, it would work exactly the same as it works now.
Just there would be fewer laws about stupid things like, uh, nonviolent
drug offenses, um, prostitution, uh, trying to think of other examples
that would be pretty much uncontroversial for libertarians.
Licenses to do people's hair.
Yep.
Uh, occupational licensing.
50 years ago, having homosexual sex.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Uh, ending the forever wars.
And I think this is why libertarianism is somewhat popular.
Whereas anarcho capitalism is a total fringe position because just being
like, we're not changing much.
We're just getting rid of the stupid stuff is, is more palatable
than we're getting rid of all government and replacing it with this weird
thing no one's tried before.
Yes.
That's true.
But also libertarian is libertarianism, even the moderate version is pretty
unpopular because a lot of people are just horrific, busy bodies and would
prefer to be able to boss other people around at cost of being bossed around
themselves and they would to just like let people alone.
And that's why vice crimes exist.
So in, in a libertarian framework, I still have a state number.
I can call the police and say, this person won't stop, uh, hitting my car
at the baseball bat and somebody shows up and stops them.
Right.
Yes.
Oh, great.
I mean, you could even potentially call him up and say, this person is
blaring music and there's a noise ordinance in this town.
Sure.
So what, uh, so libertarianism, the standard framework has taxes then,
just less, right?
Uh, I mean, not necessarily even less, um, uh, probably less, but, um, like I
said, uh, fiscal stuff is, I don't think really worth quibbling about.
So if you wanted to say, and the forever wars and the drug wars and so on, and
then pump that money into a UBI, that would still be pretty libertarian.
Um, uh, there are probably some libertarians who would disagree with that,
but I would consider that a win for libertarianism.
Right on.
So I, I guess, um, libertarianism in a nutshell then was like less about
completely removing government and more just about like really reining it in the
way a lot of people pretend like they want to.
Is that right?
Yeah.
So, uh, like even the really isn't necessarily something you'd need to commit
to to be a libertarian, like I'm very much in the, uh, libertarian unity camp.
Uh, so like if there are any decreases at all that you want to make, uh, to the
size, scope and spending of government, then like I, I will back you up on that.
Um, so like, yeah, I, I am very much not a purist.
I think that there should be as wide a tent as we can possibly make for who
counts as a libertarian.
Um, so yeah, if you want to make it, you want it to become a dominant, successful
position, keep as many, as many high walls as they can, are the ones who want
to make their position fringe and small and therefore never victorious.
You're not wrong.
All right.
I got my question answered unless we want to ask about, I'm less curious now
about the anarcho-capitalism way of doing it.
Is that just, I guess it, so, all right, briefly then we'll keep the rest of
this on, on libertarianism, at least for my stuff, but the anarcho-capitalist society,
someone's hitting my car with a bat.
I'm not big enough to go hit them with a bat and stop them myself, nor do I have
enough money to pay a security guard to do it.
Is there, what's my option?
So essentially you have, so you've posited you don't have enough money to
pay a security guard, which I think due to economies of scale, it would be quite
cheap in anarcho-capitalism because that's actually the solution.
Essentially, you would subscribe to a rights enforcement agency.
Shorthand the mob.
Yeah.
So they were, so the original phrase that David Friedman used in the machinery
of freedom was private protection agencies.
And he changed it to rights enforcement agencies because literally everyone
who heard that immediately thought protection racket.
But yeah, so you will subscribe to a rights enforcement agency.
And then whenever you have a complaint that you want to bring to them, then you
say, hey, XYZ is happening.
And then they will go to the rights enforcement agency of the person who's
doing it.
And he's saying, hey, this person's doing a thing that's violating someone's rights.
We're going to go find them, jail them, whatever.
I do have an idea for how exactly that would work, but it's getting a little
bit into the weeds.
So we can go into that if you want, but I'll wait for you guys to actually ask
instead of volunteering.
And then they show up at your house and say, hey, quit it.
And then, if necessary, bonk you, take some of your money, put you in jail,
whatever.
Right on.
I like that distinct answer.
That's a terrible answer, though, because that is literally the mob.
He would just have his own rights enforcement agency, which would fight
your rights enforcement agency.
I mean, I didn't say I agree with it.
I like this.
I like the strictness of it.
Yeah.
So like, so there is there is a good reason to believe that wouldn't happen.
Do you want to give me another three minutes to talk about that?
Please do.
Okay, cool.
So essentially the if two rights enforcement agencies have a conflict, one
says that their guy did a thing.
The other guy says they didn't.
Then they will go to a mutually agreeable arbitrator for the arbitrator
to be mutually agreeable.
Then they'll need to be like an impartial seeker of truth.
And then, and that is actually something that's borne out empirically.
There was a time in the, I want to say late 1700s in England, when there used
to be one court, just the King's court.
And then due to some legal shenanigans, people were able to sue and try criminal
cases, I think, but they were definitely able to sue in either the King's court
or in the Admiralty courts.
And the levels of corruption plummeted because they, the courts were paid based
on how many cases they heard, and so they actually did compete on non-corruption.
Anyway, and then if the arbitrator finds the person did actually do the thing and
the rights enforcement agency keeps on trying to defend them, then they are going
to fall into a moral hazard problem, where suddenly everyone who does bad
things is going to be trying to join their agency.
And that means that soon they will have basically every other agency
masked against them.
So unless there are like, unless the other this one agency with the criminals
is small enough or is big enough, rather, that they can go against literally
the rest of society, then they probably won't be able to get away with it.
And there is, there are reasons to believe that they won't be that big, but I'm
going to need you to authorize another three minutes for me if that's a, if you
want me to go into that.
I think I see what you're saying.
I mean, it seems like this has the assumption that both parties have a rights
protection agency memberships, where like, if I was operating outside the
law as a, you know, Old West gunman, and I didn't have a rights arbitration or
rights protection agency subscription myself, but I still wanted to whatever
shoot car windows out for the sport of it.
And then the person whose car window I shot out calls there, I'm going to say
cops, um, they call their cops and then I don't have cops of my own.
So then they basically just de facto win.
Yeah.
Unless you can stop the cops, which you probably can't.
So yes.
All right.
So the, um, objection that Charlie had upon hearing this is that this basically
sounds like government for rich people, that anyone who can't afford a rights
protection agency simply doesn't have rights that are protected.
And there's a lot of people in America who don't have a lot of money.
Uh, yeah, but current government is government for rich people.
So, uh, and, and capitalism doesn't clearly, uh, perform worse there.
Cause, you know, cops murder poor brown people all the time and get away with it.
There's issues, but like, even when I was, you know, working part-time
making 11 a year, I could call the police.
Yeah.
The police, they're, they're certainly much more valuable for rich people, but
there is some presence in, in poor people's lives that they can show up.
If, if you get murdered and you're poor, the cops are still going to look into it.
Usually.
Yeah.
Unless you get murdered by a cop.
Um, sure.
Yeah.
So I suspect, although I freely admit that this is fairly self-serving speculation,
but I suspect that, um, the, uh, rights enforcement agencies would be cheap enough
that basically anyone, uh, who like has, is gainfully employed, uh, would be able
to buy at least basic rights enforcement services.
Yeah, but not everyone is gainfully employed.
There might be like, yeah.
And for, yeah, and for the rest, I, for the rest, I think there will be, um,
uh, that charity will be able to cover it, uh, because there are negative
externalities to crime.
Uh, this is the basic theory behind broken windows policing, which of course has
a bad reputation because racism and qualified immunity.
But like if you, uh, if like there are a bunch of murders or muggings or whatever,
then to some extent those, um, those criminals are gaining skills that they'll
be able to use, uh, to conduct or to commit those crimes more skillfully.
So I suspect that there will be, um, sufficient incentives to, um, uh, to
prevent those negative externalities that, uh, uh, there will be, uh, some
sort of free package.
Uh, there are also potentially a lot of, um, uh, opportunities for in-kind, uh,
payment of subscription fees.
So like you, um, uh, one weekend a month and one week a year, uh, like go out
and be a meter maid or something, um, that is getting deep into speculation
territory because there's so much we don't know about like what the services
would cost and, uh, what sort of charity there would be and all that.
Uh, but I will say it's not obviously something that will go horribly wrong.
And, uh, I am a very, very pragmatic sort of anarcho capitalist.
I would like to see it tried, but if something that I think would work out
is tried and it ends up going horribly wrong, then I'm happy abandoning the label.
I'd be a little bit bummed, but I definitely consider human welfare, um,
more important than anarcho capitalism.
And so if it did end up having really bad consequences, like, uh, rights
enforcement being beyond the ability of, uh, many people to pay for, then yeah,
I'm okay saying it was a good shot, but it didn't work out.
Nice.
I think I probably liked that answer.
One part that I liked too, was that you're right, even if I was a mostly
self-interested, well-off person, if I knew that two, two neighborhoods over,
there's a guy robbing the houses of people too poor to afford protection.
I don't want that person to get really good at crime because I'm just up the
street and if they get a lot of practice breaking into houses, next thing
I know they could be breaking into my house.
Now granted, if I, if I'm sufficiently well off, I have gates and panic rooms or
whatever, but if I'm only medium well off, I could see my personal selfish
incentive being, you know what, I'll spend 10 bucks a month towards the public
pool for protection, whatever, right?
Well, I think that's why a lot of people moved out to the suburbs back when the
whole white flight thing happened, because they could pay more to live further
away from the crime and that just left those, those crime-ridden areas, crime-ridden.
Crime-ridden.
Yeah.
Yeah, but remember that they did have, they did have government police and one
of the functions of government police is preventing private police.
So, assuming, even if we just assumed that they were self, if that they were
rationally concerned about crime and there wasn't any racial motivations,
which obviously there were, then under anarcho-capitalism instead of running
away, you could just say to your rights enforcement agency, hey, something's
happening that I don't like, here's some more money, can you handle it?
Yeah, I don't like this idea specifically because it does remove the monopoly
on violence.
I think, I think having a government monopoly on violence in any given
territory is actually a really good idea, because I just don't like the idea
of I don't even know how many separate entities, basically everyone, everyone
being able to commit violence at any time.
And there's, there's no rule against it just because they say they're a rights
enforcement agency or that, you know, I'm a solo person, I am my own rights
enforcement agency.
And I don't like violence getting out of control where everyone feeling they
have to defend everything themselves.
I like the fact that there's people saying, no, only these specific people can
do violence and everyone else has to cut it out.
But I think that our society kind of can work on that, like on an imaginable
small scale, where like, you know, if we're off doing a 30 person camping
trip for a month or something, right?
And one guy keeps stealing food, I don't know, or maybe the situation is more
dire or something, right?
But like whatever it is, like, at some point, we don't have to call the cops
to to exercise enough force to make this stop.
Yeah, but that's because there's 30 of you.
It's like when you're in a city of a million people, that's much harder to
police.
Well, if there's one jerk running around shooting out car windows, then the
million people shouldn't have a problem stopping them either, right?
But maybe the problem then too would be like, I mean, certainly if there's a
million people and 300,000 of them are hated by the other 700,000 for bad
reasons, then the 700,000 will have no trouble kicking their asses, because
they're outnumbered two to one.
It would be nice if only the state was allowed to do it and the state was
ideally close to impartial.
I started just saying, yeah, I'm basically like a race situation, you know,
where white people are beating back people out of the neighborhoods or something.
Yeah.
So the issue there is just that, I mean, it's the standard argument that capital
or anarcho capitalism doesn't obviously perform worse than other governments,
because like if you have a democracy with 50% people wanting to run around
lynching black people, then they can.
In fact, we had something vaguely like that in the antebellum self.
Or if we have a constitutional republic, which requires a supermajority to
lynch black people, then we can.
And under anarcho capitalism, presumably the black people want to get
lynched or want to avoid being lynched more than the white people want to
lynch them.
And so basically whoever, if there are enough black people with enough money
and enough desire to live to basically outbid the white people, then they won't
get lynched.
And whether that ratio is higher or lower than it would need to be under the
current system for whether the ratio of black people and weighted by their
desire is higher than it is under the current system based on political
power and how much the police like you and so on.
I don't know.
It I could speculate, but that speculation would be obviously self serving.
And yeah, so I will say anarcho capitalism doesn't obviously lose there,
but that is a definite failure mode I would be worried about.
Still sounds like government for the rich, since the people with more money get
to decide.
So to some extent, you're right, except what you're forgetting is that lots
of poor people can outbid a small number of rich people.
In fact, this that is basically how tenements happened.
Apartments in New York City used to be like you would rent the entire building
or an entire floor or whatever.
And then landlords realized that they could cut every floor up into five,
six apartments and then charge a third as much and make more money by renting
out these relatively cheap small units rather than renting out entire floors
to the rich.
I realized that.
But three hundred thousand poor minority people aren't going to be able
to outbid seven hundred thousand middle class majority people.
And sure.
But how much do those middle class majority people really want to go lynching?
I don't know.
Like like when you are living in essentially a racist
aristocracy and you know, you'll get away from it.
Like the cost of lynching is fairly low for the lynchers.
You just need to find someone and then throw a rope over a tree branch.
If they actually had to like engage in a bidding war, they I I realize
this is fairly self-serving, but I suspect they'd quickly realize, you know,
there are other ways we can entertain ourselves.
It wasn't just entertainment, though.
Like the Antebellum South was a government supported terrorism, basically.
Like you didn't need to lynch all that many people to have a terror-based
community that kept the majority of the people you wanted to keep down down.
You only need to lynch a few to set an example.
Yeah, sure.
Yeah, that's definitely true.
I'm not sure I have much else to say here.
Yeah, like it's definitely a potential problem.
I'm it's just not obviously something that would go wrong.
I do like the idea that maybe it could be tried out in a small area first
and then abandoned if it does go wrong.
Yes, I am a big fan of charter cities for that exact reason.
Yeah, it would be an opt-in kind of thing.
We wouldn't just make a neighborhood that way.
Yes.
OK, James, did you have something?
Um, well, I don't know if you know this, but, uh,
it's, yeah, speaking of trying it out, I'm looking at the anarcho-capitalism
Wikipedia and they have a section in historical precedence.
So yes, OK, one of my favorite topics.
Yeah, I don't know which one I want to ask about more.
The Free Cities of Medieval Europe, Medieval Iceland, the American Old West,
Gaelic Ireland or Somalia from 1991 to 2006.
But which one is how did the planes Indians not make the cut?
Well, the planes Indians are my favorite.
They're not on here.
Huh, do you want to edit this Wikipedia?
I have a lot of other stuff on my plate.
Yeah, but maybe.
Yeah, the reason why I like the planes Indians is because they are
a practical solution to the hard problem.
The hard problem, of course, being national defense.
And the planes Indian Solutions was just be fucking insane
and super aggressive and be so hostile to other foreign powers
that they can't invade you because they're too busy being invaded by you.
I don't like that solution at all.
Yeah, it's not great, but it does.
It is a solution, I suppose.
Huh, OK.
No one has no one has any other libertarian questions.
I mean, I can pull more off the top of my head.
But I guess like the problem is I'm already inclined towards libertarianism.
And I I I want to fight the narco capitalism thing,
but this wasn't supposed to be a narco capitalism episode.
It was supposed to be libertarianism one.
Yeah, the libertarianism like thesis seems to have fewer holes
like to drive a plane through.
So like, you know, like I like the answer to
in how do you solve comments problems?
Well, you have laws about it.
Like if that's an acceptable solution, then there's not much else about it, right?
I guess like a common complaint about libertarianism is
it would be entirely fine in the libertarian government for a racist
lawyer to discriminate against either racist employees or not racist
against minority employees or minority customers.
And people don't like that.
Yeah, we can talk about that.
Yeah, what if I go to a doctor and the doctor says,
fuck you, I'm not giving you any medicine.
You're too white for me.
Say, all right, fine.
If you're if my money is no good here, then I'll take it somewhere else.
Yeah, yeah. So this is this is actually a problem
where competition is especially in the presence of a
of a rule of law where you won't need to worry about the KKK
burning your shop down if you serve black people.
This is actually a an arena where competition works really, really well.
Essentially, black people have money and other minorities also have money.
And if you are
if you discriminate against them,
then they you are forgoing profit.
And under the theory of perfect competition,
which of course is a homework land thing, but it's easier to see there.
If you forgo profit, then you go out of business.
And likewise, if you
if you discriminate against potential employees,
then that's the same thing as essentially artificially
restricting your supply of labor.
And when there's a restricted supply of something,
then the price for it rises.
So you still pay extra to shop at the whites only cake shop.
But like the all inclusive cake shop will just see more traffic
because, A, it's cheaper and B, people who are
intended to who don't like the whites only cake shop because their assholes
will shop at the all inclusive cake shop.
Yes, except that they both cake shops also have to pay rent.
And if the all inclusive cake shop does more business
because of their lower cost of operation,
then that will drive up rent to the point where the racist cake shop
can't make theirs and the all inclusive cake shop can buy the lot
and then expand their business.
Well, if the like there's some questionable assumptions baked in there,
but that's at least a decent first brush.
Were you grinning because baked in there, baking to the cake?
No, no, I hate puns.
If the all inclusive cake shop, though, is willing to hire from a much wider
labor pool and therefore get lower paid lower prices for labor,
what that means in practice is that the public sees the all inclusive cake shop
hiring minorities for less and then they get cancelled for not paying
their minority workers as much as the racist cake shop is paying the white employees.
I would hope that the good PR of we serve everybody would help cancel out
the lower wages, but I don't know.
I that sounds like a two that doesn't sound like a critique of anyone.
Like that sounds more like a critique of society sub or post 2013
than it does of like any of the other politics at large.
But that is a funny thing to consider there.
Yeah, that's that's definitely a possibility.
At a certain point, I just have to throw out my hands and say,
like if people are determined to be psychotic, then there's not much I can do
to stop them. I guess I'd bring this up because this was an issue around.
I don't remember if it was World War One or two, but probably World War One,
I guess, where US veterans, black US veterans were stationed in the South
or on leave in the South.
And there were no shops in whatever area that would serve them.
And this became a major issue because these people were out there
killing and dying to defend your, you know, right to exist in America.
And you will not serve them.
And there was tension.
But on the other hand, the law was on their side.
They could simply choose not to serve black people.
And since there were almost no black people or no black people
that had money in their area, they never went out of business for this.
And it was it was a thing that was part of their business model and worked.
What like what do you do when you have a large federal government
with a diverse population and sometimes part of that population
goes to places that still have these sorts of racist customs?
So I would hazard a guess.
And this is speculation, but I'm reasonably confident about it
that the shop owners were less unwilling to serve the
black people because just they didn't want their money and more
because they were worried about the KKK burning their shop down if they did.
General social pressure. Yeah. Yeah.
The theory does fail if enough customers have a taste for
not shopping with black people or not being served by black people
that it becomes more profitable to discriminate.
But again, that's just a matter of like
if you are dealing with a population that's so corrupt,
then it's more a matter of libertarianism being unable to save you
rather than libertarian libertarianism failing in a unique way.
It sounds like libertarianism requires like a base level
of not insanity to work, which doesn't sound on its face like too tall of an ask.
That is that is true.
But it's also true of literally literally every other system.
That's true. Yeah. I mean, so yeah, don't get wrong, a lot of people suck.
But like I, you know, and I'm not sure how often this happens where,
you know, a gay couple wants a cake for their wedding.
And you know, I used to hear about these where the cake shop would be like,
I don't want to make a cake for your gay wedding.
And they're like, and if there isn't a cake shop next door,
we're like, all right, cool, we'll give our money to someone else.
Like, I don't know.
And I apparently I think the cake example is fun.
A, because it's real examples.
But B, because it's kind of trivial, like you don't need a cake for your wedding.
And like at the end of the day, it does not take a skilled person to make a cake.
Like I you can get a cake at Safeway for two dollars.
OK, so like, like, yeah, all right.
Yeah, I mean, like depends on the quality of cake you want.
Well, I mean, yeah.
But but at the end of the day, if you want to serve cake at your wedding,
you know, for ten dollars, you can buy five boxes of cake, add an egg
and put it in the oven in your set, right?
Like or add an egg in some water and like.
So I think with those, I always like those examples of like
the idiot shop owner turning down money because it's like, great, you just lost
because you get you get to overcharge like crazy for your cake, right?
Like if you're selling a wedding cake.
I said, I mean, you just turned down potentially hundreds of dollars
because you're stupid, like, great, you're now out hundreds of dollars.
There is an Aziz Ansari joke about this several years ago.
And I forget if it was a real racist locksmith or a hypothetical one
that you made up for the joke.
But it's like the locksmith didn't like Koreans or something.
We thought they were always locking their keys out and didn't want to help them
or something. And then he's like really specific.
Yeah. And he's like, he's like, I imagine this guy down the road, like, God,
if I didn't hate Koreans so much, I would have made so much more money.
And yeah, and the locksmith who was happy to help Koreans, assuming that in
this hypothetical Koreans are more likely to lose their keys or something,
or this is a Korean heavy area, like they're going to do better.
Like to me, I like that that part of the competition aspect, right?
Like it I get where like, you know, I was giving the example of like
a society collectively sucks enough to where it makes it hard for certain
groups of people. That's a much harder problem.
But like today, you know, I mean, we ordered our wedding cake online for $50,
right? So like, if I lived in some shithole town that, you know,
had one cake shop full of racists, I'll order mine from a milk bar might have
been the wait, milk. I forget what it was.
It milk is in the name somewhere.
This person had a thing on Netflix that we watched.
It certainly wasn't milk bar in Denver because that's a golf club.
That's right.
But no, she works in New York and we ordered from her shop and it was awesome.
Cool. And like, I mean, so in the age, especially where you can order in
services like that from from trucks across the country, like, I guess the cake
problem as far as I'm concerned is solved.
Like the, you know, where do you live and where do you shop for groceries?
If your local grocer hates black people or something, that's a bigger problem.
Yeah. Yeah. So that that is another place where the theory fails.
If there's a discriminatory monopolist, then that can be a much stickier wicket.
But the question there is, are you more likely to have a monopolist in a
libertarian society or in a status one?
And the I think the answer there is fairly clear that you're more likely to
have one in a status society, just because so many so many monopolies
are our government made.
And the the and like, trust busting is basically just blatant rent seeking
to punish companies that refuse to essentially issue bribes to the government
rather than actually, like, you know, trying to find cases of price
hikes, discrimination or other serious issues nowadays.
So, yeah, that having a discriminating monopolist is definitely a harder problem
to solve. But I think in a lot of ways, you can solve that problem by just not
having as powerful a government so that it has more limited scope to create monopolies.
I all right, I have a follow up.
I'm going to jump in here with I'm sorry.
Yeah, go ahead.
OK, all right.
For a lot of people, government intervention in the markets is a feature and not a bug.
Like they want the price protections, they want the licensing, they want the minimum wages,
they want all these things that they know you can't build a kind of crappy house.
You have to have at least these minimum standards.
How the hell are you ever going to get people on board with libertarianism
when you're telling them you're going to have to get rid of, you know, various
workplace safety laws and minimum wage laws and all these industry protections
and tariffs and monopolies that make things so profitable for you?
Like this seems like a really hard ask.
What's fun before you answer that is that I'm exactly on the fence there
because I'm in the position where I like all of those things
and I'm finding this libertarian talk very seductive.
So like, yeah, OK, yeah.
So PR is not my department.
Libertarianism is very unpopular and that does make me sad.
But like, I'm pretty sure that's just the case because a lot of people are idiots
and or busy bodies.
Yeah, you can't just go around and say people are idiots, though.
You have to say something like, well, OK, I'm sorry, I take that back.
If you want to get a majority of the people voting,
you have to make some sort of case as to why their lives would be better.
And that's really hard to do because they can see how the licensing keeps out competition.
Yeah, so like so taking this more seriously, one of the reasons
that I think libertarians are unpopular is because it's really easy
to see benefits that the government does.
It's much harder to conceptualize the problems it creates.
So like take the medicine approval by the FDA.
So it's really easy to think, oh, sometimes drugs have dangerous side effects.
We should keep people from being able to sell those.
It's much easier.
It's much harder to wrap your mind around the notion that some drugs are safe
and that the FDA prevents them from being sold and that that also causes human suffering
or to take workplace safety.
It's really easy to look at the OSHA rules and see, oh, there are all these things
that my boss isn't allowed to do that would make me safer
or that would make my job more dangerous.
But what you don't see is that those things cost your boss money.
They also make more people willing to do your job.
So you have both a lower demand and a higher supply.
And both of those things reduce your wages.
And maybe if you were to offer those people explicitly
package A, where you have these safety features, but they get paid, I don't know,
$20 an hour versus package B, where they don't have the safety features,
but they would be paid $35 an hour, they would prefer more money.
And that's just a safe building with no fire.
Yeah. And essentially by having these OSHA rules, you are telling people
that they aren't allowed to trade money for safety in a way that they might not
necessarily want if the offer was explicit.
I think a lot of people think that people should not be allowed to make choices
like that, like choices that could be potentially harmful for them.
Yeah, it's true.
What did I just say about people being busybodies?
Go ahead.
Well, I don't know.
I'm just thinking of the triangle shirt waste fire and children working in factories.
And we kind of, I don't know, that's where I start getting uncomfortable with it
because it feels like it seems too easy to imagine a world where people are basically
coerced to work in, to have children working in factories or to accept a job
at the triangle shirt waste factory because there's not that swath of options for them.
I don't know if I articulated that well.
No, I think you raised a good point.
And I'm trying to find the exact phrasing that David used in the example from the last episode
in the notes, but it was at the end about minimum wage.
But this is sort of related to that because I forget how you phrased it, but it was nice
and succinct, but I'll try and do a good job summarizing it.
Like, if I want to hire somebody to help build a fence or something, what's the minimum
amount that I can offer them before the government comes in and says, no, that's not enough?
Yeah. So the way I put it was if there is a voluntary transaction where you want to do
a thing and someone else wants to do that thing with you, whether it be working for wages
or exchanging goods for money or whatever, what are the requirements where third parties
are licensed to step in and prevent that transaction?
Yeah, I like that because we, like Jay said, there's this kind of uncomfortable reaction
about, well, I suppose if you offered my kids $60 an hour to work at your factory because
their hands are small enough to fit in the machines or something, I might be inclined
to take that, especially if I was desperate.
But something about that, I feel like it's a mark of a civilized society that we don't
have kids breathing factory smoke, working in factories getting their hands lopped off.
So you, you are correct that that is a mark of a civilized society.
And that's why child labor was more or less eliminated before there were child labor laws.
The implementation of child labor laws were basically the government coming in and claiming
credit for eliminating something that free markets had eliminated basically a decade
earlier.
Then to take adults then, I mean, like in the US and maybe in most of the world, I'm not allowed
to sell my organs, like voluntarily, I just think that's nuts.
See, there's a massive kidney shortage that could be solved in this country.
And that's kind of where I'm on the fence.
And that's how this is less of like a challenge, the one perspective or another.
And I'm kind of just tossing this out there because you're right.
A lot of people need livers.
A lot of people need kidneys.
You could donate a lobe of your liver without any, you know, without losing your life, you
can donate a kidney.
Livers are weird.
Livers are weird.
You can just cut a chunk out of it and it grows back.
And you need one to live.
Hence the name.
Dammit, you made me laugh at a pun.
I just dare you.
I just wanted to get that proof on the air.
So like, I get we could solve this problem by saying, hey, look, who wants a kidney?
But then like, I just have this gross reaction to it.
Maybe that's my own weakness.
But like, you know, I go soliciting around a poor neighborhood or I go to war
tour in Somalia and say, hey, how about I give you $200 and I get your kidney and
like $200 is, you know, would really help you in your situation.
But like, it just, it feels so, I don't know.
I, I don't, I don't like it.
Am I, am I stupid?
Do I have a problem or am I, am I onto some moral importance there?
Yes, yes, yes, you are stupid.
Yeah, no, I mean, if someone wants $200 more than they want a kidney, then like
what, that just give them $200, that seems like an obvious effective
altruist equation here.
Well, I think that there's just something like, and this isn't a utilitarian
answer, but something net negative, not in the, again, you, you're
non-calculus, but about taking advantage of the super desperate people where like,
if they, if they were able to feed themselves, if they had enough clothes
and, and, you know, electricity to live a life, there's no way they would take
your shit deal, you know, you can make it even grosser and be like, hey, yeah,
sure, I'll, I'll salvage you and your family from this war torn nation.
Y'all can live in my house, but I get to fuck you and your kids whenever I want.
Like, I mean, you can make this as gross as you want.
Somebody might be desperate enough to take that deal, but like, that's still
terrible.
And I like the idea of someone with a big stick said, no, fuck you.
I'm not letting you do that.
Now granted, the counterpoint is that they stay in the war torn nation and get killed.
Well, other counterpoint, um, you, would you be somebody's slave for eight
hours a day if you didn't need their money to pay your mortgage and food bills?
I mean, you're, I think you're, you're being pretty, uh, loose and fast with
your use of the word slave.
You are sacrificing hours of your life every day to do something you would
rather not be doing because they're willing to give you money.
Sure, you only get so many hours of life and they are stealing it just
because they aren't stealing it.
They're purchasing it on this side of it though.
I'm on David's, I'm on, I'm on the other side of the fence where it's like, you
know, if, if, uh, if someone, you know, so I've had jobs where it was not
worth the money to do that job and it was, it took, uh, risks and, and work,
but I got other jobs where now I am, you know, I feel like I'm getting, uh,
enough bang for my buck and like, I like having money, right?
And so, um, like, I like being able to go to the grocery store without having
to check my bank account.
Like, so those are freedoms, those are freedoms I'm, I have now that I didn't
before where like, I, I'm willing to exchange the time that I give to my,
my employer for that.
Like, so it's, that's less about slavery and it's more as about my,
my personal empowerment, right?
It's like about reality too.
And so like,
Is it that different from any other transaction of giving something of
yourself for money?
So that, again, I think that this is, I don't know, we've, we've moved pretty
far field from libertarianism, but this is just something where I found
a opportunity to shoehorn in something I've been tossing around for years without
any consensus in my own brain.
So like, it's,
And I do want to say I'm not actually on the side necessarily that I'm
advocating, I just am presenting that side.
No, it's still manning.
It's important.
Um, but yeah, you might, I guess you want to, you want to make clear that
you're still manning and not, not, uh, standing up for it.
Um, so like, I, I don't know.
I think the, again, if you take it to the gross extreme where, you know,
you're saving a family, but in exchange for all this horrible shit and
they're really torn, like on the one hand, it's, so it's like a, it's like
going to like a pot right, a drought stricken area and selling bottled water
for $15 a bottle where it costs you, uh, eight cents a bottle or something.
Right.
Like you get to make a killing and they need the water.
They need the water more than they, than they need $15.
Cause they're, they're, they and their kids are dying, right.
So like it's, but some, I, and I, and I realized that like, if I were to
step in as the government and just say no, then those people all dehydrate to death.
Like that's, that's not an optimal solution, but like high price of water
was a motivation to get people to bottle up water and drag it out there.
Yeah.
No.
So, so the, the solution that you're looking for is not to ban the transaction.
It's to make sure that people have enough money and other resources that they
never have to worry about taking one of those shit deals.
Yes.
And like, uh, and I think that it's pretty clear that the, uh, general
efficiency and, um, economic growth from having a less regulated freer society,
uh, will get you a lot of the way there.
And then charity will also do a lot for you there.
And then like I said, at the top, um, of the first show, I don't consider
welfare to be a fight worth fighting now.
I think we could probably get away without it for now or not for now, but, uh,
in an ideal situation.
But if I'm wrong about that, then I am definitely okay.
Having some sort of UBI and I am definitely putting those last on the
chopping block, uh, for my incrementalist and Arco capitalist fantasies.
Can I make a case for the busy bodies real quick?
Just to take the other side here.
Uh, you can, but I'm probably going to laugh at you.
Okay.
Uh, that's okay.
Um, so the case for the busy bodies is there is a lot of people who live as
if they're not going to, uh, see 22.
Like I, there's an old song by Coolio.
I forget it is, uh, yeah, gangsters paradise.
I forget the exact line, but he's like, will I live to see 24?
I don't know.
And a lot of people live their lives that way where they're like, you know what,
I don't even know if I'm going to be alive in a year.
I'm going to take whatever risks and shit as deals I need because it doesn't
matter to me.
Uh, they, I guess future me can go fuck himself or call it a, uh, high time.
What is it?
High time discount.
High time preference.
High time preference.
Yeah.
Hang on, hang on.
I always get mixed up.
Which one's high and which one's low?
Well, one of those time preferences is, is high time preference means you are
impatient.
Okay.
Cause you have a high preference for having things sooner rather than later.
Okay.
A high time preference.
And the thing is that they're wrong in their estimation, statistically speaking.
So in the end, it turns out that society is saddled with a lot of people who
made short-term good choices, which are horrendous long-term choices.
They now have zero kidneys because they sold them both.
And all of us are left paying the bill.
They can't work.
This is, uh, terrible.
And they're on dialysis.
We're not just going to let them die.
And so it's in society's interest to be like, if we're the type of society
that doesn't just let people die in a gutter and we are taking care of them,
then we have to curtail some of their worst choices, such as whether they
can sell their kidneys, for example, or I don't know, something else.
Climate change might be a good end of that position, right?
It's the busy body saying, no, you can't pump all that smog into the air to do
this when you can pay more to do it cleanly.
It's the OSHA busy body that's saying, no, you can't work in that coal mine
without any air filtering because you'll get black lung and be hospitalized at 40
before you die at 50 after 10 years of expensive care.
Even if it costs your employer more, he hires less people and you make less.
It's still a net worth it to society.
So fuck off.
I actually think the environmentalist point is one of the stronger arguments
against the other day.
Yeah.
So, so the question there is who is better at making decisions for you personally?
You or Miss Grundy down the street?
Personally, it's me, but I realize not everyone is as smart and well-informed as I am.
Sure.
But how are you going to generalize that principle?
Because if you are going to say, for example, that people can only fly planes if they meet
these very, very stringent standards that maybe some people would rather not have,
well, then you've just regulated flying cars out of existence.
And God only knows what sort of economic gains we would have if we had actually had flying
cars to say nothing of just, you know, being able to visit relatives that are six
hour drives and half hour flights away.
I'm with Jace.
I am a big fan that we don't have flying cars like my bedroom is on the second floor.
I love the idea that I'm not going to be killed by a drunk driver while I'm sleeping in bed.
People can barely drive cars on the ground.
We don't need to be, no.
Yeah.
Yeah.
No, it sounds like a cached thought.
So flying cars would be a lot safer than ground cars somehow.
Well, just because there's a lot that is that is getting way far afield.
And I really want to control, though.
Yeah, I would refer everyone to the book.
Where's my flying car by Jace Stortis Hall for the long version.
You were supposed to do a special mind killer episode about that book.
We're waiting for it still.
Yes.
So I am I offered to do an audiobook version.
And the author said that sounds awesome, except I'm in the middle of getting it
republished, and I'm not sure the new publisher would be as fond of it as I am.
And I said, cool, I am happy to do it on any terms your publisher sees fit,
including releasing it through Audible or some other more formal channel.
And I never heard back.
So wait, did you just reach out to the author and say, like, I'd like to do
an audiobook of your book?
Yes.
Yeah, yeah, I should do that.
You're allowed to talk to people.
I guess.
Yeah, it's a free country.
I know.
Also, I have found that the phrase I'm contacting you on the advice of my
dissertation supervisor, Robin Hansen, is a downright magical.
So once the six month mark, you should text over, you should contact him again.
OK.
But to Jason's point, unless you're going to make another one, I'm curious
about the environmental, like, like, because that is an example of like
a short term gain for long term fuck you.
It's even the long term isn't even you in five years.
It's your it's your neighbor's kids.
And you're yeah.
So I have a criminal thing last episode, though.
Yeah.
So I I'm not sure if we fully address the previous point.
If we didn't, then let me know on Reddit or Discord and I'll flesh that idea out
some more, but onto the environmental stuff.
I mean, again, there's the same problem.
Like if you have the problem, if you have the environmental impacts being
so abstract and in the future, then like that's not that's obviously
something that democracies have trouble handling as well as libertarian societies.
And if you have a tort system that's capable of handling that sort of class
action, which we plausibly would under a more libertarian society, even
though we don't know how these two people that have been dead for 60 years.
So you.
So an example of reparations.
And our capitalists would handle would handle that is like if you own a beachfront
property in Miami, you say, hey, I have this building that to all rights should
stand and generate profits for 200 more years.
But because of global warming, it's going to be underwater in 30.
And then you can go you can sue people who emit carbon as whatever class and say
you owe me some suitably discounted 170 years worth of profits for this location.
Fork it over.
This is why I was more interested in the anarcho capitalism, because I don't know
about y'all, but I'm already leaning pretty libertarian myself.
I'm having a hard time like even coming up with objections beside like beyond
the standard ones like the environmental, the prison privatization, gun control,
like, and it's all stuff people have talked about to death.
I do think there's some case for some level of busybodiness that is, you know,
non zero and non ridiculous.
Like, I mean, even if and I get like, this would be a risk I take as a worker
going to the office or something, but like, you know, if I'm working downtown
and then they erected a building next to mine that has no safety standards.
And I, you know, I'm worried it's going to catch fire and probably will.
My options are quit my job or like wish I lived in a world
where they weren't allowed to build such a dangerous building, right?
Like, no, you're missing the third option.
Hiring.
And sue them.
You can't sue them before it catches on fire, though.
Yeah.
I mean, I guess I mean, if I mean, if it's if it's a provable hazard,
then sure, you can.
But but would I be able to in a like we I can only do that
because there are safe safety standards now if safety safety standards
were a thing that we did away with because the busy body's got annoying?
Like, am I just, you know, I guess who would even be willing to hear the case?
Like, so, yeah.
So there are so in addition to anti-corruption,
there are also other things that that courts can compete on.
And this would be getting well afield of where we are right now
to explain why this is true.
But there are reasons to believe that offering strict liability
for cases where strict liability is efficient would be a thing
that some of those courts would compete on.
So it it's like it explaining why exactly that's true
would be really quite complicated.
What motivation does the person who built the dangerous building
have to go with this with the strict liability court?
Ah, let's see, how to do this in three minutes.
Feel free to take seven minutes for this one.
OK.
OK. So essentially, if the so if a court didn't offer strict liability
for violating safety standards, if it's economically efficient,
then they would essentially offer judgments for in favor
of people who didn't violate the safety standard.
So someone's got to be losing profits here somewhere.
Just got to. Yeah.
So for narco capitalism, right?
Yes. Libertarianism, you don't have the option of going to other courts,
though, you only have the state court.
Yeah, for Libertarianism, like I said, welfare is the last thing
on the chopping block, OSHA and some other things like that
would be like second to last. OK.
So realistically, Libertarianism is not going to get rid of that.
Probably not. Yeah.
And then if I need to like draw some grass and stuff to figure out
why competitive courts would offer strict liability if it was efficient.
But I'm not sure that's something I can do on the fly.
So if you're curious about that, hit me up on Reddit or the Discord
and I'll explain it there.
I think one of the major problems is people always have something
they like about government and whenever you bring up Libertarianism,
since its main thing is like reducing the size and scope of government,
they will bring up the thing about government they like best
and say, why would you want to reduce this, you monster?
I mean, yeah, like I said, Libertarianism has bad PR
and I'm not sure how to fix that.
Sorry if that's an unsatisfying answer, but like I know what side I'm on.
No, the truth. The truth.
Scout mindset. Scout mindset.
The honest speaking of Free Plug for Julia Gailiff's book,
I think it's called the Scout Mindset.
She just finished writing it. It's available for preorder.
She's such a put a link in the rationally speaking episode
that came out yesterday and she didn't.
But if you Google it on Amazon.
Damn, there should be a law.
What was the title?
The Scout Mindset.
OK, cool.
Yeah, I'm looking forward to it.
And the audiobook is available read by Julia Gailiff.
So I'm buying that.
Nice. Or will be available in mid-April.
Did you have any more anarcho-capitalism questions or anything?
Well, anarcho-capitalism, yeah, because.
I mean, maybe it would just be better
if Libertarianism actually had an ordered list of what would be chopped first
so that people who say stop getting rid of the regulations
that keep people safe in the coal mines could be responded with,
you know what, once we've solved war,
once we've solved wars and pollution and poverty,
then we'll get to the coal mine safety standards to acts.
So that would be a great idea,
except if you put 10 Libertarians in a room,
they would soon come up with 11 lists of what needs to be cut.
And the logical organization to
actually put that together is the US Libertarian Party.
And they are full of just horrendously stupid Chuckle Fox.
OK, OK, hold on a sec.
If the main party in the US pushing Libertarianism
is full of horrendously stupid Chuckle Fox,
how can you expect anyone to take this seriously?
I mean, we're welding Democrat, but a lot of them are stupid.
Because we also because we also have the likes of Tyler Cowan,
Alex Tabarak, Brian Kaplan, to some extent, Larry Summers.
Like basically the reason why Libertarianism
is still a intellectually respectable
movement is because and this is actually true.
Brian Kaplan did a survey on this.
The smarter you are, the more Libertarian you are.
Yeah, but if Libertarians if the Libertarians
cannot coordinate well enough to even form like think tanks
and PR groups that people.
Oh, we have think tanks and PR groups.
They just try to distance themselves from the LP
because the LP is full of morons.
But yeah, you look at Cato to some extent, Brookings
plus a bunch of smaller think tanks.
Like there are some very serious Libertarian
policy institutes and also there's Reason Magazine,
which is by far the best mainstream media looking thing.
That still is this plug.
Yeah, Reason Magazine is awesome.
Yeah. So like there are some other groups
which would definitely do a better job than the LP.
But like they don't really have quite the same political cache.
And like I said, public relations is in my department.
So like that's my best shot at addressing that.
But mostly I just have to acknowledge that that is definitely a problem.
So I'm hearing what we got to do is infiltrate the LP
and stage a soft coup from the inside like happened to the Republicans in the 80s.
Unfortunately, after Gary Johnson and Bill Weld lost the presidency,
even though no one expected them to win
and they actually significantly outperformed expectations,
the LP put in a bunch of new rules that make soft coups almost impossible
because they are just determined to snatch defeat from the jaws of victory
at every possible opportunity.
All right, trenches and hard coups it is.
Yep, assassinations, although unfortunately,
LP meetings tend to be about as heavily armed
in total number of guns as Republican meetings.
And they are much less heavily attended.
So we're talking about much higher densities of firearms per person.
But but admittedly, that's all due to guns.
George, who brings eight thousand guns to every meeting.
Unfortunately, no, like that's a great bit and a really good goof.
But no. OK.
Man, the only things I'm left or like
the main things I'm left with are ridiculous questions.
And like I want to hear about the
anarcho-capitalist historical precedents,
like what the heck's going on with Gaelic Ireland and.
I also I'm actually surprised Gaelic Ireland's on there,
because I'm pretty sure that they were very much not anarcho-capitalist.
They were pretty dang stinking was the.
Oh, yeah, that that's it looks like just Rothbard said that
they were anarcho-capitalist and Rothbard was a complete crank
and the moron and also a racist.
I like how it's like I disagreed with him.
Also, he's racist.
So you all know you don't have to look into him to disagree with me to disagree with him, too.
Oh, no, please, by all means, look into him.
He he very much wears his colors on his sleeve, which I appreciate.
Can I ask a silly questions, please?
This is a great. Oh, also, we do have a list of questions
from random people on my Facebook.
We might have a lot of other questions.
I want one or two from from Jace before we take the community questions.
OK, so it's Paleo-libertarianism.
What was that? Paleo-libertarian.
OK, I'm looking again at the paleo-libertarianism.
Wikipedia article about libertarianism.
Yes. So also, we've got like libertarian feminism.
And I like the sound of that libertarianism.
And I just like that they also have links to properties,
theft, exclamation point and taxation, theft, exclamation point.
Correct.
Yeah, so paleo-libertarianism is paleo-conservatism, but libertarian.
Paleo-conservatism is conservatism, but racist.
And by the transitive property, paleo-libertarianism is libertarianism, but racist.
It is, in fact, the intellectual movement that Murray Rothbard is the father of.
They really are just horrifically immoral and ignorant shitboots.
I like how the answer that was just as great as I could have hoped, given the question.
Yeah, so libertarianism, libertarian feminism is pretty much exactly what you'd expect.
It's I don't expect anything.
No, I have no idea what to expect.
OK, so OK, so it's basically like what I'm one of the themes I've been hitting again and again
is that if you have enough people in a society who don't want a thing and that thing
and that society has a government, then they can stop that thing.
And so what you want to do if you like the thing is just minimizing the size and scope of government
so that there's more chance of it being able to slip through that crack or slip through the cracks.
And if you observe that women's issues are one of those things that lots of people want to regulate
and then and you realize that taking women's issues and reproductive rights
and women in the workforce and so on out of government hands is the best way
to keep the likes of Tom Cotton from getting his way.
Then that's libertarian feminism.
Oh, I feel like I thought that was going to be a funny answer.
And actually, I'm like, no, so it's basically remove all laws
that specifically target one sex from government.
Yeah. So on that definition, I am comfortable calling Ruth Bader Ginsburg
at least a libertarian adjacent.
Cool. All right.
What do you think about the criticism?
The libertarianism has no explicit theory of liberty.
I will refer you to Scott Alexander's post.
I think it is something like current affairs, six questions for libertarians
treated as writing prompts.
And in fact, I think that's one of the short ones.
So I'll just read the passage.
The entire thing is great, by the way.
So you should read it.
OK, that's true of everything Scott's ever written.
So not wrong.
The question from current affairs is, can you construct a theory
of property rights that does not suffer from internal incoherence
or depend on specious natural law assumptions?
Scott writes, Professor Krasinski sat down at her desk and booted up her computer.
It was another quiet morning here at the Harvard Philosophy Department.
She had won her position as department chair by discovering a complete theory
of morality, grounded in first principles with no internal incoherence
or any specious assumptions, able to determine everything
from the optimum number of minutes speaking to your mother each week
to how close you could come to beggars before you were obligated to give the money.
She had just finished checking her emails, mostly invitations
to speak at various conferences and events when something started to stir
in the center of the office.
It turned into a wind, then a whirlwind and finally a strange looking man
dressed in silver with gold goggles.
Professor said the traveler, Professor Krasinski, terrible news.
The professor, whose mind had plumbed the depths of ontology
and ascended the heights of metaphysics, was a hard woman to perturb.
Yes, she asked the man, what is it?
Suppose there's an evildoer who punishes all evildoers who do not punish themselves.
Does the evildoer punish himself or not?
Professor Krasinski realized the implications right away.
My God, it's a paradox.
My complete theory of morality, grounded in first principles
with no internal incoherence or specious assumptions,
able to determine everything from the right amount to tip your waiter
to the exact words you need to speak before a sexual act for it to qualify as consensual.
It lies in ruins, and that means began the traveler.
That's right, said Professor Krasinski.
She and the traveler spoke in unison.
Nothing is true and everything is permissible.
Come, she said, I've prepared for this day.
She took a key out of a potted plant on the window sill,
then used it to open a locked cupboard in her desk.
Inside were two hatchets.
She handed one to the traveler.
Where are we going?
He asked to the daycare down the road to have the limbs off of babies.
Obviously, the traveler nodded his approval
and they went off eyes red with bloodlust.
That was fantastic.
Yeah, a lot of that, like, gotten the better response to that question.
Yeah, so the moral of the story is you're allowed to have some common sense
and like just because your moral theory doesn't have
or does have some specious assumptions and or internal incoherence
doesn't mean that you don't still basically know what's right and wrong.
And just because I don't have a super well specified theory of property rights
doesn't mean that you don't still basically know what I'm talking about.
And sure, that does mean that there are some fuzzy situations around the edges,
but it's much easier to just address those fuzzy situations
as they arise than to write off the entire theory.
I want to say.
That was perfect.
I want to save that entire story as a single sound clip
to insert randomly like the data sound.
Yeah, we got to put that out somewhere.
That was that was delightful.
Yeah. All right.
I'm going to I'm going to like reluctantly stop asking silly questions
and maybe we could like answer some of the same.
I don't think we can possibly do better than that for like silly answer
or great answer to a silly question.
So OK, like a good place to put it in.
Yeah, that made my day.
So, you know, we we probably should be calling it soon.
Is there anything you want to bring up or one or two of those questions
that you really like that you want to address?
Let's see.
So we did.
Wouldn't libertarians think do things I find icky?
Are these the actual phrasings of the questions?
They are the actual phrasings I put on the outline.
They aren't the actual phrasings people put in on my Facebook.
I tell you what, there's one on here from you.
Wait, but is ideal government better than ideal markets?
That sounds like a good one to end on. OK, sure.
So this is a fun little question
just to clarify about the bonking rule.
The bonkable offense isn't bringing up ideals.
It's comparing ideals to real life.
And this, of course, raises the question.
Sure, maybe libertarianism is better in a flawed world
where people don't know things or behave immorally.
But would it actually be preferable to something like socialism
if everyone was perfect and omnibenevolent?
And the book on this is called
Why Not Capitalism by Jason Brennan.
It's very good and I will give a admittedly flawed summary here.
But if you find this question interesting
or want to hear a book length version of my answer,
I recommend you check it out.
So the Zoidberg meme.
Why not, Zoidberg?
I might have to make it.
So it's so it's it's actually riffing off of the book,
which it's a response to, which is Why Not Socialism by someone.
I can't remember his name,
but he's basically just a socialist philosopher doing ideal theory,
saying that, you know, sure, there are some practical problems with socialism.
But in an ideal world, it would work very well.
And Brennan is saying, yes, it would work very well.
But but capitalism would work even better.
And so the short version is.
Essentially, there are two problems with central planning.
And those are the knowledge problem and the incentive problem.
So the incentive problem is what?
How can you get people to do things that are not in their interest
but are in society's interest if you don't pay them?
And then the knowledge problem is essentially is a bit more abstract,
but it's essentially the business of buying and selling communicates
through the price mechanism, a lot of information about.
Resources and which resources are scarce
and what the most efficient use of resources are.
And if you're doing ideal theory,
then you can basically assume away the incentive problem
because people will just act in a socially responsible way.
But you still have the knowledge problem.
And so the you would still want something like
market with price mechanisms around just to make sure
that that information is generated and communicated in the most efficient way.
And the price mechanism is the only way we know how to do that.
You also have essentially the Scott Alexander archipelago case
where which anarcho archipelago is basically
an ideal theory version of anarcho capitalism
where different people will have different
conceptions of what the greatest good is.
And the way that you allow them to pursue those different
conceptions is by having a maximally free society
where like-minded people can just organize into their own groups.
And the pithy version of this is an ideal socialist society
cannot allow you to be an anarcho capitalist.
But in an ideal anarcho capitalist society,
there's nothing preventing you from going off and starting a socialist commune.
I do notice that you slightly change the question to ideal socialist
versus ideal anarcho capitalist, because in my opinion,
an ideal government is a government that is run by God,
who is literally omnibenevolent.
Yeah. And omniscient and all those other things
because such a society would just be perfect if an actual God existed
that actually had all the good things.
Yeah. So if you're assuming an omnibenevolent and omniscient
and omnipotent central planner, then like
calling it socialism or capitalism or whatever
is like just kind of quibbling over pointless semantics.
Because if you have that sort of actor,
then you're probably going to just get the ideal outcome.
Yeah. So the interesting version of ideal theory
is assume that we're talking about normal human people
who have the same computational and cognitive constraints,
but who are just morally superior and who don't selfishly, et cetera, et cetera.
And that's definitely, yeah.
And that has a much more interesting answer.
But if you're not going to settle for quitter talk,
the answer is make a God and put them in charge.
The answer is always hurry up and become God any question.
All right. Well, thank you for joining us.
Yeah, this was fun and informative. Awesome.
And I hope we weren't too easy on David,
since at least two thirds of us are already libertarian inclined.
If people would like to complain,
we have both a subreddit and a discord to do that, too.
And maybe someday we will yell at David again,
but probably you'd be better off hitting him up on the subreddit.
Yeah. And one third of us
does not have anything like an articulate politics.
So if there are any like
died in the wall, hardcore communists,
like read, read theory for fun types listening to this,
then I either on this podcast,
obviously it's not my podcast, so I can't volunteer the feed
because I don't own it because property rights are awesome.
But either here or somewhere else,
I would be interested in having a discussion
and or debate about this if there is someone
who's willing to really go to bat for the other side.
Oh, OK, hit us up at Basin Conspiracy Podcast at gmail.com.
And we will relate this to David.
Yeah, or as always,
you can get in touch with me by snail mail at P.O. Box 420
Clemson, South Carolina, do 9631.
That is a bit. I don't know what was available.
No, that's a bit.
If I ever get a P.O. Box, I will make sure it's P.O. Box 420.
But yeah, I don't actually have a P.O. Box.
Why don't you get in touch with me on Discord or the Reddit?
OK, right on. All right.
We have to think of patron. That's right.
I don't know whose turn it is.
That's because patron age is a old and venerable free market
solution to the problem of paying artists for creating art.
You know, it's a good thing there isn't a minimum wage for podcasting
because otherwise it would be illegal to make this podcast.
Not at all. It gives me some compelling points.
I I just, yeah.
OK, so first off, I got to say we're thinking Dina Blanco
this time for supporting this episode.
I hope you loved that joke that or the the jokey response that
Scott Alexander gave to that question.
I will be thinking about it for the rest of the day, and I hope you had fun
listening to the episode and thank you so much for supporting this.
You know, you make a good point. It's nice.
You know, God, could you imagine if whatever the podcast network
charge 200 bucks a month because there's so much content on there
and you can enjoy as much as you want, but you have to pay this minimum
subscription fee. Now, screw all that.
You can you can listen to most of them for free and you can support them
per year wishes at your whim.
And I appreciate that Dina's whim was to support us.
So thank you so much.
Thank you, Dina. You're awesome.
Indeed, I just actually I'm not sure.
Maybe we do make more the minimum wage.
I should actually run the numbers and find out at some point.
I'm not sure, but I do know that I just added.
I don't know why it took me so long, but I finally because I because I never
on like my account.
I'm on the basic disparities account, but I logged out and logged in on mine
so I could send Scott Alexander or Alexander Wales
so I could sign up for his.
I do want to say I'm sorry if that any of that seemed ungrateful on my part.
I really do appreciate all our patrons and the money they give.
And I was just trying to make some dumb libertarian jokes.
I say I thought they were great libertarian jokes.
And we've got we've got the best judge for it.
All right, that was awesome.
I don't have anything else to add other than if somehow you're unaware that
you know, I started doing a podcast called Not Everything is a Clue
where we're going through we want more style for worth the candle.
Check it out. I'm having a great time reading
and recording it. So it is it is a lot of fun.
The story is amazing.
Stephen's doing a great time being paranoid.
Oh, yeah. Yeah, you're really honed the art.
I'm trying to keep it up there.
Oh, as long as we're plugging things,
I wrote a novel a few years ago called What Lies Dreaming
and the several people on the Discord got together
and created an audiobook version of that, which is fucking awesome.
Thank you, guys. That is the most amazing gift.
It is now available at Audible and Amazon and wherever.
Like if you didn't buy the book before, because you don't like reading with your
eyes, now you can read it with your ears. That's awesome.
You got it on Amazon. Yeah, yeah.
It'll it'll be it's already available as of this recording.
So I have nothing to plug that I like those things.
So while while we're plugging things,
I also have another podcast in addition to the MindKillers.
I have plugged it over there, but I'll do it here as well,
because you guys have a much larger audience, which I will happily mooch off of.
It is the Pokemon Primeval podcast.
It is a Blades in the Dark actual play set in a post-apocalyptic version
of the Pokemon universe.
And one of the bad guy factions is
a revanchist communist from the not Russia region.
So yeah, check it out.
That's outstanding.
Is it what it's or any part of your story or anything to say how it got
post-apocalyptic?
Yes, that is literally like one of the big
mysteries that I am
queuing up.
How if you're if you're familiar with the tropes of ratfake,
it probably won't be terribly hard to figure out, but most of my audience isn't.
So fuck them.
Send us a link to that and we'll put up in the show.
We'll do.
All right.
Thank you for joining us and everyone.
Thanks for listening.
Yes.
Bye.
Bye.
