Hey everyone, quick announcement for this episode. The software we used to record remote episodes
presented an issue for me this week.
It recorded about the first couple of minutes, and that was like the warm-up talks, I don't think that's in the episode, but
didn't record the rest, although it pretended like it was the entire time.
So when I downloaded my file, I got a 2 minute 17 second file while everyone else got their 2 hour in change file.
What this means is that none of my audio will be in the episode, which is going to result in a unique listening experience.
I talk a bit less during the actual
content portion of the episode with Richard. I think it's going to still be a little challenging,
listening to him respond to questions that I asked, but there's really nothing I could do. One alternative
would have been to like listen to it, try to remember what I said and
record that and paste it in, but that would lead to like a bunch of like having to re-sync after every time that I did that, plus
I think it would still be pretty disjointed and it would have taken forever. So we actually recorded this the weekend before Christmas and
I've been reluctantly sitting on it while I attempted to hear back from their support team,
Zencaster, that is the service we use, which is overall great and affordable.
It's just it, I think it's my computer or something, something weird happened.
It also happens during the episode that we did with LAO Zeodkowski for We Want More, the finale episode,
but fortunately I had it back up recording running during that one because I didn't want to get screwed again. So
anyway,
sorry for the sort of jumbled best you can expect to get during this one.
Like I said, there's really nothing that could be easily done about it.
I do need to give a big shout out to John Peterson, our patron for this week since I was the one who named him during the
The Thank a Patron section at the end. So
thanks, John, you rock and you'll be able to hear Inyash and Jace agree, though you won't
It'll again sound a little disjointed. So sorry about this everyone and especially sorry to Richard for
having the episode, your first episode on, be kind of a wreck, but you came through great.
So when you come back on for future episodes, we'll make sure that nothing like this happens again and
Thanks for putting up with us everybody.
Yes.
The Back July
Welcome to the Basing conspiracy. I'm Inyash Brotsky. Richard Aktin. Richard Aktin!
Who are you and why are you on this podcast?
Well, so I am currently a postdoctoral researcher and bioinformatician on the technical staff
at a research institute called CCAD in Cologne in Germany. And I study aging biology.
Nice. So the reason you came was specifically because you heard our launch of the episode a
couple of episodes back and you said you had things to say about that.
Yes. Yeah. I heard you were. Yes. And as a long-term fan of the show and some of your other works,
I thought I'd take the opportunity to contribute. That is awesome. That is the...
Oh, I was going to say that's the best part of having an audience of people who are really into
tech and research stuff that every now and then someone was like, I know something about this,
let me help you guys out. And that's awesome because we learn a lot more and hopefully our
audience does as well. Yeah. And scientists are always looking for interesting outlets to share
their work right now. Because most people, we spend most of our time talking to you know
about what we do because they're like in our niche. Is that probably a little bit boring of it?
Okay. You talk to other people. Then... Did you say... Yeah. Go on. Go ahead. Did you say
bio-mathematician? No, no, bioinformatician. I am not a mathematician. Well, I mean,
that's just as confusing. What is a bioinformatician? Okay. Yeah. So I mean,
a little bit more clarity on what I actually do day to day. So I have a weird split because I'm
50-50 between a technical role and a research role. So I'm in the lab of beyond Schumacher where I do
research work, analyzing data for my own research questions and for others in that group. And then
in the technical role, I'm doing a bunch of research analysis work, a lot of sequencing
data analysis for other people in the Institute and setting up some of the core bioinformatics
infrastructure. So at the moment, I'm trying to learn a bunch of infrastructure as code stuff
like Docker so I can set up a server for running a bunch of bioinformatics tools. But yeah.
What would those tools do? The one I'm trying to work on is basically to set up a tool to let
other researchers with less command line experience use a bunch of bioinformatics tools
that otherwise are very difficult to use. It's called Galaxy. But yeah, we're getting
a little of the weeds there now. So what is the bioinformatics thing? Is that just,
is that information on biological systems? It's data science for biology, basically.
Okay. Yeah. And well, I mean, to be honest, the bioinformaticians came first and the data
scientists kind of in many ways branched out from a lot of stuff that was initially in bioinformatics
because genomic information was kind of some of the first data sets that were really big. So the
sort of the big data bioinformatician, well, the big data data scientists that we know today,
a lot of them had kind of a start as sequencing data really started to get big.
So you guys are like the data hipsters and all these people are like just new on the scene trying
to attend like we're here. We're all writing in Pearl. And
yeah, well, we moved on, but still. Cool. Yeah. I mean, I can, I can offer the perspective of
someone working in the field. So I'm not like, I'm not super current specifically on the sort of,
like longevity interventions that I mean, I could talk a little bit to those, but like,
that's not really my area of expertise. I'm kind of more about the basic biology
underpinning aging and specifically the epigenetics of aging. Yeah.
Okay. Yes. Would you like me to give the spiel on that again? Okay. Sure. So I'm
co-hosting a podcast with my friend, Michael Glinker, where we are talking about a sci-fi series
of books by Octavia Butler. It's the Xenogenesis trilogy. We're talking about the first one,
and it's kind of in the style of we want more or we got worm where I'm Stephen and
yeah, and Michael's Brian. So I've read it and he hasn't. And I get to have fun about that.
Awesome. And what is the podcast called? It's called Xenothesis. You can find it at Xenothesis.com.
Awesome. I have not. Xenogenesis is the trilogy also for some reason rebranded as Lilith Brood
later after the fact in like a re-release. And then I didn't realize those were the same thing.
Okay. Yeah. I've read Wild Seed and like I love that book and a few of her short stories that I've
read. I've loved them. I just, there's so much out there to read. I don't, you know, I've never
had so much time. Yeah. The great thing about this series of books was, we're both biologists,
me and my co-host, and there's a bunch of really interesting biology that gets kind of a much more,
I think, fuller treatment in this particular sci-fi story than it does in many other sci-fi stories.
That's why I picked it. How far through the series are you so far? I just edited on 19th episode.
And how many do you think they're going to be total? Oh, and I forgot to compute that. I should
have checked. How far to the trilogy are you at this point then, I guess? So we're only in the
first book. I think we're probably about two thirds of the way into the first book now.
Okay. So probably about 90 episodes altogether. Yeah. Yeah. If we decide to carry on directly
into the sequels, we might do something else. We're not entirely certain yet. Yeah. Awesome.
I had a suit really exciting. I love that there's more and more of these because like, it's just
more fun reading books when you have these sorts of analyses. Yeah. Yeah. It's a, I loved reading
Worm with We've Got Worm as a companion. It was, yeah. I have a book club where every two weeks
we get together and meet and talk about the book that we all read together over the last two weeks.
And that's like, that really makes reading a lot more fun to have someone else talk about it with
later. Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. It's a great excuse to hang out with friends podcasting as well.
Yeah. Absolutely. You have like an external commitment to keep to the schedule.
Which is the older you get. Yeah. The older you get, the more you need that. Yeah.
You no longer feel like it's okay just to like go over to someone's house and hang out for a few
hours. Yeah. Everything's got to be on the clock for something earlier.
Like I could hang out or I could use those few hours to get this done. Yeah. There's always more
to get done. Always. So before we get into the meat of the episode, shall we do our
less wrong posts like we normally do? Just in time. Not by being like in the middle of somebody
talking. Yeah. I'm currently visiting my parents for Christmas. So I'm in Farnham in the UK.
But yeah, I moved to Germany six months ago. So I'm normally in Cologne.
It's awesome. How many time zones different is Germany from Britain?
Just the one. Just the one. Okay. I realized as I was asking that, I'm like, I could just Google
that. I don't know why I'm wasting the time of someone with expertise in bioinformatics on
stupid time zone questions. Well, evidently it needs to be done more because that way I would
get the math right when I did.
Well, it has. Yeah. I was able to get my morning walk. So it worked out fine. Nice.
All right. So as I was saying, the less wrong posts, shall we jump into those?
Absolutely. All right. The first one actually in sequence is Petrov day,
which we are not going to get into because we've spoken of Petrov days several times before, I
believe. I think the one that we had the most to say on it was episode 69. Culture were 2.0,
which was two years ago on Petrov day that came out or close to Petrov day when someone pushed
the button on accident during one of the Petrov simulators, which we had to comment on because
it was pretty awesome. Yeah. We had a really good Petrov day, little rationalist meet up here.
Yeah. We did the ceremony with the candles. Nice. You know what? Next year, maybe we should
have the ceremony and then report back on it afterwards for the episode because this year,
a bunch of us just didn't go due to a combination of COVID and the fires that made the air hard to
breathe. Yeah. Yeah. You know, the pandemic and everything was on fire. Yeah. It's a weird time
to live. So Petrov day came up in our podcast too, actually. It's because it's a post-nuclear
war world. It seemed relevant. Yeah. I love the fact that we've sort of got our own holiday thing
going. Yeah. Nice to have some rationalist rituals, I suppose you might call them.
But yeah, it takes a while. What we really need to do is like be born into rationalism and then
have our parents raising us with these rituals as if they're a normal thing. Well, no, I mean,
it should totally be opt-in. But like Christmas doesn't feel weird because we've all been
surrounded by Christmas since we were born, right? Yeah. Opt-in gets complicated for children.
Yeah. Like if I were to move to a new society where it had something like Christmas, but I'd
never been around for it, I might think it was strange. I still think it's strange. I mean,
I went to Walmart the other day and there was just everything garishly lit and horrible Christmas
music playing and all the employees wearing like... You mean wonderful Christmas music?
It's so aggressive. At least that's actually in December, right? If it's before this month then
it's... Oh yeah. It hasn't even been Thanksgiving and there's like Christmas stuff. Yeah. I feel
like it's like Halloween and then Christmas now immediately. Yeah. Thanksgiving has been
completely absorbed by the Christmas monster. Oh my God.
Maybe there was celebrating to have Petrof Day. That's like the 20th.
The 26th, yep. Yeah.
So... Okay. Well, I think Eliezer put it best. So I'm just going to read his post,
how to convince me that 2 plus 2 equals 3. He starts it off by saying that
rashless but a heavy premium on the paradoxical seeming claim that a belief is only really
worthwhile if you could in principle be persuaded otherwise, saying if your retina ended up in the
same state regardless of what light entered it, you would be blind. But then a poster commented
that I cannot conceive of a situation that would make 2 plus 2 equals 4 false. And so Eliezer wrote
this post in reply, which I just wanted to comment on real quick. This is like the coolest thing
that it wasn't just like a series of missives sent from on high. Like this was a whole community
thing with comments going back and forth and people talking. And this post in the sequences
is a direct result of somebody commenting on something he said, which is really cool. Yeah.
Yeah. It's, I don't know. I think that made a big difference in what less wrong was and, you
know, why less wrong 2.0 is working as well. Because again, it's more of a collaborative
thing with a lot of people working together than than just like, here's my blog about what I want
to talk about. Yeah. I realized I had this thought like I wish I'd been around when they were being
released and when everybody was interacting. And I realized actually I kind of was for silly
start codex, which had a really similar thing going on. So excited to have Eliezer and Brian
interact. It's going to be so hilarious. But he does have some questions lined up.
Okay. So I guess what he draws the comparison to is why you think that 2 plus 2 equals 4
nowadays. And that's mainly because when you have two things, and then you have two more things,
you have a number of things that is, you know, four basically. It's just the way physical
reality is. But he says, suppose I got up one morning and took out two earplugs and set them
down next to two other earplugs on my night table. And notice that there are now three earplugs
without any earplugs having appeared or disappeared. Moreover, when I visualize the process in my own
mind, it seems that making 2x's and 2x's come out to 4x's required an extra x to appear from
nowhere. Also, I would check a pocket calculator, Google, and perhaps my copy of 1984 where Winston
writes that freedom is the freedom to say 2 plus 2 equals 3. And none of these were put like
directly after each other like that. I'm cutting out a bunch of things in the middle for speed.
But what he comes down to is saying that what would convince me that 2 plus 2 equals 3, in other
words, is exactly the same kind of evidence that currently convinces me that 2 plus 2 equals 4.
The evidential crossfire is physical observation, mental visualization, and social agreement.
And yeah, he also talks about like, then he would have to start wondering, why did he
ever think 2 plus 2 equals 4? Was he seen as a simulation as someone like tried to put brain
damage on him? What was it that was so wrong about his viewpoint? But I mean, on the one hand,
I have an incredibly hard time visualizing how you could have two things and two things. And yet
somehow when those are thought of as together, you have three things. But like, if that's the
way reality worked, you can't really argue with reality, right? There's plenty of things that
reality does. Yeah. Well, you couldn't just take, you couldn't take two barrels away again, because
then you would have three barrels again. Because if 2 plus 2 equals 3, then 3 minus 2 equals 2 again.
Yeah. I mean, I think the point that he's trying to make is less about the specifics of
arithmetic and more about radical empiricism, right? I love that the first instinct was to like,
start munchkinning it and start lawyer munchkinning with a rationalist response. Yes.
Well, yeah, it'd be lopsided with only three wheels, but you would have four wheels, so it'd
be okay. All right, let's figure out how we can gain the stock market. Well, why did you only buy
three tires, sir? Three wheel cars would just be those three wheeled cars. I also... Tricks.
It's all a scheme to get you to buy more tires than you need. Yeah. I was reminded before we move on
of a story that appeared in Strange Horizons, which is a cool online magazine that actually
pays professional rates for those of us who try to sell things sometimes. But back in 2000,
there was a story called The Secret Number, which I don't remember too much of, except it was a
detective murder mystery short story, where there's a mathematician that's been killed at the beginning,
and his assistant keeps claiming that it was the secret number that killed him,
because it doesn't want to be found out. And it turns out there's a secret number between
three and four called BLEEM. And obviously, the guy doesn't believe him. There's something like
questioning, how could this work? Blah, blah, blah. He's like, it just does. They're hiding.
And so they arrest him. And the next morning, the assistant is found dead. And he's like,
oh, it must be a suicide. He felt so guilty for killing the mathematician guy. But then at the
very end, there's three jelly beans left on the murder room nightstand. And one of the detective
assistant picks it up and is like, hey, look, free jelly beans. And the first detective is like,
no, don't. And he eats the jelly bean, and he looks down on the night table, and there's three
jelly beans left. Because the mathematician managed to isolate BLEEM jelly beans rather than three or
four. Yeah, it's a fun little story. It reminds me a bit of this is really weird movie about
like the whole P equals NP thing. And some mathematician discovers some like,
hacky shortcut to prove that it's the case. And he can solve stuff in polynomial time. And then
there's a whole like conspiracy, I can't remember the name of this film, but are you thinking of Pi?
I don't think so. Maybe at the very end.
You know, it's been so long since I've seen it, I can't remember. Oh, and there's like a cabal
of orthodox Jews that are after him in addition to like dog brokers and like all these various
powerful groups around the world. That does sound kind of familiar. Because the number that he
discovered that solves the P and P problem is also the secret name of God that they've been trying
to find forever. Yeah, it sounds ridiculous, but it's really trippy and cool. It's by the
same guy who did Requiem for a Dream and some other like hardy movies. It's like the long version
of that chapter and methods where Harry does the thing with the time turner to do prime factorization
with Shor's algorithm. Oh, yeah. Yeah, it was it was a really trippy movie. And I guess I just gave
away the ending. So I'm sorry about the spoilers. Maybe we should beep that part out. Okay, thank you.
Yeah, the post ends with there's really only two possibilities for a belief effect. Either the
belief got there via a mind reality entangling process or not. And yeah, that's that's what he
was saying. That is how you would entangle your mind with reality by putting two and two jelly beans
together and somehow getting bleamed jelly beans rather than four.
Not everything has to have a beautiful segue, right? Sometimes we can just be like, and now
let's move on to the next post. It's so enjoyable watching him create them. That's true. Keep it
out. All right. There's two sealed boxes for action, A and B. Only one contains a valuable
diamond. And they're all a manner of signs and portents indicating whether a box contains a
diamond. But I have no sign which I know to be perfectly reliable. There's blue stamp on one box
and et cetera. There's some things. Now, suppose there's a clever arguer holding a sheet of paper
and they say to the owners of box A and B bid for my services and whoever wins my services,
I shall argue that their box contains the diamond so that the box will receive a higher price.
And they do that. And the box owner's bid and box owner B wins bids higher, so he wins.
And then the arguer rather starts organizing thoughts. And he says, first thing he does is
write and therefore box B contains the diamond at the bottom of the paper. And then at the top,
he starts writing in all the many factual evidences for why that is. Because there's
many signs and portents that point to one box and the other. Yeah, blue stamp. Exactly.
Yeah. But you know, of key importance is that the clever arguer ignores all the ones that might
argue in favor of box A and only writes down the ones that would argue in favor of box B.
And Alias, yes, exactly. And yeah, Alias asks us to imagine a collection of worlds where there is
some objective frequency when either box A or box B contains the diamond. If you happen to be an
English speaker, you might think that the ink that's on that paper somehow meant that box B
contained the diamond. But within the subset of worlds where the ink says box B contains the diamond,
there's already a percentage of worlds where actually box A contains the diamond. And that
does not change regardless of what's written on the blank lines above. The arguments on the blank
line above are not in any way entangled with what's actually in the box. And he contrasts this to
someone who's genuinely curious and first writes down all the distinguishing signs of both boxes
on the paper and then applies the knowledge of probability. And at the bottom says there for
estimate an 85% probability that box B contains the diamond. Since that one actually has a chain
of cause and effect that causes the ink at the bottom of the paper to say 85%, it is entangled
with the evidence. And so it will accurately reflect reflect the worlds rather than not being
entangled with the evidence at all. This is hard to summarize. Yes. But effectiveness as a
rationalist is determined by whichever algorithm actually writes the bottom line of your thoughts.
Yeah. Is sort of the summary of it. Yeah. And this postlet's become pretty famous. Go ahead. Sorry.
Yeah. All right. But you do. Arya, get out of here. Sorry, my daughter.
No. Get out of here, Stephen, with your logic and words. No. Sorry. No, I guess the thing is like
you do have some evidence. There's there's conclusions you can draw. But the important part
is like, even if the the conclusion is the same similar for both for both pieces of paper,
like with one of them, the conclusion was written down beforehand. So
none of the evidence really matters at all. And and that makes a big difference. Like,
did you write your bottom line after considering all the evidence? Or did you come to it
first and then are looking for ways to justify it? Yeah.
Yeah. This is why it is an excellent idea to publish your planned methods of analysis
in advance when doing scientific research. Yeah. Pre-registering. Exactly. Pre-registration.
Something we really don't do enough of in academic publishing. But like,
we have this exact same issue, right, where we kind of loosely formulate some hypotheses,
gather a bunch of data, and then, you know, the statistical test is definitely the most
applicable to my data because of reasons. Oh, I have gotten the impression that they
that lately become a much more common to do the pre-registering. Is it still not common enough?
Well, so there are specific disciplines, mostly medical contexts for medical trials,
where it's much more rigorously enforced. But there's a lot of subcultures within academia,
different disciplines, and different norms apply in those different communities. So many
still don't have a good norm of pre-registration. How do you feel about bioinformatics?
Well, we have a problem not even with, we have a problem with being able to reproduce our results,
let alone pre-register them. There's a whole rabbit hole that is like another episode's worth
of talking, that I fear we should probably not go down to discuss academic publishing, because
yeah, somebody was saying maybe we can have that episode in the future date.
Maybe at some point, yeah. So it's hard to even get reproductions in bioinformatics? That
because biological systems are so complex or what? Ironically, because computing systems are so
complex. We don't have enough emphasis on sort of like reproducible build environments for our
analyses and not enough norms around publication of code and proper source management. It's a whole,
like most bioinformations are trained as biologists and not as computer scientists or as
software engineers. So a lot of good practice from sort of industry software engineering
is not known to people working in bioinformatics. So yeah, it's a whole kind of a thing. And also
that the incentive structure is not great for adhering to those best practices, because
like the emphasis is on publication. And very few people reviewing publications have the
qualifications to consider those computing aspects of it as well. Like they're interested
in the methods of the specific biological questions, but not so much necessarily in the process.
There's kind of a whole new set of strong norms around reproducibility of code that needs to come
into force that haven't yet. But it takes more time to do that. And that means it takes more
time to publish, which means it doesn't get done. Yeah, because then you will perish since you did
not publish enough. Yeah. Damn, do you think is does the new generation like seem to be pushing
more for that? Or is this just a static problem? Well, there's a few people who kind of there's
enough people who are aware that it's an issue that it's starting to come up. But I think it'll
take a while for people to adapt, right? People just need to know about the existence of these
tools and the norms around that use need to get stronger, which has to come from
reviewers and publishers. And there's a whole process before the culture changes. But we'll
get there. We'll get there. With clinical research, it was having software that had to be FDA compliant
or compliant with like all of the different regulatory. Yeah, that's a whole other
challenge. Similar constraints.
Alrighty, let's, I guess, let's wrap up this post and then actually get into this stuff. Sure.
Let's see. Where were we? Oh, yeah, he brought up the example. I guess Steven said there were some
real life examples. Another one was if your car makes metallic squealing noises when you break
and you aren't willing to face up to the financial cost of getting your brakes replaced,
you can decide to look for reasons why your car might not need fixing.
And then he says, okay, this is really interesting. So I want to talk about this real quick.
But the actual percentage of you that survive in Everett branches or Tegmark worlds
is determined by the algorithm that decided which conclusion you would seek arguments for.
So obviously that's true. But there's a little aside within this, which I found really interesting
that I skipped. He says, but the actual percentage of you that survived in Everett branches or
Tegmark worlds, which we will take to describe your effectiveness as a rationalist,
which I never noticed before when reading this, but which seems to me really huge.
Is this like a good way to, to decide to describe someone's effectiveness as a rationalist?
How many of the multi worlds they survive in? It feels like that might be vulnerable to what
professional poker players call resulting. There's a similar difficulty in like evolution, right?
So if you're only updating based on outcome and not based on method, then in harsh learning
environments, you're, you won't necessarily do as well in compared to like generous or gentle
learning environments. Like the difference between chess and poker, right? Yeah. I mean,
but you can't see the outcomes because you can't see other other effort branches or Tegmark worlds.
True. But isn't, isn't that what he's trying to do here? Like jump, jump back one level and
tot up the number in which you survive? Yes, you're, you are correct. He is looking at outcomes.
Yes. So that there may be, depending on the environment, specific circumstances in which
being systematically wrong, or at least employing some mostly right, but less expensive method
that doesn't necessarily give you the best result in terms of absolute truth value might produce
better survival results. So you'd end up with a higher total, even if it wasn't objectively the
most rational strategy. Okay. I think I see, I think I see what Steven's saying that this is
an application for your, or a description of your effectiveness, only in the case of
whether breaks need replacing or not, not as like a general rule. Because like otherwise,
the most, yeah, otherwise the most effective rationalist in quotes would be the one who
never leaves the house because it's risky to go outside your door, which I don't think is actually
going to be an effective life for very many people at all, especially as we now all have,
you know, some experience with that over the last year. Yes, but it's, I don't think it is the most,
it is not the most effective way to have a world, I think, like it's, you have to
okay, yeah. Yeah, that's a similar kind of thing that produces like the origin of,
like perceptual biases, right? And it's a good heuristic shortcut for getting the answer efficiently
and not, yeah, yeah, yeah, you wouldn't like the optimization procedure is not optimizing for
like accuracy alone, it's optimizing for survival, which may require
sacrificing some accuracy for energy efficiency. Yeah. And then there's also the question of, you
know, is your survival maximized by holding up inside, probably not because then society will
not get to the point where it can overcome aging, and, and you're going to die of old age
eventually, whereas if he took some risks and went outside and helped society progress, maybe
we could get to there. Yep, which is great, great, great to the episode. That's where
the distinction between Darwinian evolutionary processes of the normal kind and memetic evolution
exists, right? That's where, so, you know, evolution is myopic. It only is interested in
what in the past produced successful results. It can't look forward and make adjustments based on
models of what I think will happen. It's only it's limited to its statistical summary of the past,
whereas memetic replicators have got feedback loops and, you know, they can model stuff and
have that advantage. That's why they took over the world. Yes. I was just watching this YouTube
video of somebody who is programming cars to run around a track and using a, what is it, evolutionary
algorithm to just, to get one that could just drive around the track correctly, and just kept,
you know, tagging that one, reproducing the one that got the furthest along the track,
and it was hilarious to watch because there was hundreds of cars just spinning in circles, crashing
into walls, and the one that would like, just by complete accident, like, end up the furthest
along the track would just reproduce that one. And then at the end, they did get like, actually,
it only took a few generations before they got one that could drive around the track.
They pointed out this is all completely by accident, though. The, you know, algorithm
doesn't know it's a car. It doesn't know it's the car in the track represents.
That's one reason why evolution is very good at producing very lateral solutions, though,
because like, have you ever seen the analogous visualization of a learning to walk
simulation? Because in that one, you get some really weird strategies to solve the problem of
get this collection of points to a further distance, right? So there's one where it just
makes a really tall thing and falls over. Okay, I mean, you solve the problem, but that's not
exactly walking. Although it was evolutionary circuit design, where some evolutionary algorithm
figured out how to make a clock without a loop. And it turned out to be exploiting some weird
physical property of the chip that nobody had thought of making a clock out of before because
it just wouldn't occur to you. Yeah, I mean, we don't even have that good of a model of the
weird physical properties of the chip, right? We just expect it to run as gates and don't think
about, you know, the slight magnetic fluctuations on it as bits flip. Yep, we think of it as an
abstraction and not as a physical system and therefore miss the shortcut. Yeah. The, Jason,
real quick, the cars, were these like small remote control cars, I'm assuming? No, it was a
simulation of cars on a track. Oh, okay. It was just a 2D, basically drawing of a track and like
the cars. And there was something, I guess, bounding the, I'm not exactly sure how it was
programmed, but the cars could move and they could only move along the track, and the track was
wavy. Okay, because at first I was visualizing like actual old, old mobiles or something,
you know, just, that would be awesome. Like if somebody programmed a bunch of self-driving cars
to try to, I mean, that there would be a waste of vehicles, but it would be really fun to watch.
Demolition derby. Yeah. That would be awesome. Yeah. If I ever win the lottery, I want to just
fund ridiculous things like that. I wonder if that would be worth it for Tesla to
fund something like that, just as they sort of, I guess it already has enough name recognition
right now. It wouldn't really help that much for publicity. Yeah. Yeah. I mean,
you might get some harsher selection pressure on the edge cases, some weird stuff that wouldn't
normally crop up in road situations. You might be able to improve the functioning in those edge
cases from something like this. It would be really great if it was like a whole heap of cars,
and one of them learned to shortcut by bouncing off other cars and running them into walls.
Just got really aggressive. Yeah. It's like, I got my passengers there safely. Yep.
Everything else is on fire.
Elon Musk's marketing person because Tesla, their motto is everything else is on fire.
Honestly, isn't that like kind of the thought behind the family Hummer became really popular
in the US? Oh yeah. It's like bigger and bigger SUVs. Yeah. Brighter and brighter lights blinded
everybody else on the road. Until eventually you're running a tank or down the street. Yeah,
it was ridiculous. Okay. So to finish up, yeah, when he was talking about the algorithm you're
using, he says, in this case, the real algorithm is never repair anything expensive. If this is a
good algorithm, fine. If this is bad algorithm, oh, well, the arguments you write afterwards above
the bottom line will not change anything either way. He does say at the very end as a caution,
this is intended as a caution for your own thinking, not a fully general counterargument
against conclusions you don't like. The world's cleverest arguer may point out that the sun is
shining and yet it is still probably daytime. So yeah, people often have a habit of saying like,
oh, well, you're just writing your bottom line first to dismiss arguments, which, you know,
maybe good arguments after all. So remember that this is more for your own use. Do not be doing
this in your own thinking and handicapping yourself. But do look out for other people who
might be doing it to try to sell you something. Yeah. Now, I always thought this had interesting
implications for investigative as opposed to adversarial legal systems. In what way? In trials,
right? I mean, the normal practice is the adversarial court, at least in like descendants of the
British legal system, where, you know, you've got two sides that advocate for the side and then there's
a few investigative legal systems, I think some of the Scandinavian countries follow an investigative
approach where you don't have the sort of oppositional structure, it's more, there is an
inquiry into the events that took place. But the adversarial system has some merits from the
perspective of potential perverse incentives. There's even like the American versus the British
approach, the adversarial legal system has some interesting differences, because in the States,
you guys have prosecutors and defense attorneys who are always on one side, always the prosecutor,
always the defense. Over here, we have barristers, they swap, they do both.
Oh, that would be an interesting change.
And then, and it's always that they always have that perspective on it, they're never on the other
side of the table. So I mean, I like that. I kind of like that system because of, you know,
people do just do bottom lining and looking for things that'll support what they already believe.
So having two people that have the bottom line of opposite, of opposite bottom lines, I think will
manage to get all the evidence out. But that's only assuming that they're both competent and,
you know, interested in doing a good job. But yeah, that does lead to problems where the people who
are always prosecutors tend to form like good relationships with the police, and they will
sometimes cover for the police and the police will do them favors and things end up not being very
fair at all if they're in bed like that. Whereas, if you had the barristers, then I'm assuming the
relationships don't get as cozy. Is that the case? Well, there's a sort of slightly different set of
cozy relationships, but it's less kind of tribally entrenched. It's a bit more
the cozy relationships are kind of with the judiciary, I think, perhaps more.
There's, you know, the crown prosecution service has its issues. It's, no, no, it's perfect. But,
you know, I think it's probably better than the American approach, to be honest.
I mean, even like our comedy shows, I've been watching Brooklyn Nine-Nine lately,
and they have the thing where all the cops, I mean, it's a comedy show, it's fun, it's lighthearted.
But every now and then they go to court, and all the cops hate the defense attorneys, because
they're like, yeah, these are the scum of the earth that are trying to get criminals off of
their time and back out on the streets. And that's, yeah, that's an unhealthy tribalism.
Sorry, another tangent. Yes, yes, it does. Nice segue. Alrighty. So, yes, everybody remember
those last two segues that we had that were really good, and pretend we said them right now.
So, Richard, you are in longevity research?
Well, so the, the Green Pie work in at the moment is focused on DNA damage repair and aging,
and the model system we primarily use is C. elegans, which is a small nematode worm.
But before this, I was doing my PhD work in the epigenetics of aging. So I was doing some stuff
with epigenetic clocks. So what does the epigenetics of aging mean? That's the reason that we
start aging due to environmental reasons? Well, to some degree. So back to basics for a moment.
You've got your DNA, you know, the conventional double helix, that's the genetic information
that doesn't change much through the course of your life. And then you have the annotations
to your genetic sequence. That's the epigenetics, right? So the epigenetics are
modifications to the DNA itself, which don't change the way that it pairs.
So I think, for example, DNA methylation, so modification to the cytosine base that
can change the way the DNA is expressed. And then DNA in your cells is packed into
chromatin, which is a collection of proteins and DNA. So it's that double helix structure that
we're all familiar with from the popular meters is wrapped around these sort of disc-like proteins
called histones. And they can also be modified. So modifications to those and different versions
of those are what you might consider to be epigenetic modifications. So they're on top of
the genetic information and provide information about which cell type a given cell might be.
So you've got the same genetic information in all your cells. So you have to ask the question of
how is it that my brain cells know to be different from my liver cells and so on.
And that's what's encoded in epigenetic information.
So it have been my understanding that epigenetics, the epigenetic changes all happen for the most
part, all happen either in gestation or early childhood. Is that true or am I wrong?
I mean, the bulk of the epigenetic program, as it were, it's laid down in development.
And then there are subsequent environmental factors that can influence epigenetic information.
I think so your characterization is pretty accurate. It's mostly like it's most plastic
to environmental influence early on and becomes somewhat lesser with age.
So like by the time you hit teens, are you done getting your epigenetic stuff modified or can
it still happen? It can still happen. Yeah, it's just that there's a like the magnitude I would say
of the sorts of changes that you could affect would be less. So the origin of epigenetics is
actually in developmental biology because it's epigenetics that sort of lay down the specifics
of the developmental program. So you start from a single zygote cell and then as that cell divides
the environmental cues around it influence what the epigenetic state of the individual cells will
be. And there's this sort of self organizing process that controls what many of those environmental
cues for an individual cell will be. So as you develop, there are particular like chemical
gradients that might tell which cell where to start differentiating to become an adult cell type.
So there's this concept of stem cells and differentiated cells that kind of an opposite
ends of this axis. You've got the pluripotent stem cells that can become any cell type that you
start out with at the zygote. And then you've got the differentiated cells which are specific
functional endpoint cells like your liver and cells and your neurons. And the developmental
program kind of dictates through epigenetic information and through environmental cues
which shape what the epigenetic information will be the path that a cell takes from that initial
pluripotent stem cell down to a differentiated cell state. So,
okay, I mean, there's a bunch of different mechanisms associated with that, but many
of them you can kind of broadly simplify. So for example, there's this concept of things
called morphogens. So it's like a chemical gradient in the environment. So let's say you've
got an animal where you've got the head at one end of the tail of the other. And then at the
head end, you've got like a really high concentration of some chemical marker at the tail end, you've
got a really low concentration. So somewhere like a quarter of the way from the back, you want to
start developing some legs, right? So whatever cells are in that area might take a cue from a
morphogen that's at about 25% of the maximum concentration at the head end that says, oh,
okay, I'm in the leg region. So I should start going in the leg direction, right? That's a kind
of slight oversimplification. But those kind of mechanisms are what yields the patterning
of an adult organism, extremely. Yeah, stuff does happen, not maybe that.
Yeah, I mean, it's not always perfect. And there are varying degrees and different organisms to
which it is defined. And to which is stochastic. Oh, yeah, yeah, it is really good. If you remember
thalidomide, I think it was the that they were prescribing for a while, thalidomide for morning
sickness. Pregnant women. That is every single time anyone says anything bad about the FDA,
everyone comes back with a thymidolide. And you're like, what time they got lucky?
Well, there was also the Tuskegee syphilis experiment. And anyway, I can talk about that.
But thalidomide caused, well, it was a good, like, I guess, pain medication for pregnant women.
I'm not actually sure what they were prescribing it for. But it caused limbs to not develop.
And they're in the babies prescribed as an anti nausea modification for morning sickness.
So there's the story there is quite interesting, because it's some
there are different isomers of the thalidomide molecule. They have
handedness, right? So there's like a left handed and a right handed version of thalidomide.
And so one is toxic, the other one is safe. Yeah. But when you synthesize them,
you get what's called a racemic mixture, which is equal parts of both.
And they hadn't done enough work in the synthesis process to ensure they could purify
out the right version. And in fact, you can safely use thalidomide for certain things today,
if you use the right isomer. Yeah, they were still totally using it in cancer care.
Which although if you're in cancer treatment, you're probably not pregnant anyway.
If you're in a clinical trial, you can't be pregnant because of that.
You have to promise that you will use like an effective form of contraception,
and you have to describe it. And they have to ask you about it every time. It's really awkward,
especially when your patients are like 84. And it's like, so you've been using protection,
and it's like, I have 84 and I have cancer. I have not been sexually active.
The government makes me ask you this.
Yes. That sucks. Also, what doesn't like
I wonder, does that have implications for how they do safety assessments for drugs for pregnant
women? Because? Oh yeah, it's like a huge debate. Yeah. It's kind of a between right now.
They went really, the government went really paranoid about it, where definitely like that
you try to err on the side of never giving any kind of drug that could have any potential of
causing like fetal harm to patients who are still of like reproductive age. But there's another lobby,
and it's kind of moving in the direction of well, it should be the parent's choice,
whether they decide to enroll in the trial and potentially to like what, you know,
eyes wide open, sign up for it, take something that could potentially harm a fetus.
I could see how the conservative approach would have better PR value. Yeah.
Doesn't everything potentially harmful to a fetus? I mean, that sounds a lot like California's,
this has been found by the government of California to potentially cause cancer thing.
Oh, well, yeah, no, it's like, unless it's in, there's like various categories, and there's a
few things that have been approved, but like very few. And if it's a research drug, then like,
you just don't know. So yeah, it excludes most things.
So to return a minute to the developmental biology stuff we're talking about before,
there's a useful image I'd like to put in people's heads as a way of thinking about
developmental biology. So there's this guy called Conrad, Conrad Waddington,
who has this notion of the epigenetic landscape. So if you picture a hillside with a valley running
down it, like a, you start with a single valley at the top, and then it branches out into many
tributaries or not tributaries, branches, tributaries should be the other way around.
Anyway, yeah. So if you then place like your pluripotent stem cell at the top of this landscape
and kind of picture it rolling down the slope, you have a bunch of places where you can pick
where it'll go into which branch of the river. And those are like the developmental decisions,
right? That's where something changes in the epigenetic state of the cell, which says,
I'm not going to be in this cell lineage, but I'm going to be in this other cell lineage.
And then once you've rolled down to the bottom, you've got, you know, so each of the different
valleys that the river's run into represents like a differentiated terminal cell state.
And so what, what does all this have to do with aging?
Ah, yes. So good point. We should bring it back to that. So there is, there's kind of a,
there are many theories associated with what, what aging is. There's a lot of sort of damage
based theories like reactive oxygen species, accumulation of mutations, but one that's kind
of gaining a little bit of popularity at the moment is a sort of epigenetic information
theory of aging. It's quite popular with a guy called David Sinclair, who's pretty well known
in the field. It's written a popular book on the subject. I think it's why we age and why we
don't have to is the title, which is a bit of an overstatement in my opinion. But
you got to sell books. We mentioned him on our last podcast too.
Yes. He's, he's well known. There's a couple of, you know, he's very slightly
controversial on a couple of points. Just, you know, he's a, he's a solid scientist in most
regards, but he has a slight tendency towards hyperbole in places. That's just, yeah. So,
I mean, I also would like to not age, but I don't believe I can totally stop it yet.
Yes. It's a, I think it's a slightly more thorny problem than he, no one characterizes as,
and actually the developmental biology picture is a really good place to start on
where I slightly differ with David on this. One of the, so if we return to that picture,
the epigenetic landscape for a second, and we've got these cells in the valley at the bottom of
this hill. So in, when they're functioning well, when they're doing the job correctly as a,
as a terminally differentiated cell, you know, it's a liver cell being a good liver cell doing
liver stuff, right? If it starts to become less liver-like, either by maybe sort of jumping over
to the next valley a little bit, or rolling back up the hill ever so slightly, becoming a bit
de-differentiated, that I think those sorts of properties are what we see in aging cells, right?
They cease to become quite as tightly functional in the role that they were sort of differentiated
to be. They can undifferentiate? Just a little bit, yeah. So what the, the differentiation is kind
of enforced by the epigenetic information. So the particular state of the epigenetic information
in the cell tells it what genes to express, what environmental stimuli to listen to,
how to react to, to stuff in the environment. So if that information over time becomes degraded,
as information does, when there's a finite amount of energy to maintain it, you will lose the,
the precise description of that state, right? So it becomes slightly less
livery than is ideal for a liver cell, right? Oh my God. So I love this metaphor because like,
as I've gotten older, I found myself not giving as much of a fuck about like external pressures
in my environment. I'm like, yeah, I don't really care all that much what you think. I'm okay. I'm
set in my life and I'm just going to ignore certain particularly whiny people. But like,
now I'm feeling all my cells is being like, yeah, I don't give a fuck about what you think. I'm not
going to be that much of a liver cell anymore. Yeah, like some of my cells are literally becoming
grumpy old men. Yeah, pretty much. And occasionally they have a midlife crisis and go off and become
cancer. Oh, there's nothing worse than old people, Jesus. Yeah, but so apologies to any
older. So to return to the point where I think David's a little bit off about this. So what,
so his sort of epigenetic aging hypothesis kind of has this idea of if you take these
terminally differentiated cells and you roll them back up the hill just a little bit,
you de-differentiate them a touch by using some of the factors that you find in stem cells,
and then let them roll back down the hill again. So they'll kind of settle back into the groove.
You can do that. That's the idea, right? So the idea is that you de-differentiate them just enough
that you can get them to start doing what they should be doing again.
But the catch is that the process of deciding in which value you end up is determined by those
developmental cues. So to go back to what we talked about earlier in the conversation,
that gradient between the head and the tail, where you had a particular concentration that
was close to where the legs are, so you should become legs, that information, that chemical gradient,
is present during development, but not in adult mode. So when you roll the ball back up the hill,
it doesn't necessarily know into which groove to roll back down, because there's not the
environmental cues present to say you should be going this way. And you can't give an adult
like a chemical cocktail to stimulate that? Well, that's where it gets a little bit more
complicated because it's a very precise chemical cocktail that defines what particular function
a cell should be doing. And so the idea in this sort of epigenetic rejuvenation stuff,
where you roll the ball back up the hill a little bit and let it roll back down, is that
there's enough information in the environment and in the cell's epigenetic memory to remember
where it should be rolling back to. But I don't think there's quite enough there to get it to
reliably roll back into the right spot. I think we need something like that chemical cocktail
that you described to ensure it'll end up back in the right spot instead of becoming cancer.
And we don't have anything even approaching at that chemical cocktail yet?
We have something resembling it in some areas, but delivering it and the specifics of how
we might go about it, that's still very up in the air. There's a lot of people in the field
of regenerative medicine who are working on figuring out how to cause a cell to differentiate
into a particular type of cell. So if you fuse together those two approaches, if you take this
notion of roll it back up the hill just a little bit and then you add to it some direction with
some chemical information of where you want it to go, then let it roll back down the hill,
that might work. But at the moment, those are somewhat disparate areas of research,
and they're both pretty early on. So combining them is sort of the next step, I think, in both of
those areas. Okay. How do you roll it up the hill? So that's, and what is usually used there is some
subset of what are called the Yamanaka factors. So those are a set of genes which induce
pluripotency, so that ability to become any other cell type in an adult cell. So you can take an
adult cell, you can express four genes mostly, and then it will take on the properties of a
stem cell. Well, some of them will. There's a success rate, not all of the cells end up becoming
pluripotent. But how do you do that though? Do you like have to directly inject each individual
cell? Well, it's often a sort of viral transfection method where you might put the genes in
some genome engineering vector in a virus, and it kind of gets pasted into the genome of the
cell you're looking for, or it might be expressed separately on the vector. So instead of integrating
into the host genome, you just have it present in the cell so it can express those genes, but not
be integrated into the host genome. There's a bunch of different specific methods of how you
might do that, but some form. But that's like individual cells like on a petri dish or something,
right? Is there some way to do that in a human body? Well, only with, at the moment, the most
successful methods are using viruses to introduce the genetic material. But the success rate is
a bit low. So only one in, well, there is a lot by experiment, but one in some number of cells
might be one in 100, might be one in four, if you're really lucky. We'll end up with a copy of
this genes that you want to express. I don't know if anyone's doing this, but with cancer care,
we're taking CAR T cells and harvesting cells from the patient and artificially just reproducing
the ones that had the programmed instructions to kill cancer cells. So you'd, and then put them
back in the person. And then there's a newer version where you take donor cells and do the same
thing. So I have no idea, though. I mean, that's definitely a use outside of cancer care. So I
think the blood's kind of a unique system in that regard. You can take out something that's
going to be a blood stem cell, select for it and put it back in the blood stem cell niche,
and then have it produce new blood cells. Most other tissues don't function in quite that same
way. So it's a much more challenging problem to do the selection outside and put it back in,
because you don't have that same, the same way the tissue works with respect to the
production of the blood cells from a stem cell population. There's not the same turnover rate.
So for example, you know, you can't really do it with brain cells because, you know, like each
individual one, you don't want to replace all of your neurons. If you take them out, kind of mix
them up into a soupy like substance and select the ones that work, then put them back, it's not
going to work. Would I, would I really want all my cells to become plurally potent at once anyway?
No, like that would be very, yeah, you're right.
So one in a hundred times pretty decent as long as they could keep doing it for all, you know,
100 times. Yes. So that is what one of the approaches that people are taking in this kind
of therapeutic area is like inducing them permanently can be an issue. It's the whole sort
of cancer thing. So having a small number of them turned on periodically is approach that
might work. So you can put genes on a, in like an expression cassette is what they call it,
where you have a gene that will only turn on if you're taking a drug that will activate the
transcription sites that cause that gene to be taken. So you can take an innocuous chemical
compound that will turn on a particular gene expression cassette. Now, so I have really
great results for that in mice for eliminating senescent cells. So some of those cells that
do that slightly de-differentiation thing, they kind of end up not quite being
as livery as a liver shell should be, right? It's a little bit more complicated than just that,
but that slightly de-differentiated cell can end up being a senescent like cell. So the senescent
cells have a particular phenotype, they secrete a bunch of stuff that's kind of cytokines and
inflammatory things that cause increased inflammation in the tissue, and they are slightly prone to
inducing senescence in other cells around them. And they're not really doing what is functionally
useful in that tissue. They have what is thought to be kind of an anti-cancer property. So they
sort of, it's a pseudo niche that a cell can become. So instead of being de-differentiated and
becoming cancer, it can de-differentiate a little bit. It becomes senescent. So it's a kind of a
purposeful path. It's like a placeholder cell. Yeah, kind of a little place. It's like, do this,
it's not as bad as this other thing, and it might help a little bit in some ways. So those senescent
cells and their SASP, senescence-associated secretory phenotype, which is the jargon,
the cytokines and stuff. Yeah, they're like their acronyms.
It's producing inflammation. So that has the implications for your fewer immune system as you
get older. But if you target those cells to eliminate them, so one of the things they did was
they genetically engineered mice with one of the markers, so genes that are expressed in senescent
cells. And then once they would have reached adulthood, they gave them the stroke, which
caused all of the senescent cells to basically just kill themselves off. So what you end up with
is a mouse that as an adult can be induced to suddenly lose all of its senescent cells.
That sounds brilliant. Yeah, and depending on how you administer it. Yeah, it's usually
through some kind of programmed cell death like autophagy. It just induces that process in the
senescent cells. Although sort of one of the properties of senescent cells is they're not
great at apoptosing. So you can kind of force and measure it. It seems like it would be really
traumatic for the mouse, depending on how many of the cells were sent. Yes, and I think the way that
they, I forget the exact regimen they used to look some of the stuff up, it's not really my niche,
as it were. But they, I think you can dose the drug, the doctor's cycling is what they usually
use over time. So it's not sort of one acute, no, all those senescent cells die now. It's a bit more
gradual than that. But if you look at mice that have had this done, it's night and day, right?
There's like a perfectly youthful looking, brown, smooth-coated, bright-eyed, perky,
straight-spine mouse. And then next to it is like a gray, bent, kyphotic spine, just generally
decrepit-looking mouse. And yeah, it's a really, it's amazing. At the same age, yeah.
How long can this go on for? Like, because the mouse just keep doing this indefinitely?
Well, definitely, but I think, yeah, not indefinitely. But if increased a mouse lifespan
to like 10 years, right, where normally it would be like three years? I don't actually know what
the sort of record is for mouse lifespan, and it would vary by strain. But yeah, they've done,
there are interventions that have seriously extended mouse lifespan by quite a considerable amount.
I have two questions about this. The first one, kind of sillier, does the mouse get smaller each
time? No, actually, weirdly, the one that's healthier looking is quite a lot bigger, physically.
So those senescent cells get replaced by something else that's
Yeah, and I think that also there's less, yeah, it's a very good question, come to think of it.
I'm not, yeah. Yes, they're also, they're post-mysotic, they're no longer dividing. Yes.
Yeah, that's a sort of self-destruct, yeah. No, no, just a sort of more average-looking
size as opposed to exhibiting frailty, right? As we get older, we get kind of, you know, thinner,
and skin gets looser and, you know, bone density drops and all that unpleasant stuff.
Yeah, it's not like, because they're like the biggest possible people around.
They're like, monsters, they don't get older, they just get bigger.
There is an interesting paradox relationship there, actually, with
size of organisms. So generally speaking, the bigger an organism, the longer it lives.
But within species, smaller individuals of a given species tend to live longer.
Yay. Yeah, so it's a weird thing. I'm like five-two.
Damn it, I'm gonna die soon. So my second question, and I think the far more important one is,
can this be done in humans, too?
The mouse one with the sort of, uh, senolytic thing, where they break down the,
that is, so the particular mouse approach is not really applicable to humans because it requires
genetically engineering from birth with this expression cassette.
Well, can at least our children be made this way so they have better lives?
In theory, if we go ahead with the whole genetic engineering of our kids thing,
and, you know, that's the safety of that.
Yeah, so that's, that's the whole other thing. I think we should probably
pursue the whole German genetic engineering route as a species, but that's like, you know,
another debate. The safety arguments really get to me because if, if you don't pursue it,
you're gonna die anyway. The lethality rate of a typical human is 100%.
So there is no safety argument, right? You don't want to accidentally
genetically engineer kids that like diet six, you know, but that would be kind of a tragedy.
If you die at 66, that's also a tragedy. So, you know, you're gonna die anyway.
The very least society regards it as less of a tragedy. Man, society's a load of crap.
So right now, there's no way to reverse engineer them into living.
Actually, this is one of the most sort of interesting areas of drug development
in the anti-aging space at the moment. So, senolytics, which is a class of compounds
that will cause senescent cells to be broken down as a drug intervention.
A lot of those are being funded as investigations at the moment. So there's
sort of, you know, some preclinical work and stuff going on with a bunch of
start-up companies. There's a lot of Silicon Valley people interested.
Can you get me into one of these trials?
I'm afraid I don't have those kind of connections.
Not yet, anywhere.
If you can get me into one of those trials, I will be your guinea pig.
Yeah, but that is a, that's definitely an area that people are very much looking into.
There's a lot of diversity of senescent cells.
There's a lot of debate around the precise definition of what they are.
There's different sort of subtypes and successfully targeting senescent cells
so that you have a compound that will only kill senescent cells.
It's kind of analogous to the cancer cell problem, right?
You need something that will only kill the cancer cells.
You need something that will only kill the senescent cells.
But in the senescent cell case, you have less of a tolerance for toxicity
because you're dealing with otherwise healthy people.
What the hell makes cells get senescent in the first place?
Yes, so that's an interesting one.
I mean, like, if you want to get only slightly facetious,
now that's a hard word to say, facetious,
then the second law of thermodynamics.
God damn it.
Like, kind of.
So there's this interesting situation we have where we're an energetically open system, right?
So theoretically, that's not too much of an issue because we can take energy
and we can use it to do stuff, including repair things.
But there's an interesting sense in which we're an informationally closed system.
So here, I find it useful to talk about
Nassim Talib's coinage of antifragility.
So you've got this notion of antifragility, which is something which is made
stronger or better by stress in the environment, right?
And then you've got robustness, which is something which is only
resistant to damage.
And then there's fragility, right?
So and the metaphor that he uses is the sort of damocles is fragile,
a phoenix is robust, and a hydra is antifragile.
Because, you know, you cut off a head, it grows another one.
So the genome...
Grows two more.
Sorry?
If you cut off the head, it grows two more.
Yes, two more, actually, yeah.
Getting actively stronger.
So as with, as is usual, we have to talk about evolution a little bit now,
because as Theodosia Stozamsi said, nothing in biology makes sense,
except in the light of evolution.
So in a population, the genome is antifragile because there's a feedback loop
between what the genome causes to be the phenotype and what the genes end up being,
right?
So that's the process of natural selection.
So the genotype causes the phenotype, which is what the organism is and looks like and does,
and then you've got the consequences of that in the environment,
which is where a natural selection acts.
So if a gene has a consequence which is good for the phenotype and therefore is selected for
in this particular environment, you've got a mechanism that can correct what the genome looks
like.
It can undergo what's called purifying selection or other forms of selection, right?
So you can, in the specific case of fixing something that works if it gets broken,
like in maintaining state, that's purifying selection.
So an individual, on the other hand, doesn't have that, right?
If an individual, you're only robust, you're not antifragile because there's no connection
between what your genome is doing to the environment back to the genome.
But I mean, I can see the whole culling and reproducing to drive evolution thing happening,
but couldn't that work just as well if the environment culled people due to them becoming
too unfit for the environment, rather than just having an expiration date on every individual?
So there's slightly different things that I'm talking about.
So the point that I'm trying to make, for me as an individual, there's not a feedback loop
between what my genome is causing my body to be and what my genome is.
But if there's a population of me and there's a selection effect going on,
there's feedback that connects what my phenotype is to what my genotype is.
Yeah, I agree. But I mean, your phenotype or your population would keep getting stronger
through just the natural process of culling and replenishment, even if the strongest one
from the last generation wasn't automatically killed for no good reason.
Oh yes, yeah. But my point is just that me as an individual, I'm robust.
My genome is robust. It's not antifragile because, yeah, because there's not that feedback loop,
which means that if my genome starts going wrong, if I start to accumulate some mutations,
there's not like an external point of reference. I can't go to something else
to appeal, what should my genome look like? Yeah, you can't factory reset.
Exactly. So there's only so much redundancy. You've got two copies of your genome and all
yourselves. So if you get some mistakes, and there's a whole bunch of really impressive and
complex mechanisms for repairing DNA damage, but that's all they can do, right? They can
repair the damage. They've got a finite set of information with which to work.
So when you think about it as a physical system, it's kind of an information transmission
problem, right? You've got a set of genotype information that you're trying to send forward
in time. And the physics of signaling mean that there's a sort of finite amount of energy
that you can expend to maintain a certain probability, right? So if you want to maintain
the state of a particular bit, if you want to know that this bit will always be one,
then you have to expend a certain amount of energy to maintain that state with a given
probability for a certain time horizon, right? So it's primarily that the genome degrades
over time beyond the ability of the cell to be useful still?
That is, it's a little bit more complicated than that, because it's not like we're accumulating so
many mutations that everything starts sort of breaking down. And that's where the epigenetic
information theory also sort of comes back in, because it's not all of the cells information
is in the genome. A lot of it is and relevant parts of it are. And there's definitely a role for
genetic damage in aging, like you because DNA repair mechanisms come up over and over again
in premature aging syndromes. So these progeroid diseases where individuals age really rapidly,
a lot of those rare genetic diseases have mutations in DNA repair mechanisms. So DNA repair and
maintaining DNA state, definitely important. But it has also there's also implications for
the epigenetic information. So even if you've not accumulated enough mutations to for that to be
catastrophic for your body functioning, you may have accumulated enough epi mutations. So
back to what we talked about earlier with the the epigenetic information sort of encoding
the information about what state a cell should be in about maintaining a particular differentiation.
If you like the same physical principles apply as to the genetic information, right?
If that gets degraded, if there's some loss of information, because there's a finite amount
of energy you can expend on maintaining it, then it you start to get that de differentiation
phenotype. Okay. So it's so it's mostly about the epigenetic information getting degraded over time.
It's kind of a mix of both. We don't really know to what extent it's epigenetically mediated to
what extent it's genetically mediated. It's actually very challenging to characterize
like low frequency mutations, like how often they occur in somatic cells and in the adult organism.
And it wasn't just the genome, right? I don't know if you agree with the like
Aubrey degrees five factors of aging or hever many factors they're worried about like. Yes.
Yeah. It's a bunch of systems breaking down. The whole hallmarks of aging hypothesis. Yeah.
I mean, so all of that, I think to some degree links back to this sort of this
information problem, because you start getting feedback cascades, right? So once you lose a
little bit of that's that you lose a bit of genetic information, right? So you have a mutation
that affects your ability to repair DNA. That means that you have a higher probability of
subsequent mutations, because you've got an impairment in the repair process. And the same
thing can apply in other systems like epigenetic systems. So if you get us, you know, point
mutation that affects your ability to accurately continue to maintain the epigenetic state,
then that can begin to become corrupted over time. So you get these positive feedback loops
where you lose one piece of regulation of one system and that causes some other system to no
longer function as well at maintaining its state and so on. Yeah. And then like, so some of what
causes aging is sort of your body trying to mitigate this damage to extend the lifespan rather than
like the example of the senescent cells. It's sort of, it's like a jury rig to keep the organism
going. And it also comes back to the evolutionary question again, because there is a certain amount
of selection for a given lifespan, or at least a sort of minimum degree of functionality at a
point in time, right? So I mean, evolution's utility function is to maximize for inclusive
genetic fitness, right? That's what it's sort of grinding to do. Reproductive fitness. Reproductive
fitness. Yeah. So if your, if your reproductive fitness is in some degree orthogonal to your
longevity, then it will optimize for the reproductive fitness and not the longevity,
right? Longevity is not necessarily coupled to reproductive fitness. So evolutionally,
to the degree that it is. So there's definitely, there's definitely a degree of coupling, but
they're not perfectly coupled. They're not perfectly aligned. Like there's the thing where
social species, evolution, like humans or elephants live long past reproductive,
like a reproductive age, because having grandparents increases the genetic fitness of the offspring.
Absolutely. And the offspring is offspring. But like with the example of elephants,
it just keeps the elder elephant around long enough to ensure that like the grandchildren
have a better chance at life, but their teeth fall out. Yep. And they just slowly start to
death. It's horrible. Yeah, it's really, it's, yeah, that and humans have this too, because like
having grandparents is super beneficial for us as well as for elephants. Yeah. Well, we can talk.
I mean, elephants can sort of talk, but we can, you know, tell the history of our tribes and explain,
you know, what to do in case of a war or where I hid my cash of gold.
That's right. It can get really interesting looking at model systems that are short-lived.
So there's a really interesting collection of species called African turquoise killy fish
that live in seasonal like lakes. So they have the whole life cycle in a, so in a series of weeks
in the rainy season. So they're in a puddle. Yeah, basically in a puddle, right? On this kind of
these like seasonal lakes that are sometimes bigger, sometimes smaller. And there's a bunch of these
related killy fish species that have slightly different lifespans that are tuned to how long
the water lasts in their particular set of lakes. So you get this effect where if you don't need to
live long enough to, if you don't need to live longer, then evolution stops caring about the
other stuff. You get this notion of the selection shadow, right? So after you've reproduced,
evolution no longer cares about whether or not you're functioning unless that has an impact on
the reproductive success of your kids, right? It's the weight caveat for the oddballs that are
elephants and us, right? So there's this kind of use it or lose it thing in biology where
if those genes are not being selected for to do this maintenance, then if we can get an edge
in reproduction out of changing them, or if we can just save a bit of energy so we can do more
other stuff that's not relevant to living longer, right? So maybe this gene has an effect that would
cause you to live longer. But if you can tweak it a little bit to be slightly worse at that,
but it doesn't matter because you're going to die because of the floods going to be over.
Yeah, big energy to have more eggs. Yeah. So you get this like evolution will cannibalize
longevity in a situation where it's beneficial to spend that energy somewhere else, because you
have always got a finite energy budget. So what I'm hearing is that this is all my ancestors fault
for not continuing to fuck well into their hundreds. That's the strategy that like tortoises
use. Like there's a go apacus tortoise that lives. How old did they live? Very long time.
Yeah, some absurd number of hundreds of years. It's yeah. They stay they continue to be fertile,
right? I believe so. Yeah, for quite a long time. So they long live species that I don't get
like parrots or whatever. Maybe that's just random. Like the evolution didn't cannibalize those
longevity genes. Presumably, there is some environmental factor that makes that work for
them. Yeah, parrots a bad example, because that's also a social social species. Yeah. Yeah. Trying
to think of something else though. I know there's like immortal clams and stuff like that, but
then we may as well just be comparing alien species. Well, the clams presumably get some
selective benefit from living as long as they do. There's this other concept that's quite useful
called antagonistic pleiotropy, which is kind of an unnecessarily complicated name. But so antagonistic
just, you know, against antagonists. And then pleiotropy means to have many functions or multiple
functions. So a gene which has a beneficial effect in the short term for reproduction, but a cost
later on in later life can be selected for because evolution isn't seeing that cost in later life
effectively. So that can mean that you have, yeah, selection for stuff that will be detrimental
later on, but happens to work out well early on. Okay. So maybe in theory, we could be much less
fertile in youth and live to be much longer, but evolution never saw that thing as useful.
Yeah. Yeah. That might be a... So what I have is a pet peeve about how the pop idea of evolution
always sort of almost substitutes it for God. Like, oh, and the power of evolution, like they
characterize it as this beneficial force. I'm just like, no, evolution's terrible. The system of
non-random death. Red in tooth and claw. Yeah, that's not pretty, not at all. So earlier, you
mentioned that synolytics are being worked on, like drugs that would target senescent cells and
misjuvenate people that way. How far out is that? How are things looking? Do you know anything
about that? So the synolytics are still pretty early, as far as I can tell. I'm not super current
in their development. I can probably point to a few new sources, if people are interested,
where you might get more current information about develops there. But there was a pretty
clinical trial that didn't go terribly well, aiming that treating, I think, was arthritis
in the knees with a synolytic compound. But I don't think that should necessarily be read as
being a serious problem for synolytics. It was a small early trial, and more of a safety thing. I
think the efficacy could easily be better than might be suggested. So didn't go terribly well,
you mean it didn't do what it wasn't supposed to, or you mean it like blew up people's knees?
Didn't do what it was supposed to. I think from a safety perspective, it was, if I'm
recalling correctly, it was fine. But I should probably, if we're entering into the discussion
of drugs, so I should probably just like, I am not a medical doctor. I did not take anything
that I say about longevity interventions here as medical advice. If you do anything to intervene
in your medical regimen, do so in consultation with your physician. Do not take advice about
it from random people on the internet, like myself. Right. That said, yeah, do you have like,
what would be your guess as to how synolytics are coming along, how many years or decades or
for something initially functional? I would not be surprised to see some synolytics on the market
for specific treatments like something like arthritis in the next five years or so.
Holy shit. Something, I mean, that's kind of a moderately optimistic timeline.
But for synolytics, particularly for general purpose longevity intervention, I think that
would be a longer time horizon, more in the 10 to 20 year window. And again, the effect sizes
are not necessarily huge. We don't know how much of an impact on lifespan they have.
So even if it's a small one where you're seeing a couple of extra years on average,
they might start using them as longevity interventions. But it depends what your
degree of interest is in marginal gains as it were. Similar with a lot of the other longevity
interventions or supposed longevity interventions that are on the market or that are popular by
people in this space. So there's a few that I mean, you mentioned in the last episode,
NAD boosters, NMN and NR, those are pretty popular. They seem like just a priori, those are
the sort of things you'd expect to be pretty safe because that's a very prevalent molecule in the
body as is. It's a very fundamental to metabolic processes. So from a safety perspective, I take
NMN supplements, I think they're probably like safe as to how likely they are to actually be
effective at lifespan extension. That's yet to be borne out by a good systematic study. Other
popular ones are metformin and rapamycin. Metformin is normally prescribed as an
anti diabetic drug or as a drug to control diabetes. But there's some reasonable evidence
that that has an effect on extending longevity. I mean, it's relatively small effect size, but
it seems to be there. There's pretty strong evidence for that in mice. And there's work in place to
have a large scale human trial on that one because it's metformin. Yeah, righty. That's going in my
black market. I mean, do a lot of research on it because it has adverse effects that you might not
find to be the cost benefit analysis. Absolutely. Yeah. And I made some notes before the show. I
can send you a couple of links for reference. But yeah, this is one of like NADs probably fine.
That's the one I take because I just say probably I can't see much that's likely to go wrong there.
Metformin and rapamycin, slightly different stories.
What are the side effects? It sounds like they're not good. Well, it sounds like you're extra bad
from the hesitancy I heard. So metformin, I don't know much about the specifics of the
side effects of metformin, to be honest with you. So it increases lactic acidosis. If too much
metformin accumulates, you could get chronic or acute kidney problems or liver problems or even
heart failure, which that's like all worst case scenario things. Well, getting heart failure
from trying to not get old sounds like a bad compromise. Yeah. People who advocate for a
lot of this stuff will make the case that getting old is the single largest risk factor for heart
failure. That's true. And for the most part, those risks are like for a lot of drugs,
the added risk profiles are like for kind of rare edge cases. A lot of people won't experience
many of the specific side effects. Sometimes the side effects are very prevalent, but something
that's as severe as heart failure is unlikely to be a very common side effect of a drug that is in
common use. And metformin is used a lot. Stomach effects are a very common side effect though.
So you have to trade off the potential to live two, three years longer than you might have
with just having chronic diarrhea or other kinds of stomach disturbance.
Again, there's a lot of individual to individual variability. Some people will have
very limited side effects, others will have quite severe ones. It's dependent on people's
individual genetics and environment, microbiome, all kinds of stuff. And rapamycin is perhaps the most
controversial potential longevity drug. Some people make a very strong case for it,
but it is used. The mouse that won the Methuselopros, they used rapamycin.
Yeah, it is, it's one that has a pretty reasonable effect from what we can see,
but it is an immunomodulator and is used in immunosuppression in some areas.
So during COVID times.
Well, this is the thing. It's not necessarily, so it's an immunomodulator, not an immunosuppressant
as such. So there's the specific, like, I think it's transplants.
Where it sort of reduces the risk of like transplant rejection. But there are other cases
where it might actually improve immune function in certain areas. So it's not,
it's not a straightforward, like just dial down all immunity drug. There are more nuances to it
than that. So I mean, these are the ones that, for example, David Sinclair has said before,
he takes all three of those as a cocktail.
How did he get prescriptions for them? Or is he also sailing the high seas?
I don't know exactly, but he has, he always talks about having like a sack of rapamycin
in his basement. They just like takes a tablespoon of the stuff. It's like,
I don't know about rapamycin, but I think metformin is pretty easy to get.
Yeah, metformin. Yeah, it's, I mean, it's like, if you do analysis on river water,
you see trace amounts of metformin. That's how commonly it's prescribed these days.
It's all over the place for diabetics.
I guess all you got to do is knock over a rapamycin bank one time and you're set for life.
Yeah, so now I got to hook up from David. Who knows.
So what exactly do you do in the research field in here? Are you working on the,
directly with a similar company?
No, I'm not doing any sort of corporate work. So my PhD work was, well, one of the things I
was looking at was trying to create epigenetic clocks, which actually is a thing that's worth
talking about because, so an epigenetic clock is effectively just a means of estimating how old
you are based on the state of your epigenome. So you take a machine learning model, or it's a
pretty simple machine learning model for those interested. It's just, I mean, barely machine
learning is, they usually use elastic net regression, which is sort of a compromise between
ridge and lasso regression, to pick a set of estimators. So a set of, in the case of DNA
methylation clocks, particular CPG sites, which is where the methylation takes place,
you look at the amount of methylation that's present on a collection of sites, and that gives
you a very accurate prediction of how old someone is. So if I take a measurement of the
methylation state, and then I run this predictor on those numbers, I will be able to pretty
accurately predict how old you are, or at least how old an average of a population is,
how good it is at individuals is a bit variable, but a very good estimate for the average of a
population age. Have you taken the test yourself? No, I have not. Oh, okay. Yeah, that would be fun
to do. Yes, yeah. So in order to actually create one of these estimators, you're doing usually
a DNA methylation assay. So you take some blood, the DNA methylation assay is used,
something called an array technology, which is originally used for doing genotyping. So
you can treat the DNA that you extract from an individual with a chemical process involving
bisulfite that will change all of the non-methylated seeds so that they will pair differently. And
then you run this array, and you can see whether or not, when you try to incorporate a new nucleotide,
if it's changed, so you can infer whether or not a site has a methylation or not. So with that,
each of these probes at a site has a particular location in the genome. So from that information,
which uses a fluorescent probe, so you kind of shine a laser on this glass slide with a bunch
of little dots on it, and each one, depending on the color, tells you whether or not the
particular location in the genome is methylated. So then you have this big list of sites in the
genome methylated to a greater or less degree in a given tissue. So with that big list of numbers,
but just sort of a proportion that's methylated, you use that as your input to the machine learning
model and the age of the individual from which you took it is the thing you're trying to predict.
And does people's methylated age differ often from their years on earth age?
That's where it gets interesting. So whilst it's very accurate at predicting your chronological age,
the difference between the predicted age and your chronological age is very informative about
your biological age. So if you are older in methylation age, then you are chronologically,
then you will probably die sooner than if you were younger.
That's a bummer.
Yeah. Plus or minus three and a half years ish. Yeah.
So we don't, I mean, there are certain things that modulate it. So like smoking,
you smoke, you have an older biological age by the methylation clocks, which is unsurprising.
And there are a few kind of environmental factors, but smoking, I think, is by far the largest.
We don't really know that well what the things are that modulate it. That's kind of an active
area of research. But one of the challenges in doing longevity intervention research is
it takes a while, especially in humans, right? So if you want to test whether an intervention
works, like it's impractical to give it to people when they're young and wait till they die.
Right. So the good high quality biomarkers of aging, like the DNA methylation clock,
are a great tool potentially to use in that context. So if it's a good proxy for longevity,
then if you give someone a treatment and you see their biological age, according to one
of these clocks come down, then okay, maybe this treatment will work to extend longevity.
So that's one of the spaces where these are looking at being used.
The NMF and nicotinamide riboside, why is it easier to say than the agronome anyway?
Yep. Yes, absolutely. There have been a couple of early trials of this with small numbers of
individuals with longevity-increasing interventions that have shown promising results for this as a
proxy. So it looks like this will be one of the things that is used as a tool in the longevity
extending drug development space going forward. Whereas the ones that have been done so far are
mostly the sorts of things we talk about before with like metformin and repamycin, NAD, that kind
of stuff. I forget which there's a small trial with like 10 participants where they did something
along these lines. And that showed a small effectiveness, but it was so small as a trial
that it was kind of a proof of principle. It wouldn't really say anything strong about the
actual efficacy. So when they go bigger, it'll be interesting to see. But the other thing is
they do know this works in model organisms to a degree because they've done this where you can
show even in like the C. elegans worms that they work on in the lab where I am now that treating
with longevity extending interventions shows decreases in biological age as indicated by a
clock. In the worms case, it's a transcriptional clock because they don't have DNA methylation,
but same principle. Is there any way to get one of these methylation tests like a 23 and
me type surface or? Actually, I believe there is. Yeah. Although I'm not sure I'd recommend it.
Oh, you don't think it's very accurate? There's conditions that could cause poor methylation
and it could tell you if you have one of those. I don't know if it's like you'd have to pair it
though with this machine learning. That's actually that would be very easily done if you got the raw
data, right? It's basically a quadratic equation with a fixed set of terms. Well, not quadratic,
but a polynomial equation with a fixed set of terms. You're multiplying by some defined
certain numbers that's published in these papers and getting out, but it's super simple too.
Oh, shit, I'm going to do it. Well, I mean, you wouldn't recommend it because the commercial
ones aren't very good right now or? So I can't really comment on the quality of the commercial
ones. I think there's no particular reason why they would be good or bad. We still don't know
very well how good a predictor of individual difference this is because we've been doing it
at a kind of population level. We say like the average in these 100 individuals is that this
many are accelerated, this many are less. We don't really know how effective it is at the
individual level. I mean, it might be, it might be an interesting thing to have, but
I mean, but if you've got some 500 bucks, whatever it is to burn on the test, then maybe.
But the other thing to bear in mind is the privacy and data element of it because there's a decent
chance that if you go for whatever commercial offering there is, there'll be some terms and
conditions that say we can use this in however various ways we wish. Like 23andMe has many
of those catches. So it's, depending on your feelings about giving the company information
that might potentially one day impact on your ability to get life insurance. Yeah, that's.
But how could they tell like what your cellular aging is if it was above or below the norm,
if they couldn't tell what it was within the three-year margin?
Well, I mean, you still get, well, yeah, so that's, there's a source of noise there, right?
Yeah. So I mean, you get an exact predicted age with some error bars, right? So we normally just
effectively ignore those error bars, but somewhere in the error is a mix of technical error and
biological age information. So do you, okay. And I was wondering, do you feel like comfortable
giving a name of any service or is this something you'd rather just not?
If I couldn't actually remember any of them, I think there's one called Elysium, maybe.
Elysium is the company that makes NAD supplements. Oh, wait, no, then that's, and they also.
Oh, they do that as well? Yeah, I think they do. I don't know if it's the same company.
Yeah, I've not looked into the commercial offers of the test. Yeah. I mean, so at the moment they do,
that the only commercially available sort of array based profiling one is very expensive,
because it's a whole methylome effectively, well, it's about 450,000 or another new ones,
800,000 sites in the genome, and they do the whole profile, but you only need 356 or so
to run a clock, at least the original one from Steve Horvath from 2013.
Okay, the company Elysium Health is the same company that makes the NAD supplement,
and they do have a $500 home DNA test to tell you how old your DNA says you are,
your DNA methylation. That's much more than the cost of one of those arrays.
There's one called EPIAgingUSA.com, which has one for $169. I don't know why that's cheaper.
Maybe they're not as good.
They might be using a different assay, because you can do a targeted sequencing type one and
run a different clock. There's a whole bunch of different versions of these clocks now,
so some of them use a different technology, which can be run cheaper. Yeah.
All righty. Well, we are getting close to, actually, I think we're slightly over our two
hours. I guess we're getting close to the point where we should wrap up, so I was wondering,
like, what have we not touched on that you would select to touch on?
I think we covered a lot of ground. There's one thing that, so the question that I think was raised
on one of the blog posts that might have instigated the previous episode was kind of what
areas might people be interested in working on in aging biology? What's an area that needs
attention? I think there's a really interesting point at the moment where
a lot of descriptive work has been done in understanding how many of these mechanisms
of aging work, and there's a bit of a dearth of theory. We've kind of gone through a period of,
there was a lot of theorizing, this theory of aging, that theory of aging, and none of them
were quite right, and they were all a bit, you know, they didn't have the whole picture.
Now we have a lot more descriptive information, but we don't have as much theory, so I think
there's an opening for some new overarching theories of the aging process, and I suspect
these will be rooted in the field of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics.
So there's an interesting book that came out quite recently from, what was the author's name?
The title is Every Life is on Fire, Jeremy England, that's the name of the guy,
and he works in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and non-equilibrium thermodynamics,
that kind of area. So it's understanding how, like the thermodynamics of computation relates
to aging, that's the area that I think is potentially very promising, because we have all
of this information about the way that information processing works in biology now,
but we have a gap in the theory of aging, and I think it's rooted in information theory,
and we have these, you know, our biological systems are these very far from equilibrium
systems that are maintained away from equilibrium by a flux of energy through them, so using ideas
from non-equilibrium statistical mechanics to model aging processes is, I think, something
that has a great deal of promise, but I am nowhere near physicist enough to be actually
engaged in that area of research, but that's something I think is a lot of promise. So if
anyone out there is skilled in the math of non-equilibrium thermodynamics and that kind of physics,
the application of it to biology I think would be fascinating.
That sounds very promising, how would they get into that? I'm assuming there's not like an
application. I mean, to be honest, I think the starting point would be get in touch with people
like Jeremy England, so there's some kind of reading around that area where, I mean,
generally speaking in academia, if you want to get into a particular area, do some reading,
find out who the authors are on the papers in that area, and email them. A lot of scientists
are working in the super niche area, and they'll respond to emails because there's not that, you
know. Yeah, and if they have logs, you can like read them. Exactly, yeah, reading the blogs in
the box. So there's Jeremy England's book, there's a bunch of papers, it's a nice talk from him from
MIT, it's a great starting point with a bunch of academic references in it to some of the work in
this area. Awesome, yeah, we just talked to someone who said, yeah, they got started in Miri by
emailing and asking how can I help, and they're like, well, read all these papers for us, and
they actually did it. Yeah, let's go. Yeah, I mean, it's often that simple,
surprisingly, right? People are sort of far too afraid to just like randomly fire off an email
and see what happens, because it pays off more often than you think it would. Yeah, especially if
you have. Yeah, exactly, yeah, it's hard to get out of that groove though, it's so easy advice to
give difficult to follow. Exactly. And just from personal experience, you know, sometimes they just
don't reply to your email, and you can't say it personally, they're busy people too. Exactly,
they're busy, they have things to do. So there's a certain trade off between putting in enough work
in the initial email to signal to that person that you are interested and competent and
worth their time talking to. Yeah, knowledgeable in the field. Yeah, if you can say to them that
you've read some of the research and have some, like, potential as a collaborator that won't
involve too much, like, additional effort from them, right, it will be a productive relationship
for them to work with you. Like, if you can signal that, do that, because then they'll reply to the
email much more likely than if it's like, Oh, this this guy's going to be a lot of work. Yeah.
All right, well, thank you for coming on with us. I think this has been like,
incredibly informative. And thank you so much for having me.
Yeah, I think this has been like, the last launch of the episode we did was fun and all,
but the true value of that one was that we managed to get in touch with you and get you on here.
Oh, thanks. Yeah, I tend to run my mouth a lot. Yeah, and I'm, I'm prone to going on extended
expositions. So, yeah. Yeah, yeah, great. Thank you. Yeah, true.
Yeah, don't don't read my thesis. That's don't subject yourself to that.
Feel free. But yeah.
Well, the podcast again, as well. So the podcast that I'm running is Xena thesis.
Xena thesis.com. That's spelled with an X in case anyone's unfamiliar with the spending of Xena.
But yeah. And actually, the next week, we're doing an unusual episode. It's a special one.
We're, so because Cyberpunk 2077 came out, we're doing a whole episode on cybernetics and genetic
engineering modifications. And I'm going to talk a little bit about software in that context. So
it's one of the things people don't talk about. Like having software that you can trust running
in implants that are in your body is going to be a really important thing because the internet of
things is a complete chit show. And when we start to start putting those things in our body,
we're going to have a real problem. So the the dystopian aspects of that, as well as the potential,
something we'll be talking about. Well, I mean, there's already Fitbits and like the Apple Watch,
I think, can track like a lot of biometrics now. And I'm wondering, since you mentioned 23 and
me's privacy issues, could like insurance companies deny you based on your Fitbit info? Oh, man.
Yep. That's definitely a possibility. So I mean, if you ever like, I don't mean to
be impertinent and inviting myself back on, but if you ever want to do episodes on the subject of
like software freedom and kind of the that when I have that pertains to those kind of things, the
whole, you know, surveillance capitalism and the like, that area, I'll talk your ears off about
that. And also academic publishing, as I managed to resist going down that rabbit hole right at
the beginning. If you want to hear my like, add solutions to that problem, then let me know. Awesome.
That might be a bit taxing. Yeah, that's a good place to end though.
Oh, that was you. Yep, I did. Yes, a little bit by a little tiny contribution to that to the audio book.
And thank you for that. I don't say this enough, but like the audio book was not just my work,
there's literally over 100 people that contributed voices or music or something. And
it was a very large group project that I could have never pulled off without everybody's help.
And yeah, I really can't take down the opportunity to thank you for that because
I aside from academic papers, I don't read much. I'm dyslexic. It takes me a little
while longer to read stuff. So I listen to stuff all the time. And so without the your podcast
version of the methods of rationality, I probably wouldn't have like read it and then gone down
the whole rabbit hole of reading the sequences and getting into the rationality community.
So thank you for that. Oh, absolutely. I'm glad I managed to have some positive effect on the
world. Yeah, that's cool. HPML was one of few books that like when it got ahead of the audio
version, I would actually read it because I was so interested in the storyline. But yeah, it takes
a bit to get me to read something if there's not an audio version, and it's not a paper. Yeah.
Thanks. Great. Oh, should we do a real quick thing for the patron? Sure, we're thinking today.
Okay, all right. If anyone hears this episode and joins the information theory of aging
effort and then cures aging, this will be in part due to well, all of our patrons,
but specifically John Peterson this time. So thank you, John. You may have saved us all.
That is my form, just hope. All right. And thanks again, Richard and everybody for listening,
and we'll see you all in two weeks. Bye. Bye. Bye, everybody.
