Hello Bayesian conspiracy listeners, this is Kyle, the sound editor and sound designer
of this podcast. We at the Bayesian conspiracy are looking for a new musical track to begin
and end our podcast, as the heavy metal track that you've been hearing thus far was just
meant to be a placeholder that we never got around to updating, that is, until now.
So we'd like to ask you, our listeners, some of whom surely have vastly superior musical
composition skills than we do, if you'd like to compose something for us. Your name will
be credited at the end of every show. Send us your submissions in MP3 format to Bayesian
conspiracypodcast at gmail.com, and please keep the track no longer than a minute or so in length.
Thank you so much for being fans of the show, and we are very much looking forward to hearing what
you all come up with. And now, back to the show. Welcome to the Bayesian conspiracy, I'm Enya
And I'm Steven Zuber. And today we are going to do things a little bit differently. For a long time,
I've been wanting to do general episodes on stuff that I've seen in the rationalist blogosphere,
basically, and there's never like a good time to have an episode just on one particular subject,
and then by the time I get to it, it's been like a year since it was posted, and it's kind of stale,
and there's no point. And some of them, they just don't necessitate an entire episode to
think, to talk about. So I'm hoping that from now on, like at the end of every episode, maybe we
can have like a little section like, Hey, here's cool shit I saw in the rationalist blogosphere
recently. Oh man, can we rip off the rationally speaking pick? I sure what is that? I'm a bad
rationalist. Oh man, you guys heard it here first, Enya doesn't listen to rationally speaking. God
damn it. You should listen to at least a few episodes. I have learned a few episodes. Oh yeah,
so at the end, they do their rationally speaking, rationally speaking pick, where back when it was
Julia Galef and Massimo Piglucci, and they were just doing it like together, they would pick one
for each of themselves. But then when they had a guest on to let the guests do it, and now it's
just Julia soloing it with guests. And so the guests typically picks. And it's just like,
what's something that's tickled your rational fancy, whether it be a blog post, or a game,
or a book, or a movie, or whatever. Perfect. Yeah, we should totally do something like that.
Cool. Every episode. We'll have to rip off the name and do something different. But yeah, anyway.
As long as we acknowledge that's where we got the inspiration from, and if it's what you wanted
perfectly, I'm totally down doing that. So I think for that, you texted me on what, Sunday,
with the episode idea, and today's Wednesday, and you had three things. Yes, because I was like,
there's a bunch, let's just use one episode to knock a whole bunch of them out at once,
and then we can do it as a regular feature afterwards. So I think the goal for this is
you're going to drive because I am now familiar with all three, but not fluent in any of the
three. So you can just run it by me and I'll have some concepts to relate it to.
Do you remember what the three I told you were?
Elias Yardkowski on No Fire Alarms for AI.
V's post on Slack and Inadequate Equilibria.
Okay. We should probably just do a whole episode on Inadequate Equilibria at some later point.
We'll see how much time we have. We can at least paraphrase it fairly quickly.
Because I also wanted to do a pick on the less wrong crypto autopsy.
Actually, just earlier today, the episode of Sam Harris' Waking Up where he interviewed Elias
Yardkowski dropped, and so he mentioned the No Fire Alarm for AI in that. So I'm not going to
spend as much time on it, I guess, but I still wanted to mention it because it was really interesting.
He just said that he talked about it in his Facebook post. He didn't really talk about it
that much. Did he? I can't remember. He talked about it.
Yeah, he hit the main concept behind it.
What's the main concept on No Fire Alarms for AI?
The main concept is that, like many of Elias's posts, it starts out with a cool
anecdote about how humans in the real world are less than optimally rational.
No. Elias Yardkowski said that?
He did. I know. Shocking. This was an experiment and I prefaced this with the same
disclaimer that he prefaced it in Sam Harris' interview that there is a replication crisis
in social experimentation nowadays. I'm not sure if this is replicated, but regardless of whether
it has or not, it applies to AI even if it may not apply to real life. Elias Yardkowski said that
he is moderately confident that this one actually has been replicated and is a pretty good encapsulation
of how people act in the real world. Anyways, the experiment was a bunch of people are put in a room
and then smoke starts coming in from under the door. And the researchers see how long it takes
before someone actually is like, hey, shit, guys, there's a fire. We should get out of here.
And what happens is that they wait way too long because most people are looking around and seeing
if anyone else is panicking. And if no one else is panicking, then they're like, well,
obviously this must not be that big a deal. Maybe someone is burning some toast. Maybe
this is just an area of the city that naturally gets lots of smoke or something. Like if there was
an actual fire, something would happen to tell me this is dangerous and I should run.
So I think these experiments, I've seen videos of this kind of thing being done that were like
grainy from the 70s and 80s. I think people have been testing this for a long time. This is partly
bystander effect where bystander effect is where people, well, there's a number of things. But
basically it's like pushing off responsibility in situations of possible social stress. So a
good classic example is if you see somebody stagger into an alleyway and collapse on a somewhat crowded
Friday night street downtown or something, you don't immediately run over and panic
because you look around and no one else seems to be doing that. And you start rationalizing,
oh, maybe they're just drunk and they're going to rest it off for a second or whatever. But you
don't think this person fell over and had a heart attack. And so even when they stage things like
this and somebody grasped our chest and collapsed on a crowded sidewalk, people just walked past
them. And I think it's not because people are like psychopaths. It's because people,
being the social animal that we are, we look at the people around us and say, oh, if something
goes wrong, they'd be freaking out. They're not. So nothing's wrong. But the thing is that they're
also doing that. And since you don't want to look non-calm when looking around assessing the
situation, neither do they. So there's just this blanket effect. It's a feedback cycle.
Everyone is trying to look calm and look at everyone else. And since everyone else is also,
there's this false sense that everybody is calm and there's nothing to worry about.
Right. And so you could do things where you get like two Confederates and one test subject sitting
in a waiting room and then smoke comes through the door or comes from the concurrent of the door
and they just sit there. And I think he said it was like 30% would act up pretty quickly. But
everyone would like to think, I thought there was a fucking fire. I'd do something about it
right away. But you don't look like an idiot. And so, you know, if you get up and like, guys,
is that a fire? You know, you don't want to look foolish in front of your peers, the people around
you, I guess. There's so much suboptimal shit that happens just because people don't want to look
dumb. Yeah. So I'm kind of over that too. I'm trying to work on that. So like I said,
speaking of not giving a shit, so it's really easy for you not to worry about looking dumb.
Because I'd be stressed out all the time. But yeah, so
people will wait until, you know, basically the room's hazy and it's hard to breathe before they
start reacting, which, you know, if there's an actual fire might be too late. So yeah,
very likely could be too late. So how does it relate to AI?
It relates to AI because that doesn't really happen when there's a fire alarm. Even though
the humans already have all the evidence they need for a fire with the room filling up with
smoke, they don't do anything. But when there's a fire alarm, that is, it now has made it public
knowledge that there is a fire, everybody knows there is a fire, you will not look stupid if
you get up and leave now, because there's a fucking fire alarm. And so it breaks that social
awkwardness, I guess, by making it known that everybody knows that there is now a problem.
His assertion is that at least half the benefit of a fire alarm is just that specific thing.
And he says that we have a problem in that there is no fire alarm for AI. And what he means by
that is there are a lot of people who say, look, guys, AI is not a big deal right now. We don't
have to worry about it. Who knows how far off it is, maybe technically impossible. But even if
it's not, we'll have some warning signs and we'll see it coming. And we can do something to address
it once it actually becomes an issue. Right now, people are like crying, oh, the sky is falling.
And, you know, funding their mega research projects off the backs of poor, deluded geeks who are
scared of the AI coming to get them when there's really nothing to worry about.
And Eliezer pointed out that there is no way to break this narrative, that the closest thing he
could imagine would be if a program came from zero knowledge of a system to teaching itself
entirely about a system that humans have been working on for millennia without quite getting it
and surpassing the humans within a day on domain knowledge in that area. That would be kind of
a red flag. So we had a red flag like that somewhat recently, didn't we? It's called Alpha Zero.
He was just reposing this in response to Alpha Zero. He was like, this is a sign that AI could
be coming close. And yet still people are like, you know what, I'm an AI researcher or an AI
programmer. This shit is really hard. I don't see how people can get it done. So I'm not worried
about it. And his assertion is, what would make you worried? That sounds compelling to me. If that's
not evidence, I don't know what is. Exactly. What will you accept as evidence? Do you have to wait
until the nanobots are literally chewing on your leg, turning it into computronium for the AI?
Because at that point, it's a little late. And that was basically the gist of the thing, that we
don't have a fire alarm for AI. It'd be good if we did, but since we don't, we should at the very
least openly acknowledge that there isn't one. Is there anything actionable that we can do with
that information? Like, you know, say if, I don't know, you could run a company-wide awareness
campaign in a world where there were no fire alarms and say, look, if there's smoke coming to the
door, no one will think you're stupid if you get up and check and leave. Like we want to encourage
that. Is there something like that we can do with imminent AI? I don't know if there's much
we can do personally aside from, you know, more publicly saying, hey, this is actually an issue
that people should worry about. And I think things are getting a little better in that respect. There
are very well respected people in the tech field that are coming forward. And even not the tech
field, like Stephen Hawking, isn't actually in the tech field, but he's a respected intellectual,
and he says that he is worried about AI. So it's starting to swing that way. But the fact that
there's no single large, you know, alert or alarm or criteria that would get everyone to say, oh,
okay, we should start working on this is also a problem. What can we do? I don't know. Keep
getting the word out. Keep trying to fund research. I mean, like, we can take it seriously, but what
does that mean? Like, that's not actionable for us. You're right. So that's sort of a drag. That's
disheartening. Yeah, I guess at the very least, you know, use your voice to point out, like if
someone says, oh, I doubt it's really a problem, and you're comfortable objecting, you could say,
no, I mean, you might feel that way no matter what, like, just keep in mind that this is a real
situation that there are many people who think that this is something worth worrying about. So
maybe ask people what would convince you that this is a problem to worry about?
And many people might not be aware of AlphaZero. And then you could be like, oh, you just described
something that happened last year. Yeah. Yeah. Okay, cool. That was pick number one.
Round two. Round two, fight. Round two is Slack, a concept that has been introduced by Zvi
together with Ben Hoffman sort of. So first of all, who's Zvi and Ben Hoffman and where can we
read this stuff? Oh, okay, cool. Oh, yeah. The previous one is from you mentioned this from
Facebook post by Aliezer. And I'll go ahead and link that. So Ben Hoffman is Ben Compass Rose
Hoffman, who is, I don't know, a blogger, everyone who I mentioned is basically just a blogger that
I read in the rational sphere. And I don't necessarily know what they do offhand. So Zvi, who blogs at
the Zvi, the name of the blog is Don't Worry About the Vase, brought up the concept of Slack. Zvi is
actually, I consider him kind of an up and coming in the blogosphere person. He's writing a lot.
He's writing good, interesting posts. The quality of them keeps getting better in my personal opinion.
And they are, they grab you. They're interesting to read, which is really important with blogs.
I mean, that's what has made Aliezer and Scott Alexander so influential, right? That you like
reading their things. So you keep coming back day after day. But unlike Scott Alexander, at least
the one post that I read most of today, the Slack one, it was brief. Yes. So they aren't all brief,
but that's fair. Yeah. But some of them are. This one, it being brief is actually a good
part of the theme of the post. So well, because you only have so much slack to go around and you
want to spend, you know, lots of your precious time reading about it. So let's talk about what
Slack is. Okay. So this was inspired actually by a post from Ben Hoffman talking about the
concept of the Sabbath. He relayed a anecdote about how he went on a solo camping trip.
Originally, I tried to summarize the situation, but I ended up doing a poor job of it. So here's
a direct reading of the relevant paragraphs with some emissions for time. Ben writes,
Recently, I've been feeling too caught up in local social momentum. To spend some time alone,
I asked a friend to teach me how to go camping. On my first solo two night camping trip, I forgot
to bring a backup battery to charge my laptop or phone. So instead, I mostly kept my phone turned off.
Very quickly, I started being able to think about aspects of my situation that had been too overwhelming
to in motion to get leverage on the day before, because I wasn't dealing with them. I wasn't
keeping up with anything. I was just present where I was. I wished I'd done this years ago.
And then I realized, if I had been keeping a Sabbath, it wouldn't have taken years to step
back from social momentum. I'd have gotten a chance within seven days of noticing there was
a problem. And seven days later, another chance and so on. So like the requisite problem is that a
lot of us might be able to unearth similar things that we could work on or fix if we weren't spending
10 hours or not, I guess maybe 10 hours a week on Facebook and Reddit and this and that. Not
because those things are bad, but because there's this pressure to not be out of the loop.
I mean, when I went out to dinner with you guys last night, I hadn't seen the launch of
Elon's spaceship. I'd heard about it because I opened up my Reddit feed when I was leaving work
and it was literally the top five things on my feed from different subreddits.
Yeah, I hadn't seen it yet either. But there's this discomfort of being out of the loop
and having to halt a conversation while your friends catch you up is always uncomfortable.
I mean, there's an incentive like not necessarily through punishment, just through awkwardness
that you want to have the same prior information as all your friends.
Ben makes the argument that work is nowadays we think of work as things that we do for money.
So if we aren't doing something for money, it's not work. But he says really the essence of work
is the activity of producing or maintaining the artifacts that allow you to keep living.
So leisure is the opposite of that. It's when you're not responding to this persistent stream
of demands. When you're having leisure, you aren't having demands from your boss,
no demands from TV commercials, no demands from news feeds. It is purely your own time
to do nothing if you want. Just let your mind wander. This goes into the concept of,
as we were talking when we did our social media episode, in the modern day,
everything wants your attention. Everything wants your time all the time. If you allow it,
it'll take all your attention. Having a time where you are forced to not be able to keep up with
things is good. His real point with all this was, you don't have to do this every Sunday.
But if something like an orthodox Sabbath seems impossible for you, that you cannot take a day
where you can't drive, where you can't look on the internet, where you can't cook any food,
then you are probably in a permanent state of emergency. Zvi picked that up and ran with it.
He said that if you are living so far away from any support area that you can't take one day without
a car, there's probably a problem. If you don't have the time to cook a few meals the day beforehand
and put them in the fridge, there is very likely a problem. That you don't have any room for absorbing
shocks that may hit your system. Do you remember which book he recommended?
I don't. It was in the link, which wasn't that long to read, which we'll link to in the show notes,
but we can also find the book. I know there was a similar book about shock capitalism,
which is the same thing. A lot of people are just making it day to day with $100 in the bank,
or maybe less. They're living off their credit cards. And if something happens, if a tire blows
out, they're fucked. They can't get to their job. They might get fired. If you get in a car accident
and can't come to work for three days, then you could lose your apartment or your house because
now you can't make a payment. It's very important to have a cushion, a little margin of error
for economic things. So he defines... I didn't mean to interrupt you or in the flow. Go ahead.
Oh, well, and that he was saying that this goes to more than just money. That in work areas,
like I just got off a brutal month of work because it was year-end and year-end is always
awful for accountants. But in a typical work situation, you don't want your people working
at 100% all the time. Because first of all, people do need to rest. But second of all,
this means there's no room for if something goes wrong to go back and correct it. There's no room
for someone to get sick and everything goes to hell. There needs to be some inherent slack in
the system. And there is actually an article out there, interestingly, that argues that in
programming areas, it's 60% is how much you want to optimize, how much you want to utilize your
system at any one time with 40% of time devoted to Slack because any more than that, and you start
losing productivity because you can't take the time to fix small things that come up or whatever
the situation may be. So the argument in general is that Slack is incredibly important to have
because it makes it possible to not be in a permanent state of emergency and to take advantage
of opportunities that show up. And I'm going to read a little quote directly from it, but go ahead
and say what you were going to say. I was going to say two things. One, I can attest to that in
software for sure. I don't think my boss's boss listens to this, but for possible designability,
I know somebody whose direct manager says, I plan for you guys's work for five hour days.
And I know you guys are here roughly between six to eight hours a day, but we're not going to plan
for more than five hours or the work a day at most. And that's because a lot of that time,
so I read a lot of work. A lot of it is for stuff that relates to my job, but I don't have to do my
hardening my knowledge at home on my free time. It's a part of it for that, but there's also
a Nerf gun battle this afternoon. And there's ping pong. In fact, there was just a company-wide
tournament where one of the developers won. He's apparently the best ping ponger in the company.
And just random little shit like that. And that keeps morale up, right? So there are some parts
that people are like, and I'm coming in on something like this this week, it's weird,
but because it's the first time I've had actual obligations since I started there,
where I've got to deliver something that I don't know how to by the end of the month.
But it makes the times where you're crunching. If you're always crunching, if your job was
always like it was last month, you would last three months, right? So the fact that there needs
to be some downtime. And yes, your employer doesn't want to pay you to dick around, but they have
to if they want you to not dick around for six hours a day, right? So yeah, just supporting
that for my thing. And I wanted to define slack the way that's V did on the post. So slack was
the absence of binding constraints on behavior, which is super vague, but it fits into exactly
what you described, right? So the idea that you have some cushion, if you're 10 minutes late,
it's not the end of the world. If you have unstructured time, which if you're working
two jobs and you take a two-hour commute between jobs or something and you have six
hours of sleep at night, you don't. So slack is just this commodity that in the way that that's
to be portrays it is this commodity that you have that is this encapsulation of everything that gives
you freedom from behavioral constraints, I guess. You know, so it's and I'm sorry, go ahead. Yeah.
Can I read the thing because it ties in perfectly right to what you're saying right now?
Go.
Okay, this is like the little part of his post that I just really loved because it
almost felt like a poem to me where he is again continuing to define slack. He says,
slack means margin for error. You can relax. Slack allows pursuing opportunities. You can
explore. You can trade, which just as real aside, you can't take time to explore if you're in
permanent crisis mode, right? Slack prevents desperation. You can avoid bad trades and wait
for better spots. You can be efficient. Slack permits planning for the long term. You can
invest. Slack enables doing things for your own amusement. You can play games. You can have fun.
Slack enables doing the right thing. Stand by your friends, reward the worthy, punish the wicked.
You can have a code. Slack presents things as they are without concern for how things look or what
others think. You can be honest. Without slack, you cannot relax. Your life is not your own.
Those who do not value slack will soon lose it. Slack matters fight to keep yours.
I loved it. The reason I didn't finish this, even though I had 15, 20 minutes at work because
I read it slow, and I thought of examples for each one of those things, right? You can do the
right thing. You can have a code which if you're financially desperate and you open your car door
in the parking lot and it dings somebody else's door, you can't afford to do the right thing and
go tell them, right? Because you're deductible will mean that you can't pay your rent. That
constraint makes you have to violate your preferred moral norms, right?
A lot of dystopian fiction is that kind of thing where people just don't have the ability to do
the right thing because it would literally kill them. That's what makes it dystopia, you know?
Yeah. That's a good definition of dystopia. You can be honest. That is a
slacky freedom that we have. I profess my weird beliefs to my coworkers, but if I
worked in a less free environment, then I would be less free to share those things.
I liked that a lot. Then you had the line to fend slack. Where was I on here? What was it again?
Those who do not value slack soon lose it. Yes, because other people are happy to take advantage
of it. That's why I like, even I think with some exception, even at my job where you're not expected
to work all the time, you're expected to kind of look like you're working most of the time.
You can get up and play ping-pong whenever you want, but you can't spend the whole day over there.
When you're at your desk, if you're not working, if you can put code up on one of your monitors
and then you're reading a blog post on your laptop, then at least it looks like you maybe
are reading something related to your job. I'm ready to keep going.
Okay. It seems to have caught on because it's a concept that everyone intuitively
understands, but now there's a word for it. There's a handle that we can use to talk about
this concept and that's super useful. Also, the tool that I use to dig around a lot at work is
called Slack, which he mentions in the article. It's like an instant message tool. People who use
it will hate that because you can make channels and it works cross-company and that sort of thing,
but I also use it for formal communications between people that I'm working with and collaborating
on, but I also have fun channels with my team. If you want to just ship post or plan lunch or
something, we talk there. Zvi was on Slack. What was the other guy's name? What was the name of
the article that he posted in case someone doesn't want to get it? Ben Hoffman. Was it a blog post
or was it a book or what was he? It was a blog post. I still have the link. Okay, cool. Sounds good.
I'll put it up. All right. All right, so that was two. That was two.
Are you familiar with this Bitcoin thing that's been going around?
Let me take a wallet real quick. It was a scary week for my wallet.
You messaged me when it was up around $14,000 or something and saying,
like, what should I do? And I said, sell half of it. What did you end up doing?
I hold onto it. So I actually, I only bought, when I initially bought, I bought my,
I think the weekly spending limit that Coinbase gives me and pros of this will hate that I use
Coinbase, but it's easy. So I used it and I bought 25% Bitcoin, 25% Ethereum and
what, 50% Litecoin? Is that what that average is out to? I've since sold the Bitcoin and put it
all back into Ethereum. But yeah, so now Bitcoin is down to eight grand, which is slightly above
what it was when I bought it. Which means it's now up to eight grand because wasn't it down to six
like a week ago? Yeah. Okay. But so it's still left from when I bought it, but that 14 bubble
did pop. But it's like, obviously if I'd sold then I would have made some money and I bought
right before it exploded, like the first week of December is when I bought. So I've never gone
negative, but I came within 15% of, of like, so my total gains went down to 15% like earlier this
week. Oh no, 15% gain in two months. Well, considering that when like, after two weeks,
it was 100% it had gone up 300% or wait, I guess 250 ish. So like, it was huge. But my plan
basically now is just to like, hold on to it till I need it. Since I don't really see it going
below my initial investment. When it looked like it was going to earlier this week, I was gonna
finally have to face the hard question of how low, how much money am I willing to actually lose.
But so far, all I've lost is forsaken gains. So like right now, and you know, the best thing about
investing and gambling is like, you don't lose anything until you cash out, right? So if my,
if my coinbase wallet is $10 next week, well, as long as I don't sell, there's always that hope
go back up. But yeah, right now I'm holding on to it as sort of like a, I'll probably need it
down the road, like I'm trying to buy a townhome at some point. So I mean, fuck it, if it goes nuts
again, I could put that could be a substantial hit into my down payment, which would be really cool.
So I, I initially bought, I didn't buy very much. I think it was like $500 worth when it was at 4000.
And then I sold a large majority of that when it hit 9000. Because I was like, it's probably not
going to get any higher. And I was like, damn it, I wish I held on to it until it's 16.
But like in your defense, you couldn't have known, right? And you doubled your money.
I did. I'm more than doubled it. So that's pretty cool.
Yeah, that was nice. And now I'm like thinking, what point should I buy back into this shit?
Frankly, if you'd bought back in on Monday, I know it would have already been up 20%, 25.
Yeah. But I mean, so like, just on this out there, if you're thinking about it,
now might be the time, I'm done. I've already decided I'm not going to put any more money
into it. You threw out the number, how much you put in? I put in $2,500, which I'm kind of like
new to having like, expendable income. And this was enough to where like, I wasn't going to
mis-rent if it all vanished overnight, even though I was confident it wasn't. But it would have
sucked. Like this was, this was a substantial amount and still is of like my total amount of money.
But the lowest it's been since I got it was 3,100 after I was had access to it. So like,
but at most it was pushing like 66 for my entire wallet. So maybe a little more,
69 or something at some point. So like, there was a period where like, I made like four grand
and just doing nothing. So that was kind of cool. And so this Bitcoin hypey stuff, I'm somewhat in
the loop on, but not enough to, I'm not technologically informed on it that much. But even
the friends I know who are, I went to talk to one this earlier this week on Monday when it was
dying. And I'm like, what should I do? You know, should I, you know, what did you do? And
he's like, Oh, I sold it all last weekend when I was, you know, getting my new apartment. I'm
like, Oh, then you're good. And he's like, Yeah, I'm fucking lucky. But, you know, I was like,
Well, what would you do? You know, he's like, I don't know. And he's like the most knowledgeable
person I know about any of this stuff. So my impression is that nobody really knows anything
about any of this. And that like, it's literally gambling. I was, I was waiting for it to hit 5,000.
I was like, once it hits 5,000, I'm going to buy back in, but it never did. And now it's up to like
eight again. You could get not Bitcoin and get something else. It's true. I have like 12 Litecoin.
I think I have 12 and a half Litecoin and they're 120 ish bucks right now. So,
and when I bought them, they're at 100. So I'm still up on Litecoin, but for like a week,
they were over 300. Like it was insane. So this whole thing's weird. And I feel dumb talking about
it because it's like, it's like, you're at the roulette table. It's like, I've hit green like
four times in a row. Isn't this awesome? I'm going to keep going back in. So what's the,
what's the rationalist blogosphere have to say on cryptocurrency?
Well, this is actually Scott Alexander's grading the rationalist community in a way,
sort of, not really. Actually, he did literally assign it a letter grade, but
what was the letter grade? C.
Or is that spoiler? C.
C. Yeah.
Passing.
Yeah. Yeah. He, he,
as rationalists, we should be getting A's and I'm assuming he's grading us on our rationality,
right? So.
Yeah. He actually has a very good, a very interesting post on this. It's called a
less wrong crypto autopsy. And he posted this over at lesser wrong.com instead of on his normal
blog. I'm pretty sure we've mentioned lesser wrong before, but less wrong is where this whole
thing more or less started with Eliezer posting and then everyone else jumping in and turning
into a big conversation and community. And it kind of died out and people went their separate
ways on the internet to their own personal blogs, which is why we now have a blogosphere
instead of lesser wrong.com. But there is some effort to try to revitalize this. And so lesser
wrong.com is around now. And they're actually making a pretty good go of it. There is,
there's some interesting content there fairly frequently and some, some decent posters. I
mean, there's a V posts on there. Scott Alexander apparently is now going to be posting on there
now and then.
Matt Freeman said he posted a lot over there. We've had him on the show.
Yeah.
Same as plug for his, his worm podcast called we've got ward. That's what it's called now.
It's for the sequel to worm. I just started giving it an honest listen and I love it. So
I want you to listen to that show. If you're reading worm and if you're not, you should
read worm and listen to this accompanying podcast and then read ward and you can do it in real time
with Scott and Matt while they, while they do the podcast.
And I know at least one of our listeners wrote to say, Hey, thanks for letting me know about
that podcast because that was really cool.
Cool. Yeah.
What was I going to say about, oh, lesser wrong. They also have, it's like lesser wrong is fun,
but it was clearly not. Well, I don't know. I guess I can't say clearly anything, but it,
at first glance, it is not optimized for like newcomers and like there's a small button that
says sequences, but it doesn't, you know, other than the fact that no one shuts up about it on
there, especially back in the day, like read the sequences, you don't really know where to go.
Lesser wrong has like a nice cool thing where it's got a suggested reading thing.
And Slate Star codex is on there. The sequences are on there. So anyway,
it has recent posts on there. Yeah. So yeah, he posted on lesser wrong, a crypto at autopsy,
where he starts it out by giving a history of how closely intertwined the original cryptocurrencies
and less wrong were. Says way die, which I don't know if I'm pronouncing it right. Why day maybe?
Anyway, I'll go with why day. Why day? One of the first people Satoshi Nakamoto contacted.
Are we, before I go on, we know who Satoshi Nakamoto is.
Let's pretend we don't.
Okay. He is. I don't. They is a fictional person who is the anonymous creator of Bitcoin.
Okay. Yeah. I didn't know that. Yeah.
I thought I knew something about Bitcoin. I guess I don't.
No one actually knows who this person is, but they made Bitcoin.
God, I hope it's like Elon Musk. Sorry.
So way die. One of the first people that Satoshi Nakamoto contacted about Bitcoin
was a frequent less wrong contributor. And yeah, some of his posts were really good,
some of my favorites. So was Hal Finley, the first person beside Satoshi to make a Bitcoin
transaction. The first mention of Bitcoin on less wrong, a post called making money with Bitcoin
was in early 2011, when it was worth 91 cents. Yeah. Gwern also a big poster on less wrong and
famous for his incredibly involved and complex posts where he explores things with his own
Kula experimental method. Gwern predicted that it could be someday be worth upwards of $10,000 a
Bitcoin. According to the recent Slate Star codec survey, 9% of SSC readers made $1,000 or more
from Bitcoin as of December 2017. Among people who refer to SSC from less wrong, which he uses
as a standard for long time less wrong regulars, 15% made over $1,000 on crypto, which is nearly
twice as many. A full 3% of less wrongers made over $100,000. That's pretty good.
On the other hand, 97% of us, including me, didn't make over $100,000. All we would have needed to
invest $10 back when people on less wrong started recommending it. But we didn't. How bad should
we feel and what should we learn? Part of this might be me protecting my own ego. Actually,
I don't take that much protection. I didn't know about Bitcoin in 2011. I'm shielded there, but
I imagine some of the reply would be, this is the one I didn't read. I don't know anything about
what Scott's position on this or any, I guess I know what his position is now, but I didn't know
this coming in or what any of the feedback might be. But I would say part of it is a couple of
things. One, you had no idea of knowing that this would do anything. Granted, $10 isn't a huge
investment, but you don't know. There's $10 lottery tickets, right? And to the point,
$10 lottery tickets are really easy to pick up, whereas getting into Bitcoin back then was a
process. You would need someone who knows how to do this and like an afternoon.
So that combined with the fact that when I was coming onto the scene and all the ones that are
sub-a-dollar, there's like 100 that come up pretty easily when you're searching. So I was like,
how do I know which one's going to be the next Bitcoin? So maybe it was easier when there's
only one. Maybe it was a less excusable mistake, but I haven't invested in any of the tiny ones.
One of the guys that I know at work does, and I think he's made some money, but not $100,000.
I don't think he's made $1,000. I don't know, but he's not rolling it yet. He still works there,
I guess is what I'm saying. All right, let me articulate this. I think it is a reasonable
rebuttal, which I'm positive Scott gets to because he's a smart guy, that we couldn't have known this
would do anything. So what's the reply to that? Back when Bitcoin was the only one,
Bitcoin was never the only one. One of the people who I've replied to Scott's post on this was
the first person who knew, one of the first people who knew about Bitcoins because he was a
moderator on the forum where it was introduced. So he even saw it before the normal forum users,
and he said at that time there was about a dozen new cryptocurrencies that people were pushing,
and Bitcoin was just one more of those. And so there were a number of people who said that
sort of thing, but Scott's reply was that there was a lot of people who we knew to be smart,
and know these technical matters, and we trust who are in the rational sphere who are telling us
there is a 1% chance that this thing could go to the moon. Maybe 0.1 even, but it's a decent chance
that you can get 5,000 times returns on this thing. And yet most of us did not jump on it,
and that as a rationalist is something you should do. And again, people pointed out, you know,
when something is a 1% chance, you go in for the first three, four, five, maybe dozen,
you keep getting screwed by these things that take $10 plus an afternoon of your life,
and eventually you're going to burn out and not do them anymore. And again, Scott's reply was like,
as a rationalist, you should expect only about one out of 100 to actually pay out if you assign
it a 1% chance, and not get discouraged after a dozen because you realize that the chances are
most of them will fail. But then we're talking about $1,000 investment on average. No, we're
talking about... If we're spending $10 per thing. Oh, over 100. Yeah, yeah. So then I think that
becomes a harder case, right? If I'm going to give $10 to everything that has a 1% chance of making
me money, I mean, so like your odds of making your money back on a scratch lotto ticket are like
one in five, or maybe one in four. So like a lot of them pay back the dollar you got to get you to
buy in again. But the expected returns on a scratch ticket are always less than $1. And in
fact, in some cases, significantly less, right? Well, like slot machines advertise that they're
really good because they pay back 98% of every dollar that you put in on average. On average,
right? Yeah. Which is... I want to shudder when I see that advertised as a good thing. They're
like, we give you back 98% of your money. So there's two things with that. One, I've never seen
that advertisement. Okay. But I guess I don't... Maybe it was on... It was on a billboard as I
was driving. Okay, that's hilarious. So the other thing about that is... So you're telling me I'll
only on average lose 2% of my money. That's like... If you're reading this, even the literal way,
which is the... Obviously, like I said, it's on average. So you get a jackpot winner. So they
give back 98%. And they're saying, we only keep 2% for the house or whatever. But that's telling
me as the player, it's like, oh, okay. So on average, I plan only lose 2% rather than lose
nothing if I don't play. Right. That's insane. Yeah. But this is a thing where the payoffs were...
Like when Gordon said, has a chance of going to over $10,000, that's a case where you invest $10
and you get back $100,000. What was Gordon's case for that? I don't remember. It was yours.
I know. But I was wondering if it was referenced in this article, because if all he was saying
was like, I think it'll get big. No, like...
Gordon is Gordon. He spelled out reasons he had to have, because man is meticulous.
But I guess... And I'll have to find this case. I will look it up. But I'm curious how he could
have anticipated. Also, was Gordon one of the 3% that made $100,000? I don't know.
I certainly... He'd better be after proselytizing for it.
And there are a number of people who... Well, I'll get to that in a second. But there was
there's the fact that if you expected to have a 1% payout, sure, that's $1,000 to go into all $100,
but a $10... If any one of those hits and you've put in $10, you expect to get back $100,000.
So that's still 100 times your money back. You put in $1,000, you get back $100,000,
totally worth it. Yeah, that sounds pretty worth it. I'm not an economist, but...
Right. So, I mean, that would be like the expected payout of, for every dollar you spend,
we only give you $100 back. That would be a gamble I would take.
So it was an interesting post. And he said that, but as is pointed out, 3% of people
got really super rich by following this. And a lot of people said, this looks good in principle,
but then just didn't follow through with it. And he said, I think our epist...
Epistemological. Thank you. Our epistemological... My mouth isn't braining today.
Our epistemological rationality is pretty good, but our instrumental rationality still needs
serious game because we may know things, but we don't act on them. And there were a number of
people who pointed out things like, for example, an afternoon is a significant investment of one's
life. If you have to spend 100 afternoons, that's a lot of fucking effort. There were a number of
people who said, I did buy in very early, and then I got out when it hit 400 because I didn't think
it would ever get much more above that. There were a few people who said, I got in early,
and then I lost everything when the Mt. Gox hack happened. So it's... Yeah, this wasn't actually
as risk-free as some people necessarily make out. Yeah, that plus... It'd be one thing if we were
all told... I guess I still need to read the original case that Gvern made because we're all
told with really high reliability that this would work, but if it's one person's well-thought-out
speculation, that doesn't mean that we knew something and didn't act on it. It means that we
knew, I guess we knew odds that we didn't project properly and act on those. I remember when I read
it, I was excited by the article and I even had a friend who was really into the cryptocurrencies
and was trying to push me to get into them as well. I looked into how big of a pain in the
ass it was to do, and I was like, eh, it probably won't pay out, and I didn't do it, and now I regret
it. I was looking into getting on one on Reddit. It was a Litecoin clone that someone made a
couple weeks ago called Garlic Coin. Garlic Coin, there's no break, so it's 1c.
And Garlic Coin is built on an understandable and familiar stack that Litecoin is built off of,
and they were going to hand out two free ones to everyone who subscribed to the subreddit
and this and that, so I was like, all right, I'll subscribe and I'll follow this a little bit,
and it's largely hilariously shit-posted memes because everyone's just making the biggest fun
of this ever, but they're actually worth something now. I'm not sure how much.
Really?
Less than... I saw something that... I can't even... So that's the thing. As I imagine this is probably
easier than it was getting into Bitcoin eight years or seven years ago, but I can't even figure
out how to buy this shit, so I followed a few links, and then it's like, all right, cool, download
this thing, and then put in your credit card and stuff, and that sounds shady as hell. I didn't
download the thing, but I couldn't even figure out who to give my money to or how to do it.
So if all I'm hearing is that, yeah, go to this weird site and download the software
under your computer, and then suddenly you own part of the blockchain, trust me, that's a thing,
you're good, and then when you put in your credit card, that's fine too, don't worry about it.
I think there's a lot of good reasons to say, no, it'd be really easy for someone to steal my
money if I was just going to put my credit card and stuff that I don't know what I'm doing.
You know my project for this Saturday?
No.
Going to create basecoin?
Yeah, perfect.
Apparently launching garlic coin was harder than I thought it was going to be,
so... and they have quite the cult following on Reddit, so heads up, it might be kind of hard.
But yeah, I saw something about how that must have been a dip.
I think it went from like 1.5 cents down to 0.5 cents.
But shit, if it was 0.001 cents to start or something, then it goes up to five bucks.
It's like, yeah, sure, I'll put in $10, who cares?
But I couldn't even figure out how to do that, and honestly, maybe I should have,
and I'm kicking myself.
In fact, fuck it, I'll figure out maybe how to buy garlic coin when I get home.
Because in 10 years, this is the next light coin, they're all worth 130 bucks each,
then I've made some money.
Can I give you a buck?
Get me a buck worth of garlic coin?
I'll throw it in for...
Hold on to your paper.
If you want to Venmo me a dollar or whatever.
But yeah, we'll see how this works out.
I don't really, like I said, I'm not even sure how to get my hands on it,
but I think that might have been the objection that people had back then.
And I knew people too who bought or who mined and bought Bitcoin back in the day,
and then sold it was a few hundred bucks.
I guess they could have said maybe my returns will keep going, but in a lot of ways,
that's like, I'll keep doubling down on green on the roulette wheel.
Rather than take my 500% return and leave, I'm going to stick around for more.
Like that sounds insane too, right?
And I sincerely wonder whether or not like if there was this big epidemic of a lot of
rationalists investing in Bitcoin, and then they all bought and then it crashed.
If they'd be like, you guys should have sold it and it was high,
why did you guys keep gambling?
Or why did everyone buy into this thing that's an obvious mistake?
Because it did crash quite a few times.
There was a number of times where people were like,
God, I wish I had sold when it was at $40.
Because now it's down to whatever it was down to.
So I wonder, this does seem, autopsy is a good word for it.
Because now we're analyzing the situation, that happened,
and seeing how do we get here and how can we appraise it.
But the situation could have gone differently.
And I wonder if we'd all bought this and it blew up,
or if we'd all bought this and it withered and died,
then he'd be like, how could you guys all have been so stupid?
This only had a 1% chance of working, right?
Well, but you shouldn't feel that bad about it,
because you knew it only had a 1% chance of working, right?
I don't know.
But how bad is he saying we should feel knowing
that only had a 1% chance of working now, right?
Not too bad.
He said, okay, so I love this paragraph,
which I just want to read verbatim.
He says, suppose God had decided,
out of some sympathy for our project,
to make winning as easy as possible for rationalists.
He might have created the biggest investment opportunity
of the century, made it visible only to libertarian programmers
willing to dabble in crazy ideas.
And then he might have made sure that all of the earliest adopters
were less wrong regulars just to make things extra obvious.
But he said, basically, I think we did mediocre.
We got to see, in his opinion.
That's hilarious.
But they're still seeing that going the other way.
You know, suppose the devil set us up
and they wanted to trick us to some stupid Ponzi scheme,
and then I'll blow up in our faces
and we're all acting all sad and surprised, go figure.
Eliezer actually replied directly to it.
And he said, he disagreed directly with Scott.
He said, what thought pattern would have generated
the right answer here without generating
a lot of wrong answers in other places
if you had to execute it without benefit of hindsight?
Which, you know, I guess that's a much more eloquent way
of phrasing what I've been trying to articulate this whole time.
Yeah, he says, a bounded rationalist should not expect to win
at everything at once.
And looking back and thinking you ought to have gotten
all of the fruits that look easy in hindsight
can lead to distorted thought processes
or distorted thought patterns.
Which I'm like, okay, yeah,
we don't want to beat up ourselves too much over it.
We also don't want to go out and piss away our,
like, you know, take out a mortgage
and buy a bunch of garlic coin, right?
Yeah, oh, God, no.
Well, so like, that's my point.
But if, or maybe, you know, Scott wouldn't have advised
taking out a second mortgage, but even like, you know,
spending a thousand dollars, which is not negligible,
but it's not going to like keep us from feeding ourselves.
Well, and every afternoon that you spend on it
is one afternoon that you aren't getting better
at rationality or writing a novel or, I don't know.
But it's also one percent chance
that a, you know, a million percent return, right?
Yeah, yeah.
Losing an afternoon if your life is a lot.
I would lose a, I would lose a couple of summers
for a hundred thousand dollars.
Well, for guaranteed hundred thousand.
Yeah, yeah.
So I think, I think by that, by that logic,
that I'd be willing to lose one half of a day
for a one, one percent chance, right?
Right.
I do see that objection, like, to when it was first coming out,
like, obviously, it's like, why am I going to burn a day
figuring this weird stuff out and giving some, you know,
machine my credit card number that I've no idea what's happening.
I can see that being more of a stopper.
But like, you know, if your only thing is like,
oh, I'm busy in an afternoon is important,
like, yeah, I like walking around too,
but I also like making money.
So anyway, what was the rest of the other years reply?
That was basically it.
Did Scott reply to that?
Because I'm curious too, what general thought process
could lead to, like, making calls like that?
Not that I saw, but I don't have infinite afternoons.
So I don't keep up on everything all the time.
If I had an infinite afternoon,
it would be a much happier person.
Oh, God, yeah.
That's, I think, one of the reasons, you know, just as long as it's,
you know, as long as I'm going to ramble, I, you know,
like how I wanted to marry a time-turner
with a irrationality, I felt exactly the same way.
Like, that is just the idea that, like, you know what,
I'm going to burn, I'm going to go take an hour.
And just like, you can just go do that whenever you want
a few times a day.
Yeah.
I would, I would seriously sacrifice, like,
10 years off my lifespan to have that power
for the rest of my life.
If I, say, if I knew I was going to live to be 100,
I'd give up 10 of those years on a heartbeat,
if I knew that I could do that, right?
I might give up 20.
That's, I mean, that's one of the reasons I'm not,
I say now I'm not as willing to give up an afternoon
because I have this back list of reading
that I got to do to stay current,
and also just because I enjoy it, right?
I'm also curious how you find all these things.
Like, what, maybe this is actually a good time to pitch this.
Like, what is your, like, first of all,
when do you read all these things?
And second of all, do you have a,
do you have, like, a RSS feed that emails you
every new post on all of these?
Do you go to these websites once a day
or every couple of days or?
No, I, so there's some that I hit fairly regularly.
Scott Alexander's blog, of course,
Leistar Codex, The Ungrumpable Grinch on Twitter,
on not Twitter, on Tumblr,
and the unit of caring on Tumblr
are ones that I check pretty regularly
because they give me the burst of dopamine.
I just enjoy checking them.
And every now and then they'll link to cool things like this.
I make an effort of going to Leistar Wrong sometimes
and of going to V's blog sometimes.
And just, I don't know, it's,
this is one of those things I enjoy doing in my spare time
is just reading around and finding these things.
I don't really have a method or a RSS feed or anything.
I stumble into things a lot.
And then now I'm going to start making notes of them
so I can bring them up during my weekly pick
or bi-weekly pick.
Sounds fun.
Like, so for me, I do,
especially now that I fall into a nice job where I can,
you know, I'm happy because I,
I'm waving my arms a little bit as I say, I'm happy.
Like, I enjoy my work even when it's stressful.
Like the, the class of problems I have now
is so much better than they used to be.
I have downtime, I have smart peers,
I have interesting problems to tackle.
And, you know, even when it's stressful,
I still get to figure something out.
And that's like really rewarding.
But part of the purpose that I get a lot of time to like,
you know, I read stuff related to work
and stuff not related to work.
Like I read Robert Hansen's book last month,
exclusively on the clock, I think.
Well, maybe minus 10 to 15%.
But like I was paid to read almost all that book.
I would say I do a good 60% of my reading of this stuff at work.
So I guess what I'm trying to figure out is I would like,
maybe we can put this on the, on the website
or maybe every time we link one,
or we talk about one in the future,
we can be just be sure to link to where it came from,
like the blog in general, where you found it or something.
Because I would like to have a cool thing to check every,
you know, once every couple of days,
just, you know, a list of five places I go look and see.
A lot of it comes from Facebook.
I just friend people in the rational sphere
and every now and then they'll put something on Facebook.
And whoop, there it is, you know.
And I use the ignore function very liberally on Facebook.
I think there's no more than,
probably 90% of my friends list is muted
because I'm just like,
okay, you got, you got personal things going on in your life.
Unless, unless you're like one of my 12 peers
that I really care about, I'm muting you
because I don't care about your personal life all that much.
But this interesting article that someone just posted,
that's cool.
And so I keep those people that post interesting articles
pretty high in my, in my Facebook nose.
I click through those links a lot
so promotes their shit to the top of my feed.
Yeah, I think I, I think everyone that I was friends with on Facebook,
like what do you call unfollowed me?
Because when our girlfriends in New York getting their masters,
we just like send each other like cute pictures
through Facebook three or four times a day on each other's walls.
And when you see other people's activity,
it's like, oh, I'm missing another fucking puppy
and you just stop following this.
So like, I'll notice, you know,
I don't know, a couple of years ago
when I would still try and reach out and do stuff,
I'd get like two replies even though I have like 200 friends.
I'm like, you know, no one's seeing this.
Oh, that makes perfect sense.
I would have unfollowed me too.
No hard feelings.
So no one looked at my stuff for,
or I guess if anyone is still seeing my stuff,
they're not seeing anything.
But also I found, I was digging up on here
to try and find the post.
I was trying to find Eli's reply.
And he just links to Facebook post that replied to it.
He didn't reply in the comments here.
Okay.
The only thing in the comments he says,
this is pretty low on the list of opportunities.
I'd kick myself for missing.
A longer reply is here.
And he posts to the Facebook page.
Okay.
So I probably got that reply
because I just pasted it into my text file.
I probably got that reply off the Facebook then.
That makes sense.
But I'm curious.
I'm going to skim it really quick while we're here
just to see if Scott replies to it or not,
because if he does, I'd be interested in hearing that reply.
Oh, here we go.
Scott Alexander's reply.
I'm not arguing people were bad
for not being able to figure out Bitcoin was great in 2011.
And if anybody had had, excuse me,
I suck at reading out loud.
And if anybody had all of this in mind,
that Bitcoin might go up, but there's no way to make sure
that Bitcoins wouldn't be stolen along the way
and who would know when to sell and so on.
I can't criticize them,
basically the stuff that we were saying.
My main point is that a lot of people,
including me, did specifically decide Bitcoins
were a great investment, tell others they're a great investment,
confirm with people that they believed the same,
and then didn't do anything about it.
I talked to a couple people who did the correct EV calculation,
mined a few Bitcoins for a while,
and then forgot about them
because they were difficult and annoying.
EV being expected value, I believe.
Yeah, I think so.
And yeah, I was the same way.
When I was deciding whether to go into Bitcoin or not,
I didn't think, oh, I might get hacked or whatever.
I just was like, oh, this is kind of a pain in the butt.
Well, that's fair.
One of our friends, Thomas Elliott,
was on the podcast replied to Scott's reply there.
And so the Eleizer said, well,
all I can say is that I didn't reason that way.
Maybe I'm not the right person to ask,
but I do have a general heuristic that says,
I could have made this great financial investment
and outperform the market.
What was me usually is a losery thinking.
Is that Thomas's reply?
No, that's Eleizer's.
Thomas's was, I think I made this mistake,
and I think it was a genuine mistake.
And I think the reasoning in the OP
as to why it wasn't is specious and excuse-making.
So a lot of disagreement in both directions
on this particular topic.
I did think it was really interesting, though.
It is interesting.
And we are here to bring you the rationalist news.
Yes, today we are.
The feedback.
Yes, feedback.
So before we do feedback,
let me quickly think our think,
thank our supporter for the week.
This week's supporter is...
Hold on. Where was it?
Ah, here's the list.
Matt Freeman.
In fact, Matt Freeman.
Is that our Matt Freeman?
I can only assume what's our Matt Freeman.
Okay. Thank you, Matt Freeman.
If you are our Matt Freeman, you rock.
If you're not our Matt Freeman,
you obviously also rock
because you are helping support the podcast.
So yeah, whichever Matt Freeman you are, you're cool.
I'm pretty sure it's the one that's been on the show.
Okay.
I'm only, I'm guessing.
We can ask him.
Yeah, that's fair.
Awesome.
But yes, and thank you to all our supporters, of course.
But in this week specifically, thank you, Matt Freeman.
We couldn't do this thing without you.
And I mean, I guess technically we could,
but we wouldn't want to.
Agreed.
I want to rephrase that now.
That sounded kind of bitchy, didn't it?
That we wouldn't want to do it without you.
Your money doesn't just fuel for the servers.
It also fuels our hearts.
That's a good way to put it.
That's the dumbest way to put it.
I like it.
If this stays in my caveat about this being the dumbest way
to put it, it has to stay in too.
Okay.
So there's a lot of conversation on the Reddit
about the marriage episode.
Yes, let's, let's read a little bit about that.
So Shelley doesn't drink.
I don't know if that's a Shelley that I know.
It is.
I also know the Shelley that doesn't drink.
Yeah.
Legal marriage in the US does grant a lot of benefits,
sometimes in ways that play into systemic
or institutional singleism, discrimination against single people.
For instance, as you mentioned, the fact that spouses
can't be required to testify against each other.
There's some other legal benefits.
Bullet pointing through, because this is what I was asking about.
At the end, I was like, why do people want to get married?
If all this does is put you up in a situation
to shoot yourself in the foot, and why was this like,
why weren't gay people lucky that they weren't,
that there wasn't pressure for them to get married
because they couldn't?
And you guys were like, kind of shruggy.
I'm sad we didn't address that more.
There was a commenter that actually asked us the same thing.
So we should, we should get to that too.
We will.
But I'm going to list off some of the things
that Shelley pointed out here.
So various immigration benefits.
That's true.
The ability to sue for wrongful death of a deceased spouse.
Can you not sue for the wrongful death of a friend?
Probably not.
I mean, I have a related example that I'm pretty sure
at least you can for family members,
but I guess spousing makes somebody a family member.
So let's see.
That's interesting that you can't sue for the wrongful death
of a friend.
If that's true, then fuck that.
And thanks for pointing that out.
Inheriting the social security and veteran survivor benefits
of a deceased spouse.
Can you not sign that?
I'm assuming that she's done all our homework on these.
So I'm going to assume that they're all true.
Yeah.
But I know that like at my work,
I guess it's not social security,
but it's not veteran's life.
So it's neither of these,
but like my life insurance policy,
I can give to whoever.
Yes, you can.
But I think social security is specifically,
and maybe veterans too, is specifically for spouses.
Then that's the thing.
Workers comp, ability to roll a deceased person's 401k funds
into an original retirement account
without paying income tax,
and in many states inheritance taxes on those funds.
And I mean, all of these make sense if you assume that
the marriage is one person.
So I guess the positive effects of that are these things.
So I'm going to keep that in mind
with the rest of these going forward.
Spousal inheritance in general
for people who haven't made a will,
lower likelihood of will.
Make a will.
Yeah, make a will.
I need to do that, by the way.
Let's sort of just hope whoever is in charge of my stuff
will be nice to it.
I guess that's the latest will ever.
Well, I mean, there's some default things.
It goes to next of kin, which...
I don't know who my next of kin is.
Whoever's most closely related to you by blood
that's still alive.
I think it might be your parents.
Oh, you have a twin brother.
I'm not sure it takes that into account,
but I believe it'll go to your parents.
Then I trust them to be nice about it,
but yeah, fair enough.
If your parents are gone, then siblings, and so forth.
All right, I'll learn to make a will,
and I'll get around to it.
Got to stare death in the face to do this,
not look forward to that.
Can I just say wills, sometimes not the greatest thing.
Well, not as ironclad as some people would like.
This just happened at my work like two weeks ago.
There's an older gentleman who recently died
who had a lot of money,
and during the last four years of his life,
he married a wonderful young woman
who is less than half his age, and...
Sure, it was true love.
You know what?
I ain't judging.
Point is he was happy, and he...
You know, he married her,
and he signed over a lot of stuff to her,
and now the rest of his family, specifically his siblings,
and his children from his previous marriage,
are all really pissed and are taking it to court
because they're like,
look, this lady only knew him for a few years.
She comes in, swoops in, gets everything
given to her in the will,
like almost nothing at all left for anyone else.
Even though she wasn't around helping him
when he was sick, like in his 60s,
he had something or whatever,
and she has a habit of doing this.
The last person that she married
was also an old man with too much money who died,
and she got the same thing.
Black widow.
Yeah, right.
All right.
Yeah, so...
Which, I mean, if that's the line of work you can get into.
Right.
You know.
I mean, and...
I say tongue in cheek, no one take that seriously.
No, no, no.
Like, I think of it from...
What if I was the old man,
once you're like decrepit and in your 80s,
and divorced,
like not that many hot people are going to be into you.
I thought Black widow specifically married
and then killed their partners.
Well, yes, they do.
So, yeah, that's what I was talking about, yeah.
I don't think she actually murdered anyone.
There was no foul play in the fall.
If he was just an old dude at the end of his life.
Well, why do you prove foul play
if you just died of old age?
You know, it looks a lot like old age suffocation,
just saying.
I guess it could have been, but...
But no, there is so...
I mean, I would want to be able to make the trade
with someone,
hey, look, I have a lot of money.
I know I'm not physically attractive anymore.
But you make me happy.
I have Viagra.
Will you stick around with me for a few years?
I will give you all the shit after I die.
Oh, that's rough.
I wonder what the going rate is
compared to like your entire life savings
versus just like, you know,
five hours a week with a prostitute or something.
Yeah, well, I mean, but there's a difference
because five hours a week with a prostitute
is not...
doesn't come with much of an emotional relationship to it.
Having, you know...
Well, I won't get into that.
But, uh, so...
Uh, the...
The...
The...
Being having something that you can share your life with
and who will like, you know,
live in your house and help clean it up
and take care of you
and share all sorts of experiences with you
is something.
That's true.
And like, if I had the money to make that sort of a deal,
I might be willing to make that sort of a deal with someone
and I would be really upset to learn afterwards
that my parents were contesting the will and court.
And that's what they're doing right now.
They're contesting in court because,
again, it's the law.
Everything is negotiable.
So, even getting married and having a will isn't 100%.
It...
It kind of sucks.
That's interesting.
And I'll say, like, having seen this on the other side,
that's pretty detestable to watch people argue over,
like, some, you know,
a dead family member's stuff and money.
Yeah.
Like, when my great-grandpa died,
actually, shortly before,
like the summer before he died,
his son, who I had never met,
I met him first at Grandpa's...
Or, I guess, Grandma's funeral.
But when he was out there for Grandma's funeral,
he also had grandpa who was in his 90s
and not 100% with everything.
But he was still, like...
He was still there.
He'd, like, no trouble remembering who he were or anything.
But, you know, his son wanted to see inside,
like, his cool safe.
We had all these antique coins.
And then he emptied it.
Oh, shit.
And, you know, because it's his son,
he, you know, felt, you know,
like he couldn't really do anything about it
and that sort of thing.
And so, this would be my dad's biological dad.
But my dad was adopted when he was two.
And I don't know when he first met his biological dad,
but I didn't meet him till I was in my 20s, I guess.
Or, I guess, late teens.
I forget when Grandma died.
But, like, I never met Tom's kids.
Actually, well, drop a name.
Who cares?
We'll call him Tom.
Okay.
You know, I've never met his kids.
And yet my dad's kids, me,
we went out to see my grandparents every summer.
Like, you know, and they're great.
We loved them.
And, like, you know, his biological dad,
his kids couldn't give a less of a shit.
And they're one step closer to my great-grandparents
than I am.
And, like, they didn't come out for the funeral.
And, like, you know, his fourth wife
took Grandma's wedding ring out of her purse
when we, after she was buried.
And, you know, oh, yeah, well, you know,
Grandpa said I could have this.
And, you know, it's like, well, no, he didn't.
That's why he wants it back.
Like, you know, but, like, anyway, so that level
of weird petty stealing from dead people's shit is disgusting.
That's just my thought on that.
You might notice that sometimes we record these shows
at night, and the later it goes, the weirder it gets.
So buckle up, we're not done yet, exactly.
So.
Although, to be fair to Shelly,
she did say lower likelihood of Will being contested.
Not that, you know, it wouldn't be.
It's well thought out.
I want to keep going.
Greater chance of being able to get
to health insurance coverage from a spouse's policy.
True.
And you did talk.
Oh, no, that was off the air.
I want to throw in Yasha some props.
Naveen asked him after we finished recording,
is there any circumstance under which
you would still marry somebody,
given what your position is now.
And you, I think, very thoughtfully,
and you maybe won't admit how thoughtful
and why reason it was,
you would said, yes, I've thought about this.
And if somebody that I cared about was going,
you know, needed medical treatment and couldn't afford it,
I might marry them.
I would likely marry them or something, whatever you said,
to give them my health insurance so that they won't die
or theoretically improve their life,
which showed me that you'd actually thought
about, like, all the angles and didn't just, like, say,
I'm against it.
What's all my ammunition for it?
You thought about the various perspectives,
and I thought that was really cool.
So I wanted to give you props that you did anticipate that,
just not on the air.
Being able to make medical decisions for our spouse
without needing medical power of attorney document,
I guess that's true,
but are medical power of attorneys documents that hard to get?
I don't know.
I've never looked into it.
But yeah, that's true.
Being able to become a guardian for a spouse
who needs guardianship without needing
the Declaration of Guardian support.
So I think, like,
these are the things that I was talking about,
you could get other paperwork for.
Eligibility for step-parent adoptions in many states.
Um, being legally granted preference over legally unmarried
people for adoptions in some states.
So, um, oh, sorry, she goes right on to say,
even though there are other legal documents
that can grant certain rights
plus privileges that are typically bundled
into legal marriage,
the authorities often ignore these documents.
Yeah, that is, that is unfortunate
and some horrible bullshit.
I remember back before gay marriage was legal,
there were people that would get some of these documents
for their, uh, for their gay partners.
And sometimes the hospitals would just ignore them.
They'd be like, I don't care that you have
medical power of attorney.
We don't approve of gayness in this state.
And therefore you can't go see the,
the person that you are legally allowed to see.
If they were legally married with the doctors.
And they'd be, what are they gonna do?
Push over the orderly and muscle your way
into the room?
That's not going to make anything better.
Would a legal marriage put,
stop some bigoted orderly anyway?
No, probably not.
Like just saying in that particular case,
like agreed, it did, you know,
might have made it harder.
But the fact that people,
Like for some reason, like there are a lot of people,
especially the bigoted old school people,
ones that has the word marriage are like, well, fine.
I guess now that it's officially okay with God
and the government or some shit.
I don't think that they think it's okay with God
if they're old bigots, but they think,
yeah, it's okay with the government apparently
and the government's forsaken their lord or whatever.
I don't know how these,
I'm too tired to think of in these people's shoes.
Yeah, I, you know, I don't spend a lot of time
in the hospital, luckily yet, fingers crossed.
And, you know, I would be pissed, you know, fuck it.
Like it's just a social weight that comes
from that particular piece of paper
that doesn't come with a lot of others.
I just think it's stupid.
Like if my friends want to come visit
and I'm unconscious, come gawk at me.
I don't care if I'm awake and, you know,
I say I wanted to see them.
It's like, well, you can't because you're not married.
I would, I would, I don't know,
throw my colostomy bag at whoever said that,
like my bedpan or whatever.
Like fuck that.
That's insane.
Although you could probably hit with an assault charge
for doing that.
I would find some form of revenge to do for that.
I don't know.
I don't think they would actually hit you
with an assault charge.
Oh man.
I would kind of hope they would.
I don't think they would work in hospitals
if somebody threw literally shit at them.
I hear that happens a lot in hospitals.
Oh man.
And they get only paid like 11.75 an hour.
Yeah.
Which isn't enough to like pay for,
I guess, whatever medical treatments you might need
to look and like, am I going to get sick now?
Jesus.
Okay.
In general, I think a solution in which government
had less interest in knowing which adults
or each other's family members would be better
and certainly less institutional singleism
would be better.
But as things are now, on an individual basis,
there are many benefits for whom the practical
bent, or excuse me,
there are many people for whom the practical
benefits of legal marriage in the U.S.
currently outweigh the risks.
That's a well-reasoned position.
Kind of like your thing about net neutrality,
like, hey, if there are no regulations and no
bullshit going on here, that'd be great.
Since there's tons of bullshit,
then, you know, this is the way to play the game.
So I guess if I'm not a veteran,
if I'm not, if I don't have social security,
you know, like a lot of these don't apply
to me right now, right?
Yeah.
And there are, there's an interesting other
aspect to this where if,
so we said that a lot of the benefits of marriage
can be replaced by things like these,
these wills and medical power of attorney,
that sort of stuff.
And I don't, I think this was a different comment.
I'm not sure it was in Shelley's comment,
but someone else pointed out that,
yes, but you can get all those cheaper and easier
with a marriage contract.
Just sign that for, you know, 10 minutes,
pay your $50 fee or whatever it is.
And you got all that instead of having to hire a lawyer.
I think the interesting thing behind this is that
there is a very small subset of people that
marriage is actually beneficial for with these
benefits that a lot of people mention.
If you are rich enough that you need inheritance,
that you're worried about inheritance stuff,
you can probably afford a lawyer to get an actual
well-written will out.
Like the people, the people who are so poor,
they just need to run down and get a marriage
for $15, don't really have anything
that gets transferred over, right?
I mean, maybe like a junk or car.
If you have an estate that's worth your family
bickering about, you have enough money to hire a lawyer.
Yeah.
Like not even, it's not going to be, you know,
a $3,000 venture probably, right?
You're going to bring somebody on for, you know,
people do wills for not the like, you know,
$400 an hour lawyer rate, right?
The more interesting aspect to me more recently
has been that there are a lot of benefits
to not being married as well that the government provides.
I remember reading, do you guys,
do you read SMBC comics?
Yes, big fan.
God, love SMBC comics.
It is like, in my opinion, the rationalist comic out there.
Zachary Wintersmith has been on rationally speaking twice.
Fucking fantastic.
That's on the less wrong Slack.
Cool.
The less wrong Slack channel.
Okay.
Yeah.
So yes, it is definitely the rationalist webcomic.
SMBC for XKTV though, while not rationalist,
is it's like a warm version of, yeah.
Yeah.
It's very close, read by a lot of the same people.
Yeah.
I was off mic for a second.
I mentioned XKCD has another awesome webcomic.
And that it is like the worm.
Yes.
If it's not quite rationalist thick, it's damn good.
Yeah.
All right.
But yeah, there was, when the healthcare overhaul
was happening with Trump a few months ago,
Zach Wiener posted about it and said that a lot of people
who are, especially people who are creative,
self-employed people.
I saw that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Or really freaking out like,
what can we do about this?
And he said that he was in a meeting
where some people brought up jokingly
that they had looked into getting divorced
for the benefits.
And that stuck out to me because I know a couple
who has gotten divorced for the tax benefits.
Because like literally went through with it
because there are a lot of benefits the government
does give to people who are in the lower income bracket
if they are single and have children.
And by getting divorced, all of a sudden the female
in the relationship was now a single mother.
And she and her children could get on much better
medical coverage.
They're eligible for all sorts of government programs
which more than made up for what few benefits they got
from the tax break for being married.
And so if you're on the extreme low end of the spectrum,
marriage is more costly for you.
You get more benefits out of not being married.
If you're on the extreme high end,
marriage is too costly for you because you can afford
to protect yourself.
But yeah, I know.
So there's this very small slice if you're kind of
in the middle where you don't have a lot of assets
but you have some and you don't have a lot of spare cash
for lawyers but you do have a little bit of money
and if you are of the traditional 50s housewife
and husband model of family
where the tax benefits actually help you,
then yeah, there's a slice of the American electorate
out there who probably gets more benefits out of marriage
than most of the people that I know, I guess.
But there's a lot of people to whom marriage
just doesn't have all these benefits.
Like who cares about being able to not have to pay
income tax on inheritance of almost nothing, you know?
Yeah, it's a whole weird thing.
Like I think I said everything I can think on it.
I mean, those are interesting points to raise.
And you know, I was talking with another friend
about this too.
I think the benefits are overhyped,
I guess is what I'm saying.
And like a lot of those benefits don't apply to us, right?
Like because we're not soldiers, we're not vets,
we're not on social security.
So like, you know, those things,
like those particular ones don't apply to us
but they do apply to some people and that's an important caveat.
I feel like the whole thing is kind of just like,
you know, and this is something that you've expressed a lot
but I'm saying more and more of,
it's like why is there just so much fuckery in this?
Like why is it 50 things
and why does nobody know about all of them?
And it's really, it shouldn't be this complicated.
But, you know, the other thing too, well, I don't know
how you can even go about that.
So we won't.
So let's go on to the next feedback thing here.
Okay.
Unless anything's more on to say on to Shelly's.
No.
Zeke Rahn says,
I think you guys had some misconceptions about what
common law marriage is.
According to Colorado law,
you cannot accidentally be common law married.
Oh.
Neither Stephen nor Enyash are going to have to go
through a common law divorce
if they split up with an antagonistic partner
because I know neither of them are signaling
as if they are actually married.
So one thing with that is,
like I said, my leasing office thinks I'm married
and I don't correct them,
but we're not running around introducing each other
with husband and wife.
But you're saying check lower than that or something.
Yeah.
Okay.
I think we basically covered that in the episode where
We can skim.
We can tell me whichever one is going to read or whatever.
I don't mean to just go through all of them.
There are a lot of comments on this one.
Sure.
Which is a friendly reminder that there's lots of fun
conversation to be had at the Bayesian Conspiracy Subreddit
if two hours of this in your ears every two weeks isn't enough,
you can get online and argue with strangers at the subreddit.
So by all means, strongly invited.
The one that I wanted to, that I think we should respond to
because it was a good point was Zikaron said,
I think Stephen had the best argument in the first five minutes.
Did gays fight for the right to get married
based on hospital visitation rights and other benefits?
Yes.
Therefore people find value in the legal contract known as marriage.
I feel like this was ignored for the rest of the conversation.
I think he steel manned my argument.
I was asking if that was a question and I think I even
flippantly said something along the lines of like people
raised this point every time it came up,
like it was happening to everybody once a month.
And I was being somewhat dismissive.
Like I get like that happens to real people and that's bad and it shouldn't.
But like that shouldn't be the reason why you're fighting for marriage
because there's a one in 10,000 chance that you won't be able to visit
your loved one in the hospital, right?
Or even like, I mean, that's probably not a good number.
There's like a one in 10,000 chance your lover will end up in a hospital
and then further the constraint of you being barred from visiting them or something, right?
Or you being barred from visiting them after trying to set up a
whatever legal document that lets you visit.
So because of that also being barred,
you're putting a lot of epicycles on this.
I think that like that's probably a tiny number of people, right?
Now granted, we don't discriminate against anybody and that's fucked up,
but like to say that we all want this because of hospital visitation,
that seems like a weird flag to get under because that's a very small subsect of people.
I wanted to, I feel when I read this, I felt a twinge of pain because I thought that was an
excellent point and I had wanted to address it, but I got distracted by something and it
flew out of my mind and I, we never really got to it.
Maybe I'll disregard the whole thing I just said about not liking the point because it
sounds like I was being so gallant, but no, no, no, no, I think that was decent.
I think, I mean, the reason and I guess I am asserting this rather than having researched
back it up, but the reason that gay people wanted marriage equality was because they want
fucking equality. They, as long as that right is denied to people by the government,
the government is saying you are lesser humans. You do not deserve the same rights as everyone else
and that is a shitty thing for the government to do and also is that I think that a government
should not be allowed to do. I totally agree. Yeah, they're not allowed to say to people that
you do not count, your love doesn't count, your relationship doesn't count,
and you are a lower class of human. And that is really what they were fighting for, for the
social status to be seen as equal to everyone else, that their love is just as important,
their lives are just as important, and in that case, this meant getting the right to marry,
getting the right to fuck up their relationships like all the straight breeders do.
But I think that was a Homer Simpson quote, like why don't we let them get married miserable
like the rest of us. It was some TV show, but no. But the way that that has to be fought
for in the courts and in other public arenas is that you say we are being denied these benefits
that married people get like hospital visitation benefits and adoption benefits.
Right, you can't point to the social recognition and say we're being denied that because it's like,
well, so what? But if you can point to legal discrimination, then that's where the case is
made. Exactly. Okay, so that's the statement, and I can totally see that. So they really,
they say it's for these fringe benefits that very, very few people get to benefit off of.
But like you said, and you put it much more eloquently than I could have, it's like, no,
we're doing this because whether we all love this or not, the culture says if you love somebody,
you get to marry them. And you're literally not letting us get married, you're saying that we
can't love each other in society's eyes, and that's fucked. So if you have to fight that
terrain on like quasi legitimate grounds of like, you know, what if I want to visit my
partner hospital or have them have my social security, then yeah, fight to win because it's
important like the victory there was important. And while I wish the victory wasn't important
because it like it seems weird that you need this, you know, 50 page government contract to
say that you love somebody. Since that's the case, it's kind of like, you know, again,
the regulation thing, the less there is, you know, whatever. But yes, since that's the case,
you know, fuck it, go nuts, right? Yeah, I totally agree. I think it's a symptom of buying into the
if you love someone you get married thing, but you know, they bought into it, so they were fighting
for marriage. And that's fine, you can buy into all sorts of things. Heck, the fact that I
disagree doesn't even mean that I'm right. It just means I disagree, which I'm sure everyone who
thinks I'm wrong would agree with very strongly. I think that's that's fair. Let me see what's
going on here. Sorry, I was reading. I didn't I didn't hear the last thing you said that was rude.
I was giving the rest of this post. Fine, it's fine. Not without incident said,
not without incident was the person that we quoted and responded to when they said,
I quoted them as saying, they don't care about the economic impacts of a net neutrality regulation.
They just care about their personal experience. And this is going to be like the third time now
that we're responding to that sort of thing. But yeah, not without incident said,
I wasn't trying to suggest that economic growth was never good for consumers or internet users,
just that there isn't an obvious correlation between any given period of growth or contraction
and the experience of people on the internet. Karen was approaching things from a macroeconomic
perspective first, and I don't agree that that's what's important in this case. I was like, okay,
I should at least read that and let him have a say because I didn't want to misrepresent what
he was saying. Also, sorry, not without an incident said in terms on the marriage side of
things. Maybe this is self evident to everyone else, but I wish there had been some discussion
about why community property is bad from an FX standpoint. Everyone, even Navin seemed to agree
it would be better to maintain separate finances while still gaining the legal benefits.
Just from a personal perspective, I'm happy with community property because it makes life
so much easier. And my wife and I were basically living that way well before we were married.
If I get divorced, splitting everything 50 50 seems fair regardless of who earned it.
What's more, this seems like the general understanding people have of marriage through
personal experience, divorced friends and pop culture. When Kanye says, when she leave your ass,
she go and leave with half. I don't think he was imparting any secret wisdom, which Kyle,
if right here you could underlay some gold digga beats, he would be so pumped about that.
Well, unfortunately, I don't really listen to much in the ways of hip hop. So here's my best effort.
Um, Shelly also said my impression is that most people are aware that losing significant amounts
of property and or having to pay alimony are possibilities in most states. And yeah, I mean,
I was also aware of that. And when we bought our house together, I, I, okay, I'm about to say I
knew I was going to lose it when we got divorced, but that's not the correct thing to say because
it's not losing it. Like if you buy a car and then you fix it up and sell it at a profit after
you've sold it, you don't say, Oh, I lost my car. You know, so we bought this house together,
we fixed it up, we sold it at a profit at the divorce. And so that's not losing it.
She deserves half that house, half that house is hers. And I was totally fine with that. It was
all of the other things afterwards that she found as ways to bite into me and hurt me
that I didn't realize the law made possible. That really sucked. Like the fact that you almost
lost your like town home that you had before you met. Yes. That to me is insane. Yeah. And I get
they all belong to the marriage now, but like that's, that's the kind of shit that how could you
possibly fucking known that that's your stuff. You know, her name couldn't be on any of it, right?
Right. And when I, when I married her, we were both pulling an income and mine was a bit more
than hers. But you know, it was at the point where the alimony would not have been much of
anything. I would have been like, yes, I am happy to give you a few thousand dollars, maybe, you
know, even $10,000 to help you on your way as we are splitting apart. But after, after
some period of our being married, she basically, well, she did quit her day job and wasn't drawing
any income for the rest of our marriage. And I was supporting her as she was trying other things
out. But the point being, after all that, it looked like rather than me loaning her money and
helping her investor or small business, I was supporting her. And this was now the lifestyle
she's accustomed to, quote unquote. And I had to keep doing that, which was, I mean,
I mean, really, people can just say you married the wrong person, you shouldn't have married
someone who's that irresponsible and blah, blah, blah or whatever. But when I got into the marriage,
we were making not that different of an, you know, amount of money. And like,
you know, I didn't want to get into this and we can do this later if you want or never. But like,
you know, nobody gets married thinking, all right, this person, you know, has like a one and
two chance of flipping on me, right? You think it's a distant, if not impossible, like or possibility,
I guess, you know, it's, you wouldn't have done it if you thought it was going to happen, right?
So like, planning for it and saying, you know, well, if you know, she was making less, whatever,
like that's nobody, nobody thinks about that, or rather they do and they dismiss it, not dismiss
it, they conclude that it's a very low risk, right? That's why whenever I talk about it,
I couch it in the terms of like, what if one of us had a stroke or something, you know, because
that's really the likelihood situation where I could see it happening. And that's probably
somewhat how you felt like it's, and sorry, this is personal. No, no, no, it's fine.
But yeah, I was talking to a friend about it. And he was, you know,
because he called, he was listening to this episode. And he was like, where was I on this? I was,
like, it was basically just that, you know, like, nobody does this if they feel like they're,
they're really putting themselves at risk. You just feel like you're doing something that
people who love each other do. And it's, I'm going to just keep repeating myself. I also do that
when I'm tired. So I, in our meetup earlier this week, someone said, just imagine, like if,
because of the whole marriage and polyamory thing came up briefly, they're like, yeah,
imagine the alimony you'd be paying if you divorced four people at once. And I was like,
oh no, from what I know of marriage, if I'm married to four people, I quit my job and go
immediately unemployed so that when we get divorced, I collect alimony from four people,
which is sadly what I would literally be incentivized to do if I were to get married
again, I'd be like, well, I'm going to quit my job right now. So when this goes south,
it was a solid rebuttal. I was trying to be funny and I think you made a, made a good,
good counter argument. I wanted to do a couple more of these. We've got a Shelley doesn't drink
saying that Navine's stated reason for wanting legal marriage, wanting to site, wanting society to
put him and his wife in a pen is pretty awful in my opinion. I kind of agree. And we talked about
that, you know, this hard to get out of box with nothing in it. I understand that the ability
to pre-commit is a game theoretic advantage. So if you want to limit your own autonomy, go ahead,
but don't try to get society to limit your autonomy for you. That leaves society
distributing others with their autonomy too, often in cases where they, unlike you, didn't want it.
Also, it's coercive, disrespectful, and lacking integrity to deliberately use the legal financial
pressure to make your intimate relationships last longer. I might have read that fast, but it was
basically what we talked about, which is funny because it's, it shows the nuance and Shelley's
position here because she gave all these reasons pro marriage, but she's saying, look, all the
reasons are for it. That one shit. And here's why. I also didn't like that reason. And that was,
that was Kyle's reason that we talked about in the feedback of the last episode. So it's
interesting. Sorry, I'm still reading.
I wanted to quickly put in this one from the crash store, said, this one, this one actually
hurt me. The crash store says, once again, you didn't taboo the term you were arguing about,
then proceeded to use the majority of the park podcast to argue past each other by assuming
different definitions. And yeah, I, when, when I read it, I was like, fuck, we did. And I mean,
it's okay if you do it once, like we did with the spirituality episode, because you can,
you can fuck up once, right? And it's whatever it's a fuck up, but this was two times in close
succession. And I, we really, I personally should have paid attention and known better. And so I,
I apologize to our listeners. I should have done better.
It was a learning experience. I feel like it was still fun to listen to. But yeah, I mean, like,
and we did articulate down the road, because I didn't know what Naveen's position was before
we started talking. And then it became clear that he was defending something that you clearly
weren't arguing against. Or rather, he was defending something that you, let me, let me phrase that.
We were talking past each other.
Well, he, you guys agreed on like everything. But I feel like he knew that going in and neither
of us did. And I think it was like, he knew your position and presumably he knew his,
whereas you didn't really know his, all you knew that he was going to come is defend marriage.
But he was defending in his words, this unobstantiated class that never is actualized in the real
world of marriage. And that's not really what we were talking about. Like it was what he was
talking about. But yeah, taboo, we'll work on it. That's a good life lesson. I'm not going to beat
myself up over it. Like, what can we do? But other than try and get better, which we will.
So all right, I personally will flatulate myself quite a bit.
I have one last one. So go ahead and do whatever you would like before I get to that one.
I got it. I'm just giving you go right ahead.
Okay. The last one is one that I absolutely loved and agreed with so hard that I almost
broke my monitor. Basically, boss says, my mother was a housewife who was divorced a few years ago
after approximately 23 years of marriage. Since then, she has had to find a new place to live,
get back into the job market, and frantically try to put together money for her retirement.
Things have mostly worked out for her because my mother is capable and lucky.
Before marrying my father, she was a government contract negotiator work that hasn't changed
much and has a decent pension plan. But most people in her place have a pretty hard time of it after
20 plus years out of the workforce. The terms of the marriage is a contract designed to remove
risk barriers to one income households on the assumption that marriage is for having children
and raising a child is a full-time job. Preciousness of childbearing years aside,
spending 20 years out of the workforce to raise a child is going to seriously dent your
professional skills and income growth. And yeah, I absolutely agree with that.
We talked about that. We acknowledged that, I think. We maybe didn't give it a fair enough
shake and it hits home with this person closely. But that's not the context that you were in,
for example. That's not the context that many people are in. Although, I know people who are
in marriages that it would be great if they weren't in, but they've been married since they were 30,
they're now 55. And it's like, well, what can I do? Maybe I have a job but it's not very marketable
and many of them don't have jobs or they didn't have opportunities to get jobs that would be
sustaining. And you could do a $12 an hour temp job or something, but that's not going to let you
get a place to live in the town that you've lived in for the last 30 years. It's just this whole
weird fucking thing. But I guess I don't see a way around that one. I don't know if it's...
I think that that is a very... Okay, so two things. The first being that if people are
getting married for this reason, I think it should be acknowledged up front and that people should
say, I am... I consider marriage almost buying another person. I am going to be buying your
services for the rest of your life. I know that you are losing basically the opportunity to have a
real career due to the 20 plus years you're going to sink into this. So you get part of my
retirement fund, you get part of my pension, you get to own half of this house. And that is what
I am giving you in return for raising my children and making this house a wonderful place for me
and the kids to live and all the other things that a wife does. And I mean, it'd be better, I think,
if they could literally split the income into two different accounts and have two different pensions
or whatever so that it's easier to split up later if they want to. And the house would just have to
be sold because it's only one house, you can't split it in two. But if they want to do it the
way that it's currently done, sure, that's fine too. But as... Sorry, what was the name again?
As basically Boss says just a little bit later on, I can't agree that marriage is obsolete,
which implies inferior to newer alternatives because for long-term,
monogamous relationships with a full-time parent, one full-time parent and one income earner,
it's actually a pretty damn good solution. And I agree with him. But the reason I say
marriage is obsolete is because that basically never happens anymore. I mean,
probably there's some places in the U.S. where it does, but...
And going forward, it's happening less and less.
Exactly.
Like now that women aren't barred from the workforce.
Yeah.
And there's far more relationships are both parents working. A lot of people choose not to
have children at all. But when they do, it's usually both parents working, hiring some outside
help to watch the kids. Things are much more equal nowadays and it just doesn't apply. Most people
aren't monogamous and no longer have to keep up the pretence that they are while having an affair
or something on the side. They're just... Maybe I shouldn't say most. But a lot more people are
more honest about these sorts of things and it just doesn't apply to most relationships that I see
nowadays. That there are some people that it probably still works for. But for the majority
of people that I'm assuming are listening to the podcast, this is sort of an obsolete institution.
I think I agree. And I think basically, boss agrees. Well, to some extent.
They say it would be nice to have a different contract backed institution practice as a default
people could do to demonstrate loving, but not necessarily permanent commitment. So like,
you know, the social recognition without the legal baggage.
Yeah. They say something like hand fasting for maybe five years.
I'm not sure what hand fasting is.
Hand fasting, I don't know where it comes from, but it was a thing where like you
hold your two hands together and you tie like a thing around them.
Oh, for a friend to get married that way. I saw his pictures on Facebook.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah. And that, my God, like I just so want that to be the default,
like showing loving and through a commitment without all this other bullshit that comes from the
old style one income husband goes to work, earns money, wife stays home and watches the kids,
which just to me anyway is distasteful on per grounds of personal autonomy.
But I understand some people do want that and like that. So I'm not going to.
That was my childhood until I was in my teens.
And, you know, it was largely like my dad had, you know,
trade experience and had a career at the time. No mom didn't. Well, I think she had a job.
But like it just worked out to be where, and if you current the numbers too,
like the wife in the, you know, since it's typically the wife who stays home, it's not
always, but being for my general, for my personal experience, my mom wasn't making enough at the
time to make it worthwhile for her to keep that job and hire somebody to take care of us.
So like, I think it averages out to be something north of 20, something
plus $1,000 a year to hire, you know, full-time care for your kids.
And I guess that's in today's money, not in 1990, early 90s, whatever, but
it, whatever it was, it made economic sense for her to do that too, not also because that's
what she wanted, but it just happened to pan out that way. But yeah, like, you know, it's 2018,
man, things are a little different is my tongue-in-cheek conclusion to that for now.
So, yeah, basically, boss says the real problem then isn't that marriage itself is bad,
it's that widespread ignorance plus the pressure of it's what you do when you're in love pushes
people into making a decision that isn't right for them. And yeah, that's, that's absolutely
where I stand and I love everything they said. I fully agree.
I think that's a good note to wrap up on. Okay. I think, I think we might be at time too, so.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So thank you, Kyle, again, for being awesome. Yep. Kyle, our sound engineer,
makes this show less painful. You still have to listen to the words, but at least they don't
sound so bad coming in. So I'm kidding. I like doing this. I hope people like listening to it.
I was reading, that's why I mentioned the iTunes thing at the beginning. I found them on,
when I was reading, once again, Matt Freeman's, We Got Worm podcast, I was reading it in the
podcast store on the iOS. Nice. And it was easy to do. So I looked at ours. There's some nice
thoughtful things there. And honestly, the fact that people listen to this and enjoy this make
me really happy. Like I did this when it was just going to be like, you know, three people hanging
out chatting, but not doing it over coffee. And if it made 10 people happy, that'd be cool. But,
you know, people listen, I don't know, it gives me the warm fuzzies. So I do this for the fun of
it. And there's also that. So although now they're probably regretting it because I sound like an
inarticulate loon. So we've got it. We've got it. You're getting all sandy on everyone.
All right. No, I agree with you. Cool. All right. Thanks all. Thanks. Bye.
