In the first section of the course, you heard about the impact of nanoscience and nanotechnology
in areas like computing, communications, and imaging.
We're now ready to leave the physical world and enter the biological world to discuss
nanoscience in the world of biology, and as well the applications of nanotechnology
to medicine.
Biology fundamentally operates at the nanoscale.
The basic building blocks of life are all around one or two nanometers in size, so things
like amino acids, sugars, lipids, even DNA molecules are all nanoscale objects.
Be slightly larger than these molecular building blocks are the vast world of molecular machines
and the messengers that drive cellular function.
Now historically, the cell was thought of as having a few major organelles that did most
of the work.
For example, the cellular mitochondria, which are the power producers in the cell, they're
about a thousand nanometers, so a little too big to be nanoscale.
But we now know that there are thousands of smaller different molecules that run around
inside cells, and these molecules allow cells to live and replicate.
So for example, proteins are synthesized by molecular machines called ribosomes, and these
ribosomes which perform a very complicated function are only 25 nanometers in size.
As well, energy for the cell is produced by an enzyme called ATP synthase.
And this enzyme, again, a very complicated machine that has a very important function,
is about 10 nanometers in size, and the cell membrane, which holds everything in the cell
in place, is typically about 10 nanometers too.
So you can see that this idea of biology really being nanoscale spans many, many different
aspects of biology.
As well, certain self-replicating organisms can also be nanoscale, although just barely.
So certain viruses can be around 20 nanometers, others are about 400 nanometers, but then
the very smallest bacteria are about a thousand nanometers, so not really nanoscale.
Now as you might imagine, nanoscientists derive lots of inspiration from biology.
We look at the complex world of biology, and we marvel at its ability to self-organize,
and we try to recreate what we see with the tools of nanotechnology.
And it will be important for us to understand some of these nanoscale activities of the cell,
so that we can understand disease mechanisms and the action of nanodrugs, and as well the
logic behind nanodiagnostic approaches.
So in order to do this, we need to take a look at the biomolecules that are responsible
for all of the action within a cell, and we need to understand how they're structured,
and how they function.
And then we can explore how these biomolecules can be put together with nanomaterials to do
something let's say like advanced drug development, or help with the invention of new diagnostic
tools.
Our next two lectures will combine discussions of basic biological processes with nanotechnological
applications.
And then we'll move on to some discussions that are more focused, and they'll be focused
on applications of nanomedicine.
So we'll start in this lecture by looking at a new type of diagnostic testing based
on gold nanoparticles that has very exciting potential.
What is so exciting about this is that this is a completely new type of testing that can
read out a variety of DNA mutations that give rise to genetic disease or drug reactions.
And this type of testing relies on a very simple measurement, the change of color of
a nanomaterial.
And this was one of the first nano-enabled diagnostic systems to come onto the market.
The discovery that this diagnostic approach is based on was made in the late 1990s at
Northwestern University in Illinois.
A group there in the chemistry department discovered how to attach small DNA molecules
to gold nanoparticles.
Now how did they do this?
Well, they identified a type of atom, a sulfur atom, that was very good at sticking to gold.
So they then attached a sulfur atom to the end of a sequence of DNA that they synthesized.
And with these DNA nanoparticle complexes, they showed that they could read out small
changes or what we call mutations in very long DNA sequences from patients.
And the detection of DNA mutations, as I'm sure you know, has tremendous relevance to
the diagnosis of genetic diseases like cystic fibrosis.
Genetic diseases are caused by very small changes in an individual's DNA, and these
changes then get passed down from generation to generation.
The gold nanoparticles, again developed at Northwestern, were able to scan DNA molecules
for these changes.
And if a problem with the DNA was identified, the particles changed color and they turned
from red to blue.
Now how can something as complicated as genetic disease be detected with a simple color change?
It almost seems way too good to be true.
So let's take a close look at this so we really understand how it works.
So in order to really have a complete picture of how this type of diagnostic approach works,
we need to understand three different components that are coming together.
A gold nanoparticle, a small DNA molecule attached to the particle, and the DNA genome
that's being scanned.
So let's start with the DNA genome so that we can understand the challenges involved
in genetic disease diagnosis.
As I'm sure you're aware, DNA is the molecule that stores all of the information our cells
need to function.
It does so by programming information in a biological code.
And so if we zoom in at the molecular level, and keep in mind that this is also the nanolevel,
we find that DNA is a double-stranded molecule.
If you look closely at the structure in the figure, you'll see that there are two strands
that are wound around each other and they form this very famous double helical structure
that I'm sure you've seen before.
Now why does this helix form, you know, if all structures to be present in DNA, why do
we get this helical structure?
And how does it carry a code?
Well, I'm sure the answers are familiar to you from introductory biology.
The key feature of DNA that is relevant to both of these questions is that it contains
four different building blocks that we call the DNA bases.
They each have one-letter abbreviations, either A or G or C or T. And don't worry too
much about these names, but the one-letter abbreviation either stands for adenine, guanine,
cytosine, or thymine.
All four of the DNA bases have different chemical structures.
So you'll see that A is colored red, T is yellow, G is blue, and C is green.
And if you look closely at these structures, you'll see that they have not necessarily
different kinds of atoms, but atoms that are arranged differently.
And so they each base has a unique structure, and we'll talk about why that's important
in a few minutes.
Now the helical structure of DNA results from specific attractive forces between bases that
dictate what partners they pair with.
Now why is there this pairing, why are these strands attracted to one another?
It turns out that hydrogen bonding is what's key in holding the structure of DNA together.
Hydrogen bonds are bonds that actually hold molecules together kind of loosely, but with
a high degree of specificity.
Now these types of bonds, not surprisingly, they're called hydrogen bonds, and they involve
hydrogen.
We have to have as one part of the partner a hydrogen atom, and then as the other partner,
we usually find things like oxygen or nitrogen.
And it turns out that all of life, all of the molecules that are wrapped up in our cells
are held together by the attractive forces of hydrogen bonds.
So as I said, this is a loose type of bonding, but it's very specific, and it's enough to
have us live and breathe and do all of the things that we do.
And as you look more closely at the structure, if you now can pick out a hydrogen bond, you'll
see that the A moieties bind to the T's, and they have two hydrogen bonds.
The G's bind to the C's, and they have three hydrogen bonds.
So there are these different levels of bonding in the different base pairs.
So these attractive forces between different bases cause the strands to pair up.
This is why DNA helices form, and the specificity here is amazing.
So you can take a piece of DNA that has 100 units within it, and if you introduce the
complementary sequence where for every A you have a T, every G you have a C, and vice versa,
those two DNA molecules will line up perfectly, and there won't be any mistakes.
It works every time.
And even more amazing is the way these bases are arrayed is what codes the genetic information
required for life.
So the pattern of bases that are found in a DNA molecule gives a cell a full set of instructions,
so it knows exactly what to do to keep itself alive and healthy.
Now I've shown you the structure of DNA and pointed out its key nanoscale features.
But how do we know that this is exactly how it looks and how was the structure of DNA originally
characterized?
Now to answer this question we have to go back to the 1940s.
At that time members of the scientific community were aware that DNA was most likely the molecule
of life that carried genetic information.
They also knew that DNA included different amounts of the four units, A, T, G, and C,
but nobody had the slightest idea of what the molecule might look like.
There were proposals, there were models drawn on a piece of paper, but it was all really
guesswork.
And you have to keep in mind that when this question was being answered, this was long
before we had the ability to image molecules at the nanoscale.
So two men, James Watson and Francis Crick, ended up being the ones that eventually did
solve the structure.
And they got a start on getting that structure using stick and ball models.
And they were working on this problem in the 1940s at the University of Cambridge.
And you'll see in the picture that you're viewing a depiction of their model, then two
of them working on it.
And it may seem funny to try to solve something as complicated as DNA structure by building
something out of wire and trying to get it to work and come together, but if you're thinking
about something chemical, it's actually quite a valuable way to build up a structure because
you know what the bond angles and bond lengths can be, and you can eventually put together
something that makes sense.
Now at the same time, other scientists were using experimental methods where they were
trying to directly characterize the structure of DNA.
Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, who were also in England, but they were King's
College in London, used X-ray diffraction to understand the physical structure of the
DNA molecule.
Now when you shine X-rays on a crystal of DNA, the invisible rays bounce off the sample.
The rays then create complex patterns on photographic film, but it would take hours and hours to
capture a single image.
But then by looking at the patterns, it was possible to get important clues about the
structures that made up the crystals.
Now Watson and Crick were building their models, but they were having difficulty getting the
strands to match up properly.
Every time they would stand in front of their model and they would try to bring the two
strands together, they just couldn't make it such that it was stable.
They knew it would just fall right apart.
And it was as though they were trying to solve a puzzle, but they weren't using the
right pieces and they just couldn't get the whole thing to work.
Now a major breakthrough came when they saw Rosalind Franklin's famous photograph 51.
This was an X-ray diffraction pattern of a DNA sample.
And you'll notice that it has a fuzzy X in the middle of the molecule.
And this is not actually a direct image of DNA, but the diffraction of X-rays bounced
off of the DNA show a pattern.
And this pattern indicates that there's a helical structure there.
And so that told them that the structure of DNA was a helix and that it had a certain
periodicity that told them about the space in between the bases.
And it was this information that allowed Watson and Crick to finally get the structure right.
They published their structure of DNA in the journal Nature in 1953.
And this paper was published alongside of a paper from Rosalind Franklin, another paper
from Maurice Wilkins describing the experimental data that they had collected.
Now Watson, Crick and Wilkins received the Nobel Prize in 1962 for their discovery.
Unfortunately Rosalind Franklin died in 1958 of ovarian cancer and thus did not live long
enough to be recognized for her very important contribution to solving the structure of DNA.
So now that we know something about the nanoscale structure of DNA, let's think about the much
longer pieces of DNA that are present in the cell.
So there are six billion bases in the DNA found in every cell.
Each base takes up about 0.3 nanometers in a linear sequence.
So that means for every 10 base pairs you have about a nanometer of DNA, 100 base pairs
give you about 10 nanometers and so on.
So if you think about it and you add up the numbers, that means that there are two meters
or over six feet of DNA in every cell if you were going to stretch it end to end.
So the DNA in just one of my cells and there are trillions of cells in my body, if it was
stretched out linearly and vertically, it would be taller than I am.
Just one cell's worth of DNA.
So if you took all of the DNA in all of your cells and laid it out end to end, it would
actually stretch to the moon and back about 130,000 times.
It's amazing to think about and I really don't suggest trying to see if I'm right.
You'll have to just take my word for it as for one thing, it would be very hard to get
the DNA back in your cells after you took it out and it would also be very expensive
to fly back and forth to the moon every time to check that.
So hopefully, again, you take my word for it, but it's really amazing to consider how
much DNA it takes for us to function.
And the reason that we can fit all of this DNA in our cells is that it is condensed
into tiny particles and it's not present in a linear form.
In the figure that you're looking at, you can see how the DNA of an X chromosome, which
has 155 million base pairs, but is only about 100 nanometers in size, it really needs to
come unraveled for the linear form to be the least bit visible.
So now that we have an understanding of the structure of DNA, let's talk about the role
of DNA in genetic disease and then we'll be able to look at how nanomaterials can be used
for DNA-based diagnosis of genetic disease.
Now patients affected with a disease called cystic fibrosis typically have mutations in
a gene that dictates how well their cells can deal with salts.
For example, the most common mutation causes three bases to be missing from a sequence
that codes for a protein that is essential for cellular function.
This causes mucus to accumulate in the lungs and serious bacterial infections result that
then interfere with breathing.
This is a very serious disease.
Now let's come back to the gold nanoparticles that can sense these mutations.
How do they do it?
As you now know, DNA consists of two complementary strands in the cell.
If we want to target a particular sequence of DNA to diagnose a disease that would result
from mutations in that sequence, we can take a man-made strand of DNA and design it to
stick to the region of the mutation and how well it sticks will tell us whether the mutation
is there or not.
Now in order to detect the cystic fibrosis mutations, two different types of gold nanoparticles
can be made that will line up specifically with the region of mutated DNA.
This is depicted schematically in the graphic that you're looking at so hopefully you can
see what's going where.
If the altered DNA sequence is present, the gold nanoparticles will bind to it and they'll
come together.
When this happens, the nanoparticles will change from red to blue.
It's that color change that tells us that the mutant sequence is present.
That may sound a little strange.
One material, a gold nanoparticle changing color because it's binding to DNA.
I want you to really believe me that this is what happens.
I'm going to do a demonstration of this so that you can see for yourself how it works.
What I have here is a solution of gold nanoparticles.
As you see, they're just suspended in solution, nothing really hanging around in the solution.
These are all very soluble and stable.
I've put some of that gold nanoparticle solution into two different test tubes.
What we'll do is we'll add DNA to one but not the other.
We'll see what happens in terms of the color change in the tube where DNA was added and
then we'll compare it with the one that was just left alone.
Here's my solution of DNA.
A clear solution, again, DNA is completely soluble, doesn't really have any color of
its own, so this just looks like water.
I'm going to take a few drops, add it to one of our gold nanoparticle solutions, and then
you see what happens.
You can see that right away, the solution is changing color.
Again, we started out with red, I added something that's clear, and now you can see that this
guy is turning kind of blueish-purple.
That is the color change that's affected by gold nanoparticles brought together by a
complementary sequence of DNA.
That's exactly the type of effect that's used to pick up on the presence of genetic mutations.
If we step back for a minute, this is kind of curious.
We are talking about gold nanoparticles, we all know what color gold is, and it's solid
form, it's gold.
Now why did I start with one solution that was red, and then I was able to change it
into a blue solution, and this all of a sudden starts to seem kind of confusing.
If you happen to have two rings that are made of gold and you bring them together, absolutely
nothing happens, right?
Gold in its metallic state really doesn't ever change color, but here we're not talking
about macroscale gold, we're talking about nanoscale gold.
When nanoscale gold is dispersed in solution, it has a very different set of properties,
and so that red color is related to the nanoscale size of these particles.
This is a great example of how a nanoparticle or a nanoscale object can have a completely
different set of properties than the macroscale version that maybe we're used to looking at.
This is a key point that illustrates why nanomaterials can have unique utility.
This color change that we're talking about, and the fact that the gold nanoparticles in
solution start off red to begin with, arises because of the interactions of the particles
with light.
If you think about light and the waves that make up light, those waves are on a length
scale of nanometers.
We talk about the spectrum of light and the unit that we describe that in is always nanometers.
The fact that you have light with these oscillations that are nanometers, you have a particle
that has a set of dimensions that are about on the same size scale.
There is an interaction there that is unique.
Again, macroscale gold that doesn't have anything nanoscale going on doesn't really interact
with light.
It just reflects light.
Here with these tiny gold nanoparticles, we have electromagnetic waves that are dispersed
on the surface of the particle, and there are highly delocalized electrons there.
The wavelengths of light and these waves on the surfaces of the particles interact and
they dictate what color the particles appear to be to the human eye.
Gold nanoparticles that are surrounded by water and not close to other particles appear
to be red.
When the nanoparticles come close to one another, they appear blue.
Again, it's the same material, but it just has a different distance separating it.
The fact that the absorption of this material becomes blue reflects the fact that they become
electronically coupled.
What does that mean?
Well, it means that their electrons actually start talking to one another.
They know that they're there, and then that perturbs the surface waves on the nanoparticles.
It's this perturbation of those surface waves that gives us the color change that we see
when nanoparticles line up on a strand of DNA in the presence of a disease-related mutation.
So now you understand how gold nanoparticles can be used to detect the DNA mutations that
cause disease.
And you're probably wondering, is this something that can be done now, or are we talking about
something that is years away from being available?
Well, it turns out that nanoparticles are actually being used today for exactly this
application that we've just gone over in hospitals all over North America.
A company called Nanosphere that was launched out of Northwestern University, where all of
this research began, has taken the gold nanoparticle technology and developed an instrument that
can automate its use.
So me squirting my solutions here on a bench, we wouldn't necessarily want somebody to be
using gold nanoparticles that way to do something as important as diagnosis of disease, but
the same concept has been packaged up into an instrument.
So in a testing laboratory, a technician can take a sample of blood.
They extract the DNA from the cell, so they break the cells up and they take the DNA out
and they purify it, and then they inject it into a cartridge, just a small testing unit
that can mix it up with the nanoparticles.
And then this mixture is put onto an array, and what the array is doing is picking out
a pattern of blue spots or pink spots that allow us to know what mutations are present
in the sample.
And this is important because there are many different DNA mutations that cause cystic fibrosis,
and so it's important to be able to look at many sequences at once, hence the need for
lots of different spots for the same test.
We wouldn't want to miss, let's say, a very rare mutation and miss the diagnosis for that
reason, so being able to look at lots of things at once is very helpful in that regard.
Now this type of testing instrument, in addition to being used for cystic fibrosis testing,
can also be used to see if patients have mutations that make them sensitive to certain drugs.
So genetic factors have much to do with why individuals react differently to the same
drug, and there's a nanosphere test now available that allows physicians to assess this genetic
predisposition before writing a prescription, so before they give a patient a drug that
they're going to have a bad reaction to, a very powerful capability.
Things like viruses and as well bacteria can also be detected with the nanosphere instrument.
Different viruses and bacteria have different genetics, and so the same principle can be
applied to diagnosis of viral infections, so it's very clear that this technology has
tremendous utility, and as I mentioned at the beginning, this is one of the first nano-enabled
diagnostic systems to come onto the market.
This advance is the first of many, and in a few lectures we'll discuss other types of
diagnostic approaches that are a little bit earlier in their development, but have just
as much promise, and so we'll come back to this idea of looking at nucleic acid molecules
using nanomaterial to do very sensitive and specific detection, and we'll look at a variety
of different approaches that can achieve this, again, all using nanomaterials.
So in this lecture we've covered some key concepts that will help you to understand
nanomedical advances and how they work.
We've now seen an example of a nanomaterial, a gold nanoparticle.
This has come up in other lectures, but now you've seen how these materials can scan DNA
for mutations.
We also discussed a special property of nanoscale objects, and that's the interaction with nanometer
light waves, and this gives nanomaterials like gold very different colors than their macroscale
counterparts, and you now know that this special light changing capacity can be used
to diagnose genetic disease resulting from DNA mutations.
Now in the next lecture we'll talk about nanomaterials that are given special functions by the attachment
of a different type of molecule that's also nanoscale, a protein.
So we'll look at the structures of proteins, go over their functions, relate how the functions
of proteins can be used to manipulate nanomaterials or to make them more powerful.
See you then.
