Everyone knows that protein is an important part of our diet, but do you know why?
Well, our bodies are actually 20% protein, and it's this material that allows us to think
and run and do all of the other things that we do.
Protein is a very important part of our diet so that we can make the molecules that we
need internally and keep our cells running.
Just like DNA, which we covered the last time, proteins are a major class of biomolecules
that can connect biology very directly with the world of nanotechnology.
What we'll do in this lecture is to look at some of the basic features of proteins and
see how these features have been used to manipulate nanomaterials or make them useful
for applications in nanoscience and nanomedicine.
Proteins are a type of cellular molecule that, unlike DNA, have a wide range of functional
roles and structural motifs.
So when we talked about DNA, we talked about its very regular structure and the fact that
it really only does one thing, it stores genetic information.
Proteins, on the other hand, have many, many different functions.
So they drive all of the chemical reactions that occur within cells, they provide structural
support to cells and tissues, they're also the gatekeepers of cells controlling what
molecules are allowed in and out, and proteins are also the key players in our immune system.
They're able to recognize foreign cells like bacteria and viruses and target them for destruction.
So before we talk about how proteins and nanomaterials can interact, let's consider the nanoscale
structure of proteins themselves.
These molecules are composed of small building blocks that we refer to as amino acids, and
when we call them small, what do we mean?
Well, they're no more than one nanometer in size.
So the picture that you're looking at shows the structure of tryptophan.
This is an example of an amino acid you're probably familiar with because of its reputation
for making us sleepy after we have Thanksgiving turkey.
That's not its major function, but that's one of the things that it can do when it's
floating around in cells.
It turns out that there are 22 versions of tryptophan that serve as building blocks in
proteins, and they're all slightly different.
Some are more greasy or water friendly or they may have a molecular charge.
The part of the amino acid that you're looking at that's gray is what varies from one amino
acid to another.
The rest of the molecule stays constant, and the ordering of the amino acids within a protein
can have a strong effect on structure.
Now how is the sequence or the ordering of the amino acids within a protein determined?
Well, this is what the information within DNA is used for.
It's turned into a protein code that gives cells the molecules they can use for all of
their various functions.
The first glimpse of protein structures at the nanoscale came around the time that DNA
structure was first characterized.
It was much harder to interpret the protein data though because unlike the simple double
helical structure of DNA that is very uniform, it turns out that proteins have structures
that are highly variable.
So let's take a look at a protein named hemoglobin.
This protein carries the oxygen from our lungs to other sites in the body, or if you happen
to be a fish and you're tuning in, it carries the oxygen from the gills to the rest of the
fish, and this protein is roughly six nanometers across.
You'll notice that there are curly helical sections in the protein structure, but it's
not a straight continuous helix like DNA.
There are sections that are not helical that are interspersed, and these can be quite disordered,
and this is one of the things that makes structural characterization of proteins extremely difficult.
Another challenge was that there were 22 different amino acids that could be present within the
protein, and having so many building blocks made it much more challenging to fit everything
together.
But a breakthrough was finally made in this area in the 1950s, which as you'll remember
was a decade after DNA structure was characterized.
Two researchers working at Cambridge University, Max Perutz and John Kendrew, spent an entire
decade trying to deconvolute protein structure, and they were finally successful in 1957.
And they received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1962, and you'll remember probably this
is the same year that the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine was awarded for the
structure of DNA.
Now, why are the structures of proteins so variable?
And we think this is connected to the fact that they've performed so many different
functions within the cell.
Some proteins have evolved to very specifically recognize other proteins, or even DNA or other
molecules, and so their structures are designed to find and bind partners.
The helical sections that you find in proteins are very rigid, and so they're good at grabbing
chemical functionalities on other molecules.
And this is where different amino acids come in.
The ones that are good at making hydrogen bonds can reach out and make contact with other
molecules.
The linker regions that you saw in hemoglobin are quite flexible, and they're good at allowing
a protein to change its shape to give off a signal.
Proteins are able to change shape, and they can tell a cell whether the cell is cold or
it's hot or it's hungry, and it can give off these signals so that the cell can do something
about it.
Other structural motifs that are found in proteins can provide binding pockets where
chemical reactions can occur.
So now that you know what a protein looks like, and you have a feeling for the highly
variable structures of proteins, let's discuss what proteins do and connect their functions
with different aspects of nanotechnology.
One of the most ubiquitous functions of proteins is the catalysis of chemical reactions.
Catalysis is a term that is used to describe what needs to happen for a reaction that is
not spontaneous to proceed.
Proteins are really good at taking unreactive molecules and making them do something special.
They do this by binding molecules in special pockets where they can bend the molecule to
put it under stress and break a bond, or they can use one of their own functionalities to
cut or replace a chemical bond, and they're very clever about getting work done.
Let's take, for example, the peroxidase enzymes.
As the name suggests, peroxidases can break down peroxides, like hydrogen peroxide.
On its own, hydrogen peroxide is pretty stable, but when it binds the peroxidase, it's cut
into and it's made very reactive.
And this is an important function that helps the immune system fight disease.
In the presence of an infectious agent, for example, a bacterial cell, the enzyme converts
hydrogen peroxide into a reactive molecule that will stop the bacterium in its tracks
by damaging its cell wall.
So this type of enzyme and the chemical catalysis that it facilitates has an important function
that keeps us healthy.
And there are actually a variety of diseases linked to high and low peroxidase levels.
Too much peroxidase seems to be linked with coronary artery disease.
The peroxidases may help to speed the formation of plaques that are very harmful.
But too little peroxidase is linked with immune suppression, also problematic.
A very interesting potential new role for peroxidases has been identified as relevant
to the use of nanomaterials.
The enzyme peroxidase seems to be able to break down and biodegrade carbon nanotubes.
And we'll talk more about carbon nanotubes when we discuss drug delivery, and you'll
appreciate why this discovery was so important as we talk about how powerful carbon nanotubes
can be in an in vivo system.
The discovery that carbon nanotubes could be broken down with peroxidase was made by
Alex Starr, a professor of chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh.
Alex worked with carbon nanotubes for several years, and he first developed very powerful
sensing systems using these materials.
But in the course of these studies, he began to wonder what would happen to nanotubes once
they were inside the human body.
And he was then the first person to observe that a peroxidase called myeloperoxidase could
degrade a nanotube.
He first showed that this was possible in a test tube, and eventually showed that it
could also occur in a living animal.
And this finding really captivated the nanoscience community because it indicated that nanomaterials
could be biodegradable.
And again, we'll come back to this, but we'll discuss how nanotubes can be used for drug
delivery, and you'll realize that if they were not biodegradable, this type of application
just wouldn't be possible.
It would be very problematic because if nanotubes were left behind once a drug was dispensed,
they would eventually accumulate and they could cause inflammation.
And there have been studies of mice where mice that inhaled carbon nanotubes developed
severe lung inflammation and went on to suffer from lung fibrosis.
So this was a serious concern, and this is why finding a way for nanotubes to be biodegradable
was a major breakthrough.
The way that peroxidase degrades nanotubes is a really amazing process.
So nanotubes sometimes exist as what we call multi-walled structures, meaning that there
is a nanotube inside of a nanotube that is inside of a nanotube.
This is very much like the matryoshka dolls that maybe somebody's brought you as a president
from Russia that are nested dolls.
Now when peroxidase degrades these materials, it does so one layer at a time.
And Alec Star and his team were able to observe this in real time.
They were also able to observe that once the nanotubes were present as a single layer,
so all of the outside layers were degraded, then there was just a single nanotube left,
the enzyme chewed from the middle of the carbon nanotube to break them into smaller pieces.
And what I read about this mechanism in detail, it reminded me a lot of the way that my kids
eat sandwiches that they don't like.
So I have a two-year-old, four-year-old, both boys, and if I give them a sandwich that they
don't like what's in the middle, they start to eat the sandwich from the outside, and
they eat the bread.
They eventually break one sandwich into 20 sandwiches, and all that's left is whatever
was the filling for the sandwich with a little layer of bread.
And that's exactly what happens to these carbon nanotubes that they get chewed up from the
outside and then just the core is left.
So this discovery really highlights an important discovery in nanoscience, the enzymatic degradation
of carbon nanotubes, and it also gives us a good example of a chemical reaction that
a protein catalyzes.
Another important class of proteins are antibodies.
So these proteins do all of the heavy lifting for our immune systems.
Antibodies are able to specifically recognize foreign agents in our bodies and tag those
foreign agents so that they're eliminated.
Most antibodies have the Y shape that's shown in this figure.
They have a stem and two recognition domains that are very specific sensors.
Now how do these proteins recognize threats to our immune system, and how do they work
to eliminate them?
So this seems like a hard problem to solve, recognizing an unknown agent that your body
has never seen before.
How on earth do we do that?
It turns out that what we do to cope with this challenge is to make large libraries or sets
of antibodies, and every member of this set is slightly different.
Once one of these antibodies finds something threatening, it gives us a signal that says
that it should be amplified.
And then many copies of it are made to ensure that an infection is cleared.
The binding between an antibody and its target is very strong, and many molecular interactions
are made that hold the complex together.
As I'm sure you're aware, sometimes our immune systems can turn against us.
For those of us with certain food allergies, it's the immune system and antibodies that
mistakenly treat a certain component of a food as a threat.
But we've also learned to make our immune systems work better.
We know how to vaccinate against many diseases by injecting substances that mimic infectious
agents.
Using these types of strategies, we've been able to eradicate many terrible diseases.
We also know how to produce highly specific antibodies in large quantities so that we
can exploit their binding properties for medical applications.
There are several antibody-based drugs out there that are able to find specific proteins
on the surfaces of cancer cells, and they're able to selectively eliminate them, just as
if they were a bacterial cell.
And these types of drugs are very effective at controlling cancer.
We'll find that antibodies are also a very powerful tool in nanomedicine.
We'll look at several examples of antibody-functionalized nanomaterials, for example, metal nanoparticles
or quantum dots, with an antibody tethered to the surface.
And this is a way to take a nanomaterial and make it very specific for a certain type of
cell or a certain type of molecular target.
Let's look at one example of this type of antibody-mediated targeting that relates to
the gold nanoparticles from our last lecture.
It turns out that antibody-gold nanoparticle conjugates are already used as indicators
in many of the commercially available pregnancy tests.
These are tests that can provide a result simply by introduction of urine onto a dipstick.
The urine is drawn up into an analysis chamber, and it reacts with two strips of material
enclosed within the dipstick.
One is a control, so as long as urine was introduced onto the dipstick, a line is formed.
The other indicates whether or not a hormone associated with pregnancy, HCG, is present.
The outputs for this type of test are just red lines.
You just read it by eye.
And again, in many of these commercial tests, these red lines are formed with gold nanoparticles.
The way this works is that an antibody that specifically binds the pregnancy hormone HCG
is modified with a gold nanoparticle.
And then there are also larger spheres in the mixture.
If HCG is present, it binds the antibody, and a large complex is formed.
This complex then flows along the dipstick until it reaches the test site.
At this site, a filter will stop the large complex from flowing through it, and it concentrates
it into a line.
And then close by, any leftover gold nanoparticles that are still there are trapped by a finer
filter, and they're used as a control to show that the sample was actually transported through
the device, so that you always have a positive signal, even if the pregnancy test is negative.
So here, the intense color and the nanoscale size of gold nanoparticles are being leveraged
to make this type of diagnostic testing easier and more sensitive.
If it was not for the nanoscale size of the particle, the filter-based approach would
not work.
So small molecules that we usually use as colored dyes are difficult to stop with filters.
So this just wouldn't work if all we had to work with was a dye.
So now you're a little bit more familiar with antibodies, and you can see how they can help
a nanomaterial recognize a target molecule and sense it.
And we'll look at many other examples of materials functionalized with antibodies as we go along
through the next few lectures.
Now not all proteins have functions that we consider active.
Others are passive, and they're present to provide a structure to a cell or a tissue.
For example, collagen, which is a protein named after the Greek word for glue, is a main
component of connective tissue, and it represents 30% of the total protein in our bodies.
It has a very interesting structure.
So rather than being variable, it's quite constant, and it always exists as a triple
helical structure about 1.5 nanometers wide and 300 nanometers long.
These triple helices of collagen are wound into tough bundles.
They can be hundreds of nanometers thick, and they provide a guide that can tell cells
where to grow.
And there are a number of diseases related to problems with collagen.
So I'm sure that you've heard of scurvy and know that this results from a deficiency of
vitamin C. Scurvy was at one time a serious issue for those on long military expeditions
at sea, but it is fairly rare now that its origin is well recognized.
It turns out that the vitamin C deficiency that causes scurvy produces defective collagen,
and the connective tissues are affected.
The gums in our mouth are particularly susceptible to this, and tooth loss was a major ramification
of scurvy.
As well, healing of wounds is a process that's expedited by collagen, and slow healing was
a major symptom of scurvy that made people affected with this disorder susceptible to
infection.
Collagen is an intensely studied protein also because of its role in our physical appearance.
So the changes that appear in our skin as we age, those come about because of collagen
breakdown.
So as we age, the collagen in our face and other places kind of breaks down and we lose
the structure of our skin.
So many cosmetic procedures have been developed that attempt to reintroduce collagen to repair
the effects of aging.
Collagen is also an important component in types of artificial skin that are under development
and an important ingredient in treatments given to burn victims.
The relationship between collagen and nanoscience is that this protein has been used as a model
for the development of nanomaterials that can support cell growth.
As we just discussed, collagen is oriented in fibers and its directionality and the spacing
of the fibers tells cells how to position themselves.
And this natural phenomenon has been mimicked with nanomaterials.
Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have produced nanoscale gradings
that mimic the structure of collagen.
And they found that these gradings are effective at orienting cells.
So for example, here you can see a cell that is growing along an anode grading.
Without the collagen mimic, the cell simply spreads, it doesn't have any directionality
at all.
And it turns out that it's very important for cells to have directionality in order
to be able to pick, build up tissues and organs in an organized manner.
And so these types of materials have tremendous promise for artificial tissue engineering.
We'll return to this topic in a few lectures.
For now, we're talking about the different functions of proteins at the nanoscale, and
we've talked about three different functions so far.
We've talked about proteins that can catalyze chemical reactions, proteins that are good
at recognizing other molecules, and proteins that provide structural support to tissues
and cells.
So now let's look at one other important function of proteins that relates to a role
that they can play in nanoscience, and the role that they play as cellular gatekeepers.
Now cells are very picky about what they take in.
They do this to protect themselves, and it's rigid requirement that very delicate balances
of different molecules be maintained in cells.
There are proteins that sit on the surfaces of cells, and their function is to decide what
should be allowed into the cell, or what should come out of the cell.
These proteins, and we call them receptors, are inactive if they don't have anything
bound.
They just kind of sit there and wait for something to happen.
But once they do bind something, they trigger an amazing chain of events that causes the
cell to make pockets in its outer membrane.
And these pockets, if you imagine the cell membrane, and it's nice and smooth, and then
this protein binds something that it wants to take in, and then the membrane will just
loop in, it'll make a pocket, and the edges will re-close, and then whatever the receptor
wanted to drag into the cell comes in.
This type of process plays an important role in how cholesterol gets processed.
One type of cholesterol is packaged in a nanoscale particle formed by a protein called
low-density lipoprotein, or LDL.
These particles can bump into a receptor on the surface of the cell, and the cell takes
the LDL in.
Now, LDL is what we think of as bad cholesterol, right?
That's the one that you don't want to see showing up when you go to your physician for
a checkup.
But there's a reason for this.
So if we don't get that LDL into cells, it's running around in our blood, and that's when
it can do bad things.
If this process goes smoothly and the cholesterol is taken into the cell, then it can be metabolized
and processed very efficiently.
So individuals that have a defect in one of the proteins that sense the cholesterol particles,
the LDL, if you have a defect in that, you will be very susceptible to having high serum
cholesterol concentrations, and you'll be more susceptible to the coronary and vascular
issues that come along with that.
Now, LDL is roughly 15 to 25 nanometers in size, and so the cell is used to seeing nanoparticles
of this size.
And interestingly enough, it turns out the gold nanoparticles can use the same pathway
to enter cells.
They bind receptor proteins on the outsides of cells, and then they're taken in through
these pockets that can be formed in the membrane that I just described.
And how efficient the uptake is depends quite a bit on the structure and the size of a particle.
A colleague of mine at the University of Toronto, Warren Chan, studies this issue in detail.
Warren actually started his career using nanomaterials as medical imaging agents, and will actually
talk about some of his work in the next couple lectures.
Recently, he's turned away from using nanomaterials as imaging agents and turned over to looking
at the details of how nanomaterials interact with cells.
His lab has incredible capabilities when it comes to studying very specific and detailed
cellular phenomena, but he also has significant experience in the development of interesting
new nanomaterials.
Recently, Warren's group did a study where they looked at the uptake of gold nanoparticles
and nanorots into cells.
What they found was very interesting.
While the spherical particles that they studied, and these were particles with many different
sizes, they all entered the cells.
But when they changed out the particles for rods, they did not see any uptake into cells.
So it seems as though a cell can be fooled into thinking that a gold nanoparticle is
a particle of something else, like cholesterol.
But it knows that the aspect ratio on a rod is not right, and that that material does
not belong in a cell.
The Chan group also observed that the closer the size of a nanoparticle was to something
biologically relevant, like LDL, the more efficient the uptake was.
Now, how did they do this study?
How did they tell whether or not the gold particles were getting into the cells?
The Chan group uses quite a bit of a technique that I think you've already heard about called
scanning electron microscopy.
So they incubate the material with the cells that they want to study, usually human cells
that you can culture in the lab.
And then they take them over to the electron microscope, and then they actually image the
cell.
They look at different pockets of the cell.
They look for the gold nanoparticles stuck in the membrane, or maybe in the cytoplasm
of the cell.
That's just kind of the stuff in between the organelles, or maybe even inside the nucleus
or other organelles like mitochondria, and they count up how many particles are there
and look at the localization profile to draw some conclusions about whether or not the
particles could get into the cell.
And so it's a very precise measurement that they use to study this phenomenon, but as
you can see, it gives us a tremendous amount of information.
This type of study is quite helpful as new nanomaterials are being designed for applications
that take place both on the inside and the outside of the cell.
We can use this information.
We now know that if we want a nanomaterial to enter a cell, let's say perhaps to deliver
a drug, then it should be spherical, and as close to the size of a natural nanoparticle
as possible.
On the other hand, if we want a nanomaterial to stay on the outside of a cell, perhaps
to tag the cell as a cancer cell for detection, it should be rod-shaped.
We will return to how receptors can be used with nanomaterials in the next few lectures.
In this lecture, we've reviewed the main functions of proteins, and we've linked each
of these functions to the world of nanoscience.
Now that we have all of this information about proteins and all the information that
we went through in the last lecture on DNA, we're ready to talk more about specific applications
in nanomedicine.
In the next lecture, we're going to discuss a cutting-edge approach to detecting cancerous
tumors in the human body, and we'll talk about how sensors made of quantum dots can
serve as beacons that will illuminate sites of cancer.
See you then.
