Some of the most exciting work in all of nanoscience first appeared and is still taking place in
medicine.
And now that we've taken a look at different types of biomolecules and how they can work
together with nanomaterials, we're ready to look at a variety of applications where
nanomaterials can be used in medicine.
We'll start by looking at how nanotechnology is having an impact on the early detection
of cancer, one of the most deadly diseases we contend with in the 21st century.
So let's start by talking through why cancer happens in the first place.
To understand the origins of this disease, we first need to think about the cells that
make up the human body.
As you know, cells are the basic physiological unit that make up tissues and organs.
They're micron-sized and they hold all of the proteins and DNA molecules that are needed
to support life.
Humans have an incredibly complex set of cells.
We have over 300 different types of cells that perform different functions.
Overall, if you count up all of the cells in the human body, there are over 100 trillion.
I think that's a really staggering number, I never really stopped to think about how
many cells I'm made up of, but that's an awful lot.
And we're constantly making new cells.
We need to regenerate our tissues and replace old cells with new ones.
So every day, about 0.1% of our cells divide to replace old or dead cells.
So that's 100 billion cells every day in every one of us.
So if you ever feel that you've not gotten much done in a day, just remember how busy
your cells have been and call it a great day.
Now when these 100 billion cells are made every day, there's a chance that a mistake
could be made.
Every time a single cell divides, all 3 billion bases in the human genome need to be copied.
So that's 3 trillion bases that need to be copied every day.
You'll remember from two lectures ago that every strand of DNA is copied by a protein
and it reads a single strand to generate a complement.
And the proteins that are assigned this function in the cell are really pretty good at not
making a mistake.
They've evolved over time to become more and more accurate.
But nobody's perfect and given that many assignments to copy that much DNA, every once in a while
they do make mistakes.
And in addition, if a person is exposed to something like radiation or a damaging chemical
that can react with their DNA, these mistakes or mutations may be even more frequent.
And sometimes these mistakes affect cells in ways that are harmless.
If you were to roll out all of the DNA in our cells and look at what parts of the DNA
code for proteins and which parts are just there, most of our DNA is just a spacer.
So if a mistake or a mutation happens in one of these regions, it doesn't affect the cell
and we just go on with our cells doing what they did without the mutation.
But sometimes a gene is modified that affects the way a cell divides and maintains itself.
And once a mutation is made in DNA, it can be difficult to repair.
So for example, free radical damage to DNA, which can be caused by radiation or chemicals,
can cause the G residues in DNA to take on an extra oxygen atom.
When this happens, the protein that copies DNA mistakes this new form of G, we call it
oxo-G, for a T. And when it synthesizes the strand across from it, it puts in an A instead
of a G. And so this G to A mutation is then perpetuated in all of the daughter cells and
it can affect the ability of a cell to self-regulate.
Now how does this happen?
We touched briefly in the last lecture on the idea that protein sequences are encoded
by DNA sequences.
And you now know that proteins have many important chemical, structural, and regulatory functions
in the cell.
If a DNA molecule that codes for a protein becomes mutated, then the new form of the
protein that is produced may have some strange properties.
For example, there are proteins called kinases and these proteins run around the cell and
they attach phosphorus and oxygen to other proteins.
And why do they do this?
Well, it's a signal and the signal, the purpose of the signal is to tell the cell where it
is in its life cycle.
If one of these kinases has a sequence that becomes mutated, it can become overactive
and then it runs around the cell too fast and it does too much modifying.
And then the cell thinks that it is time to divide earlier than it should and it starts
to divide at an accelerated rate.
Mutated proteins can also cause cells to become dangerous by tricking them into ignoring signals
that they are in trouble.
So normal cells know when they need to be turned over and replaced.
And there is a process called program cell death that healthy cells use when it's time
for them to go.
And cells that have mutations in certain genes tend to ignore these signals to turn over
and they become aggressive.
They divide too quickly, they overtake the population in a tissue, they ignore the signs
that they're in trouble and eventually they can form what's called a neoplasm.
And this neoplasm is really the start of a tumor, it's the thing that can become a tumor.
And sometimes tumors are harmless, we call them benign in this case.
And the cells within them are a little too aggressive and that they divide too much,
but they're not aggressive enough to cause damage and that benign tumor just stays contained
and doesn't do any harm.
But sometimes the cells that form a tumor can become increasingly aggressive and invasive.
It's kind of like a cascade or a snowball effect that once a cell starts mutating, more
mutations may build up.
Now what do I mean by a cell becoming aggressive?
Well very aggressive cells that are part of a tumor can take advantage of the fact that
tumors are very well connected to the bloodstream, they're wired right in, they need oxygen and
so there's usually blood vessels that connect them.
And so these very aggressive cells are good at becoming detached from the primary tumor
and then they hitch a ride in the circulatory system to another organ.
And then they colonize in these remote sites.
This could be the liver or the brain or the bones and these are places where these tumor
cells can do real harm.
So this is why cancers in tissues like the breast or the prostate, tissues that don't
really have that much function as we age, can be deadly.
So you're looking at an image of metastatic breast cancer cells that have made their way
to the liver and formed a tumor there.
It is the metastatic tumors, not the primary ones that formed in the breast but the secondary
ones that formed in the liver, these are the ones that are problematic that eventually
affect the health of people with cancer.
Now cancer is a disease that's treatable if it's caught early.
So for example a small breast tumor can be surgically removed and a patient may be disease-free
if it's caught early.
One thing goes for prostate cancer but the methods that we use to screen for cancer are
not very good at catching it at the early stages.
There are methods that are good at looking at a tumor after it's formed like MRI.
So here we slide a patient into a giant magnet and all of the hydrogen atoms in the human
body are used to collect an image that can reveal a tumor.
So the blue map that you're looking at shows the incredible amount of detail we can collect
this way.
We can see every single region of the brain and we can see where there might be abnormalities
or a tumor but MRI is really expensive.
So it's about $1,000 a scan just for a localized region, that's just for a brain scan.
It would be much more expensive if we were to MRI the whole body.
So it just turns out that the health care system cannot support this level of cost and
MRI is just too expensive to be used at a yearly checkup to screen everyone for cancer.
And maybe more importantly, MRI doesn't help us find cancer cells in the blood.
The cells basically have to be still, they can't be swimming around as the blood is circulating
in your body.
And this then would not tell us about cancer cells that were spreading in the body because
those ones are usually in the bloodstream.
So we need other solutions.
So think about this using what you know so far.
How might nanotechnology be leveraged here to find a solution?
You already know that it's possible to make nanoscale structures and modify them with biomolecules.
It turns out that if we're clever about using biomodified nanomaterials, we can use them
to find cancer cells.
Either while the cells are still in the body or if they're in samples that we take out
of the body.
So in the next two lectures, we'll look at different approaches that can be used inside
or outside of a human being.
For many types of cancers, the ones where solid tumors are formed, detecting cancer inside
the body makes sense because we have to send a sensor around and figure out what tissue
the tumor is in.
For others like leukemia or for cancers that are becoming metastatic and traveling through
the bloodstream, taking a sample from a patient and analyzing it outside probably makes more
sense.
So in this lecture, we'll talk about nanomaterials that are good at finding tumors in vivo, meaning
that they can find them in a living organism.
The idea here is that if we could send tiny nanosensors into the bloodstream and make them
smart, we could then find the smallest of tumors hopefully before it becomes metastatic.
Now by finding a tumor, what I mean is that these sensors would be able to differentiate
a cancer cell from a healthy cell and that sensor would then give off some type of signal
that could be detected accurately.
So let's take a look at how we do this with nanomaterials.
We've already seen examples of nanomaterials modified with specific biomolecules that make
them able to recognize other molecules with very high levels of specificity.
So what types of molecules do we need to be able to recognize to know if a cell is a cancer
cell or not?
Well we can't target the mutated DNA that I just mentioned because as you know DNA is
packaged up on the inside of the cell.
If we're going to send a sensor that's going to circulate around the body, it really only
has markers that are located on the outside of the cell to work with.
So there are protein molecules we talked about this in the last lecture that are called receptors
and these proteins sit on the outside of the cell and they look at the environment and
they let things in and they take things out and certain types of receptors are often present
at very high levels on the outside of cancer cells because these receptors are involved
in signaling and involved in some of the cell regulation processes that I just mentioned
that kind of go crazy in cancer cells.
So these receptors then are good markers that we can target nanoparticles to.
In the images that you're viewing you're looking at a normal cell and a breast cancer cell.
The cancer cell has about five times as many receptors on its surface relative to the healthy
cell.
So the receptors are an excellent target to go after so that a tumor can be imaged.
Now what type of material would be useful for finding a tumor in a living organism like
a human?
One of the most sensitive ways to get a signal out of a sensor is to have it emit light and
if you think back through all the nanomaterials we've seen so far, think through all the things
that we've looked at and think about the subset of those that emit light, you probably remember
the quantum dots are some of the best materials for light emission.
Another nice feature of these materials is that the color of their emission can be tuned
across a broad range.
Now it turns out the tissues also emit light.
So we need to think a bit about whether the light emitted from the quantum dot will be
visible if it needs to be detected with tissue in the way.
So we can actually look at the absorbent spectrum of a typical tissue and this is shown on the
graph that you're looking at in black.
Now if we overlay the spectrum of an orange quantum dot you can see that the emission
from the human tissue is pretty weak in that region.
The light will indeed be able to make its way out to be detected.
Now you may be wondering why human tissue absorbs and emits light and if you think about the
components of tissues and cells, many of them are things that are colored, obviously our
blood is highly colored, it absorbs lots of light because of all the human globin that's
in our red blood cells and so this is a major issue when it comes to in vivo imaging.
How do we get around the natural absorption of tissues?
And this is one of the key advantages of nanomaterials.
There are not that many materials out there that can absorb and emit light as far in the
let's say the red part of the spectrum which is where we need to be to get around the absorption
and emission of natural tissue.
And so the fact that nanomaterials do have these properties is one of the things that's
very special about them.
So now how are we going to help a quantum dot find a receptor that is specific to a cancer
cell?
Well, we'll rely on proteins called antibodies.
We talked about these two in the last lecture and these proteins can be engineered to stick
to other proteins and so we can attach these proteins to the quantum dots and how do we
make these?
Well we can prepare the quantum dots, we can give them an outer layer that is easy to functionalize
meaning that it's easy to come in with the antibody that we want to attach and we link
it and then it's covalently bound and that complex will stay together basically irreversibly.
So now if you think about these quantum dots swimming around in the bloodstream, they're
looking out for a cancer cell with lots of receptors on the surface.
If they bump into a healthy cell, hopefully they don't see that receptor that's at a much
lower level on the surface of the healthy cell and they just bounce off and keep on
going their way but if they hit a cancer cell there's a high probability that they collide
with a receptor and then they stick because that antibody has been engineered to stick
to the receptor.
Now you're looking at an image of a cancer cell that has been bound by green quantum
dots.
The quantum dots are actually stuck to the outside of the cell where the receptors sit
on the surface.
The blue part of the image is just showing us where the nucleus of the cell is.
This is the middle of the cell so you can see that the quantum dots are stuck on the
outside and there's not on the inside of the cell.
So this works on cells but it also works on tissue.
So the image that you're viewing now shows a tissue that was collected during breast
cancer biopsy.
It's glowing red in this case because the quantum dots that were used are red.
So this really does work.
We can get quantum dots to show us where cancer cells are.
But the key question of course is does it work in a living organism?
I've shown you pictures of cells and tissues where quantum dots have stuck to the cancerous
cells.
Now, how do we think about whether this would work on a live subject?
Ideally, we would take a solution of quantum dots that are specific for a certain type
of cancer cell, inject it into the bloodstream and let the quantum dots circulate and find
their target.
And if they don't find a target, hopefully they're excreted and we don't get a signal.
Now as they're traveling through the bloodstream, they would flow through different areas of
the body and if they came into contact with a tumor, they would stick and accumulate.
Then they could be detected if we looked for the light coming out.
So basically you would need to put the person in a dark room, have a light source there
that's irradiating the quantum dots and then we take a picture and see if anything is glowing.
Now if you think about the quantum dots circulating and doing their thing as they're looking for
a tumor, this may sound like a pretty grand challenge because we know that the human body
is very good at filtration, right?
Our kidneys filter our entire volume of blood every day 25 times.
That's their main function.
So will these quantum dots don't really belong in our bloodstream be able to stay in circulation
long enough to find their targets?
Now the answer to this question and the first demonstration of quantum dot based visualization
in a living organism was obtained several years ago by a group working at Emory University
in Atlanta.
The group of shooming knee was able to show that they could see tumors lit up by quantum
dots in a lab rat.
The knee group generated three different colors of quantum dots.
They made green ones, yellow ones, red ones and they made each color specific for a different
kind of tumor.
And believe it or not, you can take a rat or a lab mouse and implant different tumors
in that animal.
So you introduce the tumors, you let them take hold and grow and then if you're going
to do this type of imaging analysis, you introduce your imaging agent and watch how well it localizes.
So they did this.
They took their three different solutions of quantum dots all mixed together.
They injected it into the tail vein of the rat and then they let the animal go do its
thing for a few hours, its last few hours.
Then they imaged the light coming out of the back of the animal and lo and behold they
were able to see the three types of tumors lit up and they knew which tumor was where
and they knew that the green quantum dots went to the right tumor, the yellow ones went
to the right tumor and the red ones went to the right tumor.
Now you may remember me mentioning a guy named Warren Chan in my last lecture.
He's a colleague of mine from the University of Toronto who is a nanomaterial specialist.
He spoke about his work on tracking nanoparticle uptake in cells and I also mentioned then
that he had started in the field of nanomaterials based medical imaging.
It turns out that this is actually the system that he worked on as a PhD student.
He published a landmark paper about quantum dot sensors in 1998 in the journal Science
and this paper has been cited thousands of times by researchers around the world.
It is a very impressive contribution that has made a real impact on nanoscience.
Now there were a few unexpected discoveries along the way to this advance that are quite
interesting on their own.
One is that there's a magic quantum dot size that allows this type of approach to be feasible.
So a few minutes ago we talked about the fact that with this type of approach one concern
is that the kidneys would remove the quantum dot so quickly that they wouldn't be able
to find their target.
But this didn't appear to be the case and we saw efficient targeting of the quantum
dots to the tumor.
However, we don't want to take this too far.
It would not be desirable at all to have the dots in circulation indefinitely.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration insists that any material that gets injected into
the body, whether it's a drug that's going to treat disease or if it's some type of diagnostic
agent like this one, they insist that that material is cleared completely from a human
being in a reasonable amount of time.
It's not completely specified but it has to be reasonable.
It has to be finite so that long term side effects are avoided.
So for these quantum dots it was observed that particles with an 8 nanometer diameter
were not cleared fast enough.
They're still present after 24 hours and if the animal is taken apart after the experiment
and there are different organs are analyzed you can see that there's very high levels
of accumulation in the liver of the animal.
Now quantum dots that are 50 percent smaller with a 4 nanometer diameter are cleared within
about two hours and they don't accumulate in any organs and they do hit the tumor specifically.
So the difference of 4 nanometers here makes all the difference when it comes to whether
these materials are usable for in vivo imaging.
Another interesting discovery that was made about the targeting of the quantum dots relates
to the mechanism by which they accumulated within the tumor.
While we know that the matching of the antibody on the quantum dot surface to the cancer cell
receptor helps targeting to be efficient and specific, it turns out that the structure
of the blood vessels that feed oxygen to tumors also played a role.
So the blood vessels around a tumor turn out to be quite leaky and that's because the tumor
puts pressure on the blood vessels, is pressing against them and this may cause them to have
holes and become quite perturbed.
So if there are little holes and breakages, this makes it easier for a nanoparticle to
get out of the blood vessel and into the tumor.
So we now realize that even though we have a specific antibody immobilized on a quantum
dot and we realize that that's important for recognizing a tumor cell and ignoring the healthy
cells, the structure of the blood vessels that feed tumors may also really help the
sensor to reach its target.
So now where is this approach heading?
It has enormous promise.
We've looked together at the data that demonstrates that it is indeed possible to target tumors
with nanoparticles and read that signal from outside.
So this is truly non-invasive imaging where we don't even have to really put a needle into
a patient, take a blood sample, anything we just send the sensor inside.
Now it's very promising that there are further advances that will need to be made for quantum
dot based tumor imaging to be used in the clinic routinely.
So we need to look at the long term effects of a quantum dot injection to make sure that
we understand the risks.
So quantum dots are very stable.
You can make them, let them sit around in the lab for months or a year and they're the
same material after that amount of time as they were to begin with.
But if you take a look at the components of quantum dots, they can be made from materials
that can be quite toxic, metals like lead and cadmium.
So we do need to look very closely at the in vivo stabilities of these materials.
Now it may seem a bit odd that these materials were engineered and they've been brought
this far with such weirdly toxic components.
So why did we go with these materials in the first place?
Why were they brought forward as the most promising materials for this application?
Well it really relates back to the emissive properties.
We talked about the fact that biological tissues have a lot of absorption, they have
emission in a certain range within the visible spectrum and quantum dots get around that
because of their special electronics and the wavelengths at which they can emit light.
So that's a really hard set of properties to match.
But people are certainly looking for alternatives.
There are some very interesting results now starting to come out with things like nanoscale
diamond.
As you know, diamond is a very stable material, it's made of carbon.
We have lots of carbon in our body so this is a material that should in principle be
very non-toxic.
There may also be ways to coat quantum dots with different materials to make them more
biocompatible and more stable.
Things like gelatin, you know, a very non-toxic substance could basically rescue the properties
of quantum dots if they're found to be problematic.
Now another challenge lies in the scale up of quantum dot based imaging materials.
As I mentioned the synthesis of the quantum dots is quite straightforward, the materials
are stable, but if we think about now scaling this up to have enough to actually use for
medical imaging, the synthesis needs to be highly reproducible and consistent.
And most of the work that has been done in this area so far has relied on small batches
of materials.
So it remains to be seen if these materials can be made in sufficient quantities.
So many think of the successful scale up and clinical validation of quantum dot based
tumor imaging as a holy grail in the field of nanomedicine.
It holds a great deal of promise for the detection of tumors that are too small to cause symptoms,
but these tumors should be treated aggressively anyway to ensure that cancer does not spread.
Now that we've taken a look at the challenge of tumor sensing inside the body using nanomaterials,
we'll look at some other systems.
Some of the ones that use nanomaterials and ones that are aimed at doing early cancer
detection, but these systems will function outside of the body.
So here we'll be taking samples out of human patients and then using nanomaterials to analyze
them ex vivo.
In the next lecture, we'll see how this type of approach differs from what we just discussed.
And we'll look at the advantages and disadvantages and really pull together all of this information
to understand what the options are and what the promise is of nanomaterials based cancer
diagnosis.
See you then.
