Testing for cancer inside the body using circulating nanosensors, as we discussed last time, is
a very promising approach that may eventually allow us to screen for cancer in a way that's
completely non-invasive. But there are limitations. First, as you're aware, any time a substance
is being developed for use in a human, there are significant regulatory hurdles that must
be dealt with. The FDA protects all of us by having a very rigorous process in place
to ensure that new medical procedures or treatments are tested thoroughly on human patients before
they become accepted practice. Second, not all cancers respond equally well to testing within
the body. In particular, we talked about the fact that in vivo imaging approaches can only really
catch solid tumors. A leukemia, for example, is a blood cancer, and it doesn't have as many
malignant cells that stand still. Same thing goes for tumors that are metastasizing, where there
are cancer cells traveling through the bloodstream. The cells that are leaving the primary tumor are
moving around, and before they colonize as a metastatic tumor, they wouldn't show up by imaging.
So let's zoom in on some different approaches that may be usable outside of the body, and that are
especially relevant in the short term. These are the approaches that may be relevant when we want
to analyze cells or cancer markers in the blood. It's also quite possible that we will see nanomaterials
appearing sooner as cancer diagnostic tools when they're used in vitro or outside the human body,
given the lower regulatory burden of getting these things into clinical practice. Many of the tests
currently used for cancer screening look for blood-borne markers, and they're performed with
this type of in vitro or test tube approach. For example, the PSA test that is used for prostate
cancer screening is performed using blood samples drawn from patients. The PSA test measures a protein
that is released from the prostate if a tumor is creating pressure within the organ. This in vitro
test, and most others actually, are not accurate or sensitive enough to catch cancer early. So there's a
real need for improved testing systems. Now, the key feature that a testing strategy has to have to be
effective for early cancer detection is a very high level of sensitivity. Now, what do I mean by
high sensitivity? So if we think about what's going on in this sample that's going to be taken from a
patient, the molecules that can be used as markers of cancer and other diseases are going to be present
at levels that are correlated with the burden of the disease or the size of a tumor. If a tumor is
very small and still localized, it will not release many molecular markers into the blood stream. Or if
we're thinking about diagnosing a blood cancer, like one that affects the white cells found in blood,
the cancer cells will be a tiny population compared to the red blood cells. That means that if we're
going to take a sample of blood and use it for cancer screening, whatever method we use must be able to
track very low levels of a targeted molecule in the presence of a background of an excess of cells
and molecules that can't interfere with a detection strategy. Nanomaterials show great promise for
achieving this type of sensitivity. As we've touched on before, the fact that nanoparticles are
almost the same size as proteins or nucleic acid molecules means that there's the potential for each
particle to only need one molecule to make a give-off signal. This is actually an area that my own
research group works in at University of Toronto. And so I'll take the opportunity today to tell you
about some of our work, and this is work that is focused on developing new types of nanocensors,
and in particular nanocensors that will assist with early cancer diagnosis. And at the end,
I'll also touch on another approach developed in another lab that's also extremely promising.
So we got started in the area of developing new cancer diagnostics about 10 years ago.
I first started my own laboratories at Boston College, and very soon after I got my lab going,
I was offered a grant from the National Cancer Institute. This is part of the National Institute
of Health in the United States, and I was asked to start up a project that would develop a new
cancer diagnostic system. The NCI liked some of the preliminary results we had, and they thought
the approaches we were pursuing, all of which relied on nanomaterials, had significant promise.
Now, 10 years later, we have a very powerful chip-based system up and running that uses
nanomaterials to very sensitively detect DNA sequences that are the markers of cancer.
Let me tell you a bit about how this works.
The chip we developed is a device that is made using the same processes that are used
in consumer electronics application. We print chips at the wafer level, meaning that we can
make thousands at a time, and this is really important if we eventually want to mass produce
the devices we're developing for clinical use. I have one of these chips with me, and we can take
a closer look at it. Now, as you can see, this chip is tiny. Looks like it couldn't do much of
anything, but as I'll tell you, it's very powerful. This chip allows us to monitor a whole panel of
markers at once, and it does it with a very high level of sensitivity that lets us go directly
into a clinical sample and see what's there. Now, the underlying substrate of this chip is
silicon, and then if you were able to zoom on this and see what's here, you'd see a gold pattern,
and this gold pattern is generated using a process called photolithography. You heard about
photolithography when Ted was telling you about information technology. Photolithography, as you
know, is the main tool that's used to pattern metals and other materials on chips. It uses light
to define the areas where patterning should take place. We don't need this particular capability
to make our chips, but there are now types of photolithography that can be used to make nanostructures.
So this is a huge tool in nanotechnology, and the resolution of photolithography gets better every
day. Now, back to the layout of our chip. So rather than making you squint at that tiny chip,
we can look at a drawing, so you can see the features more clearly. The yellow squares that
you can see, those are made out of gold, and that's where we're going to contact the chip
to read out the signal. The pointy things that you see
are leads that separate the sensors from the context, so we don't get any short circuiting.
We put our sensors at the ends of the leads. Now, the printing of this chip on a silicon wafer
is not what gives us our nanoscale features. Instead, it's what we actually do once we bring a chip
in the lab, so the chips get fabricated at a semiconductor fabrication facility,
and then they come back to us and we post-process them. So if you look at the surface of our
chip, you wouldn't be able to see this by eye, but it turns out that there are tiny holes in the
surface of the chip, and they were put there purposely to provide a place for us to introduce
nanomaterials. We take our chips, we put them in a bath of metal salt, we apply a potential,
and that causes metal to electroplate onto the chip. And this is what gives us our nanostructuring.
As the metal plates onto the chip, it forms tiny nanostructures that are actually quite easy to
manipulate. So for example, if we use three different conditions for electroplating,
we can get three different levels of nanostructuring. So you're looking at images that are collected
using scanning electron microscopy, and these are three different sensors that we made,
and they were all made side by side on our chip. The one that is on the left has no nanostructuring.
It's basically smooth. While the one in the middle has pretty large nanostructures that are about
200 nanometers. Now, the sensor on the right has very fine nanostructures that are about 20
nanometers. So why do these different levels of nanostructuring appear? We actually use the
same materials to make them, same conditions in solution, except for one condition, and that
has to do with how fast we do the electroplating process. If we make it go very fast, the metal
plates onto the chip very chaotically, and the voids formed in the sensors don't get filled in.
If we go slowly, we don't get any nanostructures because all of the voids are filled. So you get
this nice, smooth sensor. So this is a nice, easy way to control nanostructuring.
Now, how can we use these to detect biomolecules, and what role do the nanostructures that we've
created play? So we can design and synthesize a DNA sequence that is complementary to whatever
we want to detect. We know about the genetics of cancer cells. We know about the genetics of
pathogenic organisms, where this approach might also be valuable. And so we can identify that
sequence, program it into our DNA synthesizer, and then attach it to our sensor surface.
When the sequence that we're looking for is present in a sample, it binds to the sensor
through the type of hydrogen bonding and base pairing that we talked about a few lectures ago.
This binding event causes an electrical current to be given off, and that's what we're able to measure.
We can put a variety of sensors on one chip and collect a profile of signals that can tell us
about the type of cancer cell present in a sample. Now, it turns out that the presence of nanostructures
on our sensors has a dramatic effect on the sensitivity of the approach. If we use a smooth
sensor and we have a solution that contains a known number of DNA molecules, we've been able to
determine that we need at least a million molecules in a sample in order to get that sensor to give
off a response. So a million molecules, that's quite a large number. That's not typically what you
have to work with in a clinical sample, so we obviously need to push past there.
So now if we take our sensor with 200 nanometer nanostructures, our sensitivity gets better,
but we still need hundreds of thousands of molecules present to get an accurate reading.
Now, when we move over to the sensor that has the 20 nanometer structures,
all of a sudden we only need 100 molecules in solution to trigger detection. This is a huge
improvement over state of the art that allows us to contemplate using these sensors to analyze
clinical samples for cancer biomarkers. So when we studied these different levels of nanostructuring
and we were able to pull out this trend and show that the nanostructuring gave us much better
sensitivity, we were very excited about making that discovery. So why does this work so well
and why does nanostructuring matter? One thing that we discovered in the course of our work is
that the closer a nanostructure is in size to the molecules that are being looked at for detection,
the better the sensors work. So now if we think about what's going on at the nanoscale,
the molecules that are immobilized on a sensor that are being used as molecular bait,
they're trying to reach out to find their complementary sequences in the sample.
Now if they're on a surface that is flat on their size scale,
they aren't really accessible. It's kind of a sea of bait molecules and they can't really see
over their neighbors. Now if instead they're displayed on a small nanostructure, one that
has a radius of curvature that they can feel, they're much better at finding the molecule
they're trying to detect. The nanostructuring and again this size matching creates room around the
DNA strand trying to see the molecule that it's looking for. So it's a bit like being in a movie
theater. If you're in an old theater that has the seats arrayed on a flat floor and you're
vertically challenged the way that I am, soon as somebody sits down in front of you, your vision
is obscured and you can't see what's going on. But if you go to one of these nice new theaters that
has the the tiering, doesn't matter how short or tall you are or how short or tall the person in
front of you is, you have an unobstructed view and you're able to see what's going on in the entire
room. But if the seats in that theater were only tiered by an inch, that wouldn't help, right?
The spacing of the seats need to be approximately on the human size scale to make a difference.
Same thing with our DNA strands. The nanostructuring needs to be on the order of the molecular size
scale to give them some room to see what's in the solution. Now let me tell you about a specific
study we did using this chip. There is a certain form of leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia,
that affects white blood cells. Specifically, it affects the granular sites that are important
for fighting infection. It's one of the most treatable cancers with very effective drugs
available to arrest it. However, it's very important that it's diagnosed and classified very specifically
so that the right drug is used to treat it. There are many different forms of leukemia
and it's really just this certain form that will respond to the the drugs that I'm mentioning.
So the origin of this disease is very interesting. It arises because a specific
break occurs on chromosomes 9 and 22 and then they recombine to form a fusion.
This creates a new DNA sequence that is not present in healthy cells.
As a result of the sequence being present, a mutant protein is produced that causes the cell
to be overactive and divide too quickly. This is what increases the level of white blood cells to
a level that the body can't sustain. Now we don't know why this chromosome break occurs,
but there have been suggestions that it could result from exposure to radiation.
There must be other causes though because there are people affected with this type of leukemia
that we know haven't been exposed to radiation, so that's still a bit of a mystery.
The good news is that a drug is available that very specifically targets this protein
and shuts the mutant cells down. Since the mutant protein is only present in leukemia cells,
the drug has no effect on other cells and has few side effects and there are very few
drugs on the market that are this specific. So now let's talk a bit about how this type of cancer
is diagnosed presently. So if someone has a high white cell count, a sample of their blood is drawn
and then it's taken to a lab. Once it's at the lab, a research technician will take the sample,
they'll isolate all the DNA from the blood, and then they'll start analyzing it. Now even from a
large sample of blood, that 10 mils that usually goes into a vacutainer, there's not enough DNA
to analyze using most methods that are available in clinical laboratories. So a process called PCR,
the polymerase chain reaction, is used to amplify the CML gene. PCR makes many copies of a DNA
molecule, so just like a Xerox machine just runs lots and lots of copies off of a single original,
and it can produce billions of copies from a single original molecule. Now once you have this
much DNA in a sample, it's much easier to use pretty simple methods, for example monitoring the
emission of light coming from a DNA binding dye, to analyze a sample. In the figure that you're
looking at, the vials are showing you the strong fluorescence signal that's obtained once a CML
sequence is amplified. So this works, but it's expensive, it's slow, and it can only be done
in specialized laboratories with very experienced laboratory technicians running the tests,
and so that's why we decided to test whether or not our microchip-based system could be used as a
substitute. So here instead of amplifying the thing that we're trying to detect by running off copies
of it, we're trying to turn up the volume of the signal that it produces. It seems to us that it's
more straightforward to do detection that way. So to test our chip-based approach for leukemia
detection, we designed a chip that would display a DNA sequence specific to the CML gene fusion
on a nanostructured sensor. Recent advances in the synthesis of artificial DNA make it possible
for us to have a machine in the lab that is able to make any DNA sequence we need.
Once the DNA sequence is made and ready, we attach it to the sensor by putting a sulfur
atom at its end. We touched on the fact before that sulfurs are very good at sticking to the
metals that make up our sensors, so that allows us to take a specific sequence and anchor it to our
chip. So then once the chip is ready for a measurement, we calibrate it and then we introduce
a sample containing an unknown number of cancer cells. Data is produced from the chip that allows
us to determine how high the levels of CML cells in the sample are. What you're looking at is raw
data generated from our instrument that reads the chip, and it shows how much current is generated
in the presence of varying numbers of cancer cells. We were able to do this kind of measurement,
both with samples taken from patients where the white blood cells were isolated,
and also in whole blood samples. The fact that we could get these kinds of readings in whole
blood presents the possibility that maybe someday, rather than having to take a 10-mil blood draw from
a patient, we could just do a pinprick and take a tiny drop of blood and analyze it, something that
could be done right in a doctor's office. So we're very excited about the potential of this
technology. What will it take to put this on the market and make it available to the clinical
community? Well, we have a prototype instrument that we're using to validate the sensing approach,
and I've brought a prototype of this instrument with me to let you take a look. So the way that
this will eventually work is that our chip will be embedded in a cartridge that a physician can
inject a sample into. So if you were able to see this up close, you would see the contacts of the
chip sticking out here, so the chip is embedded in the cartridge, and these foil packs, those are
what hold our reagents, and so those are the things that we need to be able to run this assay.
And what will happen is that the sample gets introduced into this cartridge, the cartridge then
gets slid into the instrument, locks in, and then all one has to do to start the analysis is to
press one button on the instrument, and then within five to ten minutes an answer will appear to
indicate whether or not there are cancer cells in the sample. So why are we able to make such a small
testing unit? Why is this possible? Well, all of the signals that come off of our chip are collected
electronically, so we don't need any optics in this instrument, we don't need any type of fancy
detectors or excitation sources, we just need a pretty simple set of circuits that can apply
potentials to our leads and then collect the signals from the sensor. So inside of this box
is just a collection of very simple electronic parts, and so we think that this is an instrument
that can be produced very inexpensively and put at a price point where every physician could have
one in their office. Now, very often when I tell people about this technology, they tell me that
it sounds like a Star Trek tricorder and it's too good to be true. But this type of approach
where information on species or molecules and blood can be reported very quickly
is slowly but surely making its way into clinical medicine. Take for example the way that
diabetics can now manage their illness with handheld monitors that report on blood glucose
levels. These are very simple instruments that are quite inexpensive. Now, the premise here
is the same. We use the same guts in our instrument that you find in a handheld glucose monitor,
but our analytes are much scarcer in the samples that we analyze, hence the need for nanomaterials.
But there is every reason to believe that disease diagnosis will be made much faster,
cheaper, and straightforward in the next decade, and nanomaterials will play a big role in this
paradigm shift. Now, let's look at another advanced in cancer diagnosis and management
made possible by nanoscale sensors. We've discussed gold nanoparticles as good sensors to report on
genetic disease and also the presence of hormones that can confirm pregnancy. These materials,
it turns out, are also very powerful for cancer detection. They can detect proteins in the same
way that we discussed for the case of determining whether a woman is pregnant.
The red color that a gold nanoparticle produces can be concentrated on a chip,
and the fact that these red absorbing nanoparticles are nanoscale makes them much easier to handle.
A recent study using gold nanoparticles to do protein detection looked at detecting PSA. The
protein I mentioned at the beginning of the lecture that is a marker for prostate cancer,
and they used a gold nanoparticle approach rather than conventional methods that are currently used.
The commercially available PSA test is good at detecting large changes in levels of this protein,
but it's not as good at looking at small variations. It's also not good at looking at
very low levels of the protein. Men that are treated for prostate cancer with a prostate
have traced levels of PSA in their blood post-operatively. The levels of PSA go way down,
and they're actually not measurable using the existing test. Why does this matter?
What turns out that how fast the PSA comes back after the operation can tell a physician
quite a bit about what treatment regimen to use. This decision should be made just when the PSA
is starting to creep back up, not once it's already kind of on a steep trajectory.
Again, the methods that are currently used for PSA screening simply can't look at these low levels
that are present. A study published in 2009 showed that the very sensitive gold nanoparticle
approach was a great solution, and it could predict recurrence very quickly and accurately.
So, in this study, again, done using gold nanoparticles, PSA detection data was collected for a series
of patients, a pretty large cohort of patients. The data sets that were collected showed a dramatic
difference in PSA reappearance in different patients. For some patients, the PSA stayed nice
and low after the operation was complete, and this must have given this subset of patients
really great peace of mind. For other patients, however, about a year after they had their prostate
removed, their PSA level started to creep up again. Now, there are many treatment options that can be
helpful for patients that surgery doesn't cure. Here, with access to this technology, the oncologist
treating these patients had the information that the cancer was not gone many months before they
would have known using the conventional diagnostic assay. So, it's clear that adoption of this approach
should improve treatment outcomes for prostate cancer patients significantly.
So, we've looked at two approaches to in vitro cancer diagnosis that have significant promise.
While in vivo approaches may help us do whole body screens for early tumors,
in vitro approaches are probably also here to stay as they provide information on cancer cells
and markers in the blood. But before we leave this topic, let's take a step back and think about
these two different approaches and how they may be complementary and potentially used at the same
time to more effectively manage cancer. So, we have the in vivo approach where we send the
nanosensors into the patient, let them circulate, let them take advantage of the leaky vasculature
of tumors, let them accumulate in tumors, and then we get a snapshot of a patient's profile
that tells us where there may be an accumulation of cancer cells. So, this is a very powerful
approach. Again, it has the promise of detecting tumors when they're at a very early stage,
and it should be a very simple measurement. We just need to look for light shining through
the tissue and skin. So, that is an approach that will continue to advance. As we mentioned,
we talked about that material that the safety of the imaging agents needs to be assessed.
The regulatory burden on that type of approach is higher. So, we then turn to our in vitro methods
to look at how nanomaterials can be leveraged to look at samples that are taken out of patients.
And we looked at two different systems, one that is a chip-based system that allows cancer-related
nucleic acids to be analyzed, and another, a golden nanoparticle system that's very good at looking
at low levels of protein. So, here, one of the unique advantages of doing things on a sample,
doing things on a chip or with particles, is that we can look for many markers at once. If we do
things in vivo, we're usually looking for one marker. If we do things in vitro, we can look for
panels. So, again, these approaches are very complementary, and eventually, they'll probably
both be available and used together for more specific diagnoses and more and earlier diagnoses.
So, in the next lecture, we're going to switch gears, and we'll start talking about nanomaterials
as drugs. That's right. Nanotechnology not only has the possibility of detecting medical problems,
but it may also be just as useful in treating medical problems. So, we'll get away of thinking
about how you find trace analytes and samples or in the human body, and we'll really start focusing
on the solution and new treatments for cancer that are based on next-generation nanomaterials.
So, next time, we'll really hone in on how treatments can be developed to selectively
eliminate harmful cells. See you then.
