If you're a science fiction fan or a Raquel Welch fan, I bet you see the movie Fantastic
Voyage.
This 1966 movie has a plot that involves the invention of a miniaturization technology
that allows a submarine to be scaled down so small that it can zoom around the human
body and repair problems like clogged arteries or blood clots.
You may remember from the movie that the team goes into the submarine and it has a series
of misadventures.
It encounters turbulence in the heart and attacked by white blood cells.
In the end they're finally able to repair a brain blood clot and escape from the body
through the tear duct.
Now this is clearly science fiction.
We can't miniaturize people and we probably never will be able to.
Down at the nanoscale, a human type body wouldn't even work because of the way we need to take
things in from our environment.
And yet, we'll see in this lecture how nanomaterials are being able to achieve something similar
but without the miniaturized people.
You already know how gold nanoparticles can be modified to recognize specific molecules
and diagnose disease.
You also know about how semiconductor quantum dots can be used to seek out tumors in vivo
by selectively accumulating in cancer cells.
Now we'll look at how nanomaterials that seek disease cells in the body can also be used
to destroy those disease cells.
Just like the microsubmarine in the Fantastic Voyage, except without the tiny people inside.
Which is good news actually.
In the Fantastic Voyage, the miniaturized people were somehow able to breathe regular
oxygen even though one molecule of oxygen would have actually been too large to fit
in their mouths.
So things simplify quite a bit if we think about making tiny submarines to do these kinds
of jobs but ones that don't need a human crew on board.
We'll see in this lecture three different ways that a familiar material, gold nanoparticles,
can target and eliminate disease cells.
Gold nanoparticles are really good at moving around the circulatory system and just like
quantum dots, they're small enough to move through even the smallest of capillaries.
But how good they are at doing this actually depends on their size, which can range from
about one nanometer to over a hundred nanometers.
A recent study compared twenty nanometer and hundred nanometer particles that were introduced
into a mouse that carried a tumor.
The animals were examined after different time intervals and then portions of their
tumors were analyzed.
So as we look at gold nanoparticles that can selectively eliminate cells, we have to keep
an eye on the sizes of the particles.
Smaller seems to be better to enable the particles to travel away from a blood vessel and penetrate
a tumor.
This makes sense as the particles need to be able to slip in between the cells that make
up a blood vessel.
Now what properties do gold nanoparticles have that allow them to kill disease cells?
We've discussed to some extent how these materials interact with light.
For example when we talked about the color changes that result depending on the spacing
between particles and in that case the nanoparticle was emitting a signal that we were following.
Here we'll be looking at a different phenomenon.
The ability of gold nanoparticles to absorb light and then convert it into heat.
If you think back to our discussion of quantum dots, you'll remember that when their photo
excited light goes into the particles and then the energy contained within comes back
out in the form of emitted light.
It turns out that the electronic structure of quantum dots makes them good at holding
the energy in an excited state that can be emitted as photons.
For gold nanoparticles when light goes in the energy actually comes back out as heat.
These nanoparticles are not good at keeping the light in an excited state and so the light
is instead converted into vibrations that produce heat and as we'll see this effect
can be used to kill cells that gold nanoparticles selectively enter.
Now why would a bit of heat kill a cell?
Well most biomolecules lose their shape when they're heated up and this interferes with
their ability to function and in certain cases gold nanoparticles get really close to molecules.
For example it was discovered several years ago that a 1.4 nanometer gold particle was
exactly the right size to sit in the major groove of DNA.
You'll remember that the double stranded structure of DNA contains two grooves or spaces between
the two strands of DNA and these grooves are actually asymmetric and the larger one which
is about 2.2 nanometers wide is referred to as a major groove while the smaller one which
is about 1.2 nanometers wide is the minor groove.
So if a 1.4 nanometer gold nanoparticle nestles itself into this major groove space and light
causes the particle to give off heat local heating is going to result and that heat can
cause the two strands to dissociate and when DNA strands dissociate well that really interferes
with a cell's ability to function properly.
And roughly the same thing can happen with protein molecules.
Certain proteins will even non-specifically attach themselves to gold nanoparticles and
these proteins can also be denatured when heat is produced.
Really all cellular structures which are held together by non-covalent interactions like
hydrogen bonds and Van der Waal interactions can be perturbed by heat.
So exciting gold nanoparticles with light can basically turn a good detection sensor
into a sensor that can both seek and destroy a cell.
So let's take a look at an example of how this can work.
A group at Georgia Tech has done some very nice work with gold nanoparticles that selectively
enter and kill cancer cells.
They were able to use a trick that we've already talked about in order to get the particles
to recognize the cells.
Basically they attached an antibody to their gold nanoparticles.
You'll remember that many types of cancer cells over express a protein called the epidermal
growth factor and there is an antibody to this protein that's available.
So they attach that antibody to gold nanoparticles and verify that the nanoparticles were very
specific for cancer cells.
So to do this they took two types of epithelial cells, one healthy and one cancerous, and
they tested the activity of the gold nanoparticles.
Epithelial cells are the kind of cells that line the surface of tissues like skin and
cavities like the mouth or the stomach.
The healthy cells don't have much of the receptor that the particles were designed
to bind to, while the cancer cells which were derived from an oral cancer tumor have
high levels of this receptor.
So if you look at this image you can see the difference in gold nanoparticle binding to
the two different types of cells.
So on the left are the healthy epithelial cells and on the right are the cancer cells.
You can see that there are many more nanoparticles inside the cancer cells.
Now when these researchers irradiated these particle containing cells with light they
saw much higher levels of cell death for the cancer cells.
So this provided really good proof of principle because it showed that gold nanoparticles could
be used to get targeted ablation of cancer cells.
And it turns out that we can use the same approach to selectively kill bacterial cells.
We can also get antibodies that are specific for certain types of bacteria and basically
play the same game.
So in a study done at the University of Arkansas a group in the microbiology department there
generated gold nanoparticles that carried an antibody specific to the bacterium Staphylococcus
aureus.
You've probably heard of the infections caused by this bug they're typically referred to
as staff infections.
They can be quite serious even or especially if the bacteria ends up in the blood.
So when these particles came into contact with the bacteria here the nanoparticles didn't
actually go inside the cell but instead they just sat on the membrane.
And when the particles were excited with a laser they disrupted the cell and caused the
bacterium to break open and die.
And the images that you're looking at show this quite clearly.
On the left you can see a bacterium with the nanoparticles attached to its surface.
And on the right you can see how the cell wall has broken open.
So the use of nanoparticles to seek and destroy certain cell types is applicable not only
to human cells but also to bacterial cells.
And it's potentially a very powerful way to kill and target problematic cells while
leaving other nearby cells unharmed.
But so far we haven't looked at whether this gold nanoparticle approach to cancer or bacterial
cell elimination works in a living system.
So why not?
Well here's the catch.
Gold nanoparticles typically absorb in the 500 nanometer to 600 nanometer range.
The larger the particle the more that absorption shifts to a higher wavelength or the red part
of the spectrum.
But in this part of the spectrum there is lots of absorption by tissue as we discussed
in the previous lecture.
So if the tissue all around is absorbing the light that means that very little light will
make it to the gold nanoparticles even if we use a powerful light source like a laser.
So while gold nanoparticles give us really important proof of concept for using nanomaterials
to target and damage specific cell types this absorption of light by surrounding tissue
really appears to limit the use of gold at least this kind of gold in living systems.
But let's take a look at a clever approach that circumvents this issue and uses gold
in a slightly different way that solves this problem.
It turns out that one way to solve the absorption problem is by making a modified type of gold
based nanoparticle.
Several years ago researchers at Rice University figured out that if instead of using nanoparticles
entirely composed of gold they instead used a core of another material like silica and
then they coated it with a very thin layer of gold and what they observed is that this
shifted the absorption of the particle way into the infrared and infrared is a much better
region of the spectrum for getting light to pass through tissue.
The absorption by tissue is really minimal in this part of the spectrum so the light
can actually reach the nanoparticle.
So first let's take a look at how these gold plated nanoparticles are made.
You start off with a particle composed of silica which basically has the same composition
as sand but the particles are obviously much smaller than those that you find in sand.
They then get coated with tiny particles of gold until the gold shell grows together.
And what's really neat about these materials is that as the coating gets thicker the absorption
peak shifts from the more red part of the spectrum to the more blue part of the spectrum.
This makes these materials very tunable that is the thicker the gold plating the more the
absorption peak shifts to lower wavelengths.
These nanomaterials really illustrate why being able to control materials at the nanoscale
is so important so just by varying the amount of gold plating we can really tailor their
optical properties and their heat absorbing properties to make them really effective in
particular applications.
Now here in order to use these as better cell targeting and killing agents we obviously
want to focus in on the materials with the thinner coatings that will absorb light more
in the red and the infrared part of the spectrum.
And it was found that these gold nanoshells could be used in the same way as the original
gold nanoparticles but we'll see that that shift that was achieved in the absorption
spectrum allowed them to then be studied in real tissues.
A study done at the University of Texas Southwestern provided a very compelling example of an in-vivo
study showing how powerful these nanoshells are.
In this study a mouse model of prostate cancer was generated by implanting tumors that grow
from human prostate cells.
The tumors were allowed to grow until they were about 40 cubic millimeters and this is
about the size of a pencil eraser just so you know how big it is.
The mice then had the gold nanoshells injected through their tail veins.
After about 18 hours had gone by the researchers then irradiated the tumors with 800 nanometer
light for about three minutes and then they monitored the mice over three weeks and measured
the tumors over the course of this time period.
Now in the control group of mice that they monitored that didn't get any treatment the
tumors tripled in size over this time.
But the tumors in the treated group the group that got the gold nanoshell therapy they shrank
so small that the researchers couldn't measure them by the end of the three weeks.
This was a really striking result.
Now despite the success of this study and the proof of principle that they achieved for
using gold nanoparticles in a tumor that was buried under a little bit of tissue the authors
of the study pointed out an important consideration in how this work should be moved forward.
And it turns out that they got to the goal that they wanted to achieve they were able
to use the nanoshells to improve the absorption properties of the particles and they were
able to do a study in living animals but they knew that there were still limitations.
When they measured the penetration of infrared light into the tissue they found that they
could go a good distance but once they went further than a centimeter they had trouble
getting the light into the tissue.
So if you think about many types of tumors like lung or breast tumors these would need
better penetration deaths in order to be accessible.
But there are solutions that may allow us to use these materials.
One would be to deliver light to different places in the body directly.
For example by bringing a fiber optic bundle into the lung or another part of the body.
So if we continue to run into trouble with getting light through tissue there's always
a way to solve that by bringing the light closer to the particles.
But there's another way to think about this.
Instead of using the type of light that we've been talking about visible light, infrared
light we could think about using a different type of radiation that doesn't have these
absorption problems.
One of the most common methods of cancer treatment relies on what we call radiation therapy or
radiotherapy.
Here we're using radiation but it's very high energy radiation and it has much smaller
wavelengths than the light we were just talking about.
And these wavelengths of light can be used to directly damage cancer cells.
We call this kind of radiation ionizing radiation because molecules when they are hit with it
they're forced to give up electrons and they become charged ionic molecules.
And this triggers D&A to release electrons and causes it to self-destruct.
In other words, ionizing radiation typically causes a cell to die.
This type of external beam radiation therapy focuses a really powerful beam towards a tumor
and it's very effective at shrinking tumors.
And the type of energy that we're talking about here is much easier to get through human
tissue.
So tumors that are buried under the skin can be treated this way.
But in this approach it's very difficult to cleanly target the tumor because there's
always healthy cells in the vicinity.
So what if we could use gold nanoparticles as an antenna for ionizing radiation?
And we could use the fact that we can make them specific for cancer cells to help radiation
therapy be more selective for tumor cells versus healthy cells.
Now how can gold or any other type of nanoparticle act as an antenna?
Well there's an effect called the dose enhancement effect that comes into play when you have
radiation interacting with the junction between two different materials that have very different
atomic numbers.
And what we find in the human body are elements that mostly have pretty low atomic numbers.
So carbon has an atomic number of 6, oxygen is 8, hydrogen is 1 and these are the common
elements in cells.
Gold in contrast has a very high atomic number, 79.
So at the interface between the gold and the atoms of human cells, very high doses of radiation
will be generated.
And the enhancement of radiation dose can be as much as 500%.
This is a really powerful effect.
So we've seen before that gold nanoparticles can be directed to cancer cells, bind them
and enter them selectively.
And here potentially we could use the good penetration properties of ionizing radiation
to more effectively get at these tumors that are buried under skin and tissue, but will
leave the healthy cells untouched hopefully.
So let's take a look at a study where this idea was tested.
A group of scientists at the University of Connecticut Health Center collaborating with
a company called Nanoprobes that is based in New York, were one of the first to explore
how ionizing radiation could be used together with gold nanoparticles.
They generated a mouse model of breast cancer and they generated tumors within the mice
that grew to about 50 cubic millimeters, about that eraser size again.
They separated these mice into four different groups, one that didn't get any treatment,
one that received radiation only, one that received only the gold treatment, and then
one that got both gold and radiation.
For the gold only and the no treatment groups, the tumors grew very quickly and they enlarged
by about a thousand percent within five days.
The radiation only group had slower growing tumors, but within 20 days these mice had tumors
that were actually identical to the control group.
But amazingly, the tumors in the group of mice that had been treated with both the gold nanoparticles
and radiation, the tumors were completely gone, they were too small to measure.
And what was particularly neat about this study is that these researchers then followed
the mice in each group for an entire year so that they could evaluate whether the animals
that received the gold plus radiation treatment were healthy in the long term.
And when they did, they observed an improvement in survival rate from zero percent for the
control group to 86 percent for the highest dose of gold nanoparticles.
This is an amazing result, you know, if we were able to see the same type of effects
in humans, cancer would be a much more treatable disease.
Now let's take a look at a third way that nanomaterials can be used to selectively ablate
cells.
We've worked through a photothermal approach where gold is used to generate heat and an
external radiation approach where gold is used to amplify radiation coming from an external
source.
So I think you'll be able to appreciate this third approach.
It turns out that gold nanoparticles can also be used as an internal source of radiation.
This then eliminates the need to have radiation passing through healthy tissue at all.
And so it's even cleaner than the amplifier approach we just spoke about.
So first let's talk through how internal radiation has traditionally been used without nanotechnology.
And then we'll turn to how nanomaterials can approve the efficacy of this approach.
The use of radioactive particles to shrink tumors is referred to as brachytherapy from
the Greek word for short distance.
This approach is particularly effective for the treatment of prostate cancer.
It is much less invasive than surgery and much less prone to complications and so it's
quite popular as you can imagine with patients.
It can also be used to make surgery more straightforward by shrinking the tumor before
a surgeon tries to excise it.
So what's done here is that small gold seeds made of radioactive gold are implanted near
a tumor.
The gold is radioactive because it has an unstable nucleus that gives off gamma emission.
The overall effect that results, the death of cells close to the particle, is the same
as what's achieved with external radiation but here it's much more localized and you
don't have any healthy cells in the way.
Now one problem that can be encountered with this approach is that the radioactive seeds
can be difficult to work with and somewhat heterogeneous with lots of variability in
their sizes.
Radioactive seeds of varying sizes are likely, less likely to focus on the tumor and more
likely to focus elsewhere, perhaps causing inflammation, pain and other side effects.
So this is where nanotechnology comes in.
As you now know, it's pretty straightforward to very precisely control the size of nanoparticles.
So what people realized is that by using well-defined gold nanoparticles made of radioactive gold
they could greatly improve the reproducibility and reliability of brachytherapy.
Let's look at a study where this idea was tested.
At the University of Missouri a group of clinicians and scientists got together and made radioactive
gold nanoparticles to test their efficacy for brachytherapy.
They were able to show that the gold nanoparticles had very little variation in their sizes and
in the levels of radioactivity that they emitted.
You're looking at a set of traces that illustrate how nanomaterials can be sized.
A technique called dynamic light scattering is used to estimate the size of the particles
and also to judge how much heterogeneity is present.
The sizes of these particles were nicely clustered just around 100 nanometers, right around 85
nanometers with very little variability.
At most the particles varied in size by about a factor of 5 from the lowest size observed
to the highest size observed.
And when conventional gold seeds are used their sizes can vary by a factor of 100.
So we've cut down the variability in size quite a bit by using nanoscale gold.
So once this group knew that they had a good material to test they made sure that the gold
nanoparticles did not affect the blood of the mice injected with them just to look at
the side effects that might result.
So they looked at the aggregation of platelets, they also checked that the hemoglobin levels
didn't change and this made it apparent that the gold nanoparticles didn't have any adverse
effects on the mice.
Then using mice that had prostate cancer tumors they tested their materials.
And what they observed was that the tumors in the group of mice that were treated with
the radioactive gold particles had a reduction in the volume of their tumors of about 82%
and no side effects like weight loss or hair loss.
What's really exciting about this discovery is that it may present a way to effectively
deal with tumor metastases.
Usually these tumor satellite sites are detected using imaging and then depending on where
they're located external beam radiation is used to decrease their size.
Small tumors what are called micrometastases are difficult to pick up with this type of
imaging so we usually don't even get the chance to treat them until they're larger.
But with the approach I just described to you the particles could actually find the tumors
and shrink them irrespective of size and this would likely be a much more effective way
to halt the progression of metastatic cancer.
So now you know how nanomaterials can be used to seek and destroy cancer cells and other
dangerous cell types.
We talked about examples of cancer cells and also bacterial cells that can be destroyed
using the same approach.
For the cancer cells we actually went through three different ways that we can use gold
nanoparticles.
We can get them to give off heat, we can get them to act as an antenna for radiation coming
from outside of the body or we can actually use them to deliver radioactivity directly
inside the body.
And in each of these cases the ability to manipulate matter at the nanoscale was absolutely
essential.
So particles of particular sizes and with high levels of uniformity this was critical in
order to make these materials effective killers of cancer cells without harming other nearby
cells.
So the materials that we looked at may not be as smart as the micro submarine in the
fantastic voyage but you can see that they certainly get the job done and they would
do it cheaply.
So you may be thinking about the fact that the price of gold per ounce is pretty high
and you might wonder how much gold we would actually need to treat a patient.
It turns out that it would probably just add up to about 10 milligrams of gold.
So if someday the price of gold went up to $10,000 per ounce we're still only talking
about $3 per patient in terms of the cost of treatment.
So that's one thing to keep in mind that even when we're using expensive materials if we're
using them in their nanoscale form it's not going to be cost prohibitive.
So the work that I described on nanomaterials being used as drugs to kill cancer cells or
bacterial cells is just beginning and we talked about some of the challenges that still exist
with getting light into tissue and really getting these materials to be effective but
it's clear that we're going to find solutions to make these materials work.
And there's many other applications of the same types of approaches including the treatment
of heart disease where destroying harmful plaques can be very important.
So even though we don't yet have those nanoscale submarines you can see that very powerful tools
for medicine can be developed using pretty simple components.
So in the next lecture we will explore what you can think of as a division of labor in
the mission to seek and destroy disease cells.
Here we'll look at nanomaterials used as delivery agents for other drugs.
And we'll find that this approach is actually farther ahead than the one we just discussed.
Several drugs that are already approved by the FDA use nano delivery systems and they're
already on the market and in clinical use.
See you then.
