Have you ever thought about what happens to a pill once it lands in your stomach?
Think, for example, about aspirin.
In addition to curing your headache, it may also give you a stomach ache.
The way that we administer drugs is very often untargeted, and we introduce a drug and we
let it distribute itself throughout the body.
This can lead to a lot of side effects and irritation, like the aspirin-induced stomach
ache.
So, what we'll talk about today is how nanoscience may provide a solution allowing more targeted
drug delivery.
So, what do I mean by that?
Well, we know that nanomaterials can be targeted to certain types of tissues.
We've looked at examples where that has worked for, for example, imaging cancer tumors.
Now, if we could turn this paradigm around and learn how to use nanomaterials as drug
capsules and target them to specific tissues, we could leverage this type of specificity
for better treatments.
This lecture will be the first of two focused on nanoscale drug delivery.
And by that, I mean that we're going to be focusing on systems that allow us to take
a drug, package it up, and allow it to be delivered to the site within the body where
it's going to exert its action.
And we'll start by trying to understand the challenges of drug delivery, and then we'll
look at a variety of nanomaterials that can be used to meet those challenges.
And we'll also discuss several of the leading anti-cancer drugs so that you're familiar
with the agents that will be involved once we shift over to look how nanomaterials can
be involved in their delivery.
So that'll be this lecture, and then in the next lecture, we'll look at specific examples
of nanopackage drugs that are either on the market or in development.
So, by the time we get through all of this material, I think you'll understand how drug
delivery is one of the areas where nanoscience is making a really significant near-term impact
on medicine.
So getting a drug to work in the human body is all about getting it to the right site
at the right level.
Now why is this hard?
So we almost always rely on means of distribution for a drug where the drug just goes all over
the body.
So if we take a drug orally in a tablet, like aspirin, it goes into the stomach, it's absorbed
through the small intestine.
We can also administer drugs through the eye or the ear or the nose.
All of these places will take drug up into our system, but each of these are also delicate
tissues that we don't want to perturb.
And you might also be aware of the fact that in the last decade, we've become better and
better at delivering drugs using patches.
And so we put a patch containing the drug on the skin, and the drug then goes into the
skin, but it does actually end up in the bloodstream.
So this is not really a localized type of drug delivery, but something that's fairly
delocalized.
Now maybe the one way that we're able to deliver a drug in a way that is very specific and
localized are topical drugs.
For example, if you get poison ivy, you don't take a pill, you put a cream on your skin,
and that works very well, and there are no side effects from that type of approach.
But the skin is really one of the only places that we can do that.
Anything that's affecting an internal organ obviously needs to be addressed from the inside.
So for all of the drug delivery challenges, the main thing that is difficult is that the
drug has to pass through a barrier.
And this barrier may be our small intestine, or it may be the tissue that's in our ears
or eyes or mouth, and the epidermis of our skin is just one example of a layer of epithelial
cells.
So our bodies have several kinds of these densely packed protective cells, and the drug has
to be really good at getting through these barriers and into the bloodstream.
In addition, many drugs just won't survive the acidic conditions of the stomach, and
they get stuck in some of the other places that we mentioned.
So in this case, we typically inject them right into the bloodstream.
Now this is obviously not a very convenient way to administer a drug.
Nobody likes needles, but in some cases it is the way to go because it gets more of the
drug into circulation where it can start doing its thing.
Now what happens once a drug is in the bloodstream?
Now let's say we're injecting a drug into a vein, kind of the simplest case we can consider.
That drug will first go into the heart and then over to the lungs along with the blood
to get oxygenated.
Once it picks up the oxygen, it will then travel through the body in the arteries and
then flow into the capillaries.
And the capillaries are where the drug within the blood has the opportunity to make it into
a tissue.
So arteries and veins are designed for physical transport of blood, and really that's it.
While it's the capillaries, the much smaller vessels, that handle chemical transport.
And so they're really there to feed oxygen and other agents to tissues.
So they have good exchange properties, whereas again the veins and arteries don't.
So it's the capillaries that will really allow drugs to travel into tissues.
So how big are these capillaries?
You probably have a picture in your mind of them being quite small.
And we have to think about, are they so small that we can't really envision getting nanomaterials
in them?
But it turns out that there are about 10 microns, or 10,000 nanometers.
So we don't really need to worry about nanoscale drug particles getting stuck.
They'll be able to flow through just like the blood cells.
Now some of the toughest challenges in drug delivery is in the area of anti-cancer therapy.
And tumors are some of the hardest places to reach in the body.
They're very dense, and by that I don't necessarily mean that the cells are more closely packed,
but they're much harder to penetrate, in part because the blood supply only reaches certain
parts of a tumor, really only comes to the outside.
And then the cells inside can really be protected from the blood supply, which is how we're
going to get drugs in.
So that's a major challenge.
And in addition, many of the drugs that are used to treat cancer have significant toxicity
if they reach healthy cells.
So it's quite important to try to engineer some type of targeting into their delivery.
And we've touched on a feature of the blood supply around tumors that does help nanomaterials
reach them.
So if you remember when we were discussing tumor imaging, we went over the fact that
blood vessels or capillaries can be quite leaky around the tumors.
The leaks that are there actually create openings that measure about 500 nanometers.
So this type of opening is too small for a red blood cell to leak out, but it's large
enough for a drug packaged up with a nanomaterial to leak out if it's packaged properly and
if the size scale of the particle is right.
Okay, so that's how drugs travel around the body and into tumors.
So the problem that needs to be solved here is how to more specifically target drugs.
In the scenario that I just discussed where we considered how a drug would be circulated
by tagging along with blood, the drug will go to the lungs, it'll pass through the liver,
it'll go through the heart, and the kidneys.
And there's lots of bad things that can happen to these organs while they're being exposed
to drugs.
And if, let's say, we're trying to target a drug to the pancreas, it's really unnecessary.
You know, if only we could send it right there and not have it stop in any of these other
places.
So what we'll find as we start to discuss nanomaterial-based solutions is that some
nanomaterials can be very good at keeping drugs out of trouble in non-target areas.
And we'll also find that nanomaterials can be helpful for drug delivery in a different
way.
Many drugs are difficult to formulate, and by that I mean that in order to take a compound
and then administer it to a human, you have to have it either as a pill or in solution
or in a patch in some type of formulation so that you can give it to the patient.
And many drugs are really difficult to work with.
If they're too hydrophobic, they won't dissolve in water.
If they're not very good at making powders, you can't make them into pills.
And so in certain cases, nanomaterials have really been able to solve this part of the
drug delivery problem, which again is a formulation problem.
And for drugs that get turned into intravenous drugs, one that we administer as a solution
and a needle, it turns out that sometimes the solvents that are needed in order to take
a very greasy drug molecule and get it into that solution can be quite nasty.
They have more side effects than the drugs themselves.
So you can think of things that are good at solubilizing greasy molecules, these organic
solvents like benzene and chloroform.
And you probably know the names of these and know that these are not things we would want
in the human body.
And that's very true.
There's other things like castor oil that can be effective at dispersing a drug, but
we'll talk about why that's undesirable for other reasons.
So we'll see that nanomaterials can be quite good at getting drugs that are difficult to
work with into a better state.
And then they'll also help us avoid some of the common side effects.
Okay, so before we start talking about how we can use nanomaterials for anti-cancer
drug delivery, let's look at a few examples of clinically used drugs and review some of
the issues with using them as a treatment.
And it turns out that there's just a few classes of drugs that are used for cancer chemotherapy.
Some of these are molecules that react with DNA.
And this is a good approach for an anti-cancer drug because this can shut down rapidly dividing
cells because it deprives the cells of instructions for making more copies.
Other drugs interact with the structural components of cells, and this also interferes with cell
division.
A third approach to cancer chemotherapy are molecules that act like natural metabolites,
and they interfere with DNA synthesis.
They shut down the enzymes that are responsible for copying DNA, and again, they deprive the
cell of the instructions that they need to replicate further.
So we'll look at a few examples of these.
One of the anti-cancer drugs that's been around the longest is a molecule called cisplatin,
and this is used to treat ovarian cancer, lung cancer, leukemia cancer, and quite a
few others.
The type of activity that it has is called DNA alkylation.
Now what does that mean?
It's just kind of a dumb chemistry term, but maybe I can explain it.
So this molecule sees a piece of DNA, and it sees the guanine residues within DNA, and
it modifies them.
It attaches the drug to them.
And so now you have a piece of DNA that's there to be copied, right?
It's carrying the genetic information, but it has this platinum molecule sticking off
of it, and that really messes up the copying of DNA.
So the alkylation just refers to the fact that we're hitting one of the functionalities
on the DNA base and then interfering with its structure.
So cisplatin has been around for quite a while.
It was actually first characterized in 1845 when scientists were basically just messing
around and looking at reactions occurring at platinum electrodes.
They saw this interesting molecule being formed.
And people kind of continued to play around with this platinum-based complex, and then
somebody decided to look at it in the 1960s to see what it did to cellular function and
observed that it really stopped cells from replicating.
So it was then put into a series of tests and through a clinical trial, and then it
was approved as an anti-cancer agent by the FDA in 1978.
Now drugs like these, the DNA alkylators, affect both normal and cancerous cells.
So they would definitely benefit for more specific delivery.
Cisplatin has a range of side effects.
It's really not a fun drug to be on.
It causes kidney problems.
It can cause hearing loss.
It causes weight loss and nausea.
And this type of drug is really dangerous to all cells, and so it's something that we
would just like to minimize the exposure of healthy cells to.
Another effective anti-cancer drug is doxorubicin.
This is a drug that is used to treat certain leukemias and bladder cancer, breast cancer,
tissue sarcomas, and lots of others.
So doxorubicin works a bit differently, so it doesn't modify DNA, but it just slips in
between the DNA-based pairs.
And what this does is it makes it difficult for cells to copy their DNA because there's
this extra molecule between the bases, and then part of what needs to happen during the
copying is the two strands need to be pulled apart, and with this molecule in there, that's
tough to do.
So the DNA copying gets shut down, and then this helps to shut down cell division.
So this is another way to interfere with the dividing of cancer cells.
So doxorubicin, where did we find this molecule?
It was actually originally isolated from a microbe that had a bright red color, and it's
actually the color of a ruby, and that's where the name of the drug comes from with doxorubicin.
The bug that produces it probably uses this molecule to fight off other bugs.
So this molecule was originally thought of as an antibiotic, but then we figured out
later on that it has this antineoplastic activity or anti-cancer activity, and so this class
of molecules is sometimes called antineoplastic antibiotics, and I don't suggest that you
try to say that 10 times fast, but just in case you ever hear the term, that's what it
means.
And it's interesting that organisms like bacteria bother to make these very complicated molecules,
but you have to realize that bacteria live in a world of thousands of other kinds of
bacteria.
There's lots of bacterial warfare that goes on, and the way that they protect themselves
from their neighbors is sometimes to have a molecule on hand that is harmful to somebody
else but not harmful to them.
So many of these compounds have been found to be good at killing cancer cells while having
some selectivity against healthy cells.
But the main problem with using doxorubicin is that it causes damage to the heart and
also to the lungs, and the cardiotoxicity that's seen after doxorubicin treatment is
a major side effect, and it can actually be life-threatening once a certain dosage is
reached.
So we obviously need to find ways to keep doxorubicin out of the heart.
Now the second approach that I mentioned are drugs that interact with the structural components
of a cell.
Taxol, which is the name that was originally given for reasons that I'll get to in a minute,
the name of the drug when it's used clinically is actually Pachlytaxol.
This is a drug that is widely used for the treatment of lung, ovarian, and breast cancer.
And interesting enough, this is where the name comes from.
It was originally isolated from the bark of a specific U-tree, Texas Revifolia, and so
that's where the name came from.
Why were we looking at tree bark for drugs?
That may seem like a pretty crazy thing to do, but it turns out that in the 1950s, the
U.S. National Institute of Cancer started up an aggressive program to look for naturally
occurring drugs.
So we know that, for example, Native Americans, other populations that don't have access
to what we call westernized medicine or modern medicine very often rely on natural remedies.
So they look at things around in their environment, they've kind of tried different things, they
know what cures they may have out in their backyard for different ailments.
And so there was a move by the U.S. government to try to collect some of the same information
by studying the molecules and plants and in the environment.
So there was a group of botanists that were recruited from the USDA who were sent out
in the field, and they were told to gather as many samples as they could of different
kinds of plants.
Now they would bring them back into the lab, they would extract all the molecules from
the plant, and then they would see if it had any effect on either cultured cells, so cells
that can just be grown in a flask in the lab, or on mice.
So in the mid-1960s, an extract from the Pacific U tree was tested, and very high levels of
activity were observed.
Now this is a great finding, but it also presents a bit of a problem.
So are we going to cut down every Pacific U tree in the world to get this drug?
No, obviously not, that's not a sustainable solution.
So how did people contemplate taking this drug and moving forward with clinical testing?
Well it turns out the taxol is a very complicated molecule, it has lots of bonds, and the bonds
have specific orientations that nature is very good at programming.
So nature is great at making complicated molecules like this one.
For synthetic chemists, and they're the people that would be able to make large batches of
the molecule, making this compound was quite a bit of work and very challenging.
And eventually what happened is that pharmaceutical companies were basically able to marry the
biology and the chemistry, get cells to do a lot of the work, and then they were able
to produce the drug in a way that didn't involve cutting down any U trees.
So that was a very good solution.
And this drug was eventually approved by the FDA in 1992, and Bristol's Myers Squibb
was the first company to offer it.
The sales of this drug peaked in 2000, this was before there were any other analogues
with the same activity available, and in a single year, $1.6 billion worth of this drug
was being sold.
It's now off-patent and it's available as a generic drug and is used widely in anti-cancer
therapy.
So how does taxol work?
It binds to a part of the cell that is quite important for structure, a part of the cell
called the microtubules.
The microtubules are actually nanoscale structures that are about 25 nanometers in diameter.
They provide support for the cytoskeleton of the cell.
So when the cell divides, the cytoskeleton actually needs to be disassembled.
But when taxol is bound, this is made much more difficult.
The cytoskeleton can be broken down to make way for new cells, so this is another way
to shut down rapidly dividing cells.
The major problem with using taxol is that it is a large greasy molecule.
As I mentioned, it's a very complicated structure and it's very hydrophobic.
It doesn't like water and that makes it very difficult to formulate.
So it needs something really kind of greasy to make it stable in solution.
So what was arrived on as a way to get it into solution is a form of castor oil.
And again, it might seem like kind of a strange thing to test, but castor oil has been around
for a long time.
It doesn't taste very good, but it's at least a kind of a biological substance.
But it turns out that many people react badly to the solvent.
And I'm not talking here about the bad taste wanting to spit it out, but instead that castor
oil, when it's used as an intravenous injection, can cause certain people to experience neurotoxicity.
So clearly we need better ways to deliver drugs like taxol.
So now you have a better appreciation for why we need better solutions for drug delivery.
We need to keep drugs out of the sites in the body where they can be harmful and we
need to be able to introduce them into the body without carriers that produce side effects
of their own.
So let's use what we know about the world of nanoscience to survey the range of approaches
that are being explored to solve the problems of drug delivery.
So one of the first classes of materials that we can look at are carbon nanotubes.
If you think about the structure of a carbon nanotube, you have this very hydrophobic
shell of carbon and then an empty space in the middle.
So that almost looks like a drug capsule, doesn't it?
And the fact that carbon nanotubes are very hydrophobic means that these drug molecules
that I've talked about as being very problematic to formulate will be happy inside of a carbon
nanotube.
And we've also talked about the fact that carbon nanotubes can be biodegraded.
So they can be attacked by enzymes like peroxidase and that allows them to be broken down in the
body.
So that's a very useful property that carbon nanotubes have.
It also turns out, and this is a very interesting development, that people have learned how to
cork carbon nanotubes.
So if you think about the way the structure usually appears, it's an open-ended capsule.
That wouldn't be all that useful, right?
If you just have an open capsule floating around, let's say, in the bloodstream, it's
eventually going to spill the drug into the blood.
But people have figured out how to kind of snip the end shut, but then have them opened
back up once they're in the right environment.
So that's a very nice type of switchability that allows these materials to be used with
quite a bit of flexibility.
And another neat thing, and we'll come back to this in the next lecture, is that you can
actually coat carbon nanotubes with drug on the outside.
So rather than putting it on the inside, you can layer a bit of drug on the outside of
a carbon nanotube, and that then gives you kind of a finite dosage carried on that nanomaterial.
And what we have here is also a picture of a very neat kind of carbon nanotube.
It's actually a carbon nanohorn.
So this is a type of carbon nanotube which has solved the open capsule problem by actually
growing one side of the carbon nanotube into a horn shape.
And you'll see in this image that there's actually cisplatin particles in this nanohorn,
and they're sitting there waiting to be released once they get into a tumor.
So now let's talk a bit about liposomes.
This is another major class of carriers for drugs that are nanoscale.
Now we just looked at carbon nanotubes.
Those are kind of a hard nanomaterial.
Their structure is really fixed.
Liposomes are different.
Liposomes are really soft materials, and they're mainly made out of the lipids that
make up all of our cells, that make the membrane around all of our cells.
So what happens here is that we formulate a drug by putting it in the middle of a liposome,
and then we form the lipid bilayer around the drug.
And so you have this capsule of drug, lots of drug molecules inside, encapsulated by
something that the cell is very used to seeing.
So again, excellent biodegradability here.
And so we'll come back to this in the next lecture with some very specific examples,
but these liposomal carriers have turned out to be very powerful for getting around some
of the side effects that we see with drugs that don't have any kind of nano-packaging.
Now another class of nanomaterial-based drug delivery agents that we'll look at are protein
nanoparticles.
So protein nanoparticles are a great vehicle for drugs because not only are they biodegradable,
but the cells recognize them as just being proteins.
So if you can find a way to make a particle out of protein, stuff it with drug, this is
a great way to move a drug around the body and get it to tumors very specifically.
So another thing that we'll find that nanomaterials can do is get around some of the resistance
mechanisms in cells.
So drug resistance and drug resistance to anti-cancer agents is a major problem.
We have people that start responding very well to a therapy, and then after a few dosages,
their tumors become resistant.
And this is because cancer cells are very aggressive, and they're very good at coming
up with ways to get rid of a drug so they can pump it out of the cell.
They can over-express that pump in a very short amount of time.
They can also introduce enzymes that will deactivate a drug.
But if you package the drug up with a nanomaterial, that really fools the cell into thinking that
it's not there.
And if you can have the action of the drug be much faster, you give the cells much less
time to become resistant.
So that's another advantage that we'll revisit of packaging drugs into nanoscale delivery
vehicles.
And there's some other very interesting things that are just being developed for drug delivery
based on nanomaterials.
There are things that are referred to as nanovalves.
So these are drug packages that can come up to a cell, and they will sense the pH of
that cell.
So the pH tells us whether something is acidic or basic.
It turns out that healthy cells have a different pH than cancer cells.
So these nanovalves can come up to a cell, they can figure out what pH it is.
And if it has the pH of a cancer cell, only then will these things release the drug into
the cell.
So that's very specific, very powerful.
Now if we've just gone through a survey of different nanomaterials and how they can be
used for drug delivery, how do we study this?
How do we take a drug, package it up, and then figure out whether we've done anything
to improve it?
So there's lots of ways to do this, but the most popular way is to use cultured cells.
So we have cells in flasks that we can grow in the lab, and we can introduce the drug,
always do controls to make sure we're not looking at an artifact, and we can look at
the effect of the drug kind of within, without the nanomaterial based carrier, and see if
there's an increase in activity.
Another way that we can look at drug efficacy, of course, is to use animals.
So once you have some proof of principle, some experiment that you've done with cells,
you can then move into an animal to see if you can reproduce that same effect, but here
where you really, you have the circulatory system to contend with all of the other intricacies
of a live animal.
Another way that we can study drug delivery that's very unique to using nanomaterials
as drug delivery agents is that we can use things like scanning electron microscopy.
So if we have a particle that we can see, we can use that as a carrier, and then we
can image either the cells that we're testing, or even an animal, and figure out exactly where
the particles went.
See if they got into the cells, see where they went within the cells, and really get
the full profile for what's happening at a very fine level.
So now we've looked at many of the key concepts that are important to appreciate so that we
understand the challenges and solutions that exist in the area of drug delivery.
We've considered how conventional drugs are distributed in the body, and what the issues
are with the conventional approaches.
We've also worked our way through the major classes of drugs that are used to treat cancer,
and we've looked at the major classes of materials that can be used to solve the delivery problem.
So with all this information covered, we have all of the pieces, both the available drugs
and the available delivery mechanisms, so that now we're ready to turn in the next lecture
to how this all comes together.
And in the next lecture, we'll look at examples of nanoscale drug delivery systems that are
already playing an important role in cancer treatment.
And we'll also look at examples of some newer systems that are in very early stages of development
that are quite promising.
See you then.
