The
effective treatment of diseases like cancer relies on our ability to come up with drugs
that are potent and safe.
In the last lecture, we discussed the challenges of delivering drugs within the human body.
We also looked at some of the most powerful drugs that we have at our disposal to fight
cancer.
And we also examined the limitations in their use that comes from side effects and formulation
challenges.
Nanoscience, as you know, brings a unique set of tools to problems like this one.
And that's particularly true for the drug delivery challenge.
It gives us a variety of structures at the nanoscale that could potentially be used to
bring drugs to tumors in a way that is much more directly targeted.
We've already talked about a variety of carriers, including nanotubes, liposomes, protein nanoparkals,
and nanovalves.
And a common feature of all of these is that they can carry drugs and they are potentially
programmable to get to certain tissues to give us more specificity in the way that drugs
are delivered.
So we're now ready to look at some specific examples where these nanomaterials have been
shown to be very effective at improving drug activity.
So first, let's touch on how we evaluate the efficacy of a drug and how we evaluate improvements
that could be realized when nanomaterials are used as carriers.
Now in the studies that we'll review, mice turn out to be a very important system in
which to gauge drug efficacy.
And we have methods at our disposal that actually allow tumors to be transplanted into mice,
and so they can serve as a good model and mimic what happens in human patients.
So we can use mice to understand how much of a drug is in circulation as a function
of time, and this is important so that we understand how much drug is there and how
long it sticks around.
In other lectures, we've talked about the fact that our kidneys and livers are good
at removing chemical agents from our bodies.
And so again, it's quite important that we look at the kinetics of drug clearance and
we understand how long it's present in a living organism.
In analyzing the efficacy of new drugs, we'll also look at tumor volumes.
So monitoring the size of a tumor in the presence and absence of a drug is a very direct measurement
that tells us how well a drug is reaching a desired site and how well it's working.
And you may wonder, how do we measure tumor volume?
It's usually a simple measurement basically done with a ruler, so it's a crude type of
evaluation, but it tells us exactly what's going on.
We'll also look at response rates and survival rates.
These values look at the overall effect of a drug and not only how the tumor responded
to the drug, but how the animal as a whole responded.
And many of the studies that we'll take a look at represent what we refer to as preclinical
trials.
These are studies that are typically done in academic labs to test whether modifications
to an existing drug or a completely new drug has significant activity.
And here we'll be looking at the influence of the inclusion of nano-carriers.
And we'll also be looking at drugs that went all the way through a series of clinical trials
from the preclinical stage all the way through the clinical trials that were needed in order
to gain FDA approval so that the drugs could be used in human patients.
Just so that you have an appreciation of what this process the FDA involves, I want to quickly
take you through the steps.
Once the preclinical data is collected on cultured cells and mice, the next step is
for a phase zero clinical trial to be organized.
This study is collected or conducted on a small number of patients and is designed to
very quickly understand what a drug does to the body and what the body does to a drug.
Here safety and the degree of efficacy for a drug are not really being assessed and it's
more about trying to match up studies that may have been done in a mouse with a study
being done in a patient.
So after phase zero, a phase one trial is conducted and this phase one trial uses a
large group of healthy volunteers and the healthy subjects are used so that the safety
of a drug can be assessed.
If a healthy person can't tolerate a drug, it's pretty unlikely that a cancer patient
will.
So this is an important thing to assess early on.
And then if everything goes well with the healthy volunteers, the phase two trial then
looks at how well the drug works in a cohort of cancer patients.
Here information on how the drug should be dosed is also collected.
If up until this point effectiveness is observed, then a large phase three trial is set up.
Now here a large group of patients is collected, sometimes into the thousands of patients and
these trials are randomized so that one half of the group is given the drug and the other
half of the group is given a placebo.
The improvements in survival can actually be small in drug trials, especially cancer
drug trials.
So it's quite important to look at these kinds of placebo effects and really document them.
If the results of a phase three trial are positive, then a drug will typically be approved
by the FDA.
So this entire process can take about eight years and the preclinical work with mice
needed before you ever start a trial and all of the discovery that needs to take place
can take about six years.
So this is a very long process that is involved with the development of a new drug.
And for every thousand drugs that begin preclinical testing and are tested in research labs, only
one goes to clinical testing.
So now you should be able to appreciate why the list of drugs that we have to fight cancer
is so small and why pharmaceutical companies really struggle to make progress.
Time and the odds of success really work against drug development.
But with all of this in mind, let's now take a look at an example of a drug that was coupled
with a nanoscale carrier and this new form of the drug was able to make it through the
entire FDA process into clinical use.
The name of this drug is doxal and as you might guess, it's based on the drug doxorubicin
that we discussed in the last lecture.
The vials of the drug that you're seeing in this image show you that bright ruby red color
that I mentioned in the last lecture.
Some people actually refer to this drug as red death though because it is not well tolerated.
We talked about the fact that this drug causes cardiotoxicity and can impair the function
of the heart.
The images that you're looking at show a comparison between healthy heart cells and those that
have been exposed to doxorubicin.
And you can see that those cells are really perturbed and this is a consequence of the
drug passing through the heart once it has been injected into the body.
In the 1990s, researchers at the University of San Francisco and then a small company
called Sequs, also based in the Bay Area, developed a new form of doxorubicin packaged
inside a nanoscale carrier.
The carrier that they used was a liposome and on the inside of this particular liposome
floating around in a drop of water was a collection of doxorubicin molecules.
So every particle has many, many drug molecules within it.
Now what's holding them in place is a lipid bilayer and then a layer of polyethylene glycol.
So what are these layers doing?
Why do we need them?
Turns out the lipid bilayer is very good at keeping water on the inside of a particle.
The lipids are greasy in the middle, but then they have charged groups that the water really
likes.
So lipids are molecules that are abundant in cells, so they're biocompatible.
On the surface of the liposome, the polyethylene glycol helps the particle stay in circulation.
It helps the circulation of the particle by keeping the immune system from attacking
it, and by making it think the particle actually belongs in the human body.
This liposomal packaging system helps a dose of drugs stay in the body longer.
If we look at the kinetics of how fast unmodified doxorubicin stays in the blood, we see that
the levels drop off precipitously.
In hours, the drug is basically gone.
Now if we look at doxol, the drug packaged in liposomes, it stays around much longer.
So this means that the drug has more time to find the tumor, and it also means that
repeated doses don't need to be administered.
So one of the first things that was noticed during the doxol clinical trial was that levels
of cardiotoxicity were lowered.
The immediate conclusion was that since we didn't have to readminister the drug and readminister
the drug, there was less buildup of the drug in the heart, and so we were suppressing cardiotoxicity
that way.
Another very interesting thing that was discovered is that the cardiotoxicity was also suppressed
because of the nanoscale structure of doxol.
So by being larger than a regular molecule, the doxol particles were kept out of the crevices
of the heart where they could do damage.
So this was another thing that helped the drug be more effective.
Doxol also takes advantage of the passive tumor targeting effects that we've discussed.
One of the first conditions it was approved for was to treat Kaposi sarcoma.
This is a skin tumor that is very often seen in AIDS patients.
I once saw Frank Zoka, one of the inventors of doxol, he's a professor at UCSF.
I saw him talk about the clinical trials that were done with Kaposi sarcoma patients, and
the images that he showed were really dramatic.
One of the patients that they studied basically had tumors covering many parts of his body,
and in the study, they labeled the drug with a dye that allowed them to see where it went.
In the images that were shown, you could see almost perfect overlap between where the tumors
were and where the drug went.
It was really amazing to see that targeting really taking place, and again, this is just
a targeting that happens because of the leakiness of the blood vessels around tumors, even tumors
on the skin.
So doxol was approved for use by the FDA in 1995.
It was shown to be particularly effective in Kaposi sarcoma patients who didn't respond
to other treatments, and it's now been approved for the treatment of several other cancer types.
So now let's move on to another nanodrug delivery success story.
In the last lecture, we talked about taxol, or apacletaxol, and the problems with its
solubility and formulation.
When this drug is used clinically, it's administered as a solution.
It's made into a liquid formula by dissolving it in a liquid called cremaform, which is
a form of castor oil.
So while taxol, which as you know binds to microtubules and disrupts the replication
of cancer cells, has a pretty good side effect profile, in addition to make matters worse,
because it is good at dissolving things, this solvent can dissolve the plasticizers and
the tubing that is used to administer the drug intravenously.
So cremaform is a solvent not only has bad side effects, it's even dissolving parts of
the delivery system that we need to get the drug into the body at all.
So a company called Abraxis, located in Los Angeles, developed a form of apacletaxol
that allows it to be administered without any toxic solvents, and they packaged it into
nanoparticles of a protein called albumin.
This protein is water soluble, and it occurs naturally in humans, and it also has a tendency
to form nanoparticles that are about 100 nanometers in size.
Even more important is that this protein can bind to receptors and blood vessels, and it
can give them a signal that allows the drug protein complex to travel out of the blood
vessel, and the drug is packaged inside the particle and it goes along for the ride.
So by packaging this drug within a protein nanoparticle, the ultimate biodegradable vehicle,
we get around the need to use toxic solvents, and the activity of the drug is very impressive.
In a trial focused on metastatic breast cancer patients, the tumor response rate was twice
as good for the nanoformulated drug, and to make things even better, only 30 minutes
were needed for a complete IV dose of the drug instead of three hours.
So this benefit, it may seem somewhat minor, but it really offers improved quality of life
for patients being treated for metastatic breast cancer, to shorten their time that
they need to be in a hospital to get a drug dose, definitely makes this easier to bear.
And this type of treatment is in addition to being faster, it's more effective and it's
safer.
This form of Pachlitaxal was approved by the FDA in 2005.
The clinical trials that were done, in addition to showing better patient responses, also
show dramatically lower levels of side effects, and the clinical community has really embraced
the use of this drug, and over $300 million worth of the drug is sold every year.
The company that developed it, Abraxas, was sold to a New Jersey based pharmaceutical
company, Cellgene, for about $3 billion in 2010.
So now that we've looked at two major advances in the development of more effective drugs
that were made possible by nanoscale delivery vehicles, let's turn to some next generation
systems that also have significant potential.
There are lots of things that we can do with nanomaterials that are simply not possible
without nanoscale structural control.
Let me walk you through a very clever study that was done at MIT and reported in 2005 that
really showcases the advantages of nanomaterials.
The particles that this MIT group made actually had two layers, so the core of the particle
was made of doxorubicin, and as you know this drug will keep cancer cells from replicating.
The outer layer of the nanoparticle had another molecule encapsulated with it, one that interferes
with a process called angiogenesis.
So angiogenesis is the process by which new blood cells, blood vessels, get made.
Tumors need lots of angiogenesis to happen because they need a good blood supply to be
provided to them so that they can survive.
It's been hypothesized for some time that a way to shut down the growth of a tumor would
be to starve the tumor of its blood supply.
So these nanoparticles that should be able to do that would deliver a double whammy.
They would hit the DNA inside the tumors and then they would also hit the blood vessels
outside of the tumor.
So are these nanoparticles, these dual layer nanoparticles effective?
Very much so.
Their efficacy was tested in a mouse model of melanoma, and when these mice were treated
with either doxorubicin or the anti-angiogenesis agent on its own, the mice only survived
for 20 or 30 days.
With the combined nanoparticle, they lived three times as long.
So if we could reproduce that in human subjects, that would obviously be huge.
To extend the lifetimes of cancer patients by three times would be really amazing.
Now again, without the control to make these nanoscale layers, this type of approach wouldn't
be possible.
So again, I just want to emphasize that this is why nanotechnology is so powerful because
it really allows us to manipulate things at a fine level that can make a big difference
for drug delivery.
So we'll spend the last part of this lecture looking at a variety of systems that are all
in a pretty early stage of development, but they all show tremendous promise.
So one nanoparticle based drug delivery system that I learned about very recently is something
that's under development at Duke University in North Carolina.
I was just down there a few weeks ago visiting some collaborators and got to meet a group
of people in the bioengineering department there that were doing some very interesting
work.
So what they've been developing is a peptide based nanoparticle that has produced some
really dramatic results when used as an anti-cancer treatment.
Again at an early stage in models, but the early results are quite interesting.
So what they did is they started off by engineering a peptide that would self-assemble around the
drug doxorubicin.
So the sequences that they developed, they thought long and hard about how to design
these sequences to do this.
And what they ended up with, once I described that, you'll realize that they were able to
mimic some of the features of a liposome, but with a peptide sequence.
So on these peptides, there's a domain that has a section that is really able to grab
the drug.
Part of the peptide is kind of greasy, and the drug is kind of greasy, so they come
together and they stick.
On the other side of the peptide is a group of amino acids that are very hydrophilic.
So they love water.
So they really want to be in water.
The other part of the peptide wants to be near the drug.
And so what that means is that if you take a solution of these peptides and the drug
and water, the drug and the sticky part of the peptide goes inside, and the hydrophilic
part goes on the outside, and you get a nice water-soluble particle with the drug encapsulated
inside it.
So these peptides will spontaneously form 100 nanometer particles, so that's a good size
for a drug delivery system.
And what's really astonishing is that these nanoparticles, when they were tested in mice,
after a single dose, increased the 60-day survival of these mice by 90 percent.
So these were mice with tumors.
They had an untreated population and watched their survival rates, and then they looked
at the population treated with the peptide nanoparticles, and there was an improvement
of 90 percent.
That's just absolutely amazing relative to some of the other things that we looked at.
And what's special about these particles?
Well, the peptide sequences were very carefully engineered.
The peptides that they used are pretty small, so the nanoparticles are a little bit smaller
than what we've been looking at, and they seemed to be pretty speedy at distributing
the drug.
It was also discovered these conjugates are good at allowing cells to not become drug-resistant,
and this is likely because the drug is very fast-acting.
So it seems as though this system has been able to provide a very effective drug delivery
vehicle, but with some really special properties that gives it a very special level of activity.
And it will be quite interesting to see what happens as this nanopackage drug goes through
clinical trials.
So now let's take a look at a pH-sensing nanocarrier.
We quickly touched on how these work in the last lecture.
The person who led this study, his name is San Bin Nguyen, was a classmate of mine at
Caltech.
He's a really smart and very creative guy.
He's now a professor at Northwestern, and his group came up with the idea of producing
nanobins that could sense pH and selectively release a drug in response to a pH change.
Now if you look at the SEM image of these materials, they really do look like shallow
bins.
You could see how they could carry the drug around using that depressed space.
So to get these bins, they were able to develop a polymer that could be cross-linked.
And the cross-linking is to hold the polymer together, to hold the particle together, and
it allows them to load it with the drug doxorubicin.
Now these polymer bins, because they're pH responsive, they shrink when the pH is lowered.
So as that pH goes down, the bin just collapses on itself, and eventually that squeezes all
the drug out.
So this is almost like a nano-sponge.
And so why were they focusing on pH as a way to release the drug?
Well it turns out that cancer cells have a lower pH than healthy cells.
The metabolism of cancer cells is really perturbed.
They don't function as normal cells do, and that drives the intracellular pH down.
So the idea here is that they would be able to get preferential drug release in the cancer
cells.
Now when they tested these interesting nanostructures in a mouse model of breast cancer, it worked
extremely well.
They imaged the tumors while they were still in the animal, and they could see them shrinking
significantly.
And importantly, just injecting the animals with the bins on their own had no effect.
We haven't really talked about this, but it is always extremely important to test an
empty carrier when it's being evaluated as a delivery agent.
There are many structures or molecules out there that look pretty innocuous, and you
think, yeah that's a good carrier, probably won't do anything, but you never know.
And structures, again that seem like they should be pretty stable, can have strange
effects when they're taken up into cells.
So it's always important to look at the empty carrier and make sure there's no effect there.
Now in the last lecture we looked at carbon nanohorns that could hold cisplatin, we just
took a brief look at this as we were surveying different types of nanomaterial carriers.
And these nanohorns do something really interesting.
They bind to the surface of the cell, and they seem to be able to poke through the cell membrane
and deliver the drug right into the cell.
The group that did this work, which is based in Japan, was able to show that the potency
of the drug improved by about six-fold in a mouse model, and there was no weight loss
observed for these mice, and that's a common problem with cisplatin.
This group also checked very carefully to make sure that the carbon nanohorns didn't
cause any toxicity on their own.
Again, an important check for this kind of material, which could cause inflammation or
other problems if it accumulated to high levels.
So let's also look at the use of a carbon nanotube transporter.
Use can be put on the inside of carbon nanotubes.
We've talked about that a little bit, and we've also mentioned the fact that it can
be adhered to the outside.
And this is a really cool idea because it allows just a small amount of drug to be carried
on the nanotube and then released when it reaches its target.
This work on coating carbon nanotubes was done at Stanford in the lab of Hongji dye,
and Hongji is one of the pioneers in carbon nanotube chemistry.
He's done all kinds of things with carbon nanotubes.
And so his group tested this doxorubicin nanotube approach in a mouse model of lymphoma, and
the results look really good.
This conjugate, just like doxol, which we talked about at the beginning of the lecture,
seemed to decrease damage in non-tumor sites.
So interestingly, when they looked at doxorubicin on its own, they saw significant damage in
the intestine of the mice that they were testing.
But this damage basically disappeared once they attached or adsorbed the drug onto carbon
nanotubes.
And most importantly, tumor growth was completely arrested, survival rates went way up, and
the side effects were minimal.
So now let's look at one last example, a targeted polymer nanoparticle.
This drug delivery system was invented at MIT by the group of Bob Langer, and you'll
hear lots more about Bob Langer's work when we discuss nanoscale tissue engineering.
But his group also works in drug delivery, and they came up with the first targeted drug-containing
nanoparticle.
This particle has a polymer core that's very good at binding an anti-cancer drug.
In this case, they used a drug called dosataxyl, and this is a relative of pachylataxyl.
And what is unique about this system is what they attached to the outside of the particle.
So here they incorporated a recognition domain that allows the particle to specifically pick
out prostate cancer cells.
These types of cells have a special protein on their surface, and so this is what the
Langer group directed the recognition element towards.
To test the drug, they implanted prostate tumors into mice, and what was really remarkable
here is that the tumors in the treated mice basically disappeared.
They shrank and shrank and shrank, and then disappeared.
So this is a really dramatic result, and we think it results from the specific targeting
of the system, and they're directing the drug right to the prostate tumors.
So now we've looked at a variety of nano-enabled delivery systems.
We've looked at protein nanoparticles and liposomes that are used clinically to deliver
drugs with greater potency and fewer side effects.
We've looked at next-generation approaches that combine some very interesting activities
and also specificity domains.
And it's really probably this last angle where heightened specificity is obtained to lessen
effects on healthy cells that will be an increasing focus of this field.
Of all the examples we looked at, the one with the most specificity, the one that had
a recognition element that was able to specifically bind a prostate cancer cell, this was the
one that achieved the most dramatic results with complete ablation of a tumor observed.
So I think we'll be seeing more and more work in this area.
It's also important to realize that nanoscale drug delivery has applicability in a variety
of disease states, not just cancer.
And there is very interesting work going on in a number of different areas.
So cardiovascular medicine, diabetes, there are nanoscale drug delivery systems under development
for these diseases that have some similarities to what's going on in cancer drug delivery,
but with some subtle differences that have to do with the exact type of disease that's
trying to be treated.
So in general, it's clear that the pace of progress in nanoscale drug delivery is rapid,
and it will likely continue to be producing very exciting advances in the short term.
In the next lecture, we'll look at nanoscale surgical tools.
These can be used to perform surgical procedures one cell at a time.
We'll survey a variety of literally cutting edge systems that can be used to make surgical
excisions cleaner and faster to heal.
We'll also look at very small surgical tools that can excise disease cells with incredible
precision, a very exciting capability.
See you then.
