surgery is currently the most effective and widely used procedure in treating human cancers
and it's also essential in the treatment of other diseases like kidney failure and heart
disease. A recent study indicated that for particular types of cancer, surgery can cure
45% of cancer patients when it's used for treatment whereas radiation or drugs only provide
a 5% cure rate. But to be curative, surgery has to be done incredibly precisely. Incomplete
removal of a tumor can decrease survival rates significantly. In order to completely
excise cancer, a surgeon needs to be able to identify tumor tissue and distinguish it
from healthy tissue, where these two different types of cells come together are called the
margins of a tumor. And it's very important to take as little of the healthy tissue as
possible because there could be important nerves or blood vessels in the tissue. So
getting the margins of a tumor defined precisely is very important and it's also really hard.
Surgeons need to get all of the tumor, yet nothing but the tumor. Now surgeons use different
types of guides like radioactive tracers or visual or tactile inspection of tissue to
make a call on whether tissue is diseased. Studies have been done looking at how often
surgeons are correct in thinking that they have removed all of the cancer cells in a
patient and almost 40% of the time cancer cells are actually left behind. So it's obviously
difficult to get this right with the tools that we have available. And the lymphatic
system complicates things further. Lymph nodes are present throughout our bodies to trap
foreign particles. Cancer cells spreading from a tumor site will often first travel
to lymph nodes. And so surgeons usually take samples of the lymph nodes close to a tumor
and then the lymph node samples that are acquired can tell you whether the cancer has started
to spread. But figuring out where these nodes are can be very tricky. When Richard Feynman
first started talking about nanotechnology in 1959, one of the things that fascinated
him was the possibility of producing nanoscale surgical tools. The material we'll talk about
today shows that this is becoming a reality. In fact, there are a whole, there's a whole
toolbox now of nanoscale surgical tools that will improve surgery in more ways than Feynman
originally suggested. Not only can surgeons perform the operation using nanoscale tweezers
and scalpels, they will eventually also be able to use nanomaterials for more accurate
diagnosis and assessment. For example, by identifying tuber margins and lymph nodes with greater precision.
And when the procedure is over, other nanomaterials can be used therapeutically to speed up the
healing of a wound. So let's start by talking about how nanomaterials can make the assessment
of tumor margins more precise and allow surgeons to see the boundaries of tumors more clearly.
As I mentioned, there are nerves and blood vessels near tumors that have to be avoided
at all costs, making surgeons very conservative when taking extra tissue. Typically, when an
operation is complete, a surgeon will take a small sample of tissue that they consider
to be outside the margins of the tumor, and this tissue is tested post-surgery. In breast
cancer, as many as 50% of partial mastectomy cases require a second procedure owing to the
fact that there's tumor found outside where surgeons thought the margins were. Surgeons
are obviously very conservative when they remove breast tissue in order to lessen adverse
impacts on a woman's health or self-image, and this is a tough thing to balance with
making sure that all the tumor cells are gone. In early stage lung cancer, residual tumor
deposits after surgery are associated with up to a 35% reduction in survival. Here, it's
critical to take as little lung tissue as possible because the tumors are typically
located near airways. Likewise, with brain tumors, the stakes are extremely high as every
extra cell it is taking can air fear with the survival of a patient. The limiting factor
in detecting microscopic tumors or defining the borders of a tumor at the time of surgery
is really the sensitivity of the human eye. The eye can only resolve objects that are
about the size of a dust mite, so that's about 250 microns in size, so most microscopic
tumors or cell clusters can't be spotted with a background of normal tissue around. Really
only in special cases are tumor cells visually distinct from healthy cells, so this makes
it even more challenging to selectively take them out. Now, if residual tumor cells could
be detected in real time in the operating room, surgical resection of the tumor could
be more accurate and then survival rates would increase dramatically. The imaging of tumor
cells during surgery using nanoparticles has already been shown to be a very powerful approach
to improving surgical removal of brain tumors in lab animals. In 2002, a group of researchers
in Boston at the Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School showed that iron
nanoparticles could be used very effectively for this application. They made a really cool
type of iron oxide nanoparticle that would help with the visualization of a brain tumor
before surgery using MRI and that would also help light up the tumor with luminescence
during surgery. Now, MRI is a very powerful tool for the visualization of tumors, but
it's incredibly expensive to use. The instruments are really expensive and so it can't be used
in every operating room. On the other hand, luminescence is pretty easy to track and requires
only a cheap excitation source, sometimes just a handheld lamp will do. So the researchers
that made these bifunctional nanoparticles managed to make something that was good at
giving off both types of signals, so the MRI signal and the luminescence signal. The
iron oxide core that they used had magnetic properties that were really great for getting
a strong MRI signal and then they joined this core with a chemical dye that would emit light
when it was excited. They injected this compound material into mice that had brain tumors and
then they allowed the nanoparticles to circulate for 24 hours. They collected MRI images and
these images show the researchers exactly where the tumors were. With these images in
hand, knowing where the tumors were, they opened up the skulls of the animals and used
luminescence signal to make a second call on precisely where the tumor tissue was. The
image that you're looking at shows the tumor lighting up because of the presence of the
nanoparticles. Once the surgery was done, they looked at the entire brain of the animals
with methods that can only be used postmortem and they were able to determine that all of
the cancer cells were gone. On how did they do this? How did they look at the brain once
the animal had been taken apart? Well basically they sectioned the brain tissue and then they
incubated the tissue slices with stains that give a visual clue about whether a cell is
diseased or healthy. This type of analysis works for postmortem analysis but it's obviously
not something we can do with a living subject who would need the tissue back. So clearly
given the human eye, some more help in the form of glowing nanoparticles is an extremely
powerful approach to improving the surgical removal of brain tumors. This was a really
amazing study that back in 2003 was one of the first to prove the utility of nanomaterials
for surgery and the fact that this test case involved brain tumors makes it that much more
incredible. This may not have occurred to you yet but in order for these nanoparticles
to do what they did, they had to cross something called the blood-brain barrier. As the name
implies, this barrier is a shield around the brain that is very difficult to get through.
There is a network of capillaries that surround the brain. If you placed all these capillaries
end to end they would span about 400 miles. And on top of that the capillaries are very
densely packed and they have lots and lots of cells in them to ensure that only certain
things make it to the brain. Small molecules that are about a nanometer, things like sugar,
alcohol, nicotine, also certain antidepressant drugs are good at getting through this barrier.
But typically large molecules can't get through. The fact that iron nanoparticles that were
50 nanometers were actually able to make it across is really surprising and obviously
very fortuitous. Exactly how this works though we really don't know yet. Many people around
the world are trying to understand which combinations of properties allow these particles to trick
the capillaries into letting them through. But it looks like we're going to have to wait
a little while in order to have that answer. Now another type of surgical precision that
can be enhanced by nanomaterials is the visualization of sentinel lymph nodes. As you may be aware
the lymphatic system is a network of vessels that instead of carrying blood carries lymph.
Lymph is a fluid that contains much of the waste generated by cells and it's also used
to transport foreign cells to the lymph nodes where they can be destroyed. So the lymphatic
system provides another route for cancer cells to move around the body. And some cancers
spread in a predictable fashion from where the cancer started. And their first stop is
a lymph node or a gland close to the tumor and it goes there before the cancer spreads
to other parts of the body. The lymph node closest to the tumor is referred to as the
sentinel lymph node or SLN. So the idea behind surgery on SLNs is to see if the cancer has
spread. If the sentinel lymph node does not contain cancer then there is a high likelihood
that the cancer has not spread to any other part of the body. The way that SLNs are typically
imaged involves the injection of a radioactive tracer near the tumor. A Geiger counter can
then be used by the surgeon to track the tracer as it moves to the SLN. Now using radioactivity
for this is not ideal. Lots of radioactive substances are somewhat harmful and this is
where nanomaterials may be able to provide an alternative solution. In 2006 researchers
working with semiconductor quantum dots noticed that when infrared emitting semiconductor
quantum dots were injected into a tumor they localized right to the sentinel lymph nodes.
The quantum dots clearly found the same path that metastatic cancer cells take through the
lymphatic system to reach the SLN. It took only 15 seconds for the lymph nodes to light
up and so this would allow a surgeon to visualize the right lymph node and take samples for
biopsy in real time. The pig model system that they use for these trials is what's
called the Sinclair mini swine. This is a type of pig that has been engineered to spontaneously
develop melanoma and melanoma is a very relevant type of cancer for sentinel lymph node mapping
because about 70% of melanomas in humans metastasize by passing through the lymph nodes.
The pig form of melanoma is quite similar to the human form so this is a really relevant
system for the testing of the quantum dot imaging approach. Another feature of these
pigs that is indirectly useful is that they have highly pigmented skin and dark hair which
is a little bit unusual for a pig but that's what these guys have and this makes it more
of a challenge to detect the light being given off by the quantum dots in the lymph nodes
and so getting proof of principle even in this system makes it that much more likely
that it would work in humans. The use of nanomaterials to find lymph nodes is likely
several years away from being used in humans but the potential for impact on surgical outcomes
is significant. Lymph node resection is one of the most difficult things for surgeons
to learn when they are using existing techniques for visualization so it can take new surgeons
over 60 surgeries to achieve technical proficiency leaving all of the patients with incomplete
resections unless somebody more experienced is looking over the shoulder of the inexperienced
surgeon. So being able to use nanoparticles to illuminate lymph nodes should make the
learning curve much less steep. Now what if someday we were able to teach robots to perform
surgery rather than relying on people. This may seem kind of far out but it turns out that
robotic surgery is something that's already being used today. The most common types of
robotic surgeries actually have a human being controlling the robotics but using the robot
as an interface to the patient helps eliminate tremors and it allows finer manipulations
to be made and it also allows surgery to be done remotely. As already happened in 2001
when a surgeon in New York removed a gallbladder in a patient in France. But one thing that
robots really lack is a sense of touch and for most types of surgery it turns out that
this is quite important. A fine sense of touch allows a surgeon to know how much force to
use and it may also give them information about the health of the tissue. A really neat
nano device may provide a solution here and give robots a sense of touch. This device is
basically a nanoparticle sandwich. There are two layers of gold nanoparticles on the outside
of the sandwich and a layer of cadmium sulfide nanoparticles on the inside of the sandwich.
The two kinds of particles are separated by a layer of squishy plastic and when stress
is placed on the gold nanoparticles on the outside this causes them to get closer to
the cadmium sulfide and then the coupling between the two types of nanoparticles causes
light to be emitted. Now by coupling I mean electronic coupling or the extent to which
the particles can feel the presence of the others. So now we've seen how nanotechnology
can be used to visualize our field tumors and also to visualize the spread of cancer
cells. Let's talk about some other promising approaches to the development of nanoscale
surgical tools. The better we get at seeing cancer cells the better able will be to take
only the disease cells during surgery and leave the healthy cells behind. But in order
to be able to cut out a single cell a very small scaffold would obviously be required.
Throughout this course we've looked at nanomaterials that certainly should be able to achieve this
kind of resolution but only if they could be manipulated at the macro scale. But this
is the tricky part. We can't hold a single nanotube at our hand so how could this type
of material be used? Well a study reported in the journal Science in 1999 described a
really clever approach that gives us some leads on this. So what was done here is that
a thousand nanometer glass rod was attached to two carbon nanotubes and the attachment
sites were made of metal so that they could serve as electrodes. When there was no potential
applied to the electrodes the carbon nanotubes remained apart but when eight volts were applied
the tips of the two carbon nanotubes were drawn together. This amazing set of images
shows exactly what happens. You can see that as the applied voltage increases the carbon
nanotube tips get closer and closer until they're touching. So this device acts just
like a pair of tweezers and could be able to pick up a single cell. This hasn't actually
been tested yet but the researchers working with the nanotube nanotweezers did show that
they could pick up a single plastic particle with a diameter of 500 nanometers. You're
looking at an image that shows the tweezers grabbing the particle and keeping a firm grip
on it. Another way that increased precision could be achieved during surgery is through
the use of nanolasers. Very fast and focused laser pulses are able to target single cells
or even substructures within cells. This type of approach has been used to cut single nerves
in tiny worms. These worms are just one millimeter in length. Now why is it useful to practice
surgery on worms that may not seem obvious? Well this is a good model system where the
amount of precision needed to cut a single nerve measuring just a few microns could be
validated and it also provides the opportunity to be able to watch the regrowth of the nerve
in real time. So this will help us understand how nerves can regenerate themselves. What
we've looked at so far are different tools that can assist the precision of surgery.
Now let's look at an interesting material that can help in a different way. One of the
most difficult things to deal with during surgery is excessive bleeding. During the
surgery a cut is made and perhaps it nicks a blood vessel and this can produce a lot
of blood. And I'm sure you've seen medical dramas where a surgeon is yelling clamp and
a nurse whips out a pair of arterial forceps also known as a hemostat and these things
you probably have seen them. They look almost like a pair of scissors but they're really
clamping a blood vessel shut. In addition there are chemicals that can be used to stop
bleeding but they're not very fast acting. But now brain researchers have discovered
a new nanomaterial that could be very effective at stopping bleeding during neurosurgical procedures
and other types of surgery. They were working with a peptide that self-assembles into a
nanofiber and these researchers were initially studying whether it could be used as a drug
to repair brain damage. But what they discovered instead was that the peptide was really good
at stopping bleeding really fast. In addition to being a very useful material to have on
hand during surgery this could also be an important tool for treating acute trauma where
there's lots and lots of bleeding. And maybe someday a peptide that self-assembles into
a nanofiber it could even replace the Band-Aid. In my house we have two little boys running
around and Band-Aids are always being used to deal with scratches and scrapes. Both kids
usually have a few somewhere on their body at any given time. But as you know especially
for little boys who love dirt Band-Aids get dirty and they're not great when it comes
to keeping a cut clean. So maybe someday we'll have in our kitchen's little tube of this
material that could be used as artificial skin while a cut heals. Nanomaterials can also
be used to speed wound healing and limit infection. Silver nanoparticles are particularly promising
for this application. It's been known for some time that silver nanoparticles can kill
bacteria and so they're a good way to keep bacteria from infecting a wound. But studies
investigating this in rats showed something remarkable. The particles also made the wounds
heal faster. This was a study where they were comparing silver nanoparticles with antibiotics
and it was discovered that burned wounds were completely healed four days earlier when silver
nanoparticles were used. And in addition the amount of scarring was reduced. So if you
look at these images you're looking at rats that have burned wounds on their backs. If
the wounds are treated with silver nanoparticles the rats have totally healed and regrown their
fur in 25 days. Without the silver nanoparticles you can see that the rats are still in real
and pretty tough shape. But it's not just the presence of silver. Studies were also
done with non-nanostructured silver and it really didn't have any effect. Silver sulfodiazine
is actually used clinically for burn treatment but its effectiveness is pretty limited. Here
having silver present as a nanoparticle really seems to pump up the effect of the metal.
We think that the nanoparticles full the immune system into not overdoing the immune response
which then cuts down on inflammation. And since the nanoparticles kill any bacteria
that might find their way into a wound this is good. Now in addition to promoting healing
nanoparticles can also be used to solder a cut shut. We've all had the unpleasant experience
of getting stitches and then getting them removed and using a nanoparticle glue may
present a more pleasant alternative. A study that was recently done at Rice University
in 2005 showed that this is indeed possible. Using rats as model patients they apply gold
nanoparticles to cuts and then hit the nanoparticles with 800 nanometer near infrared light and
heat soldered the wound shut. They also generated a control group that had conventional stitches.
In these images you're looking at a comparison of two cuts, the top one had stitches and
the bottom one had the nanoparticle solder. You can see that the stitch wound actually
heals faster but both eventually heal. And the discomfort to a patient would really be
minimized for the nanoparticle approach so this really seems worth pursuing. The researchers
also looked at the skin cells after the wound was healed and they made sure that the cells
were normal and they really looked fine. So this seems like a promising way to repair
cuts and it's also been shown to work with muscle. There may also be a potential to use
a similar approach to repair nerves or blood vessels so we'll have to stay tuned to see
where this goes. I think it's really clear from the material
that we've covered that there is huge potential for nanotechnology to improve what happens
before, during and after surgery. There are many types of tools becoming available that
make it easier for surgeons to be more precise and that will also allow robots to acquire
and enhance the capabilities that humans have. There is also the potential to make recovery
from surgery faster, using better agents for wound healing and treatment. And while we
focused in this lecture on cancers, similar kinds of techniques have also begun to make
progress for cardiovascular diseases as well, such as arthralios, neurosis, thrombosis and
myocardial infarction. Now in discussing how nanotechnology can be used in surgery, we've
thought lots about how to repair damage or take disease cells away. What we haven't considered
yet is how to bring healthy cells back. So in the case of spinal cord damage or brain
damage, the damage is almost always irreversible. And this is because we don't know how to coerce
new cells to grow and our bodies aren't very good at getting this done either. In the next
lecture, we'll look at the role that nanomaterials are playing in a really interesting area, regenerative
medicine. In this field, scientists are figuring out how to use nanomaterials to get new cells
to grow, where there's been damage, and replacing not just cells, but entire tissues. And progress
is even being made on generating artificial organs outside of the body to help us with
organ transplants. And even though cells aren't truly nanoscale, we are learning how to get
them to form tissues using nanomaterials by providing the same cues as cells get in natural
tissues. This is a very interesting and fast moving field and I think you'll find learning
about it to be fascinating. See you next time.
