The field of regenerative medicine focuses on producing artificial substitutes that could
restore or replace damaged tissues or organs.
It's also referred to as tissue engineering.
We've known how to transplant organs for decades, but transplants are extremely difficult
and a limited supply prevents some who need new organs from receiving them.
Demand for organ transplants can exceed the supply from donors by over 300%, and in many
cases transplants are the only treatment available that will save a patient's life.
Now what if we were not reliant on the supply of donated organs coming from humans, but
could instead generate them artificially?
That might sound even more difficult.
If transplanting an existing organ is hard, wouldn't transplanting an artificial organ
be even more difficult?
Well, what we'll talk about today is how nanoscience is being used to advance this field, and we'll
walk through a collection of very promising discoveries that demonstrate the future of
medicine for damaged tissue and organs should be very different from the present.
Let's start with artificial tissues and work our way up to artificial organs.
We've talked about study after study during our lectures where cells cultured in the lab
are used to study all kinds of things, and labs are really quite good by now at growing
almost any kind of cell you can think of in a petri dish.
And simple kinds of materials like skin and cartilage can be made using analogous methods
to the ones that we use just to culture cells in the lab for research.
There are actually already forms of these tissues on the market, and they are used to
treat burn victims.
So while we can grow cells and layers of cells, what we're still not good at is putting cells
together into more complicated structures.
You can think of tissues and organs kind of like buildings.
In order to build something functional, the building blocks or bricks need to be organized.
Same goes for the tissues of human organs.
The cells have to be oriented in specific directions, and certain types of cells need
to be interfaced in a particular way.
Just like buildings need plumbing and electricity running throughout in very specific locations,
tissues and organs need blood vessels, and they need nerves.
So it's difficult, but not impossible, to build up a structure made of one kind of a
cell, but it's really difficult to build up structures where components need to come
together that are made of many different kinds of cells.
Now this is where nanotechnology can make a difference.
One of the reasons that organs and tissues know how to self-organize in the body is that
they are able to take advantage of cues provided by their environment to know which direction
to spread out in.
You now appreciate that nanotechnology's main aim is to manipulate matter at the nanoscale,
and it turns out that this is exactly what needs to be done in order to provide scaffolds
that will bring cells together and allow them to interact in such a way that functional
tissue will grow.
Before we turn to artificial scaffolds made with nanotechnology, let's first look at the
actual scaffolds used by nature.
In human beings, the scaffold is a very complex network of proteins that come together and
provide an environment that cells really like to grow in.
This scaffold is called the extracellular matrix, and the image that you're looking
at shows how all the strands of proteins come together to make this matrix.
It takes billions of protein molecules to come together and form the fibers that then
interconnect to form this structure.
One of the proteins that's involved here, collagen, may be familiar to you.
We touched on the function of collagen a few lectures ago, and talked about the fact
that it's good at giving tissue structure.
And it turns out that collagen is a major component of the extracellular matrix, and
its fiber structure is a key structural feature.
Now this extracellular matrix may look somewhat disorganized, but it's actually really a complex
structure with a high level of organization.
Each protein is in a precise location so that it can guide a cell to grow in a certain direction.
This matrix also binds factors that may stimulate directional growth and tell a cell what direction
to head in.
And it's now known that this extracellular matrix gives an organ its overall structure,
and it's a very robust entity.
Just in the last few years, scientists have learned that they can take an organ, and they
can gently separate all of the cells from the extracellular matrix by soaking the organ
in a bit of detergent.
As they do this, they have an organ that is primarily the extracellular matrix.
And this has been done with livers, with lungs, with arteries, and other types of organs.
Now in this state, these organs are not functional because they don't have the cells there, and
so that takes away the functionality of the organ.
But incredibly enough, they can then regrow cells using the extracellular matrix as a
scaffold and the functionality of the organ returns.
This is really incredible.
I mentioned that this has been done with a variety of organ types, and in a recent study
reported in the journal Science in 2010, a landmark study was reported showing that a
regenerated lung could be transplanted into a rat.
You are looking at images of a rat lung before it's treated to remove the cells, and then
after the cells have been dissolved.
It's white because the only thing left behind was the extracellular matrix.
You can see that the color comes back once the cells are regrown.
If we zoom in using electron microscopy, you can actually see the cells on the matrix that
then disappear after the lung has been removed.
So this procedure is really good at just removing the cells and leaving everything else intact.
You can see that the extracellular matrix basically stays unperturbed.
And even more amazingly, the lung not only had newly grown cells, this lung was actually
functional.
It was a little bit leaky, and there were a few blood cells in places that they were
not supposed to be, but the rats that received the transplants could do everything that rats
with two normal lungs could do.
So this work demonstrates how robust the extracellular matrix really is.
It's strong, and that allows us to reuse organs by growing new cells using the matrix as a
scaffold.
But this doesn't really help us with the organ transplant problem.
It may increase the number of usable organs that could be regenerated, but it doesn't
help us make new ones from scratch.
Now what if we could recreate the extracellular matrix from synthetic components?
That would solve the problem.
And given that the matrix is just a collection of proteins, and we know how to synthesize
proteins in large quantities in the lab, this should be doable, right?
Well, it turns out that it's not that simple.
The formation of the extracellular matrix is a very precise, programmed process that
biology knows how to organize, but unfortunately, we don't know yet how to recreate it.
So we need to find solutions that will allow us to recreate the features of the matrix
in a form that we can work with to grow new organs.
This is where nanotechnology can play a role.
We've seen a variety of nanomaterials that might be able to provide the right type of
scaffold, and so the rationale here is that engineering the right material might be a
way to recreate the extracellular matrix.
One approach to this is to use different nanopatterns on surfaces to grow cells oriented in specific
ways.
Just a few years ago, a team led by Dr. Bob Langer at MIT showed that nanopatterning,
a hard surface, could have a dramatic effect on cell orientation.
Langer is really a pioneer in this field, and he's an amazing scientist.
He has a research group of about 100 people.
He's obtained over 200 patents and has started 25 different biotech companies.
He's a chemical engineer who has learned to use nanotechnology to solve a number of
important problems, including some very pertinent to today's topic of tissue engineering.
So here you're looking at a comparison of cell growth happening on a nano grading made
by Langer's group that has a spacing of just a few hundred nanometers versus a flat substrate.
It's made using a technique called replica molding that involves making a master mold,
and for this you use a hard material like silicon that has the features that are desired
in the final product.
Then a type of polymer can be poured into the master and then it's cured.
And this process allows lots of substrates to be produced from one master.
Now as you can see from these images on the non-nanostructured substrate, the cell doesn't
really know what direction to go and it just balls up.
With the nano grading, it seems to know that it should stretch in the same direction as
the nanoscale pattern.
This is really incredible.
Now why does this happen?
Well, it's related to what happens in nature.
In the extracellular matrix, there are fibers of material like collagen that form oriented
fibers.
In this image of collagen, you can see that in the yellow portion of the image, there
are fibers lined up in a pattern that look very much like the nano grading.
The spacing is even the same.
So then what has been created using nanotechnology is a material that's a pretty good mimic of
oriented collagen.
So that's a start.
Okay, so now we've looked at a single cell and it's clear that nanostructuring influences
directionality of cell growth.
But can we engineer something more complex?
Not involving just a single cell, but a collection of cells that could eventually be used in
the body.
Well, the same group looked at a type of cell called endothelial progenitor cells.
People call these EPCs for short.
And they looked at how their growth was affected by the presence of a nanopatter.
EPCs are the precursor cells that form the inside of a blood vessel.
So this is a great system to look at to evaluate whether artificial blood vessels could be
grown.
The difference in how these cells grew on flat surfaces versus a nano grading is really
amazing.
On the flat surface, the cells grow well and you can see them trying to organize into vessels.
But they are not organized enough and all of the interconnectedness of the short vessels
that are formed makes them useless.
But now on the nano grading, you can see that nice long vessels are instead formed.
It's clear that here too, the cells are really taking a cue from the grading and they are
heading in a certain direction in response.
Now, gradings are not the only nanomaterials that can be used for this type of application.
Nanoposts work really well here too.
A group working at the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at the Seoul National
University in Korea was able to show that they could get cells called fibroblasts to
thread themselves through a nano grading if the posts had the right spacing.
Now fibroblasts are cells in the body that produce lots of collagen, a material important
to the extracellular matrix.
So they're working with an interesting cell type that's very relevant for regenerative
medicine.
We could imagine that if we could generate the right starting scaffold with nanotechnology
and then coerce fibroblasts to grow in the right directions, perhaps we could then get
an extracellular matrix to grow on a substrate as the starting place for an artificial organ.
Okay, so now we've looked at how cells can be grown on different types of nanopattern
surfaces.
These types of nanostructures are made with what we refer to as top-down fabrication.
That means that you come in from the top with some way to create the nanopattern yourself.
But that's not the only way to do this.
Let's look at a group of nanostructures very relevant to regenerative medicine that are
made using what we call bottom-up methods.
This means that the materials basically self-assemble to perform a desired role and they don't require
any kind of top-down processing.
One example of this is a peptide nanofiber that self-assembles into a very powerful type
of material.
This peptide has a hydrophobic region that when it gets put in water, it wants to huddle
together with other peptides so that it doesn't come into contact with the water, just like
grease and water would act.
So this peptide then ends up forming long fibers that then self-assemble into a gel.
Now if we zoom in and look at the nanoscopic structure of this gel, we can see that, wow,
it looks an awful lot like the extracellular matrix.
The scientists who invented this material recognized right away that they had something
really special in hand when they first saw this structure.
And we actually already touched on another application of this peptide gel in the last
lecture when we discussed a gel that could stop bleeding during surgery.
When this peptide was sprayed on a wound, it acted like a hemostat and it quickly stopped
bleeding.
It's probably the case that the matrix formed stopped blood cells from leaving the vessel.
Now here we're talking about this peptide nanofiber because the idea is that this artificial
matrix made of peptide nanofiber could act as a mimic of the extracellular matrix.
Let's see what it's able to do when it comes to growing cells.
One of the first cell types that was tested with this material was neural progenitor cells
or NPCs.
Like the epithelial progenitor cells we talked about before, these neural progenitors are
precursor cells.
The NPCs in this case will mature into neural cells.
Now a neural progenitor cell is precisely the type of cell that if we could get it to
grow into a precise structure and could control that process, we could use these to repair
central nervous system damage.
Neural damage, as I'm sure you know, can be devastating.
We're all familiar with how falls and accidents can cause spinal cord injury like the incident
which Christopher Reeve was thrown from a horse and left to quadriplegic.
And unfortunately this type of injury is almost impossible to recover from because the damage
can't be reversed.
Nerve cells are just not good at re-growing and so the gaps that are formed, for example
in the spinal cord during injury persist and they basically cause gaps in the communication
that is essential for the function of the nervous system.
So the development of methods that would allow us to regenerate nervous system tissue would
have a tremendous impact.
Now why is neural damage so difficult to repair?
Well the nervous system contains a complicated type of tissue.
It's a network of fibers and neurons that send electrochemical signals over long distances.
Neurons or nerve cells have a much more complicated structure than most other cell types because
of the electrical communication that they participate in.
These structures that you see protruding from this nerve cell are called dendrites and they
help to extend the reach of the cell's communication range.
These cells are actually pretty difficult to grow in the lab and it's even more difficult
to get them to grow into the fibers that are found in the human body.
So can a peptide nanofiber assist with the generation of artificial nerves?
To test this the group at Northwestern University who originally developed the material mixed
with peptide with a solution of MPCs and they allowed the peptide nanofibers to self-assemble
around the neural cells.
That's what makes the generation of this material bottom up rather than top down.
The nanomaterial makes its structure spontaneously and it knows just how to self-assemble around
the progenitor cells and then these encapsulated progenitor cells can get cues from the newly
formed nanomaterial.
And so what the researchers then observed is that growing the MPCs in this environment
allowed them to grow much more efficiently.
You can see in this image that there are dendrites coming off of the cell and this is somewhat
unusual to see in a cultured neural cell.
And so with this promising result in hand this group then went on to test whether this
material could repair spinal cord injury in mice.
And mice who received a treatment of peptide nanofiber after spinal cord injury recovered
about 90% of their normal functions and they feared much better than a control group.
And interestingly the researchers who did the study found not only that neural regrowth
improved significantly but also that scarring which causes big problems in the event of
spinal cord injury was minimized.
And this is really a complicating effect in spinal cord injury.
So you have the actual injury, you have the cells that get damaged and that gap that happens
and then at the junctions where the injury occurs you can have scarring that prevents
any further growth.
So this was a really exciting result to see and at the time they didn't really understand
the origin of this effect and we still don't understand exactly why the nanofiber is
able to limit scarring but it's a really encouraging type of behavior to see out of
this compound.
Another study that was done as a collaboration between a group at MIT and a group in Hong
Kong used an analogous peptide based material and they looked at a similar phenomenon but
they used a slightly different readout.
Here they're going to be looking specifically at vision and the restoration of vision.
And so what they did is they used a mouse model and then they cut a specific nerve axon
that's essential for vision.
And then they looked at these mice, again a control group with no treatment and a group
that had the peptide as a treatment and then watched how their site could come back.
And this is something that you can do very quantitatively with mice, what you do is you
give them a visual stimulus and you watch to see whether they respond and so you can
tabulate the statistics around how many times they respond to the stimulus and get good
specific quantitation on how much of their vision has come back.
And so this is a really great way to determine whether a peptide nanofiber can promote nerve
growth.
And a control group that didn't get any treatment, the mice only got back about 10% of their
vision so this is basically just the natural levels of neural regrowth.
But the group that was treated with the nanofiber got back 80%.
That is really incredible and it's somewhat comparable to what was seen in the last study
but that was much more qualitative whereas this is a quantitative measure of vision.
And so it indicates that this type of approach could bring back high levels of other functions
like speech and motor skills and all of the things that we want to bring back to people
that have had spinal cord damage.
So so far we've looked at some very promising examples of nanomaterials that can support
cell growth that have very exciting potential for regenerative medicine.
But we still haven't seen an actual example of an artificial organ.
So let's take a look at an example of a tissue engineering project more advanced than what
I've just shown you.
An astonishing first step towards an artificial liver.
The liver is an essential organ that detoxifies our blood, it produces proteins and hormones
and provides molecules that we need for digestion.
About 80% of the cells in the liver are what we call hepatocytes.
They're really good at synthesizing essential proteins and hormones and they're really
good at breaking down chemicals like drugs.
In order for hepatocytes to do their work on all of the blood in our bodies, the cells
need to be in close contact with the blood running through the circulatory system.
And so the liver has a very intricate system of vessels running through it.
It's like a building with lots of plumbing in every room.
The vessels are organized into repeating hexagonal columns that have a central vein running through
the center of each column.
And then the arteries are located at the junctions between the columns.
There are also ducts that run through the liver that transport bile, one of the most
important molecules that the liver makes and these ducts take it out of the liver.
So you can see that this is a very complicated set of structures to think about reproducing
in an artificial organ.
One of the first attempts to make an artificial liver involved the fabrication of a device
that had a collection of tiny channels that could pump blood.
The channels were made of a porous material and then liver cells were grown on top of
the channels.
The group that made this device showed that the liver cells were really happy and healthy
and they weren't being given any external sources of food so they were clearly able
to extract nutrients from the blood that was flowing by.
The levels of a particular protein that the liver produces were also measured and it was
clear that the hepatocytes were doing their thing and they were excreting proteins into
the blood.
So the basic level of functionality was there.
What they did next was to increase the throughput of the device so that it could be used as
a substitute for a human liver.
They increased the throughput by creating a stacked device that brought together many
of these blood vessel chips with layers of hepatocytes.
This device could basically handle the amount of blood that needs to be processed by a human
in a single day.
But with that said, we're probably not going to see these types of devices being implanted
into patients really soon.
So far these devices have been designed to function more like dialysis instruments rather
than organ replacements.
In order for an organ to be successfully implanted, its surface needs to be covered in cells that
the transplant recipient's immune system will recognize.
Otherwise the body will try to reject the organ and serious inflammation will result.
So this is a different type of problem, kind of a second generation problem that needs
to be solved, but it's one that's actually already been sorted out for devices that are
used already like artificial joints and corneas and the other types of tissues that we've
learned to implant.
So there's definitely a good chance that we will eventually be able to engineer some kind
of coating for this device so that it can be used in vivo.
Now one way a separate approach and this gets around the compatibility problem is to use
a portion of a recipient's damaged organ to begin building or growing a new organ.
This has been done for some simpler organs like the bladder and the transplants of these
semi-synthetic organs have been successful.
And this type of approach could be effective for organs that really only have partial damage
and it likely won't be feasible for organs that have a complex blood supply.
So there clearly is still a need for the de novo organ fabrication that nano regenerative
medicine researchers are working towards.
So we'll have to stay tuned to see where this field is headed.
It's clear that the potential for impact is huge given that the problems being solved
are really intractable by any other means.
The fields of biology and medicine are really being transformed by increases in our ability
to understand biology and intervene at the nanoscale level.
As you've just seen, cells which are a little too large to be considered nanoscale can still
be manipulated using the cues that nanomaterials can give them.
The fact that biology operates at the nanoscale with tiny messenger molecules carrying out
all of the work that cells do and giving cells clues about how to grow means that working
at the nanoscale is quite important.
With the advances that I've described to you today, we now have materials that allow
cells to grow with defined orientations and allow them to assemble into the kinds of complex
structures that are found in humans.
You now know that there are nanomaterials that are really good at helping cells regrow
after an injury.
This adds to the other advances we've looked at in nanomedicine like improved drug delivery,
earlier disease diagnosis, and better tools for surgery.
And these are all materials that simply did not exist before nanotechnology enabled us
to manipulate matter at such a fine length scale.
The many examples of nanotechnology in medicine that we've looked at really illustrate why
nanoscale precision is so important for applications in medicine.
Without it, we just can't recreate the same types of materials and structures that nature
uses to build our tissues and organs.
And we can't get the precision needed for effective drug delivery or surgery.
In the first half of the next lecture, I'll conclude our discussion of nanomedicine by
talking about how nanotechnology research actually gets done.
Ted Sargent will be taking the second half of this lecture, and together we'll take
a dive into what it takes to build a successful team of nanotechnology researchers and how
they pull together to make the kinds of exciting discoveries that we've covered so far.
See you next time.
