In the last lecture, we ended on another way to think about storing and replaying energy,
which is fuel cells. In this lecture, we'll begin with fuel cells.
We'll also use them as a way to enter into the fascinating world of catalysis.
You know, Catalyst is a word that's very familiar.
We use it in the English language all the time, outside of the context of science.
What do we mean by it?
Well, somebody catalyzes a good dinner party conversation.
A brief little toss-off remark, a little comment, leads to an hour's worth of vigorous debate.
And that represents a good analogy with how we use the term in science.
Just a little injection of something, a surface on which a reaction can occur,
a particular shape, a particular angle, a particular availability of electrons,
can lead to a rush of chemical activity.
In fact, the idea in science is that a catalyst is something that fosters a reaction
without being consumed in the reaction.
And so it can have huge leverage, it can have huge impact.
Now, in fuel cells, the role of catalysis is as follows.
We have a fuel, let's take hydrogen as an example.
This is a very attractive way to operate a fuel cell.
With stored hydrogen and simply using oxygen from the air, we're able to produce H2O, water,
lower energy molecule, and the energy that's extracted and going from the higher energy hydrogen
and down to producing with the reaction with oxygen the emission of clean water.
We take that energy, we harvest it, we turn it into electrical power.
We can use it to run a car or to heat a home.
Now, that reaction requires a catalyst.
Platinum is an example of a metal that's an extremely effective catalyst,
and it's been widely used to make these fuel cells operate.
However, you can imagine that cost is first and foremost on the list of concerns about platinum.
There's also a phenomenon known as catalyst poisoning,
where the platinum can no longer be effective after large numbers of uses.
So researchers in nanotechnology are very motivated to find ways either to make better use of the platinum
and so to make it more available.
And here the large surfaces of nanomaterials are very helpful and attractive to us.
There are also efforts to find new catalysts that are not based on precious metals like platinum,
but that can dramatically lower the cost of these materials.
And another theme that we'll spend time on today is the idea of using nanomaterials
for the efficient storage of things such as hydrogen, hydrogen fuel.
You know, you can of course store hydrogen fuel inside a tank.
It will be under pressure.
There's some concerns about the dangers associated with that, but many people think they can be managed.
But nevertheless, you can condense even more hydrogen into a finite space
if you can get rid of all the free space, if you can have a large surface area material,
such as those we'll talk about in this lecture called zeolites and metal organic frameworks,
that are specifically tailored to absorb these hydrogen molecules,
producing large surface areas to which these molecules are attached
and available for subsequent replay.
The excitement over fuel cells comes from the fact that it does provide a means to play back energy.
And so when we use wind energy or solar energy to generate power,
we can store it in a chemical format and then efficiently play it back.
And when you think of the hydrogen-based fuel cells,
what's so appealing is that you can simply use clean and available molecules in the air,
and your emissions are water.
The other advantage over battery technologies, and of course these are complementary technologies,
it's not a question of one or the other.
It's a question of where the fuel cells can play the most effective role.
But one of the advantages in large-scale storage applications, especially to the fuel cells,
comes from the fact that we separate out the fuel from its playback.
So the batteries are integrated, but in the case of the fuel cells,
we have a separate tank or region or material in which we store the fuel,
and then we have a separate device for its playback.
And so we can optimize those two components separately from each other.
So I tossed around the word catalysis.
I described its analogy with the way we use it in common everyday language.
What do we have in mind, and why are surfaces so important in the process of catalysis?
Well, by this word catalysis, we mean fostering a chemical reaction.
And sometimes what we mean is that it can increase the probability or the efficiency or the yield of a reaction.
Other times, catalysts make reactions possible that simply wouldn't otherwise occur.
And one of the key pieces of vocabulary that we use in catalysis is the idea of a crucible.
The concept is that certain molecules, say in a gas phase, can interact with each other.
They can collide with each other occasionally.
But there are two problems if we let a reaction that needs some very specific interactions,
if we let it proceed kind of open loop like that,
if we let it proceed without some kind of surface or a tether.
One is that the frequency of collisions or of interactions between the first molecule
and the second class of molecules making up the reaction, that may be infrequent.
It may not occur very often.
Now the other challenge is, even when these two molecules bash into each other,
they may not do so at the right angle.
If for the reaction to occur, we need a particular alignment of sites.
If we need a kind of very careful lock and key interaction,
and you need to put the key into the lock at just the right angle and just the right way,
that's difficult to do and unlikely to do with two molecules that are just bouncing around
and fluctuating at room temperature, like little billiard balls bouncing off of each other.
And so the idea of the crucible in catalysis is that we create a surface
which attracts one of the molecules that will participate in the reaction,
and further, that it will orient those molecules at just the right angle
such that the second molecule that needs to participate in the reaction with it
will see a set of bonds, an exposed available bond, a reactive site,
maybe an electron that wants to jump ship and participate in the reaction.
It will see those very readily, and so it will present in just the optimal angle and orientation
the right conditions for creating this reaction, causing it to occur.
And so the crucible, just as when we think of a crucible bubbling up with a little reaction within it,
this is a crucible now at the molecular length scale, the nanometer length scale.
So what specifically does nanotechnology have to do with this?
Because after all, some of these reactions can be catalyzed simply by planar metal surfaces.
They can be an exposed facet, say, of platinum.
It can have just the right orientation and spacing of the atoms
and just the right reactivity to present an opportunity for molecules to come together, interact, and bounce off.
Well, one of the areas in which nanotechnology has a role to play in,
which there have been some very exciting recent advances, is in what are called zeolites,
which instead of being planar, they present a three-dimensional structure.
They present a complex kind of, it's like a crystal, like our silicon crystals,
but it's also essentially built out of things that look more like molecules.
These templates, these structures, they're on a larger length scale.
There can be pores that are half or one or one and a half nanometers in size.
These pores can penetrate long distances in these materials.
Often there are rings that make up these pores,
and the ring diameter can be controlled by the choice of elements that make up the zeolite,
the bonding between these various elements, and how prone they are to form these kinds of tubules.
Often, because this is a question of various elements coming together and forming a preferred structure,
the synthesis of the zeolites themselves is very clever and very tricky,
and involves a deep understanding of the affinities that various atoms have for each other.
Often getting the temperature just right during the growth of these materials is crucial as well,
because one needs to give these materials enough energy to react with one another
and form these stable and very structured materials.
So where can we take advantage of these three-dimensional nanostructured materials
in order to achieve innovations, make new products, make new materials?
Well, one of them, rather than being in the area of renewables that we spent quite a bit of time on in this course,
is actually in the area of the cracking of hydrocarbons.
So taking crude oil and then producing the kinds of fuels that we actually wish to consume.
And you might look at this and say, well, this is not as maybe environmentally appealing as talking about renewable energy technologies.
But in fact, first of all, this is actually just an illustration of a chemical reaction that can be controlled
and enhanced in its yield through the use of nanostructured materials.
And in addition, these kinds of fossil fuels have been used for a long time,
and we haven't solved all the problems related to providing renewable energy sources.
And so it continues to be important to be cost-effective and also to be energy efficient
in how we utilize the hydrocarbons that continue to be used in industry and in society.
So the role here of the zeolites comes in a couple of forms.
What we're trying to do in the case of hydrocarbon cracking is to take what are typically the very long hydrocarbons.
Think of diesel, for example, diesel fuel, but even longer, even heavier.
And we're trying to break it down into lighter hydrocarbons that were more accustomed to using, for example, as petrol in our cars.
We want to design our zeolite to give it the size and shape such that the reactions proceed to break these longer molecules down
into lighter molecules, maybe five or ten repeat units long.
These shorter hydrocarbons, these more volatile hydrocarbons.
The way in which the zeolites work is first they provide these surfaces for these reactions,
but they also produce what we call a steric hindrance.
Whenever we use the word steric effects or steric bulk in nanomaterials or in chemistry,
we're referring to the effects of size.
So we're referring to the fact that certain molecules will preferentially be able to absorb inside these tubes that make up the zeolites,
or they'll be blocked, or they'll move through them very rapidly because they have a good mobility through the tubes or through the pipes,
or they'll be slow in their motion because they see these surfaces and they interact with them a great deal.
So some specific examples of the zeolites that are utilized in crude oil cracking include the aluminosilicates,
and these combine various aluminum, silicon, and oxygen atoms in order to make those structures, those rings with these very defined sizes.
The heavy hydrocarbons are introduced, they're brought into contact with the catalyst,
and elevated temperatures are combined to inject the energy that's needed in order for these reactions to occur.
And then the catalytic cracking, as it's called, proceeds.
In fact, the word catalysis is the word in catalytic converter.
Here in each of our cars, the emissions that come out of the primary exhaust from our internal combustion energy are further processed.
So we're able to further break down some of the emissions into more environmentally manageable materials.
And this idea of purification or selection of molecules, it can also be implemented using these zeolites.
We use, I think, a very appealing term here, which is the idea of a molecular sieve.
The analogy, of course, being, you know, with a sieve, typically we think of a sieve used in the kitchen as being something with pretty defined openings in it.
Let's say a millimeter or two little squares, and so the water is able to pass through,
but the pasta or the peas stay inside the sieve.
And so what we achieve, in that case, is size selection on the millimeter scale.
Well, zeolites and their friends are able to achieve size selection and also, to some degree, chemical selection,
based on the structure of these materials that are produced.
So it's really this size and also the shape of the pores that control access for molecules into the zeolite.
And so that's the most direct form of the sieve.
But another one that's a little more subtle is about speed.
It's about selection based on when things come out, the other side of our sieve.
So for example, we're able to manage size, but also chemical interactions on the inner surfaces of these tubules,
such that those materials that are smaller or less interactive with the surface are prone to move quickly through,
whereas others move more slowly, they're stuck behind.
And so in this case, the purification isn't necessarily based just on, does it go through or does it not?
Is it retained on one side or is it transferred?
Instead, we can start a process of purification, drive a solution through one of these molecular sieves,
collect the products on the other side, but the stuff that comes out first, say, will be the least interactive or the smallest molecules,
and the stuff that comes out at the end will be the larger ones.
And that's actually very attractive.
We may have different applications or different uses for the different constituents of an impure substance.
Say we have a large-scale chemical reaction where we make a large amount of something.
Well, we may be interested in all of what's produced, but there may be different people, different customers,
who may be interested in the small and the medium and the large molecules.
And so these kinds of sequential purification where speed translates into time, translates into composition, can be very effective.
Now these molecular sieve ideas are also used in the experimental laboratory all the time.
As you well know, water is something that is widely utilized in our world, including in chemistry, including in biology.
Sometimes we want to do our reactions purely within water.
Sometimes we want to do chemical reactions where there's no water there at all.
Water and metals, for example, have lots of interactions with each other.
Sometimes we want to control those interactions and just use, say, an organic solvent that doesn't include any water
in order to control our reactions with great control and purity.
And so what we can do, because of that strong interaction with metals, also cations, which refers to positively charged ions,
is that we can make zeolites that have an abundance of cations inside them, of metal ions.
And when we pass the solution through, all of the water molecules will stick to this abundant surface area,
highly metal rich, highly reactive, highly water attractive surface.
And what we'll pass through will be just the organic solvents that we want.
And so it's actually quite a simple thing to do in the chemical lab.
If you want to dry out a solvent that's supposed to be dry but you want to make it even drier and only consist of the organic molecules,
you can just toss in some of these zeolites and let them sit there for a little while or agitate a little bit,
give them the chance to interact, and this sponge will suck the water out of your reaction.
Now, one can do the converse, one can work with these organic solvents.
Organic solvents often have impurities of organic molecules of slightly bigger or smaller sizes.
Or they consist of molecules of different shapes or different polarities.
By polarity, I mean a propensity to be polarized, so for a charge to point towards a complementary charge or not.
Whereas many organic molecules are interested in a very non-polar, they don't have this inclination to turn around in the presence of an electric field.
They don't really see the effects of other charges.
Well, we can use very hydrophobic zeolites, which means these materials that are specifically designed to be anti-water.
Water is very afraid of them, but they're very interactive with organic molecules.
We can use these to separate organic molecules into their different sizes.
Essentially, we can do molecular sorting.
It's a bit like taking a deck of cards that have been randomly shuffled and being able to put them into their categories,
being able to put them into their bins, and then potentially every one of the sets of cards is useful.
We can use all of them.
So it's really the regularity of these structures.
If you like, it's the symmetry of their pores.
It's the shape, it's the circularity.
It's the fact that we're able to use these known chemical reactions between, say, the aluminum and the silicon and the oxygen
in order to form rings of a defined size that allows us to define the chemistry that goes on.
We can think of these pores as forming traps, little cages or caves that the molecules can get stuck in.
So it's the precision and it's the specificity that we leverage in these molecular sieves.
In fact, we're not limited to using sieves on liquids alone.
Probably how one would think of it, right?
Separating a liquid and a solid is the kind of thing that you do inside a sieve.
But really because it's not just about size, we can even work with extremely small molecules.
We can work with, say, water, carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide.
We can work with these kinds of gases as well.
And so based on their reactivities, we're able to take input natural gas from a low-grade natural gas stream and retain only what we want.
And so remove, extract from it some of the components that we don't want in the ultimate natural gas that we'll sell to people.
In fact, in recent years, there's been great progress on this.
And one of the attractive things about being able to develop these zeolites and engineer their properties so well is that we're able to desulfurize transportation fuels.
So we're able to take the sulfur out, which is often responsible for some of the smell in some of these fuels, and we're able to remove that and do so now at room temperature.
That's one of the impressive things about catalysts is that by making reactions more efficient, often a chemical reaction requires a bit of energy to be introduced in order to proceed.
But we can introduce the minimum required amount of energy to enable a reaction to proceed.
And so we're able to be more efficient in the ways in which we process molecules, process fuels.
One of the really exciting things about what we can now do with these zeolites, with these materials, is that we're able to gain greater selectivity as well through the way in which we impart energy into the reactions.
So if you think about adding a little bit of heat to a reaction vessel, you're putting energy into everything contained there.
So say it was inside one of these zeolites, you'd be putting it into the matrix, into the zeolite itself, and then every molecule that was participating in the reaction would also get some energy.
But it's possible to use molecules that participate in our reactions that are light absorbing and that absorb very specific colors of light.
So if we think back to our discussions of monochromatic light of a single color consisting of a single photon energy, we're able to use laser light to selectively excite only a certain class of molecules inside this reaction.
This allows us to drive forward the reactions that we desire by putting the energy, putting the excited electrons onto one of the classes of molecules that's going to participate in the reaction.
And then by embedding it in the zeolite, we have the catalyst, we have the crucible sitting right there for us.
And we now start to be able to design both where we put the energy and where we put the molecules.
So we start to achieve control via position, size of molecules, shape of molecules, and also the amount of energy that we put in.
This is both leading us to be able to create new molecules that we weren't able to build before, but also even when we were able to do some syntheses before, we're able to enhance yields.
We're able to produce the desired molecule with a higher probability. That has all sorts of advantages.
It means we consume less material in the first place. We consume less energy in the realization of these molecules.
There's less waste as a result. So it's a much more efficient process.
Even the purification steps at the end become simplified as a result of increasing these synthetic yields.
I touched earlier on in the context of fuel cells, there's the playback.
There's the fuel cell, which often till these days has used platinum catalysts that help translate the stored fuel into electrical energy.
But there's also the matter of storing the fuel.
Well, let's take a moment to think about what properties we would desire of a means of, let's say, hydrogen storage.
We obviously would like, let's say, for an automotive application, we'd love to be able to put this fuel into the smallest volume.
We'd like to maximize the density of fuel per volume.
But if you're thinking especially for a portable application, we'd also like to be able to maximize the ratio of the amount of fuel stored to the mass of this.
Because if it's in a portable application, we'll be carrying this mass around with us.
So any extra mass associated with the storage mechanism will be kind of a penalty that we pay in the efficiency of our car.
On the other hand, there are applications in which we'll just have a stationary storage region.
There, we may be very focused on keeping the cost of storage down.
But especially the energy density per unit mass may not be particularly important because we have a stationary storage site.
It's in these kinds of application areas that the so-called metal organic frameworks are particularly attractive.
In the metal organic frameworks, metal atoms are bound together using organic molecules.
We refer to organic molecules that are particularly prone to bind metal atoms as ligand.
We say that they ligate the metal atoms.
And so we create this network or this framework in which metal atoms occur at various apices or vertices.
And connectivity is achieved, the network effect is achieved through these organic molecules that are particularly inclined to want to bind selectively to the metals.
Now as a consequence of this, we're able to achieve an exceptionally high inner surface area.
And the surface area is one where, again, we control the chemical reactivity very nicely.
If you like, we've engineered chemically tunable structures where through the combinations of the metal selected, the organic selected,
and then the architecture, the spacing, the periodicity in all directions, we're able to achieve a degree of chemical tunability.
And this chemical tunability ends up being very powerful in storing hydrogen molecules on the inner surfaces here.
We say that they're free of dead volume, so whereas if you were to have a canister in which you were trying to store a gas such as hydrogen,
much of the volume would be occupied by nothingness, that within these metal organic frameworks we're able to remove the dead volume,
we're able to condense these materials as much as possible.
Now you might think if we're using chemical effects to bind the hydrogen molecules onto the inner surfaces of these metal organic frameworks,
that they'd be kind of stuck there, they'd be irreversibly stuck.
But in fact we distinguish in this field between the idea of chemisorption and the idea of physisorption.
So in general across physical chemistry and physics we use chemisorption to mean that there's actually a binding event,
that there is a very strong tether between a molecule and a surface or two molecules with one another.
Physisorption, often referred to on a surface, we use to refer to the idea of just sort of a light relaxing of a molecule onto a surface.
So the amount of energy associated with that is quite small.
The surface is present, it provides a little place of repose for the molecule,
but it's not a bond that has a huge amount of energy that we need to break in order in this case to extract our hydrogen fuel from our region of storage.
Another way to say that is there's no large activation barrier, no large energy barrier that we need to overcome in order to liberate this hydrogen.
You might ask, I mean what are the limits of this? How far can we go?
How much hydrogen can we store in here? Can we pack a hydrogen molecule on atoms that are spaced half a nanometer from each other?
Well, the metal organic framework is very compelling but it can't overcome the basic personality of hydrogen.
And there's a particular transition for this gas into the liquid phase and we can't get beyond that density limit.
So we're not getting beyond the intrinsic limits on the densification of this class of molecules.
Instead, we're trying to approach those as closely as possible by utilizing the structuring, the selectivity, the chemical reactivity of these interfaces.
What we've discussed broadly in this pair of lectures on energy storage and playback is that by having dexterity at the nanoscale, we have a lot of options.
We have a lot of degrees of freedom.
We're able to do things like control and maximize the surface area of a material, of a structure in order to maximize the density of energy that we can store on it.
And that concept is very related to catalysis by orienting certain molecules relative to others.
We're able to ensure that when a collision does occur, that it occurs at just the right angle to have the greatest impact or to have a chemical reaction that will yield what we desire.
We're able to achieve a selectivity.
We're able to engineer the structure of these materials to leverage what we call steric effects, effects that relate to the size of molecules.
And as a consequence, when we are able to control the size of pores, we're able to engineer the inputs to the chemical reaction and also the outputs.
So ultimately, we're able to engineer the reaction itself towards high yield.
High yield means better use of the input materials, better use of energy, and generation of a more pure substance at the output.
One of the exciting opportunities in these kinds of catalytic efforts, and that has been partially explored but there's much more to be done,
is in taking advantage further of optical control, bringing energy into these reactions using light.
Often a very pure color of light such as that which we could obtain from a laser.
What this really is, is an exploration of many of the most attractive building blocks of the nanoworld.
Our ability to poise electrons, atoms, molecules, take advantage of their interactions with photons,
selectively bring in laser light, like a knife, in order to sever two bonds.
This is the kind of control that engineering at the nanometer scale gives us,
and what it translates into is better use of materials and better use of energy towards our purposes.
