Hi, this is Phenomenology, and I'm Mark Thorsby.
Welcome back.
I hope you're doing well.
In this video, we're going to be taking a look at the introduction to Martin Heidegger's
seminal text, Being in Time, or in the German Sein und Zeit.
So welcome back, everyone.
I hope you're doing well.
So what we're going to be taking a look at here is, so far in this course, we've looked
at Edmund Husserl's text, Ideas 1, or an analysis of what pure phenomenology looks like.
And we've chosen that.
We chose that text, or I chose that text, because I wanted you to get a nice and a solid
understanding of what phenomenology is in its most basic and originary conception.
We're going to see here that really starting with this video is we're going to be looking
at phenomenology after Husserl.
Now, there's a lot of phenomenologists who follow Husserl, but probably the most important
and certainly the most impactful of these philosophers was Martin Heidegger.
Martin Heidegger not only studied directly with Husserl, but he even, his magnum opus
text, which here is Being in Time, he actually dedicates to Edmund Husserl, but we're going
to see that Heidegger, I think, really goes beyond Husserl and succeeds his master, as
it were.
And we're going to see that whereas Husserl's attitude and his philosophy we looked at was
really about the articulation of phenomenology and laying bare the science of phenomenology
as he saw it, in terms of what phenomenology does, how it operates, etc., etc., and what's
up in the principal themes and discoveries that phenomenology can offer us.
We're going to see here that for Heidegger, who's a phenomenologist, phenomenology becomes
a method for addressing the most important question for him, or the most forgotten question,
which is the question of Being.
And so we're going to see that he really radicalizes phenomenology in a way that is so pivotal
and so that really impacts a philosophy.
In many ways, I think, one could argue, indeed, people have argued that Heidegger is really
one of the most important, if not the most important, philosopher of the 20th century.
I don't know about the most important, but certainly I think he's up there at the top
too, in my view.
Him and Wittgenstein, I think, are the most important philosophers of the 20th century.
And so I'm really, really looking forward to Heidegger, these series of lectures.
And I hope that you'll be reading along with us as we go through these.
Now, I'm going to be honest with you, as we're reading Being in time, you're going to find
that Heidegger's language is very difficult.
I think it's difficult in a different way than Husserl.
Husserl, I think, part of his difficulty, or at least the part of the difficulty I have
when I read Husserl, just simply consists in terms of his terminological distinctions
and the many, many interrogative statements he seems to put in there.
I think Heidegger is a much cleaner writer.
It's much more beautiful.
But we're going to find that the difficulty with Heidegger's text concerns the very concepts
he's trying to lay bare, because Heidegger, we'll see especially in the introduction
here, believes that our understanding of phenomenology and ultimately our philosophical understanding
of being is itself hampered by all of the philosophical vocabulary and all of the philosophical
language that we become accustomed to that is sort of sedimented and accumulated over
the last couple centuries and over really a couple millennia.
So Heidegger has a more radical task, I think.
But I think you're going to see is that in one sense, once you're able to understand
what Heidegger is doing and being in time, it opens up and it actually becomes very clear
and I think quite beautiful.
So there's something really, really powerful of this philosophy and I think you're going
to enjoy it.
But you're going to have to struggle through it.
I'm not going to lie to you there.
So let's start off with a sort of quick introduction to Martin Heidegger and in terms of his life,
you see I sort of have put together a sort of brief timeline of some of the elements
of Heidegger's life just to give you a sense of who he is.
He lived from 1889.
Well, let me show you a picture of him here.
Here he is.
It's not the best quality picture, or at least the highest quality, but here is Heidegger.
You can see he's maybe not the most beautiful man, as it were, but he certainly looks like
a serious thinker.
Now his life, he lived from 1889 to 1976.
So really he spans the 20th century, most of the 20th century, his life and he actually
lived, of course he never met, but he lives in the same time.
He's born at the same time in which Nietzsche is alive.
And we'll see that although later on in the course here when we talk about the history
of philosophy, we'll see that Heidegger is strongly influenced or at least he recognizes
the importance of Nietzsche's philosophy.
Nietzsche died in 1901.
Now in 1909, Heidegger received his bachelor's degree.
And initially Heidegger had prepared, he was Catholic, and he was preparing to enter the
priesthood and he attended theological seminary.
It wasn't long after he began attending that he really became convinced that he didn't
really want to do theology, he was really interested in doing philosophy rather.
And by 1913, he pursues a doctorate in philosophy and in 1913 his doctoral exam is completed.
His doctoral exam was on the doctrine of judgment and psychologism.
So it's pretty interesting because when we read Husserl, if you recall, Husserl made
a sound critique of psychologism and he really, Husserl wanted to demarcate phenomenology
from psychology and Husserl, of course, was attacked for creating a sort of psychologism,
especially regarding the publication of the latter volumes of the logical investigations.
And there's a debate here, especially you can think here of Frege's critique of Husserl
as really providing sort of psychologism with mathematics.
So it's interesting here because Heidegger is sort of primed and ready in this sort of
discussion by studying psychologism and thinking about what it means to make judgments.
In 1915, Husserl, Heidegger, rather, completes his doctoral dissertation on the doctrine
of categories and the signification in Dunskotis.
Now many of you may not be aware of who Dunskotis was, but Dunskotis was a medieval philosopher
who in many ways begins to articulate an early conception of intentionality and he starts
to lay bare some early conceptions that bear a strong resemblance to phenomenology.
So there's something very, very interesting there in Heidegger's dissertation, though
by no means can talk about it really in this course.
In 1916, Heidegger meets Husserl and eventually begins to study with him and under him and
eventually later you'll see he succeeds Husserl.
In 1918, Heidegger became a private in the military for a year and but by 1919, Heidegger
became an assistant professor of philosophy at the University of Freiburg.
In 1920, he begins teaching courses on phenomenology in particular and we'll see that like many
of the Greek philosophy, many of the German philosophers from his time, Heidegger is heavily
influenced by a classical reading of Greek philosophy.
You're gonna see as you read being in time, the Heidegger is consistently referring back
to the Greek here.
This course is not in Greek philosophy, so we're not going to spend too much time on
that, but I do encourage you to brush up a little bit on ancient Greek philosophy.
Take a look at, for instance, some of the lectures and metaphysics that I've posted of Aristotle's
metaphysics on the YouTube channel.
In 1923, Heidegger moves to the University of Marburg where he accepted a position at
the University, which is where Husserl was located.
In 1926, so in those three years, Heidegger is teaching vigorously and Heidegger becomes
very, very popular professor.
One of the things that was required though and still is required, you probably heard
of publisher perish at the universities, is that Heidegger wasn't really publishing
lots of books despite his enormous popularity.
You'll see his, not only does he follow in the footsteps of Husserl as a phenomenologist,
but he really begins to radicalize some of the problems that phenomenology can address.
In fact, one of the important lecture courses he gave, and eventually he gets published
and you can read it, is called History of the Concept of Time, which really is, if you
will, sort of first draft of being in time.
But Heidegger was, in the meantime, Heidegger was working on a draft of his sort of major
work called Zein und Zeit, Being in Time.
He was forced eventually by the university to publish it ahead of time.
One of the things interesting is that being in time was actually never fully finished,
which raises some interesting questions for us.
In 1926, Husserl, Heidegger presents Being in Time to Husserl at his 67th birthday party.
And in fact, the book itself is dedicated to Edmund Husserl, so the two are very, very
close friends in 1926.
Now, over the, between 1926 and 1933, there's a lot of amazing work that Heidegger would
do.
He needed to do really, I think, amazing philosophical work throughout most of his life.
But in 1933, he was elected director at the University of Freiburg.
But in the same year, Heidegger joined the National Socialist Party in Germany.
That is, he became a Nazi, and he joined the Nazi party.
And what's more than that, Heidegger actually gave a series of speeches and a series of
talks arguing in favor of the Nazi party.
And especially regarding his, Heidegger especially denounces the Jewish conspiracy in Germany.
And he supported the new laws that the Germans had passed, that had passed under the Nazis,
that it dismissed intellectuals, Jewish intellectuals from serving within academia at the university.
And it's at this time that Husserl is forced to retire for racial reasons.
Husserl was actually a Protestant in terms of his religious affiliation.
But he was Jewish in terms of, he was Jewish, and so he was forced to retire, really quite
tragic.
And unfortunately, there's a sort of, there's a lot, there's a big question here about Heidegger's
relationship to Husserl in 1933, which you really see a sort of breakdown, unfortunately.
And of course, I mean, I'm not, this isn't a course on German history, and so I won't
go into all of what happens between 1933 and of course, 44.
But everything basically goes wrong in German culture.
One of the philosophers who actually studied under, and who's also a phenomenologist who
studied under Martin Heidegger is Hannah Arendt.
And Hannah Arendt actually was also Heidegger's lover too.
She was Jewish, and she was also forced to flee Germany despite being German herself.
But she writes a book that I encourage you to take a look at called The Origins of Totalitarianism,
which she looks at, she gives a phenomenological reading to a certain degree.
She has more other texts, which are more phenomenological in nature, but she looks at the question of
what it means for the Germans to have moved into this sort of racial programming, essentially.
So take a look at that text, it's quite interesting.
Now in 1934, though, Heidegger actually resigned his rectorship, and he actually stopped taking
part in the Nazi Party meeting.
So after 34, Heidegger is not, he doesn't, he's not official, he's still an official
Nazi member of the party, or official member of the Nazi Party.
But Heidegger, his role in terms of the Nazis really diminished, and of course, this is
many, many years before the genocide of the Jewish people, and the genocide of others.
So we can't, we're not gonna associate Heidegger, at least I don't associate Heidegger with
the genocide, though it raises important ethical questions regarding his affiliation,
especially because Heidegger refused to recant his Nazi involvement, in fact, his entire
life.
He never regretted being Nazi, and it's hard not to be critical of Heidegger, and I think
we really should be critical in this regard.
Now in 1938, in the midst of World War II, or the beginnings of World War II, Husserl
dies.
And it's really quite tragic because Husserl was prolific writer, a prolific and important
philosopher, and he really created a whole realm of philosophy at the center of which
is Heidegger.
But when Husserl dies, only two professors attend his funeral.
He was really shunned because of his Jewish heritage, which is evil, I think, and tragic.
In 1945, Heidegger survived the war.
People weren't sure if he had survived the war, but he did survive the war.
And a series of denazification hearings begin, in which the Nazi party is disbanded in Germany.
Karl Jaspers, who's an important phenomenologist actually, and a contemporary of Heidegger's.
At one point, Heidegger and Karl Jaspers had had a series of correspondences, but Heidegger
dropped them off.
Well, Jaspers writes a report on Heidegger's involvement, detailing, you might say, Heidegger's
his anti-Jewish work and the sort of the negative things that Heidegger had done.
The University of Freiburg faculty debate Heidegger's involvement in 1945, and by 1946, Heidegger
actually suffers a nervous breakdown that year, but the University of Freiburg faculty
of the University of Freiburg ultimately decided to grant Heidegger faculty emeritus
status, which means that he's still a member of the faculty, retired, as it were.
But he's barred from teaching, so he's banned from teaching any more lectures.
And really, it's because of his involvement in the Nazi party.
By 1951, the ban on teaching is lifted, and Heidegger then begins to give a series of
lectures throughout his career, and throughout the rest of his life, he continued to give
a number of really important lectures that are worth reading.
Tragically, as I mentioned before, Heidegger, at least on my view it's tragic, Heidegger
refuses to recant his Nazi involvement.
In 1976, Heidegger dies, and just a couple days after Heidegger dies, Der Spiegel, which
is a very important publication in Germany, publishes an interview that they conducted
with Heidegger.
And one of the things in that interview was they asked Heidegger point blank whether or
not he regretted his involvement as a Nazi with the Nazi National Socialists.
And Heidegger says no, and it's shocking.
The question for us is, how could a philosopher who really provides us fabulous insight philosophically
into the question of being, and really pushes phenomenology into a whole new domain and
becomes really so critical to the rest of the 20th century and 21st century philosophy,
how could such a philosopher become so blind so as not to even regret his involvement with
really one of the darkest stains in human history, politically and especially within
German history.
So it's quite shocking there.
I do think, and I don't really want to spend a lot of time talking about Nazis or National
Socialists in this video, but it raises for us some fundamental questions regarding is
there a relationship between Heidegger's philosophy and his Nazism.
Heidegger actually claimed that there was a certain relationship regarding his conception
of historicity.
We're not going to go into that right now, but on the other hand, or is his philosophy
really separate from this.
I think it's important to recognize that Heidegger is not giving us Nazi philosophy.
I think that is a misreading of Heidegger's work, but that does raise for us ethical
questions.
And in the early 80s, French phenomenologists raised this question explicitly regarding
whether or not Heidegger's involvement with the Nazis, and especially Heidegger's involvement
regarding who's forced retirement, whether or not that's something we can forgive and
how we should understand that.
So there's something we're talking about here, and maybe at some point in these series
videos we'll talk about it, but you're going to see really what I want to do in these video
lectures is really just take a look at Heidegger's understanding of phenomenology and in his
introduction to being in time.
So let's sort of take a look at that.
We're going to focus really quite heavily on just giving a really detailed reading in
this video of the introduction to being in time.
I imagine this video is going to run long, so feel free to pause the video, take a break
as you go through.
Let me take a drink off here.
Now being in time, the German, of course, is Sein und Zeit, was first published in 1927
in the Jahrbuch f체r Ph채nomenologie und Ph채nomenologist Foschum, which is a journal that was actually
edited by Edmund Husserl, so being in time here is first published by Husserl, actually,
if you will.
Of course, the book is dedicated to Husserl, and I mentioned this previously, a key preparatory
text.
There is no doubt that being in time is a difficult text to read.
If you would like, I encourage you to take a look at Heidegger's lecture, a history of
the concept of time, which is now published, which really is, if you will, sort of first
draft of being in time, because one of the things you're going to see in being in time
is that Heidegger jettisons our ordinary philosophical vocabulary, and really jettisons
the language that we saw Husserl using completely in order to articulate a new and a fresh,
and I think a more originary conception of Ph채nomenology and the question of being in
particular.
There's a lot of other great texts that can help you, great texts and commentaries that
can help you understand the history of the concept of time.
My own, there's a great philosopher, contemporary philosopher, Simon Critchley, he's actually
the editor of the New York Times philosophy blog, called The Philosopher's Stone, but
Simon Critchley has a great text on Husserl that was published just a couple years back
on being in time, which really lays out, I think, a really, really fantastic explanation
and commentary of Heidegger, and of course, I was previously, I'm friends with Simon,
with Professor Critchley, and that's my reading of Husserl is very much influenced by Professor
Critchley.
So take a look at that, there's some great stuff in there.
Now, what's the structure of being in time?
Well the basic structure is there's an introduction, that's what we're going to be looking at in
this text.
Part one is called the interpretation of docile in terms of temporality, and the explication
of time is the transcendental horizon for the question of being.
By the end of today's video, you'll have an understanding of what this is talking about,
if you've never read or read Heidegger before.
And then the being in time is actually structured into two different divisions, the preparatory
fundamental analysis of docile, I'm sorry, part one is divided into two divisions, the
preparatory fundamental analysis of docile, and then division two is about docile and
temporality in particular.
Part two of being in time was actually never completed, in fact, the majority of this book
was never completed, partially because Heidegger was forced to rush this into publication in
order for his career, publisher, parish.
You're going to see that Heidegger really structures being in time in a very similar
and definitely a very Germanic way, similar to Husserl who got a series of sections.
Heidegger organized the text as a series of paragraphs and then sections within those.
And this is how Zion Insights is organized.
So let's sort of jump in here and you'll see that before the book even starts, there's
a brief title page in which there's this quotation.
And we're going to see that, although this is a course in phenomenology, Heidegger is
not writing a book on phenomenology.
He is interested in the most important question for him, which is the question of being.
And of course, we know that the philosophy is concerned with lots of things, but at
the core, philosophy is concerned with what it means to exist and what it means for us
to understand things in existence.
All of this ruminates around this concept of being, and we're going to see that this
is the most important question for Heidegger.
So let me tell you, I want to read this passage from you just because this is directly from
the title page here, or right after the title page before he begins the introduction.
And it's quite beautiful, but it sort of gets to the heart at it.
And so let me read this to you.
Heidegger writes, For manifestly, you have been aware of what you mean when you use the
expression being.
We however, who used to think we understood it, have now become perplexed.
Do we in our time have an answer to the question of what we really mean by the word being?
Not at all.
So is it fitting that we should raise anew the question of the meaning of being?
But are we nowadays even perplexed at our inability to understand the expression being?
Not at all.
So you can see here, he says that on the one hand, we don't even understand the question
of being, what we mean by this term being, but on the other hand, we don't even care,
right?
Our aim in the following treatise in Zang Un Zaitz is to work out the question of the
meaning of being and to do so concretely.
Our provisional aim is the interpretation of time as the possible horizon for any understanding
whatsoever of being.
But the reasons for making this our aim, the investigations, which such a purpose requires
and the path to its achievement, call for some introductory remarks.
So you're going to see this is the beginning of the introduction and you're going to see
that really Heidegger is interested in the question of what being is and he doesn't even
think we even understand what being means or we even know how to ask the question of
being.
And so really being in time is less about being and it's about what it means to ask
the question of the meaning of being itself.
So you're going to see him articulate all of this in the introduction.
I'm going to follow the introduction as closely as I can section by section.
I should emphasize that there's a lot to the introduction and there's a lot of arguments
that Heidegger makes that I'm not going to be talking about simply because I will run
out of time.
We're already 24 minutes into the video and we're only now getting to part one.
So I'm not going to cover everything and so I encourage you to read this carefully and
probably to get a commentary text to help you along as well.
Now the introduction begins with paragraph one which is the necessity for explicitly
restating the question of being.
Now the question of being here in the German is called the Zeinsfrage and that just means
question of being, right, the being question and what he wants to say is number one is
that the question of being is a forgotten question.
It's not even something that philosophers are talking about.
Just particularly that Edmund Husserl never really talks about this.
Husserl talks about ontological structures and this sort of stuff and Husserl talks about
existence and he talks about actuality.
Consider for instance how Husserl in our previous lectures here, he talks about the
suspension of our general positing of actuality.
Well, what is actuality?
That's not a question that Husserl asks and he doesn't think that any of the philosophers
are asking this.
This is a forgotten question.
So what exactly is the Zeinsfrage?
What is the question of the meaning of being, all right?
And Husserl starts off, I'm sorry, Heidegger starts off by saying that the question of
being is what is stimulating this ancient Greek research of Plato and Aristotle.
Here, of course, in our introduction to philosophy video series, I give a very sort of cursory
analysis of Plato's theory of the forms and in my history of philosophy course, we talk
a little bit more about Aristotle's metaphysics in more detail.
But we're going to see here that at the core of both Plato and Aristotle's, the question
of what it means to be, what it means to be and Heidegger actually would go on to give
very specific concrete lectures about Plato and Aristotle with regards to the question
of the meaning of being.
We're not going to really review those, but if you do, you will find that Heidegger has
a very, I think, unique analysis of Plato in particular.
He doesn't think that we understand Plato correctly.
Anyway, I'm not going to go into that.
But the meaning of being, the question of what it means to be is at the core of ancient
Greek philosophy.
But things are even worse than we realize because the original contribution of Greek
philosophy, Heidegger argues, has actually sanctioned the neglect of the question of
being.
That is, the Greek philosophy is generated out of this question of what it means to be.
But because we have all of these contributions from these Greek philosophers all the way
from the originary priests of cracks like Parmenides all the way up through Hegel, what we see
is that we've neglected the question of being.
Now, being on the one hand has been said as the most universal concepts, and here I encourage
you to take a look at the work of Thomas Aquinas, who actually focuses quite heavily
on the question of being, and Thomas Aquinas argues this too, is that being is on the one
hand the most universal concept, but it's also the most empty concept, because on the
one hand, everything that we experience and everything we see is a form of being, which
means that everything has been.
But since everything has been, we don't really know what we're talking about.
It's the sort of old idea that if something is everything, then in a certain way it's
nothing.
And that's to say that existence clearly is something, it's so universal, but because
of its universality, it's an empty concept.
In fact, it looks like being just simply resists every attempt at definition.
But everyone seems to use this term, and they seem to understand what being means, or as
Heidegger would say, there's so it would seem.
We don't really know what we're talking about, though we have some sort of general intuition.
We have some sort of provisional, obscure, average understanding, but it's insufficient
philosophically.
In section two, and by the way, in all of the video here, whenever I have a pagination,
I'm using the original Heideggerian pagination, and so it's page two here, Heidegger says,
in this way, that which the ancient philosophers found continually disturbing as something
obscure and hidden, has taken on a sort of clarity and self-evidence, such that if anyone
continues to ask about it, he's charged with an error of method.
So we sort of think that we know we have a handle on what existence and being means,
to the point that, for instance, if you ask a philosopher, they can rattle off a series
of arguments.
For instance, though Heidegger doesn't mention this at all, think about the ontological argument
for God's existence, and think about the use of existence and the use of being in that
discussion, in which it's taken as self-evident what it means for things to exist.
So philosophers are not really thinking about this question, especially when Heidegger is
writing.
Now, of course, we're going to see that phenomenology, as prepared by Edmund Husserl, provides
us a way in which to begin to access this question.
But consider the fact that all of the philosophical work that's going on really around the world
at this time, no one is asking this question, not in the way that Heidegger will ask it.
And Heidegger's argument here is that there's so many philosophical prejudices that we have
that they're really too numerous.
There's too many of them that we can adequately deal with at the beginning of being in time.
So we can't really start off and really understand what the meaning of being is, or even what
the question, the Zeinsfraga of being is, the question of being, because we just have
so many philosophical prejudices.
Recall when we looked at Edmund Husserl's work, Husserl talked about the idea that we
had to bracket off all of these theoretical concepts we become accustomed to, and we're
going to see that Heidegger not only agrees with Husserl, but he doesn't think we go far
enough because we can't really uncouple ourselves from them.
So all we really have is a clue to the question of being.
Now in the introduction of being in time, Heidegger begins by sort of signifying, we
have this clue about what the question of being is, but let's lay out what our prejudices
regarding being are.
The first prejudice here is the universal nature of being.
And that's when we say that, when, for instance, Thomas Aquinas says that being is the most
universal concept, well, what kind of, what does that mean here?
And Heidegger sees this as a prejudice, which makes it difficult, or really rather impossible,
for us to begin to think about what we're even talking about.
The first thing here is that Heidegger emphasizes that being is not a universal genus.
You'll recall that when we laid out the distinction between genus and species, the genus is always
a higher category that subsumes particular individual categories.
But the idea here is that when we say that being is universal, we don't mean that being
is a universal genus.
We're not talking about a category at all.
And this is the difficulty here.
For instance, Heidegger mentions that the medieval's refer to being, and they use the
term transcendus, or at least in the Latin formulation, I'm not giving you the Latin
here, but it transcends.
And of course, to transcend is to go beyond.
And it's important here to recognize that the being goes beyond categorization itself.
So being is not a categorical intuition as such.
Now he also mentions that, for instance, Aristotle understood the universality of being really
as a form of analogy.
So when we say that being is universal, we're saying something analogically, because being
is here, and we have genus and species, and universality is a type of genetic category.
But the idea here is that, for at least from Aristotle's perspective, is that this is
not saying it's not a genus, this is an analogical relation here.
And then in this section, as Heidegger discusses the universal nature of being, he talks about
Plato and Aristotle, and he really goes all the way up through Hegel, and talks about
how in Hegel, being becomes an indeterminate, something that's indeterminate in an immediate
sense.
And of course, I'm not going to go through Hegel's logic here, which is actually quite
complex here.
And also remember that Hegel has a work in phenomenology too.
Not the phenomenology that Husserl describes, but the phenomenology of spirit.
And so being is an important category within the phenomenology of spirit, but here it's
indeterminate in the medium.
What exactly does that mean?
Basically, Heidegger's contention is that we don't know, because the history of philosophy
is actually resulted in making being the darkest of all the concepts.
It's not just one genetic category among others.
It's something completely other than that, but the history of philosophy is essentially
shrouded our conception of being by making it a sort of genetic universal category.
Section number two, the second major prejudice here that Heidegger identifies is the indefinability
of being.
Think here about what he just mentioned about Hegel.
Here it's important to recognize that being is not an entity.
And this will become an important thing for us.
When we talk about the existence of something, the being of something, being in and of itself
is not a something at all, because every something is a something only in virtue of its having
being or participating in being or in some way being infused as a being.
But being itself is not an entity.
So we're not talking about a thing at all.
Being is on the one hand, it's not derived from some higher concepts, because if you
will, it's the most universal, right, but analogically.
But then on the second way, being is not presented through these lower concepts either, which
means that we can't uncover our concept of being by looking at conceptual relations.
So a taxonomy of concepts, or for instance, a logical analysis of conceptual relations
in terms of, will never give us insight into this problem of being, right?
There is no definition of being in the ontical sense.
This is a mistake here.
I apologize.
Let's just say ontical, and we'll talk about what that means in a moment here.
Heidegger will actually lay out specific definitions for these things.
And the idea here is that when we talk about the indefinability of being, right, indefinability
demands actually a thorough examination of being, because what is a philosopher to do
when a philosopher doesn't understand something?
It means that they should examine it even closer, right?
And we'll see that this is going to be Heidegger's insistent approach, right?
The third prejudice that Heidegger lays out regarding our inability to think about being
regards the self-evident nature of being, right?
When we talk about, in our experience about things having actuality, well, it just seems
that it's self-evident, right?
And what's important here is that the way in which we comport ourselves to being, or
let's put it this way, self-evident, when I look at something and say, oh, it's just
it exists, it's self-evident, right?
This actually takes us back to a way in which I'm organizing and comporting myself in consciousness
towards being, right?
And of course, a component here, a way in which we can talk about this is think about language.
We're constantly in our language referring to being, and here think about the copula.
A copula is a logical category, which is the category for being, right?
So for the example, the sky is blue, is, is the copula, and what is the copula?
Well, the copula is a demarcation of being, right?
So when I say that I am holding a coffee cup, M refers to being, right?
I'm saying that there's, that I'm saying that the coffee cup has being in my hand.
Well, what does it mean to demarcate being exactly?
What exactly are we talking about, right?
Obviously, I'm talking about a comportment in consciousness, but we're going to see significantly
every comportment is itself a form of being, right?
So the comportment towards entities always uses the concept of being, and this presents
us with what Heidegger calls an a priori enigma, that is, enigma that comes before our experience
itself, right?
A mystery that needs to be addressed.
So self-evidence here is a dubious procedure.
To say that something self-evident is really a way at avoiding the question and the mystery
of the demarcation and the significance of being, and it's a way to dubiously ignore
this a priori enigma, right?
Not only is there no answer to the question of being here, Heidegger says, well, not that
there's not an answer, but not only do we not have an answer to the question of being,
we don't even know what the question is, right?
And so, for instance, is if as I'm talking through this video lecture, you're thinking,
what is he talking about?
What does it mean to ask the question of what existence of being means?
You don't know because we don't even have a grasp on the question of being here itself.
And you're going to see this is in the introduction of being time, because being in time is meant
to give us really a path towards eventually being able to just understand what the question
of being is, just to get us to the point where we can understand what the Zeinsfraga is all
about.
Now, paragraph two of the introduction concerns the formal structure of the question of being,
right?
So, on the one hand, we don't know the content of the question of being.
We don't really know what we're asking, but we can recognize that to ask a question, every
question has a structure, right?
Because every question is something that always asks for an answer, right?
So, what is the, can we formulate this question, and then we can ask what belongs to the form
of any question?
Well, Heidegger says, right, is that every inquiry, because a question is to inquire,
right?
Every inquiry is a seeking, a sukin, right?
Every inquiry is a seeking, and every seeking is always guided by what is sought, right?
So imagine if I'm looking for my keys, right?
I'm seeking my keys throughout the room, looking, and what is guiding my seeking is what I'm
looking for, right?
So that means that the question of being, whatever it is, right, it's a seeking after
being, and it has to be guided by being itself, right?
So seeking for what being is, and that means we have to seek in regard to the manner of
being.
So, we can start to, as it were, so Heidegger's argument here isn't that the Zionsfrog is
an impossible question.
It's rather that we have to work our way out of our categories, and we can start by formally
understanding that the answer and the question of being itself ultimately has to be guided
by being, right?
So the form of a question always includes A, that which is interrogated.
This is what Heidegger does not use this term, and I think he would object to my using this
term.
What you might say is that the question always, right, moves towards, is looking for a specific
object, right?
It's guided, and it includes that which is interrogated, but it also includes that which
is found out, and here I want to talk about the essence here.
The reason I've included the object and essence here is because I want you to see that there
is a linkage between the Husserlian categories of phenomenology and ideas one in what Husserl
Heidegger is doing here.
Heidegger, for reasons we'll get to in a moment, specifically does not want to use this sort
of language, but it is, I think, helpful for us to, and for at least in this course, I
want you to see the lineage of what Heidegger is doing traces back to Husserl, right?
Now, inquiry to inquire itself is a particular manner of being for a being that inquires,
right?
So remember here is that since, so to just ask any question to inquire itself, only
beings which can inquire can ask questions, right?
And that means that as a being that can inquire, when I make an inquiry, I'm actually taking
on a particular manner of being, right?
I'm existing in a certain sort of way, right?
Here you can think about maybe Husserl's categories of noesis, it's a type of noema,
for instance, inquiry, right?
Now, Husserl is not, Heidegger is not going to follow Husserl along those lines, right?
And in a certain way, you can see here, there's a sort of tragedy regarding Husserl's view
of what phenology was to become, because in a certain way, it gets dismantled to some
degree by Heidegger, right?
But back to the point, inquiry itself is a particular manner of being for a being that
inquires.
Oops, let's go back there, right?
Now since we have some access to the concept of being, because we do have the copula, we
do use these concepts, that means that there must be a way to inquire about it.
You can see this is what Heidegger would call our average every day, of vague, I don't know
what it's right here.
This is what we call a vague average understanding, or an average every day understanding of being.
So what is being?
Well, Heidegger says, what we need to do is we need to know what the horizon for that
very question is, right?
And by horizon here, think about the language that Husserl used here to talk about, you
know, the conditions for the possibility of the question, right?
What we do know, for instance, about being is that being determines the entities as entities.
So anything can be an entity, everything from the coffee shop to the mirror behind me, to
me, right?
All of this is being, and we know that being is what determines an entity as an entity.
So you can't be an entity if you don't have being, right?
But being, like we said earlier, is not an entity in itself, right?
So what does this mean?
Well, it means that the Zeinsfraga is not a question, to address the Zeinsfraga, it's
not a question of trying to tell a story or trace an origin.
Why?
Because only entities have origins, right?
So we're not going to be trying to link it back to some sort of start with an entity
and work our way backwards to the question of being.
In a certain way, this is a way in which you might, for instance, understand the defunct
nature of the problems regarding first movers and all of this sort of stuff that you may
have heard of, or you can take a look at regarding, for instance, Thomas Aquinas' or Aristotle
here, right?
In which there's a sort of tracing towards origin.
Heinegger as explicit as we can't do that here, right?
On six, he says, hence being, as that which is asked about, must be exhibited in a way
of its own, and this is essentially different from the way in which entities themselves
are discovered, right?
So that means we need to find a way to understand being that is, that remains faithful or has
a fidelity towards being itself, right?
So that's why we can't tell a story because you can only tell stories of entities and
we have to be faithful to being as itself.
Now what are the different ways in which we recognize being?
Well, everything we talk about, right?
Everything we have in view, all of the things we comport ourselves towards, right?
We're being, how we are is being, right?
The inquiry itself is a manner of being.
When we talk about something having reality, we're talking about being, right?
And think here about, I can talk about the reality of that which is outside of me, but
I can also talk about the reality of the presentations I have in consciousness, for instance.
All of those are real, all of those have being, right?
That something is, and we're talking about reality, what is present hand, right, before
me?
What subsistence means?
Even validity is a way in which we recognize being.
And think here, if you want, take a look at my series on Introduction to Formal Logic,
and we talk about the validity of argumentative propositions, right?
Or for instance, quantificational validity.
To say that something is valid is to demarcate a form of being, right?
It's to say that something is, right?
So when we talk about there being something is, or we're talking about something given,
we're always recognizing being.
So whatever point of departure we're going to make towards being, we have to recognize
that these different manners, right?
So from which of the entities is the disclosure of being taken?
What has the priority?
Well, Heidegger says to understand being, we have to understand how we look at being.
In other words, we need to uncover the nature of the being that we ourselves are, right?
Because since being is something that's recognized by us, and that recognition is a form of being,
we can't understand what being is in itself, we have to first begin and uncover what being
means for the being, for whom being is a question, right?
We're going to see this as an explicit reference to an important concept of Heidegger's, okay?
Now this, and this is the concept, Dasein, right?
Heidegger writes on seven, this entity, which each of us is, is himself, and which includes
inquiring as one of the possibilities being, we're going to denote by the term Dasein.
Now in German, Dasein, you can see here, Zein is the term for being, and Da means to point,
right?
So here it means something like to point to being, and what he means to say is that we're
going to call ourselves Dasein.
Now later on, in just a minute, Heidegger's going to really say, and this is what I want
you to memorize here, is that whenever you say what is being, what is Dasein, Dasein
is the being, for whom being is an issue.
Now that means that all human beings who can ask the question of being, and who can recognize
being are Dasein.
So he's talking about us, Dasein is his term for the human.
Now he doesn't use the term human here, because by using the term Dasein, he's signifying
the, the being of the person who inquires after being, right?
So he's giving this new term, this new language.
In many ways, you're going to see that being in time operates almost lexinographically,
and it operates as a lexicon of concepts for thinking about how, what being is, and what
it means for us.
Now, Heidegger recognizes there might be a problem here, that is, is there a circularity?
Because are we really just saying we're going to understand being by understanding being,
right?
And, and Heidegger's response here is, well, that factically, there is no circle at all,
right?
Because when we look at the actuality of ourselves, the facticity of ourselves, and we'll see
later in the book, Heidegger will explicitly define facticity, though I'm not going to
do it now, is when we look to how we actually exist, we recognize that we can determine
the nature of an entity's being without first formulating the meaning of being itself, right?
That is, it's not circularity, but it's a relatedness between the backwards and the
forwardness of our inquiring nature of being as beings.
This stuff is difficult, I know.
So I hope this is helping, and I hope this, this is at least laying clear some of these
concepts.
Now, paragraph three is known as the ontological priority of the question of being.
Now, what he's going to argue here, and you'll see the ontology is going to play an important
role here, and we'll get to this in a minute.
Now, when we talk about this question of being, we can ask, is the Zeinsfrager the question
of being a matter of speculation, or is it a matter of the most basic and concrete of
all possible questions?
Of course, he doesn't think it's just speculation, he actually thinks it is a concrete question.
The problem is, it's a concrete question, but it's so concrete and so basic, and then
coupled on top of it with the history of our theoretical concepts and philosophy, we just
don't know what that concretizing thing is, right?
So the task here is to understand the constitution of entities, because every entity has being,
so the constitution of any entity ultimately must trace back to being, or as it were, right?
So the task is to understand the constitution of entities in their most basic sense, and
this is what a science is doing ultimately, right?
And Heidegger here actually discusses the role of the sciences.
He talks about the crisis of science in his day, or in I think would still be today, and
he mentions, for instance, the crisis in mathematics, we can talk about formalism and intuitionism,
but he goes on to talk about mathematics, physics, biology, the historical human sciences,
theology, and so forth.
All of these have a crisis, and what's the crisis?
The crisis refers to the idea that none of these sciences are able to articulate what
it means to evaluate the things themselves, right?
So for instance, mathematics is looking at mathematical concepts that have validity,
right?
That's a type of being, but what exactly is that mathematics can't tell us?
The same things with physics and center, right?
He has a quotation here on 10, quote, basic concepts determine the way in which we get
an understanding beforehand of the area of subject matter, underline all the objects
the science takes as its themes, and all the positive investigation is guided by this
understanding.
Only after this area itself has been explored beforehand in a corresponding manner do these
concepts become genuinely demonstrated as grounded.
So you can see here is that what he's going to say is that the sciences today are in crisis
because they have no grounding in their understanding of the copula, right, of being, of continuing
on.
And in every such area, every science is itself obtained from the domain of entities themselves.
This preliminary research from which the basic concepts are drawn signifies nothing else
than an interpretation of those entities with regard to their basic state of being.
Such research must run ahead of the positive sciences as Andy can.
Here the work of Plato and Aristotle's evidence enough, right?
You can see that Plato and Aristotle without any science, any conception of modern science
or any of the work that was laid out by the later scientists, right, they're able to begin
to address this.
So we can, in fact, begin to try to understand the grounding of the sciences by looking at
being other philosophers have done so, and we too can do it, right?
And this would hold for theology as well.
Now the crisis of the sciences require an examination of what it means for something
to be as they're given.
Now this is the discussion of ontology, right?
And in a really general sense, what you can say is that ontology is the, is, refers to
the logic of being, right, ontos being in Greek there, right?
And so what you might say is that ontology refers to the relations that beings have with
each other and with themselves.
Now Heidegger is doing a fundamental ontology at the, or he wants to get to a fundamental
ontology with designs froga.
Now Heidegger makes a distinction here between ontology versus what he calls the ontical,
or the ontic, right?
And this is sometimes referred to as the ontological distinction, right?
The ontology refers concerns being itself, whereas the ontical concerns entity, the being
of entities themselves, right?
So if we're talking about ontology in its most radical sense, we're talking about being
in and of itself.
If we're talking about ontics, we're talking about the being of specific sorts of entities.
So for instance, you can say that if we go back to Edmund Hustrel's discussion of consciousness,
all of that was ontical.
It wasn't ontology proper, right?
And the same thing would go for any number of philosophers we could name, right?
All ontology, no matter how rich and firmly compacted a system of categories it has at
its disposal, remains blind and is perverted from its own most aim.
If it has not first adequately clarified the meaning of being and conceived this clarification
as its fundamental task, right?
So all of the things that the ontologies we've seen previously were actually ontical because
the ontology itself, being itself, the meaning of being, is never answered or clarified.
OK, so now we're going to move to the paragraph four, where Heidegger discusses the
ontical priority of the question of being, right?
Now, science in general refers to the totality of established interconnections of true
propositions within a specific domain, right?
So that's what science is.
And you're going to see that the Heidegger is giving a science here, but he's giving
an originary conception of what a science means.
A science in general is this totality of established interconnections of true propositions.
The question of establishment here ultimately goes back to the type of science we're looking at,
right?
So how a chemist establishes true propositions in their interconnections differs from how
a mathematician does, right?
But they're both doing the same thing in a general level, as it were, right?
But the science of beings, but what about the science?
But science has the has the being of its entities, and that is every science ultimately also
includes the manner of being of which is the of which is the occurrence of the
inquire or the sciences themselves.
In other words, that the science has an ontical theme, which is determined by the
scientist, because the scientist is the person who's doing the inquiring.
So remember, we talked about inquiring as a manner of being.
Well, that filters into science, which means that the science has the being of its
entities that has its being of us or Dawson.
So what distinguishes Dawson ontically is that that is that being is an issue for it, right?
Or being in such a way that one has an understanding of being, right?
Now, the kind of being that Dawson can comport itself towards is designated by the term
existence.
So when I comport myself towards the coffee cup here, right, that comportment is designated
by existence, right?
That's what I mean by existence, right?
And think here about when if I don't know something exists, I don't know it exists
because I can't comport myself towards it, at least in a sort of kind of concrete
fashion.
Heidegger writes Dawson always understands itself in terms of its existence, in terms
of a possibility of itself to be itself or not itself.
Here, of course, I think of Shakespeare to be or not to be Dawson has either chosen
these possibilities itself or got itself into them or grown up in them already, right?
So, so how exactly Dawson gets in this, we're not sure, but there's these different ways.
Only the particular Dawson decides its existence, whether it does so by taking
hold or by neglecting the question of existence never gets straightened out, except
through existing itself.
And here's quite fascinating, right?
This is the idea here is that one cannot recognize existence, except through a manner
of existing, right?
You can see here, it's a similar sort of question to this problem of being.
Now, Heidegger is now going to start to give us a range of categories and lay out what
these categories are.
The understanding of oneself by existence is called what he calls the existential,
existential, right?
Let's see, let's move here.
And here's a list of categories, right?
So existence here refers to that which Dawson comports itself towards, right?
The existential is the understanding of itself by Dawson.
Existentiality refers to the structures of existence and existential refers to the
analytic of existentiality, right?
That refers to the analytic of the structures of existence and the understanding
of itself by Dawson is existential, right?
So he's sort of laying out these terms, which can be confusing, but I hope you'll see
there's a rigorous formulation to what he's doing here.
At the end of the day, what we can say is that being in the world is something that
belongs to Dawson existentially, right?
That is the analytic of the structure of existence for Dawson is that Dawson is a
being in the world.
All of us are always already thrown into the world as it were, right?
We're living in a world and we can't separate ourselves from that.
And so if we want to understand Dawson's existential, right?
Then we have to recognize that Dawson is a being in the world.
And we're going to see later on in subsequent videos that this will this this
insight of our being in the world as a preliminary structural category for
Dawson is going to allow Heidegger to lay out structurally his formal analysis of
Dawson, okay?
So on 13 he says, therefore fundamental ontology, right?
Remember the ontological distinction from which alone all other ontologies can take
their rise must be sought in the existential analytic of Dawson, right?
That has to be sought out in the way in which we are beings in the world.
The way in which we have, we're a manner of being towards things that exist, right?
Now that means that Dawson takes priority here in terms of articulating the meaning
of the question of being, right?
And so Heidegger lays out, he says, really when we talk about this priority,
there's three things that go along.
On the one hand, there's the ontical priority where Dawson is an entity whose
being has the determinant character of existence, right?
So Dawson is something that existing, but there's the ontological priority in
which Dawson is in itself ontological because existence is that's
determinative for it.
Remember Dawson is the being for whom being is an issue.
And then there's the ontico ontological priority in which Dawson also possesses as
constitutive for its understanding of existence, an understanding of the being
of all entities of a character other than its own, right?
So there's these sorts of three categories that Heidegger is going to use within the text.
Now, let me give you here this great quote from Heidegger here, which is quote,
if to interpret the meaning of being becomes our task, Dawson is not only the
primary entity to be interrogated, it is also the entity which already comports
itself and it's being towards what we're asking about when we ask this question.
So let's get moving here.
Okay.
Now, now this is section two of the introduction and I've already gone an hour.
So here's what I'm going to do as I'm going to stop right now.
And in the next video, I will complete our understanding are, I will complete the
video on the second part of the introduction of being in time.
Thanks again for watching.
I look forward to seeing you guys online.
