Welcome to lecture 12 in which we're going to explore further the implications of that
very big idea we developed at the end of the previous lecture, the idea of conservation
of mechanical energy.
The idea that we can transform energy from potential energy to kinetic energy and back
and forth and in systems where only conservative forces act, where there's no friction, no
dissipation from air resistance, fluid viscosity, things like that, the total mechanical energy,
the sum of the kinetic energy and the potential energy will be conserved.
Now last time I had my beautiful yellow ball bouncing up and down and illustrating the
interchanges of energy between spring potential energy, gravitational potential energy and
kinetic energy of the ball, here's a slightly simpler system, it's a mass, a block mounted
on a horizontal spring, animation of it, the block is moving back and forth with a particularly
characteristic motion that we're going to describe in great detail in lecture 17.
But the other thing that's going on here is I've plotted a graph and on the vertical
axis of the graph is energy and on the horizontal axis of the graph are simply two places, one
mark U for potential energy, one mark K for kinetic energy and what you can see going on
as the mass vibrates back and forth, exchanging energy between potential energy when it's
all the way to one extreme, kinetic energy when it's moving rapidly through its middle
position, potential energy when it's at its far extreme, you can see the bars on the graph
changing height as they interchange kinetic and potential energy, but if you were to add
up the heights of the bars at any given instant they would always add up to the total energy,
which would be equal to the potential energy when the spring is at one extreme or the other
and equal to the kinetic energy when the spring was right in the middle and we'll be using
graphs like that to look at how we deal with potential and kinetic energy and their interchanges
in mechanical systems.
Now one of the biggest reasons for understanding conservation of energy, one of the most practical
applications of it is it allows us to shortcut the messy details of problems involving motion,
problems that would be very difficult to do using Newton's second law. We've already
seen that it's pretty straightforward to solve problems involving motion with constant acceleration.
Once we understand Newton's second law that means motion with constant forces, but forces
aren't always constant. Even something as simple as the force of a spring as we've seen
is not constant because the more you stretch a spring the greater the force and so the
more force it takes to keep stretching it and so the spring did not have a constant
force and so an object subject to a spring is not going to move with constant acceleration.
As you can see in that animation we looked at or as you can see with that big yellow
ball I was showing you last time.
Well if we can't solve those problems using Newton's second law easily how do we solve
them? Well one way would be to use calculus and then we could work out all the gory details
of the motion at least in some cases. But even that's not possible mathematically sometimes.
The conservation of energy cuts through all that and allows us to solve complicated problems
easily. Let me give you an example here, a quantitative example. Simple one but quantitative.
So here are two skiers. They're each starting out from rest and they're going to ski down
frictionless slopes and they're going to drop through a vertical distance h. The skier at
the top is on a perfectly smooth slope. It's got a constant slope to it. That skier is
going to be accelerating downward with a constant acceleration. I didn't work out the details
of that acceleration by the way but I will tell you the answer for it which if you'd
like to work something out for amusement. If you consider this angle to be theta the
acceleration down the slope turns out to be g times the sine of theta. Since the sine
of an angle is less than one or one at maximum that's a way of sort of diluting gravity.
So this skier we could solve the problem. How fast is that skier going at the bottom?
Because that would be a problem involving constant acceleration, the constant acceleration
that diluted gravity along that slope. We know how to do that one. Here's a very different
looking problem in terms of the physics. This skier is on a slope whose angle changes.
This skier is going to start out with a relatively small acceleration, go over this hump the
acceleration is going to increase then the acceleration is going to decrease then they're
going to get to the bottom. How on earth are we to solve that problem? If we were to solve
it using Newton's second law we would have to calculate the acceleration at each point
here and that would be messy. That's what calculus might be able to do if we could describe
this slope with a simple mathematical function. If we couldn't do that we'd have to throw
up our hands. Couldn't solve this problem using Newton's second law. Conservation of
energy is going to cut through all those details and make these two problems be essentially
the same. So let's start by taking the zero of potential energy at the bottom of the slope.
We're not allowed to set the zero of potential energy anywhere we like. Then the initial
potential energy of either skier is u sub zero, again that sub zero for initial is m g h because
they are starting out at height h and the bottom is where the potential energy is assumed
to be zero. So they're starting out h above the bottom. All that matters is the vertical
distance and that's again because the potential energy and the work only involve the vertical
component of the force. So each one starts out with potential energy u sub zero u naught
equals m g h. The skiers start at rest so their initial kinetic energies are k sub zero
k naught equals zero. So we know their total energy. Their total energy is k naught plus
u naught, k naught was zero, u naught was m g h, so that's just m g h. At the bottom
u is zero. So at the bottom if they have any energy, and they do because energy is conserved,
their energy is all kinetic. It's a half m v squared. And what we're after is v. We
want to know how fast they're going at the bottom. So all we have to do is write expressions
for the total energy at two points, one where we know the total energy and one where we
don't know it but involves some unknown that we'd like to find. So if we write the statement
of conservation of energy, we say that their initial energy, which was m g h, is equal
to their final energy, which is a half m v squared. Notice as usual involving problems
with gravity, the mass cancels again because all objects undergo the same gravitational
acceleration. We solve that and let's see how we do it. We cancel the m, we multiply
by the two and we take the square root. And the v is two g h and it didn't matter which
skier I was talking about. The answers are the same. Regardless of how complicated that
slope was, even if there was a loop the loop like we did in the last lecture on there,
as long as there were no losses due to friction, the answer would be the same. They would reach
the bottom with the same speed, the square root of two g h. Energy conservation cuts through
all the details, especially in the second case where the acceleration is continually
changing and we really wouldn't know how to solve the problem. But conservation of energy
gives us a shortcut to the answer. We do the numbers here. Let's take h being five meters
about 15 feet, g about 10 meters per second squared. They're going to be going about
10 meters a second at the bottom and that's about 22 miles per hour. It's an unrealistic
problem because friction and air resistance are not insignificant for a skier, but they
give us a approximate sense of how they go and they show us how powerful conservation
of energy is when only conservative forces act. We cut through all those difficulties.
Let's do another example of conservation of energy. Let's take a look at this little
setup I have on my track here. I've got my little car and I've got a spring and I'm
going to pull the spring back and I'm going to use the spring to launch the car. I want
to ask a following question. If I know the spring constant and I know how far I've pulled
the spring back, how high up the track is the car going to go? I'll do this simple experiment
and the car rose to some particular height up the track. I want to be able to figure
out what that height is. Again, this is a conservation of energy problem. Let's move
on to look at that problem. Here we are, an idealized example of that problem. We've
got some block. That was my car. We've got a spring. We've got some initial potential
energy because we've compressed the spring and that initial potential energy is the
energy stored in a spring, which we found out last time was one half times the spring
constant k, the stiffness of the spring, times how far I stretched it squared. Here's our
ramp and I want to ask how high up it gets. What's the height h when the block has risen
to its maximum height before it's going to start going back down again, or the car in
the case of my track? It starts at rest. It's initial kinetic energy, k naught is zero.
Its total energy is k naught plus u naught and that's just a half kx squared. I should
mention I'm doing what I did last time and taking the zero of gravitational potential
energy at the bottom. It doesn't have any gravitational potential energy at the start,
but it does have spring potential energy a half kx squared. That is the initial total
energy and the total energy stays the same all the time, so that's the total energy at
any other time, including when it's up there. What's going on when it's up there? Initial
state, u naught, a half kx squared, k naught, zero. What's happening in the final state?
Here's our total energy. In the final state, the block is at rest. It's not compressing
in the spring. The only energy it has is gravitational potential energy and we know
that that's u equals mgh, the force of gravity times the height, the force being mg, the
weight. That's the final energy. The final state is u is mgh, k is zero because it's
not moving in that final state, at least instantaneously. It's stopped moving, it's going to start
right down again, but for an instant it's at rest. All I need to do now is apply conservation
of energy and equate the initial energy to the final energy and that's an equation. In
one unknown, the unknown is h. How high up the ramp does it get? I can solve by dividing
by mg and I'm going to get kx squared over 2 mg for the height. That's how far up the
ramp it will go. Now I present problems like this to students and often they do the problem
this way. They say, well, okay, the spring is going to launch it and it's going to be
going with some speed v and I'll figure out what that speed is. And then once I know what
speed is going at, I can figure out how high up it's going to get. Don't need to do that.
Conservation of energy cuts through all those details. Conservation of energy takes an initial
state and a final state and it doesn't care about any intermediate state. You could do
the problem by first calculating the speed with which it leaves the spring, knowing it's
kinetic energy in other words, and then figuring out the height but you don't need to. All
you need to do is start at the beginning, end at the end, and conservation of energy
cuts through all the details and gets you there. Let's take a look though at this graphically.
So there's the initial state. I've got another one of these energy versus type of energy
graphs like I had in that animation. And now I have three types of energy. I have kinetic
energy on the left, spring kinetic energy, u spring in the middle, and gravitational
potential energy on the right. We start out with no kinetic energy because it's not moving.
We start out with no gravitational energy because I defined u equals zero at the bottom.
All the energy is in the spring. At the end, same graph, no kinetic energy again, no spring
energy because the spring is no longer stretched, and it's all gravitational potential energy.
Same amount, block is the same height as it was at the beginning. That's the way we solved
the problem. If you wanted to worry about the intermediate situation right in there,
after the block has left the spring and before it started rising up the rising part of the
slope, it's got some kinetic energy. It's a half mv squared. We could find out what
v was by equating a half mv squared to the initial kinetic energy, an initial potential
energy, one half kx squared. I'm not going to bother to do that, but the point is we
could easily have solved for the intermediate state and then use that to solve for the final
state. But we didn't need to. We went right from the initial state to the final state
because conservation of energy cuts through all those details for us. Let's see how much
faith we really have in this conservation of energy principle. Let's do an experiment
that if we don't believe in conservation of energy is going to put us at risk. Here I've
got a little demonstration set up. It consists of a massive bowling ball hanging from the
ceiling and it can swing like a pendulum. In doing so, it gains gravitational potential
energy, loses potential energy, gains kinetic energy, goes back up to potential energy and
so on. In principle, if we believe in conservation of energy and we start it from rest with a
certain amount of gravitational potential energy, it can never have more energy than
that and so it can never rise to a height higher than where it started. To see if we
have faith or rather if Tricia here has faith, I'm going to ask her to hold this ball right
up to her nose. Now you'll notice that the back of her head is against the wall so she
has absolutely nowhere to go to get out of the way of this thing. If conservation of
energy were not true, her face would be at great risk. Tricia, when I tell you two, I'm
going to ask you to release the ball but the important thing is not to give it a push because
we don't want it to have any initial kinetic energy. We want its energy to be entirely
at this point potential. It will be converted to the kinetic energy of its swing. It will
be converted back to potential energy and then back it will come. Are you ready? Release.
There it goes. Kinetic potential. Whoa! Back. There it is again. She hardly even flinched.
She has faith in conservation of mechanical energy. There is no way that bowling ball
could get higher than where it started which was right at her nose and so her face is spared.
Thank you very much Trish. Well as our bowling ball was swinging back and forth, its potential
energy was changing and it was changing as a function of where it was. When it was near
the extremes of its motion, its potential energy was higher. When it was down at the
bottom, its potential energy was lower. That's generally true for all sorts of systems, not
just mechanical systems like bowling balls. Potential energy varies with position and
understanding the potential energy curve, the potential energy as a function of position
allows us to learn a lot about how a system is going to behave. Perhaps the paradigm example
of a potential energy curve is the roller coaster as I have here on this track. I'd like to
take a minute and explore the energetics of potential energy curves using the roller
coaster as a paradigm. Here's an example, a picture of a roller coaster. On a roller
coaster we're talking about gravitational potential energy. U is MGH, weight MG times
the height and so height is a direct measure of potential energy. The actual shape of the
roller coaster becomes a potential energy curve and I've marked three different heights
here and I want to comment on what happens depending on what the total energy of this
roller coaster car is. So at the graph at the left, got a quicker picture of the roller
coaster, a simpler picture, now it's a potential energy curve, its potential energy as a function
of position along that track. And if the total energy were the level marked E1 there, then
that roller coaster would be free to move anywhere along that track. It would have more
energy than the maximum potential energy it could have, namely the potential energy at
the left hand edge at the highest point on the track. On the other hand, maybe it's
energy, total energy would be E2. That's the energy it would have if it started right
at this point A on the track from rest so it had no kinetic energy and then it would
be capable of moving down the track up over this hump and it could get up as far as here
but no farther. It would be trapped between those two points, we call those turning points.
And finally, if it had an even lower energy E3 and it started out here, it would be stuck
between points A and B, or if it had started out here, it would be stuck between points
B and C, between here. Only if it had energy greater than any of these humps could it get
all the way out to the end of the curve. So that's an example of a potential energy curve
and I've got the same thing happening over here with the roller coaster. Here I have
a large hump at the end and a smaller hump in the middle and if I start the car about
here, it gets over that hump, it had enough energy, enough total energy that it could
get to the top of this and still have some energy to spare, which would be kinetic energy
and it would still keep moving. On the other hand, if I start it lower down, say about
here, it now doesn't have enough energy to get over that second hump and it's trapped
in this so-called potential well between these two turning points. Now there's friction
here, it's gradually losing energy to friction, but in the absence of friction, it would be
free to move in that so-called potential well. We'll see how these ideas continue even when
we get way into quantum mechanics and we start looking at how atoms and molecules behave.
We'll talk about their potential energy curves also. And indeed, here's a potential energy
curve not for some mechanical system like a roller coaster, but of the two hydrogen atoms
that make up a hydrogen molecule. And you can see in this potential energy curve, potential
energy is a function of position. We happen to define potential energy to be zero when
the two atoms are extremely far apart. As they come together, there is a minimum in
that potential energy curve and that's the state where a natural H2 molecule will be.
That'll be the equilibrium state of a hydrogen molecule, the state of lowest possible potential
energy. That's the state the molecule will get itself into. If you give the molecule
a little agitation, at least in terms of classical physics, it will be free to move about. Its
size may change a little bit and that describes the vibrational energy of a hydrogen molecule.
If I want to separate the two hydrogen atoms to make them now separated and make them no
longer a molecule, I would have to move up that potential energy curve until I got to
zero, the zero of potential energy far at the right of the curve, which corresponds to
the molecules, the atoms being essentially infinitely far apart.
Okay. Let's change gears a little bit. We've been talking about energy for a while. Let's
now talk about energy and something related, namely power. Energy is something, as I indicated,
it's a conserved substance in the universe. It's like matter. In fact, Einstein tells
us they're interchangeable. It measures an amount of stuff, but you'll often hear people
talking about power and power measures the rate at which you do work, the rate at which
you use energy, the rate at which you generate energy, the rate at which you transform energy.
It's about rate and it's a very, very common misconception to confuse energy and power.
The media does it all the time. Don't do it. Let me give you some examples.
So energy is an amount of stuff. There's kinetic energy, for example. There's potential energy.
There's electrical energy. There's, etc. Lots of different kinds of energy. Power is the
rate of energy used, the rate of energy generation, etc. It's the rate of doing work, the rate
of consuming energy, the rate of generating energy. They have different units. Energy
measured in joules, as we've seen. It's also measured in calories, more about that in a
minute. It's also measured in kilowatt hours. That's how you pay for energy on your electric
builds, measured in British thermal units. If you're an engineer in the United States
or a heating contractor, you work with British thermal units. It's measured in electron volts.
If you're a physicist or chemist, these are all different units of energy. They're measuring
the same thing. They can be converted one to the other. It's also measured in barrels
of oil equivalent. A barrel of oil equivalent is the equivalent of the energy contained in
a barrel of oil. Those are energy units. Power units, you're also familiar with some
of them, watts. A watt is the fundamental SI unit of power. A watt is defined as one
joule per second. If I do work at the rate of one joule per second or I consume energy
at the rate of one joule per second, that's equivalently one watt. A horsepower, another
power unit you've heard of, used to measure the power of car engines, is equivalent to
746 watts. It used to come from horses. Now it's defined as 746 watts. A million barrels
of oil equivalent per day, that's a certain rate of using energy. That's power. If you're
in the oil industry, you might talk about power in those terms.
Human kinds energy consumption rate, the entire population of our planet is consuming energy
at the rate of 16 terawatts. That's about 16 times 10 to the 12 watts is the rate at
which we consume energy. You might ask, well, is that per day or per year or what? No. It's
a rate. It's round the clock. Humankind is consuming energy at the rate of 16 trillion
joules every second. To get you thinking about this, figure out what's wrong with this statement,
which I picked from a leading newspaper, which I will not name. The new power plant will
produce 500 megawatts each hour. Or another one, which I picked from a solar installer
I won't name. The solar panels are rated at 7 kilowatt hours. What's wrong with both
those statements? We'll pause a minute and think about it.
What's wrong is 500 megawatts is a rate, period. The time is built in. 500 megawatts means
500 million joules every second. The solar panels are rated at 7 kilowatt hours. That's
meaningless. I have to know how long the sun is shining on them to know how much energy
they're going to produce. What they're probably rated at is 7 kilowatts, meaning they will
produce energy at the rate of 7,000 joules every second, 7 kilowatts. Don't confuse energy
and power. Let me do a couple of examples where we're going to calculate power. I'm
going to do one harder example first and then one rather quick, easy example. So let's move
over to the big screen here and let's do a couple of examples involving power and energy.
Here's the harder one, cycling. What's the minimum power you would need to apply? That
is the minimum rate at which you would have to do work, the minimum rate at which you
would have to supply energy to bicycle up a 10% slope and 10% happens to be 6 degrees
at 9 miles per hour, which happens to be about 4 meters per second. You and your bicycle
together happen to have a mass of 80 kilograms. This is not a trivial physics problem, but
it's one of the kinds of problems you can do coming out of this course.
We know that the work it takes to raise a mass m, a height h, is work equals mgh. I've
seen that many times. That's the work needed, but we're not asking about work. We're asking
about power, the rate of doing work. So the rate of doing work is going to be power p.
It's going to be the rate at which we're raising things up in height, so it's going to be mg
times the rate of change of height, delta h, change in height over delta t, the time involved
in making that change. Delta h over delta t is the vertical speed, which I'll call v
vertical. It's the rate at which the bicycle is going up vertically. It's not the rate
at which it's moving along the road. It's the rate at which it's rising vertically,
which is going to be less than its actual speed. So the power is mg times v vertical.
Okay, let's continue the calculation. There we are. We know that now what the power is.
It's mg times the vertical speed with which this bicycle is moving up the slope. Let's
do a little trigonometry. It comes in handy occasionally. That's a six degree slope. The
sign of six degrees happens to be about a tenth. I can show you why later when we talk
about radians and trigonometry, but for now it's about a tenth. The vertical speed is
therefore one tenth of the speed along the slope because here's our four meters per second.
That's the hypotenuse of this triangle with the six degree angle. The sign of six degrees
is a tenth, and so this vertical arrow is a tenth the length of that one. That's 0.4
meters per second. So v vertical is 0.4 meters per second. We can do the numbers. P is mg
times v vertical. 80 kilograms was the mass. G is 9.8 Newtons per kilogram, 0.4 meters
per second. That comes out 313 watts. That's about 300 watt light bulbs. And by the way,
that is roughly three times the body's typical average power output. Not surprising because
to bicycle up a six degree slope, a 10% slope, even a modest speed of 9 miles per hour is
a difficult job. So you're putting out energy at the rate of 313 joules every second, and
I haven't even counted friction or air resistance or anything like that. But that gives us a
feel for the power output of our body. It might be measured in the hundreds of watts.
Let's do another one. Let's talk about driving. This one's going to be a quicker, a kind of
back of the envelope, quick, simple calculation. A gallon of gasoline happens to contain about
40 kilowatt hours worth of energy. So I want to know at what rate is your car consuming
fuel energy? That's again a question about power if you're driving at 60 miles an hour
and you're getting 30 miles to the gallon. So at 30 miles to the gallon, you're using
two gallons to go 60 miles because you're getting 30 miles to one gallon. You're going
60 miles per hour. So that means you're using two gallons every hour. There are 40 kilowatt
hours in every gallon. So you're using energy, gasoline energy at the rate of 80 kilowatt
hours per hour. Now a kilowatt hour is the amount of energy you use if you consume energy
at the rate of one kilowatt and do so for an hour. So 80 kilowatt hours per hour is something
much simpler. It's simply 80 kilowatts. You want to get mathematical about it. The kilowatt
hour per hour, the hours simply cancel and 80 kilowatt hours per hour is 80 kilowatts
and that's about a little over 100 horsepower. You may say, whoa, I've got a 300 horsepower
car. Am I getting robbed? No. Your car's engine, whatever its horsepower rating is, most of
the time it's not putting out energy at that rate. So here's an example that shows, again,
typical numbers or they make sense. 107 horsepower sounds a little bit small for most American
cars anyway, but it's in the right ballpark for a car's power output. So that's the rate
at which you're using fuel energy to drive your car under these conditions. By the way,
very little of that energy is ending up actually moving the car. Most of it is being lost to
heat and friction and so on. So that's a quick calculation for power when driving.
I want to end with a brief discussion of another energy unit you're familiar with and that's
the calorie. Here's a food label. You look at any food label, it tells you how many calories
there are in a serving. What on earth is a calorie? Well, a calorie is a measure of
the energy content of that food. If you burn the food or metabolized it, how much energy
could extract? It's not a measure of fat, it's a measure of energy. The calorie on food labels
is actually a kilocalorie, a thousand calories, K, C, A, L, or sometimes capital C, A, L.
A kilocalorie is about 4,200 joules, about 4.2 kilajoules. A typical human diet is about
2,000 kilocalories per day. And if you work that out, divide 2,000 kilocalories, convert
it to joules, divide by the number of seconds in a day, which happens to be 86,400, you
will find you get about 100 watts. And that means that your body is consuming in your
diet energy at the rate of about 100 watts, and that's where I got that figure of about
100 watts for the body's typical energy output. In fact, if I were to stand here in front
of you and do some exercise, say some deep knee bends, and I were to calculate the rate
at which I'm doing work when I do this, and calculate how much height I'm raising my body
and what fraction of my mass is involved, I would come out with a number that's just
about 100 watts for my typical average power output. So we've seen a lot now in this lecture
about energy and power. Let me end with a quick summary here. Conservation of energy,
as we've seen, provides a powerful shortcut for problem solving. We simply write that
K plus U, kinetic plus potential energy is constant for the situation we're dealing
with and we solve. And then we've dealt with energy and power. Energy being amount of stuff,
its SI unit being the joule, power being the rate of using, producing, or transforming
that stuff, its unit is the watt equal to the joule per second. Please don't confuse
the two. You'll be real smart about energy and power if you don't. Okay, if you don't
like a lot of math, you're done. If you like a lot of math, let me give you a very interesting
challenge that combines several recent lectures. And here's the challenge. I'd like you to
consider that loop-to-loop track we worked with before. Remember, I launched the car
from a certain height and it got all around the loop and if I didn't launch it from a
high enough height, it fell off the track. So I would like you to find an equation for
the minimum starting height H in this picture that will permit the car to get all the way
around the loop without falling off. And we're going to make the assumption that the loop
has a radius capital R, that the gravitational acceleration is G, and that the car starts
from rest. And your equation should depend on these quantities only. That's going to
take you a while to work it out, so press pause or stop for a little while and come
back and I'll give you the answer. Okay, here's the answer. The height from which you have
to release it is two and a half times R, five halves R. And you might say, why isn't it
just two R? Because after all, if it's two R, I could certainly have enough energy to
get up to twice the radius, that is the diameter of the loop. But nope, it's five halves R,
two and a half R, and I'll let you puzzle about why that is.
