Welcome to lecture 33, whose subject is electric circuits.
These assemblages of electronic components and devices are ubiquitous.
They're in all our electronics, they're in our cars, they're in our appliances, our houses
are our electric circuits, the entire power grid is an electric circuit.
We're going to look at electric circuits in this lecture and see how to analyze and
understand how simple circuits work.
So let's begin just looking at a circuit.
Here's a photograph, this is actually a circuit board from a piece of electronic equipment.
You see a number of interconnected electronic devices.
The big black thing in the foreground with all the legs is an integrated circuit that
probably has millions of electronic components in it.
The small cylinders in the foreground are resistors, devices engineered to have specific
resistance and in the background you see some disc shaped capacitors and behind them
an electrolytic capacitor.
So what is an electric circuit?
It's an interconnected network of components, resistors, capacitors, all kinds of other
things we aren't even going to talk about in this course and usually almost always with
some kind of source of electrical energy and I want to spend the next few minutes talking
about that source of electrical energy that we have in circuits.
So how do we energize circuits?
We do it with something called an EMF.
Now this is an obscure term, it's based in history, it stands for electromotive force
which is actually a very misleading term so we just call it an EMF and an EMF is a source
of electrical energy that maintains a constant potential difference across two electrical
terminals.
So examples, batteries, we've talked about batteries before, they're sources of EMF.
So our electric generators, here's some generators from a hydroelectric station.
So our power supplies which are devices I might plug into the wall.
I had one in the recent lectures when I was charging up a capacitor and I'll be using
power supplies more.
Power supplies we plug in and they produce a given voltage, fixed voltage across their
two terminals.
Photovoltaic cells that we use to generate electricity from sunlight are EMF, sources
of EMF, fuel cells that we may use someday to power hydrogen fueled cars and finally
thermoelectric devices which convert heat relatively inefficiently into electricity.
Those are all examples of EMFs, sources of electrical energy that can energize circuits.
So let's look at some circuits.
Here's the simplest possible circuit you could imagine, a source of EMF, a battery in this
case and some kind of electrical load, in this case a light bulb.
What happens in this circuit?
Well charge, I've indicated charge at the positive terminal flows through that circuit
and goes from the battery's positive terminal through wires through the external load and
comes back to the negative terminal.
Now be careful.
In fact we know that the charge carriers in most common circuits because they involve
metallic wires are in fact electrons and the electrons are actually going the other way.
They're coming out of the negative terminal, going the other way and into the positive
terminal.
That's what's actually happening but it doesn't matter.
The current is still in the same direction from positive to negative and so I'm going
to talk about circuits as though positive charge is flowing, it doesn't matter.
It really makes no difference whether it's positive charge moving from the positive to
the negative or negative charge moving from the negative to the positive.
So charge flows from the positive terminal through the wires to the external load, through
the external load back to the negative terminal.
What happens when it gets to the negative terminal?
Well if you think about the battery, the battery is maintaining positive charge on its positive
terminal and negative charge on its negative terminal.
It's doing that as a result of chemical reactions that occur inside the battery.
So here comes this positive charge back to the negative terminal and it experiences an
electric field inside the battery which points downward from positive to negative.
So how does it get back to the positive terminal?
Well that's the trick that the battery knows how to do.
Chemical reactions inside the battery do work on that charge and they lift it like lifting
a weight against gravity against the battery's internal electric field and they deliver it
back to the positive charge, positive terminal and of course they do so at the expense of
their internal chemical energy which is the by the battery runs down and either has to
be discarded or if it's rechargeable can be recharged.
Let me give you a demonstration of a rather simple mechanical system that illustrates
what in fact happens inside a battery.
So over here I have a rather silly toy in which there's some penguins and the penguins
represent electric charge and inside here there's a motor that is going to run a kind
of escalator that's going to raise those penguins up.
That's like the chemical action inside the battery lifting positive charge against the
battery's internal electric field and then the penguins are going to ride down this kind
of slide and that's like the external circuit.
They're going to go through the external circuit, they're going to come to the bottom and then
that internal source of energy is going to again lift them.
So here goes the playful penguins.
They've been lifted by that energy, they reach the positive terminal, they slide down through
the external circuit, return to the negative terminal where the internal chemical reactions
again lift them against the internal electric field, in this case lifting them against the
field of Earth's gravity and away they go.
So there's a very simple mechanical analog of what goes on inside a battery.
So now we understand how a source of a circuit is energized by some kind of source of energy.
Let's look a little bit more closely at energy in electric circuits.
First of all we have a measure, a quantitative measure of energy and that's the work per
unit charge that the battery does on these charges and it's therefore the work per unit
charge or the energy that the battery delivers to the external circuit.
But energy we know is conserved.
So let's look at conservation of energy in an electrical circuit and here's a slightly
more complicated circuit consisting of a single battery and now two loads, two light bulbs
and they're connected one after the other in what's called a series combination, more
on that in a minute.
And here's what happens, charge flows from the positive terminal through the load and
back around to the negative terminal and then again it's boosted inside the battery so whatever
energy it gains from the battery it gives up in the load.
And again in circuits when we talk about energy in the electrical context we usually
talk about voltages or potential differences, energy per unit charge.
And so here's what happens, the battery has some voltage V battery.
You know I buy the battery, it's a 6 volt battery, a 9 volt battery, a 1.5 volt battery
whatever.
The battery is supposed to maintain that voltage across its terminals.
There's some voltage across the first load and some voltage across the second load and
those voltages represent the energy per unit charge that's lost as charge moves through
those loads.
In this case they're light bulbs and so that energy is converted into visible light and
heat in the light bulb.
But here's what has to be true in order for this system to conserve energy.
Whatever energy is given to the charges by the battery has got to be given up to the
load and so the voltages across the two loads sum up to the battery voltage.
So in a simple circuit like this we can conclude that the sum of the two voltages across the
load or three or four or however many there were has to sum to the battery voltage.
And that's going to be a key factor in now our understanding of how to analyze electric
circuits.
So we're going to spend the next few minutes looking at slightly more complicated electric
circuits and trying to understand how we analyze them.
So just to get started, we write circuits, we draw them as little diagrams with these
circuit symbols and I've illustrated here some very common circuit symbols.
We'll see the sort of diagonal squiggly line thing there on the left is a resistor.
We have capacitors as a pair of parallel plates.
We have batteries and I've shown some meters, voltmeters, ammeter and a switch there also.
But I'll be stressing mostly resistors, capacitors and batteries in the circuits I'll be talking
about today.
So two ways to connect electrical components.
One way is to connect them in series.
If components are in series, the only place current can go after it moves through one
component is through the next component.
So on the left here we see a battery and two resistors connected in series.
And because the only place charge can go after it leaves the battery is through the first
resistor and then through the second resistor, the flow of current in a steady state has
to be the same everywhere.
So in a series circuit, the current is the same in all elements of the series circuit.
On the right we have a parallel circuit.
Here we've got two resistors and they're both connected across the battery.
Well, since they're both connected across the battery and the battery maintains a fixed
voltage or potential difference across its terminals, they get the same voltage across
the two circuit elements across the two resistors.
But here's what else happens.
There are currents at the same voltage.
There are currents flowing in this circuit.
Two currents through the two resistors have to add up to the current that's coming from
the battery or else charge would not be conserved.
And we're going to use these facts now to analyze more complex circuits involving series
and parallel resistors.
So let's get started.
Here's our big monitor on which we like to do quantitative things and we'll start by
looking at series resistors.
So here I've got the same series resistor circuit I just showed you.
I've got a battery with some voltage VB.
There's the battery symbol.
The long bar in the battery symbol is the positive terminal of the battery.
I've got resistor R1 and resistor R2.
And I'd like to analyze this circuit.
That means I'd like to understand the currents that are flowing in the two resistors and
the voltages that appear across the two resistors.
Well, we know by energy conservation, as we saw a few minutes ago, that the sum of the
voltages across the two resistors have to add up to the battery voltage.
If that weren't true, energy wouldn't be conserved as I went around this circuit.
Whatever energy the charges gain from the battery, they lose in moving through those
resistors.
So there's the statement of energy conservation.
We also know, as I just showed you, that when we have a series resistor, series resistors,
we have to have the same current flowing through each of them.
Because once charge flows out of the battery through resistor R1, there's no place for
it to go but through resistor R2.
And unless charge is beginning to accumulate here, which can't happen in a steady state
or be depleted here, we've got to have the same current flowing through each.
It's like hooking a couple of garden hoses together.
However, much water is flowing through the first one, has got to flow through the second
one because it's got no place else to go.
So that current I is the same.
Now we understand Ohm's Law also.
Ohm's Law says that voltage is the product of current and resistance.
That's one of the three ways of writing Ohm's Law algebraically.
So we know that the voltage across the first resistor, V1, is that current I, and I haven't
labeled the current with any subscript because it's the same for both resistors.
It's I, R1, and V2 is similarly I, R2.
Same current through both resistors.
Now we're going to take these two statements that tell us what those voltages are in terms
of the current, which we don't yet know, and we're going to use them in that statement
of energy conservation.
So V1, which is I, R1, plus V2, which is I, R2, adds up to V battery.
Do a little algebra on that factor, the I, out of both these terms, and divide by the
sum R1 plus R2, and we've got V battery over R1 plus R2 is the current.
So now we know the current in this circuit.
We can conclude that this looks just like Ohm's Law, I equals V over R, except that instead
of R, we've got the sum R1 and R2.
So we conclude that the series resistance here, the combination of these two resistors,
adds up to a series resistance, which is simply the sum of the two resistances.
Series resistors add, and it's a simple matter to extend this argument to multiple resistors
in series.
They are equivalent to a single resistor whose resistance is their sum.
So that's series resistors.
That's one of the two simple combinations I introduced a few minutes ago.
Let's look a little further at series resistors.
Series resistors, same circuit we just had, have the property that they take the battery
voltage or whatever the source is, and divide its voltage into two parts.
And those two parts turn out to divide in proportion to the two resistors, and I want
to demonstrate that here.
So here's our result from last time.
We had V1 is IR1, V2 is IR2, and I, we now know, is V battery over R1 plus R2, the series
combination.
And what I'm going to do now is ask, what are these individual voltages, V1 and V2?
Well, they're IR1 and IR2, but now I've got an expression for I.
So V1 is I, that whole thing, times R1.
And that whole thing is VB over R1 plus R2 times R1, and I've rearranged it a little
bit algebraically to lump the terms involving the resistors all together, and they're multiplying
the battery voltage.
And I've done the same thing for V2, it's IR2, I've lumped the terms involving the
resistors together and multiplied it by the battery voltage.
This quantity that you see here, R1 over R1 plus R2 for V1, and R2 over R1 plus R2
for V2 is called the voltage divider fraction.
This circuit is a voltage divider.
It divides the voltage from the battery into two pieces, not necessarily equal.
They're weighted by how big each resistor is.
The bigger the resistor has, the bigger voltage across it.
There's some special cases that are worth looking at.
If R1 and R2 were equal, for example, V1 would be equal to V2, R1 would be equal to R2,
these numbers would be the same, these would add up to twice either resistance, and this
fraction would be a half, and so we divide the voltage in half.
If R1 is much, much bigger than R2, then most of the voltage is going to be dropped across
R1, and very little of it across R2, and so V2 is going to be very small, this fraction
is going to be small, and V2 is going to be very small compared with the battery voltage.
And finally, if R1 is relatively small compared to R2, then this fraction will be relatively
small.
We won't have much voltage across R1, and most of the voltage will drop across R2, and
that means R2 voltage V2 will be essentially the battery voltage.
That's going to be important in thinking about how real batteries behave.
So I want to take this result, and I want to move right on to talk a little bit about
batteries as examples of this.
So let's look at real batteries.
Here's an ideal battery.
An ideal battery is a device, you go buy it at the store, you buy a 1.5 volt battery,
and it says, I'm going to maintain 1.5 volts across my terminals no matter what, no matter
how much current I draw in particular.
An ideal battery is impossible.
If we had one, it would be the solution to all our energy problems, because it could
supply infinite energy, because it could supply infinite current, and current times voltage
is power, we could get infinite power.
That's not possible.
A real battery looks something like this.
It looks like an ideal battery with a resistor in series with it.
Now that's not how batteries are made.
They don't take ideal batteries at the battery company and stick resistors.
The resistor represents the slowness of the chemical reactions going on inside the battery.
The resistance represents actual resistances of the materials making up the battery.
It represents a lot of different processes that make the battery less than ideal.
When we buy a battery, we buy what's inside that red box, and all we have access to are
the two terminals.
Then we connect a load, something we want to supply energy to, across the battery, and
we have exactly that series voltage divider circuit we had before.
There's a voltage divider, and we're talking about what was V2 in our voltage divider analysis.
Well in this case, that becomes the voltage across the load, and that becomes our load
over what was our one before now is our internal, and our load, and that fraction of VB is
what we'll get across the load resistor.
Let's look at special cases.
If the internal resistance is much, much less than the load resistance, then essentially
the load sees the battery voltage.
That's the way we normally like to use batteries and sources of electrical energy.
We like to have a load resistance whose resistance is large compared to the internal resistance,
or equivalently we like the internal resistance to be small compared with the load resistance,
and then the battery is behaving normally.
If on the other hand we have a very low load resistance, then the battery will simply not
supply its full rated voltage across the load, in fact there will be much less, and the energy
will be going to heating up the internal resistance.
That's not what in fact we want to do.
So let's just take a second and look at some batteries.
Over here, I have some batteries that we've worked with before.
Here's our car battery.
Here are two 1.5 volt batteries, a AAA and a D battery.
What's different about the two batteries?
Why does this one cost more?
Why does this one last longer?
Why can this one supply a more powerful flashlight with energy?
Because it's got a lower internal resistance.
They're both 1.5 volt batteries, but what's different is their internal resistance is different,
and this one's internal resistance is lower than that one.
The reason the car battery is so big and massive is because it has to supply 100 amps or so
to run the starter motor of the car, and that takes a very, very, very low internal resistance,
because if you had any significant resistance, if you had 1 ohm, you'd try to drop 100 volts
across that.
You couldn't do that because the internal battery is only 12 volts.
You get the idea, the internal resistance of the battery has to be a tiny, tiny fraction
of an ohm in order to supply those very huge currents.
This whole idea of internal resistance is what distinguishes real batteries from ideal
ones, and if you want to use a battery and make it work well, you use it in such a way
that the internal resistance is low compared to the load you're connecting across it.
That all came from series circuits.
Let's now go back and look at parallel circuits.
Here are parallel resistors.
They have the same voltage across them because they're both connected across the battery.
Charge has to be conserved in this case, so here's the battery delivering a current I,
and here goes a current I1 through resistor R1.
They're not in series, so they don't have to have the same current.
Here goes a current I2 through resistor R2, and those two currents have to add up to I,
or otherwise charge would not be conserved.
We know Ohm's Law again.
In this case, we know that I1 is the battery voltage, which is across resistor R1, as well
as across resistor R2, over R1.
I2 is the battery over R2, so add those two up.
I1 plus I2 has to be I, V battery over R1 plus V battery over R2 is the current I from
the battery.
The little algebra factor out the V batteries from those and write I like this, and that
looks like Ohm's Law, except the thing multiplying VB looks like one over some resistance, and
it's one over the parallel combination.
So one over the parallel combination is one over R1 plus one over R2, and you could do
some algebra to get an expression for our parallel itself, but it's sort of nicer to
write it that way because we conclude that parallel resistors add reciprocally.
So now we understand parallel resistors, and now we're ready to look at more complicated
circuits.
Let's take a look.
Here's an example of a more complicated circuit.
This circuit has one, two, three, four resistors, and in this case a 12-volt battery, and I'm
not going to go through the analysis in detail, but here's how we would do it.
We first identify series and parallel combinations.
We reduce that to a simpler circuit.
We repeat that, we repeat that, we repeat that until we can solve for something.
So there's a parallel combination of resistors.
I can figure out the parallel resistances I just showed you, and now I have a circuit
that's simpler.
It consists of three resistors.
One of them is that parallel combination.
There it is.
Now I identify three resistors in series.
I know how to calculate series resistances.
They simply add.
So now I have a single resistor, and now I can calculate the current through that resistor,
and then I can go backwards and figure out anything else I want to find out about the
circuit.
So that's one way to analyze complicated circuits.
There are even more complicated circuits.
Here are two examples.
These circuits cannot be analyzed with series parallel combinations.
You look at them, you can't find any series parallel combinations.
The first one's got this complicated structure to it.
The second one has a bunch of different batteries.
By the way, the lower circuit is, in fact, a very important circuit in biology.
It's the so-called Hodgkin-Huxley model for the cell membrane, and it, one, it discovers
the Nobel Prize, and it describes the electricity flows that happen in a biological cell membrane.
There are no series of parallel combinations in these, so what we do is write conservation
of energy for each circuit loop in one of these circuits.
And conservation of charge for each node, each point where current can split and go
different ways, and we solve multiple equations in multiple unknowns.
And I'm not going to do any more with that here.
If you became an electrical engineer, you would take entire semesters of circuit analysis,
and you'd understand the mathematics of how to deal with such circuits.
So that is how we handle really complex circuits.
Well, I want to end by looking at one more example of a component that we can put in
circuits, and that's capacitors.
We've already seen capacitors, we understand how capacitors work.
What capacitors do in circuits, though, because you have to flow charge onto a capacitor in
order to charge it up, in order to change its voltage, because charge and voltage, remember,
are proportional in a capacitor, capacitors fundamentally introduce a time delay into
a circuit.
So that's what capacitors do.
They affect timing in circuits, and for that reason they're used in all kinds of applications
when you adjust tone controls on an old-fashioned stereo system, or maybe the balance controls,
the equalizers on a more modern one, you're typically adjusting the behavior of capacitors.
You may or may not be adjusting capacitors, you probably aren't.
You're adjusting the way certain capacitors in their behave.
Capacitors smooth out alternating voltages to make them steady and smooth.
They do that because they introduce time delays.
We use capacitors where we need time delays.
All timing circuits can be built using capacitors.
Let's see how that would work.
Here is a simple circuit that consists of a battery with its voltage VB, a switch, a
resistor, and a capacitor.
I'm going to close the switch.
The capacitor is going to be initially uncharged, and I'm going to ask what happens.
So the capacitor is initially uncharged, time t equals zero, I close the switch.
The voltage across the capacitor, V sub c, was initially zero.
And so that means the voltage across the resistor, once that switch closed, had to
be the battery voltage, because those two voltages, R and C, V, R, and V, C, have to
add up to the battery voltage, as we've seen.
So there's current flowing through that resistor, because if there's a voltage across a resistor,
there's current.
In fact, we can calculate that current, first it's V battery over R, and it delivers charge
to the capacitor.
So the capacitor charge increases, and so therefore it is its voltage, because charge and voltage
are proportional on a capacitor, as we saw from the definition of capacitance.
So the capacitor voltage increases.
That means the resistor voltage decreases, because the sum of those two is the battery
voltage.
That means the current decreases.
That means the rate at which charge goes on to the capacitor decreases, and that means
the rate at which the capacitor voltage is increasing decreases.
And that process just keeps occurring.
And the result is, an ever slowing rise in the voltage across the capacitor, it happens
to occur with a characteristic time given by the product of resistance and capacitance.
And I'm not going to do this here, but if you take the SI units for resistance and capacitance,
reduce them to their fundamentals, you'll find they come out in seconds.
And that describes the characteristic time for changes to occur in a circuit like that.
And here's what we expect from this picture, the voltage across the capacitor, to look
like as a function of time.
It starts charging rapidly, but it slows down, and slows down, and slows down, as the rate
of current flowing through the resistor decreases, and the rate of voltage built up across the
capacitor therefore slows.
And a capacitor gets to about two-thirds of its final charge in one of these time constants,
RC.
So I've shown you out here to four of these time constants RC, and by then it's almost
fully charged to the battery voltage.
Well, let's take a look at how this works in the real world.
Pause here and do a demonstration on our big screen monitor of a capacitor circuit charging.
Okay, so here we are ready to demonstrate this proposition that capacitors act as slowing
down agents in circuits.
They introduce delays.
I have here the same capacitor that I used in a previous lecture to zap a screwdriver.
I stored a lot of energy in it, and I'm not going to store as much energy in it this time.
The capacitor is connected in series with a resistor.
It's a rather heavy-duty resistor because of the big amounts of energy I was storing
in it before.
The resistor happens to be about 250 ohms.
The capacitor is about one-one-hundredth of a farad.
Remember that that product of resistance and capacitance gives the characteristic time associated
with that delay.
So if I multiply 250 ohms by .01 farads, I get about 2.5 seconds for the characteristic
time for voltages to change in this particular circuit with this capacitor and this resistor.
And I have the circuit hooked up to a six-volt battery, which will be my source of power to
energize the circuit.
And I also have it connected up to this oscilloscope, which is, again, a voltmeter, basically,
that records voltages as functions of time.
And the beauty of the oscilloscope is it can record very short times down to billions
of seconds or very long time, up to seconds to minutes.
And we're going to use it for relatively long times because we have a relatively long time
delay of several seconds.
But I want to emphasize, again, capacitors and resistance come in an enormous range of
values.
I could have built a similar circuit where that characteristic time was a billionth
of a second.
And I could have done exactly the same thing I'm doing here.
It just would have happened very, very fast.
We still could have seen it with this oscilloscope if we did the experiment repetitively and
looked at it over and over again.
But we're going to do it on a timescale that we can actually look at.
And for you to see it better, we have the oscilloscope hooked to a wire to our big screen
monitor so you'll be able to see what's happening on the screen of the oscilloscope also on the
big screen monitor.
So what I'm going to do is begin the experiment by, first I'm going to short circuit the capacitor.
Like I did with the screwdriver before, I'm going to make sure there's no residual charge
in it.
In fact, there is some residual charge in it because I've had it connected up to the
battery.
And so I'm going to start the oscilloscope going.
I'm going to discharge the capacitor.
And then the capacitor, I'm going to take the short circuit off the capacitor and I'm
going to let the capacitor start to charge.
And we'll see that characteristic curve showing the rise, the slow rise of the voltage as
charge begins to build up on the capacitor.
So here we go.
And there we go.
The curve is rising, rising with an ever slowing rate, rising, rising with about that 2.5 second
timescale.
And here we go, going toward that level of 6 volts.
And let's make sure we've got what we think we have.
I'll stop the oscilloscope there.
We can talk about what we've got.
In the upper left corner of the screen it says 1.00 volts, and that's telling me that
each of these divisions, vertical divisions on the screen is 1 volt.
So we started out at 0 volts, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, and that battery, the one we measured
in an earlier lecture, it was about 6.4 volts, and that's just about what we're getting to.
So the voltage is rising from 0 at an ever slowing rate and gradually leveling off at
6 volts, or a little bit more for that battery.
The other important parameter on the oscilloscope screen is this number, 2.0 seconds.
That describes how long it takes to traverse one horizontal division on here.
So two seconds, I calculated that the characteristic time for this combination of resistance and
capacitance was 2.5 seconds, and it ought to take about 2.5 seconds then for it to get
up to about 2 thirds of its full value.
So we started right here, and one full division is about over here, and indeed we're up to
about 2 thirds of the final voltage we're going to get to.
So we've confirmed not only qualitatively, but also quantitatively, our description of
what was going on in that RC circuit.
And let me just point out there's an awful lot of jagly noise on here, which has been
giving our oscilloscopes in trouble.
That's caused by some electrical equipment operating somewhere in the building that is
introducing stray electric fields into the situation.
So let's take a look now at what we've seen in lecture number 33, and let's summarize
it.
We've looked at electric circuits.
They generally include interconnected electrical components and a source of energy.
The components can be connected in series or parallel.
We've shown that series resistors add, parallel resistors add reciprocally.
Complex circuits require more complicated analysis, and the capacitors introduce time
delays into circuits.
And let me end with just a very quick challenge for you if you'd like to do a little more
math.
Here's a complex circuit.
I had a slide that talked about analyzing complex circuits.
I went through part of the analysis for you.
I'd like you now to find the current through the two-ohm resistor in that slide analyzing
complex circuits.
Let's look at the solution.
The current through the 5.33 ohm combination resistance in that figure, 12 volts across
5.33 ohms, ohms law gives us two and a quarter amps.
That's the current through the whole series combination in the middle figure, including
the 1.33 ohm resistance.
So V across that 1.33 ohm resistance, applying ohms law again, comes out to be three volts.
And that's the voltage across the parallel combination in the first figure, and so it's
the voltage across the two-ohm resistor.
So that gives us I2, three volts across two ohms, one and a half amps, and if you got
that, you're on your way to being an electrical engineer.
