Welcome to lecture 42, whose subject is the formation of optical images.
Now, if you're having a problem, you might want to turn your television set upside down.
But actually, I don't think you need to, because what you're seeing here is an upside down image of me,
an image formed in a concave mirror, which is behind me.
The image is clearly in front of the mirror, and I'm going to continue my journey toward that mirror,
and we'll see how that image evolves.
So here I go, approaching the mirror closer and closer and closer.
I'm getting bigger and bigger.
I'm going to kind of scrunch down, so my head stays more or less in the middle, bigger and bigger.
And now I go really wonker, and I reemerge with my face behind the mirror, enlarged, and this time upright.
What causes all those transitions among those different types of images as I took that journey toward this mirror?
Let's take a look.
Well, that mirror is essentially what's called a parabolic mirror.
A parabola is the unusual shape that has the property that if rays of light come in parallel to the axis of the parabola,
they all reflect in such a way that they end up at a single point or passing through a single point called the focal point.
Most so-called parabolic mirrors are really spherical because as we saw in lecture 17 in an entirely different context involving potential energy curves,
most shapes are approximated by parabolas near their apex, and so we can make a parabolic mirror, quote,
by making part of a spherical surface.
So that mirror we were working with was actually spherical, but it was very close to parabolic.
So what a parabolic mirror does is focus rays that are coming in parallel to its axis and send them to this point called the focal point marked F here.
If we do the opposite and put a source of light at the focal point, then the light going out in all directions will bounce off the mirror and form parallel rays.
That's how we make search light beams.
We put a bright source of light at the focus of a curved parabolic mirror and out comes a parallel beam of intense light.
Let's look at how this parabolic mirror with these properties can form images.
In general, one way to describe the formation of images is to draw just a couple of rays, two lines determine a point,
and so if we draw a couple of rays, we'll be able to establish where an image is.
And we'll use some very particular rays here in the case of image formation with a concave mirror.
I'm going to start with the object, which I will call O throughout my discussions of image formation,
and the object is always going to be an arrow because it's simple and yet has an obvious directionality to it.
So O on the left is the object, and the two rays I'm going to consider are a ray that's going in parallel to the mirror axis.
We already know what that ray does. It goes right through the focus, and so there it goes reflecting through the focus toward the eye.
Another ray, which we're going to consider, is the one that goes through the focus before it hits the mirror.
Now we know what happens to that one also. Since it went through the focus, it then hits the mirror going out parallel to the axis.
And where those two rays meet determines the image of that point at the top of the arrow,
and it's pretty easy to see that the bottoms of the arrows are going to stay on the axis, and so I can trace in what the image looks like.
In this case, the image is small, it's inverted, and it is beyond the focal point, farther from the mirror than the focal point.
That particular image is called a real image, because if you look at what that eye sees, that eye is seeing light that is actually coming from the image.
By the way, you might wonder about that point marked C. That's the center of curvature of a spherical mirror,
and you can show that it's twice the focal distance from the mirror, so the distance from the mirror to F and the distance from F to C are the same.
When I was in front of the concave mirror, I made an image that was also in front of the concave mirror,
at least when I was pretty far away from it, as I began my walk toward it.
That was an inverted real image, and the image was in front of the mirror. Let's look at some other possibilities.
What if I come in closer? Well, if I come in closer, but still beyond the focal point, draw those same two rays,
one bounces off the mirror, goes in parallel, bounces off through the focal point,
the other goes through the focal point, bounces off parallel, they now make an image which is actually beyond the object,
further out than the object itself, and inverted, and enlarged.
So there's another real image. That's still a real image, because someone looking in from the lower left would see light that was actually coming from the point where the image is.
But what happens as I move closer? Well, if I move right to the focus, that's when the rays try to go out parallel.
That's when my image went all wild and shimmery, because there was no image, because the rays were not converging.
They have to converge to make an image. What happens if I move even closer?
Here's the object now between the focal point and the mirror, and let's draw again or try to draw the same two rays.
We've got a ray that comes parallel, it reflects and goes through the focus.
We've got another ray. Well, we can't really draw the rays through the focus, because that's never going to make it to the eye,
but there is another ray that goes away from the focal point, looking as if it were coming from the focus.
That's what that dashed line indicates, and it hits the mirror and bounces off parallel to the axis.
And so what does the eye see? The eye sees two rays that are diverging, and they look like they're coming from a point behind the mirror,
and the image is indeed behind the mirror, as you can see, and it's an upright image, and it's an enlarged image.
And so after I moved through that special transition point, the focal distance from the mirror,
my image reappeared, and it reappeared as an upright virtual image.
It's virtual because no light is actually coming from the image, and the image is in fact behind the mirror.
That's how we form images with concave mirrors, and if you look at that sequence again of my walking in toward the mirror,
you will see my real image first, my inverted real image, and then I go all crazy, and then my image reappears,
and it reappears as an upright and large virtual image.
Well, that's one way of making images with devices that reflect light curved mirrors.
Let's now turn to what's probably the more familiar way of making images, and that is with lenses.
These are transparent materials that have curved surfaces, so they control refraction in a way that brings light rays to a focus.
So let's look at an example. Here's a convex lens, a lens that bends outward.
What it does is it takes parallel rays, and it bends them to a focal point.
A lens, by the way, unlike a mirror, has two focal points I could have set rays in from the right,
and they would have converged on the left, and for simple kinds of lenses those two focal distances are the same.
Notice that the focal point here I'm designating with a capital F. The lower case F designates a length, the actual focal distance.
And I should say when I talk about lenses, I'm going to consider that although refraction occurs at both edges of both surfaces of a lens,
if the lens is thin enough, as we'll see soon, it's often a good approximation to just assume there's one bend somewhere in the lens,
so that will just simplify some of our drawings.
So there's a convex lens. Refraction at the curved surfaces sends parallel rays to a focus.
And in contrast, if I put a light source at the focus, rays will go out diverging, and the lens will make them parallel.
So there's another way to make, for example, a search light.
Let's go to our demonstration setup and look at what happens with a convex lens like this that focuses light to a focal point.
So here we are. Again, we've got our setup with a white board. I've got a laser on there now, and this is actually not one laser, but five lasers,
producing five parallel beams. You can see them going across the board, and here I have a sort of two-dimensional convex lens at surfaces curving outward on either side,
and I'm simply going to place it in that beam, and you can see the lens bringing the rays all to a common point.
That's the focal point, and this distance is the focal length of that lens.
The focal length, it's probably about 20 or 25 centimeters in this case.
So that is what a convex lens does.
A convex lens does what a concave mirror does. It brings light rays, parallel light rays, and converges them to a focus.
So let's look at how we might form images with the convex lens in the same way we looked at how we might form images with a mirror.
So we're going to do the same kind of thing. We're going to do ray tracing.
So I'm going to start with an object which is way far away from the lens, and I'm going to draw two significant rays.
I'm going to draw a ray that's parallel to the axis. We already know what happens to that one.
It's bent, so it goes through the focal point, and then I'm going to draw a ray through the center of the lens.
Now, it gets a little bit of refraction at each surface, but right near the center, the two surfaces are essentially parallel,
so the only effect is to displace the ray slightly, but not change its direction.
And in the limit or approximation of a very thin lens, thin compared to the curvature radii of its surfaces,
we can ignore that effect, and so we can say that for a thin lens, a ray that's passing right through the center of the lens does so undeflected.
And once again, all it takes is two rays to establish the position of the image.
So the object is on the left. It's upright. It's fairly high. We look at those two rays.
We see where they meet again, and they meet to the right of the lens.
The object was beyond twice the focal length.
The meeting point is now between the focal point and two focal lengths, also the curvature radius.
And you'll notice the image is inverted, and it's smaller, and it is a real image.
The reason it's a real image, again, is because that eye at the lower right, looking at that image, is actually seeing light that's coming from where the image is.
So this is a real image. It's an inverted, reduced in size, real image.
So that's one example of what happens when we trace the rays with this ray tracing approximation.
So the ray parallel to the axis refracts to the focus. The ray through the lens center is undeflected.
Let's look at another case using the same two rays. Here I've moved the object in, so it's between the focal length and two focal lengths.
Same rays. I draw them the same way, but now look what happens. They converge much farther away.
The image is farther from the lens now than the object was. It's larger than the object. It's still inverted.
And if you were looking in from the lower right, I don't know how to draw the eye here, but if you were, you would see light rays that are actually coming from the image.
So it's an inverted, enlarged, real image.
So those two images are quite related. In one case, the image was reduced in size when the object was far from the lens.
As the object came in nearer, the image became larger. If I had put the object right at twice the focal length, it turns out the image would have formed right at twice the focal length,
and it would have been the same size as the object.
Well, let's look at one other case with lenses. Here's a situation in which I'm going to try to do the same thing.
Now I've got an object that's closer to the lens than the focal length. I'm going to call the focal length F, as I said.
I'm going to call the distance to the object S, and pretty soon we're going to derive a formula that handles all this.
So look what's happening here. I draw the parallel ray, the one that's parallel to the axis. It is sent to the focus, as always.
I can't draw the ray. Well, I can draw the ray through the center. There it goes, but it's not going to converge on the right-hand side of the lens.
Those two rays on the right-hand side of the lens are actually diverging, and what it looks like is that they are coming from a point way up at the left,
and you would have to look through the lens to see that image. The light is not actually coming from where that image is,
and so it's a virtual image. The image isn't, in some sense, really there. The image is never really there, but there isn't even any light coming from the image.
So this is a virtual image, and in this case the image is enlarged, and not only is it enlarged, it's upright.
This is the mode a lens is used at when it's used as a magnifying glass, for example.
The lens on a movie projector, in contrast, is a lens that's putting out a real image which is landing on the screen of the movie projector,
which, by the way, tells you that the film in an old-fashioned film projector is going through upside down, so what you'll see on the screen is right side up.
So ray tracing with lenses gives us real images or virtual images depending on where the object is placed relative to the focal point,
and the real images can be either reduced or enlarged depending on whether it's outside twice the focal length or inside twice the focal length.
Well, before we go on and look at that a little more quantitatively, let's do a quick demonstration of image formation with a converging lens, a convex lens.
So let's go over here to a demonstration I have set up, and what I have here is a source of light which is shining through a pattern, so it's making an arrow-like pattern.
Here I have a lens, it's a convex lens, also called a converging lens, because it converges light to a focus, and here I have a screen.
And right now this lens happens to have a focal length of 10 centimeters.
Right now the lens is 20 centimeters from the object, and the screen is 20 centimeters on the other side where it has to be for us to get a good focus, and there is the focus image,
and that image is in fact, let me get a little better focused, that image is in fact upside down relative to the object and same size.
Now let me move the lens closer to the object, so the object is now closer to the lens than twice the focal length.
So now the image has gotten bigger, but it's gotten out of focus, so I have to move it until it gets nicely focused, that's too far, and probably pretty good there.
And so now you can see that the lens and the object are much closer than the lens and the image, and the image is enlarged relative to the object, it's still upside down.
Now I'm going to do the opposite, I'm going to put the lens further from the object than the screen, and see if I can get a focus.
Now the distance between the object and the lens is larger than the distance between the object and the image, the image is on the screen.
The screen doesn't define the image, I have to move the screen until I get a focused image, the image is there whether the screen is there or not.
In fact if I were to take the screen away and look into the lens, I would see the image and the image would be in front of the lens, not through the lens as it would be if I use the lens as a magnifying glass.
So those are those two particular cases, it's a little harder for me to demonstrate with this the case of the virtual, the enlarged virtual image.
All I would have to do though to see that is pick up that lens and just look through it using it as a magnifying glass.
So there are some examples of making real images with a convex lens, a converging lens.
Let's look a little bit now at the mathematics of how we do that because we're quantitative in this course, we're going to handle that mathematically.
Let's go over to our big screen.
So we're going to look at what's called the lens equation which does quantitatively with numbers what our geometrical process of ray tracing did with geometrical shapes like lines.
So the lens equation works like this. Here I'm going to picture a convex lens, a converging lens.
It's got a focal length F, it's got two focal points, one on either side, and I'm going to start with an object of height H which is some distance beyond the focal point.
And I'm going to designate the object distance by s, the distance between the lens and the object, and I'm going to draw those same two rays I've been talking about, one of which goes parallel to the lens axis and then is bent through the focal point.
The other one of which in the thin lens approximation goes right through the center of the lens and reaches the first ray somewhere out here, and so that defines the image.
Now be careful with signs here. I'm designating the image height by H prime. If H prime is negative, then the image is inverted.
If H prime is positive, the image is not inverted, and the actual length of that arrow is minus H prime. So that's what the sign is about.
Notice this distance too is s prime, that's the distance to the image, that's the image distance. So I have the object distance, the image distance, the object height H, the image height minus H prime.
That's a positive number minus H prime.
Here are a couple of shaded triangles. Triangle OAB and triangle IDB, and those triangles are similar. You can see that because they're both right triangles.
There's a right angle here and a right angle there. They share a common angle because when you cross two lines like that, the angle on either side, as you learned in 10th grade geometry, is the same.
So those are similar triangles. So because they're similar triangles, I can write the following ratio. I can write that H prime over H is minus s prime over s, and the minus sign is coming in because of the way I'm designating the height as negative if in fact is an inverted image.
So H prime over H is minus s prime over s. The ratio of that height to that one is the same as the ratio of that height, that length to that length.
That quantity is called the magnification, m, and that quantity is positive if the image is regular, upright, or negative if the image is inverted, as it is in fact here.
S and s prime are both distances. They're both positive. Their ratio here is in fact with a minus sign, so the magnification in this case is negative.
Now you'll notice that these lines are all parallel, so this height is also H as I've indicated, and I've now designated that point E, and now let's look at a couple more triangles, which are also similar triangles.
So triangles E, B, F, and I, D, F are also similar, and so I can form another ratio, and in this case it's the ratio of H, the height of the object, to F, the focal length, and that's the same as this height minus H prime to this distance, which is s prime minus the focal length, s prime minus F.
So now I've worked with two pairs of similar triangles, and let's keep going. So I've got those two results from the two pairs of similar triangles, and now I'm going to do a little algebra on them.
That one I'm simply going to invert both sides, so the primes are on the bottom. This one I'm going to do a little bit more work on. I'm going to divide by the H prime and multiply up by the F, the minus sign stays up, and so I've got this relationship.
I'm going to combine those two now, because they're both expressions for H over H prime, so I can set the right hand side equal, so I have s over s prime is F over s prime minus F.
So if we do some algebra on this, we end up with the result that 1 over s plus 1 over s prime becomes 1 over F, and that is called the Lenz equation.
There are some interesting sign conventions here. If s prime is greater than 0, we have an inverted real image. It's on the opposite side of the lens from the object. That's what the picture shows.
But this equation also covers the situation of a virtual image, in which case s prime is less than 0, telling me that the image is on the same side of the lens as the object, and it's an upright virtual image.
So there's the lens equation, a powerful way of dealing instead of ray tracing with how we quantify what goes on with lenses.
And I'd like to take a minute and work a really practical example of using the lens equation to do something important, namely correct human vision.
So vision correction. And here's a particular case. I've got a farsighted eye that can't focus objects closer than about 80 centimeters.
Now, a normal, fairly young human being can focus up to about 25 centimeters, a little less than a foot.
But as you grow older, your lens becomes stiffer and it can't change shape, it can't adjust, and your so-called near point, the closest you can focus, moves on out.
It may move all the way to infinity, so this is not a terribly farsighted person being able to focus out about 80 centimeters.
So we want to specify a corrective lens for this person that will place the image of a 25 centimeter distant object at 80 centimeters, which will allow you to focus it.
So you're trying to read your newspaper or your book and you can't read it because you can't focus that close.
If you put it farther away, that doesn't help because then the print gets too small for you to see, so what we want to do is give you some lenses.
This is what reading glasses are. This is what people like me who are farsighted have for corrective lenses.
We want to make some lenses that will make it look like that thing is farther away.
So that's what we're asked to do here.
So here's kind of a picture. This is what a farsighted eye does. It focuses the light behind the retina at the back of the eye rather than in front of it.
What we want to do is put another lens, not just the, there's a lens in the eye, there's also the cornea of the eye, which actually does most of the focusing.
But this adjustable lens, this blue thing in here is what allows you to adapt to different focal distances.
And that's what you're no longer able to do as you grow older.
So we want to put another lens in there.
So what that other lens is going to do is take the object, which is here, 25 centimeters out and too close for you to focus.
And we want to move that object to an image which is farther out and then your eye will be able to focus that image.
So how do we do that?
Well, we use our lens equation that we just derived.
One over the distance to the object plus one over the distance to the image is one over the focal length.
And again, remember those sign conventions.
If s' the image distance is greater than zero, we have an inverted real image on the opposite side of the lens from the object.
If s' is less than zero, we have an upright virtual image, same side of the lens as the object.
In this case, you can see that the object and image are on the same side of the lens.
And these dotted lines indicate that light is not actually coming from the image.
It's a virtual image.
So we need an upright virtual image.
So s' is going to be minus 80.8 meters, minus 80 centimeters.
That's that convention.
So yes, s' we want it to be 80 centimeters away, 0.8 meters.
But we want it to be on the same side of the lens as the object.
And so that gives us a negative distance.
And s, the object distance, we're told is 25 centimeters.
We want to be able to take something that's at 25 centimeters, make it look like it's 80 centimeters away.
So let's do the numbers.
So one over f equals one over s plus one over s prime.
Now, what are we after here?
Well, we're supposed to specify a lens.
What does that mean?
It means tell me the focal length that lens should have.
So we're going to solve for the focal length.
So one over f is one over the 0.25 meters plus one over the 0.8 meters.
Work that out.
You get 2.25, what, meters to the minus one, inverse meters.
The units of all the terms in that equation are inverse meters, meters to the minus one.
So that's what we get 2.25 meters to the minus one.
So if you had a lens whose, the inverse of whose focal length was 2.25 meters to the minus one,
you'd have the right lens.
If you want to solve for f, f is 0.36 meters.
In that case, just take one over the 2.25.
But that's not what an optometrist would do,
because that number in meters to the minus one is called the diopter measure of that lens.
If you have contact lenses or if you have a glasses prescription,
look at your glasses prescription, look at the box your contact lens comes in.
They might say, in fact, I have a pair that do say 2.25 diopters or just 2.25.
That is a measure of the lens's focal length in diopters.
So that lens, a 2.25 diopter lens, one whose inverse of focal length is 2.25 meters to the minus one,
would correct the vision for this particular individual.
So vision correction is one nice application of our lens formula,
our formula for how you refract images through a lens.
Let's look at some other possibilities for lenses.
In addition to converging lenses, which send parallel rays to a focus,
diverging lenses send parallel rays away from a focus.
They can only form virtual images.
Let me go over to my demonstration here and just quickly show you what that would do.
I'll take off my converging lens and I will put on a diverging lens
and you can see the rays are now spreading out.
No way to form a real image with that, but you can still form virtual images.
That's a diverging lens and diverging lenses, as this ray diagram suggests,
will form virtual images on the same side of the lens as the object
and they tend to be reduced virtual images.
Look at the eye looking through the lens.
It sees that reduced image.
The lens equation still works, but you have to consider that the focal length
of a diverging lens, a convex lens, is negative
and you have negative image distances s' because the image is on the same side of the lens as the object.
A diverging lens actually corrects nearsightedness because a nearsighted eye,
the problem is that the focus by the natural eye, cornea, and lens
is not far enough back to be on the retina.
You can correct that by putting a diverging lens.
You might say, whoops, this doesn't look like a diverging lens,
but it is a diverging lens because all that matters for a diverging lens
is that it be thinner in the center than at the edges.
It still can have that curvature at the front, that positive curvature
if the inner surface is more sharply curved.
So there is a convex or diverging lens used to correct vision
and if you are nearsighted and you have contact lenses
and you have the same strength of contact lenses as mine,
but you're nearsighted, they're going to say minus 2.25 diopters
because the focal length in the lens equation with a diverging lens is negative.
So this equation works with all possibilities if you're careful
to obey those different sign corrections.
So we can do a lot with the lens equation.
We can prescribe eyeglasses, we could make telescopes,
we could make microscopes, we can do all kinds of things
because this equation basically describes the processes we use
when we drew those ray diagrams.
Okay, well let's wrap up and then I'm going to give you a little bit of a challenge.
So here we are, summarizing lecture 42.
We have curved mirrors and they can produce images by reflection.
Lenses produce images by refraction
and there are two types of images either produced by mirrors or by lenses.
They are real images where light is actually coming from the image,
virtual images where light only appears to be coming from the image.
There's no light really there but it looks like it's coming from the image.
We can determine image location, size and orientation by ray tracing
either mirrors or lenses or we can do it with the lens mirror or mirror equation.
By the way I didn't mention but that equation works for mirrors also.
Again if you look at the correct sign conventions for it.
And one application we've studied is vision correction.
So a quick introduction to lens and mirror image formation.
Well we could stop there but if you're interested here's a challenge for you.
The challenge is essentially the same as the example I worked
except in this case we have a near sighted eye
and it can't focus on anything more distant than 80 centimeters.
Near sightedness is the opposite of far sightedness.
Prescribe a lens for this person that will correct the vision
by imaging something that's infinitely distant,
something they can't put into focus to 80 centimeters.
If you image something infinitely distance to 80 centimeters from the eye
then anything closer than infinity will be closer than 80 centimeters
and the eye will be able to focus.
So this lens is going to take everything from 80 centimeters on out to infinity
and move it back to between your eye and 80 centimeters.
So here's the solution.
This is going to require as I indicated a diverging lens with a negative focal length.
Here s is the object distance, that's infinity.
We want to focus on something very, very, very far away.
So 1 over f is 1 over s but s is infinity, 1 over infinity is 0.
What's s prime?
s prime is the distance to the image.
We want that to be 0.8 meters, 80 centimeters,
but that's negative because we're talking about a virtual image
on the same side of the lens as the object.
So that comes out minus 1 over minus 0.8 meters or minus 1 over 0.8 meters
and that's 1.25 meters to the minus 1.
We don't need to invert that to get the focal lengths
because that is the lens prescription in diopters.
Thank you.
