Welcome. You are about to view a recorded talk from the online seminar series
Progress and Visions in the Scientific Study of the Mind-Matter Relation held in 2018.
The seminars aimed to bring together researchers from around the globe with a
background in mathematics or physics who are interested in the scientific study
of consciousness and the mind-matter relation. While each seminar session
consists of a talk and a discussion, the latter is not recorded and the following
video will only contain the talk. We hope you enjoy it. For further information
please visit mind-matter-relation.org.
So this is a proposal to use humans to switch the settings in a bell
experiment and so what I'll do is I'll, before I get to the actual proposal, I'll
just give the sort of background and much of this may be very familiar to
people here but I think it's worth going over the sort of basic sort of
philosophical issues of consciousness just so we know what kind of thing is
being tested. So I'll talk about consciousness and also Turing type tests.
So Turing type tests are sort of slightly broader category than the Turing
tests that Alan Turing came up with but you'll see what I mean shortly. So
first of all there's three basic types of ontological accounts for
consciousness. There's also idealism which you may think of as an ontological
account. In any case idealism is is where you imagine that you know that
basically all reality is just mental, it's just made out of thoughts. So the
other three accounts, sort of more ontological accounts are on the screen
and you see I've got two rows and two columns. So in the columns I have either
that there's no fundamental consciousness property or there is a
fundamental consciousness property being added and in the rows I have that
there's only matter or that you have mind added, so mind in addition to matter.
So the three possibilities. The first one is just straightforward vanilla
materialism. So this is basically the idea that you have some sort of
model of the universe to an entirely materialist account and at that
fundamental level nowhere is consciousness mentioned. So if you look
here's an example, the standard model of elementary particles. This is just one
example and you'll see in particular that there's no consciousness boson for
example. There's no top consciousness quark or anything like that.
So of course it doesn't have to be the standard model of elementary physics, it
could be something else, but it's a sort of standard materialist model in which
consciousness isn't posited at the fundamental level. And then the big
problem for this kind of approach is what David Chalmers has called the hard
problem of consciousness, which I'm sure has been spoken about in previous
talks. This is the problem of accounting for the existence of quality, the
existence of feelings and sensation, things like the color red. It's difficult
to see how the color red, the sensation of the color red is going to emerge
out of this sort of simple materialist account of things. Okay, so that's an
argument that's been well rehearsed. The second sort of account is, well now
you have only matter, but you also have some fundamental consciousness type
property added to matter. And so this is panpsychism. So you can think of this
like following. So here's, imagine that you have the physical world. So I'm
showing in the picture just a small part of the physical world, but imagine the
whole universe. And then in addition to the sort of atoms and whatever make up
the materialist account of the world, there's also some kind of glitter, sort
of consciousness glitter spread throughout the whole universe. And this is
what accounts for the existence of consciousness, what makes consciousness
possible. So in this type of approach, the whole universe is in some sense
endowed with the property of consciousness. The third type of account is
mind matter duality. So this is where you have matter, which may be described,
for example, by the standard model, something like that. Then in addition,
you have mind added to matter. So mind added. So mind is a separate property.
And so this idea goes back to René Descartes in 1641. And here you have,
well, here's a picture of René Descartes. And here's a picture that's meant to
represent this. I don't quite understand how it does. In any case, somehow the mind
is acting, I think this is the pineal gland. The mind is acting on the brain in
some way. And also the brain is acting on the mind. And so you have this kind of
mind matter duality. So this is the approach that I'm interested in testing.
And so I'll talk about it a bit more.
So one particular concern about mind matter duality that you often read in
philosophical textbooks is that it may be epiphenomenal. So if the world of
matter is, in some sense, closed, it behaves according to its own laws, then
it seems like there's no place for mind to come in from the outside and make
changes. So you could imagine mind passively observing matter. But if you
take this argument that the world is somehow causally closed, then it's not
possible for matter to influence mind. It strikes me that this isn't a very good
argument because if we're going to take on as radical a belief as mind
matter duality, then we might expect other things to change as well. In
particular, the idea that matter, the world of matter is somehow causally
closed. So it doesn't seem to me to be a terribly strong argument. The idea
that energy is conserved and momentum is conserved, for example, these things
seem to be sort of true to some extent. But I don't think breaking those in the
case where you have some nonphysical mind added into the picture is terribly
radical after you've already made the radical step of introducing some sort
of nonphysical mind. Incidentally, the mind, I mean, although one is describing
it as nonphysical, it's still ontological. In such a picture, you still
imagine that these minds exist in some sense. They just exist in a different
kind of realm from the matter. So an argument against epiphenomalism, which
goes back to my supervisor, you and Squires, is if you look in the dictionary,
you'll find the word consciousness in black ink. Okay, and here is a scan I
took from an online dictionary. And you can see there is the word consciousness.
So the ink atoms must have been influenced, presumably indirectly, by
whatever it is that's responsible in the ontology for consciousness. It's
difficult to imagine that the atoms in the word consciousness in the
dictionary could have gotten into that configuration sort of incidentally
without whatever it was that was responsible for consciousness somehow
being involved. So this is an argument that it seems that whatever it is that
you mind that causes consciousness would have to be involved in acting on
matter. It's an argument against epiphenomalism. So when I was preparing
these slides, I thought it would be better if I took a photograph of a
dictionary instead of just taking a scan on the internet, because then you'd be
able to see a photograph of the actual ink atoms. And so I asked my wife,
because I was at a conference, I asked my wife to photograph a dictionary and
send me the pictures. But because we were painting our house, the only
dictionary we had available was the Scrabble dictionary. And here it is.
And I don't know if you can see that, but in the Scrabble dictionary, it
turns out the word consciousness or even the word conscious is missing.
Although if you look on the front cover, the words selfie, chillax and
geocache are added. They're new in the in the fifth edition. So it goes
straight from conquian to consent. So that suggests that Scrabble players
are zombies, you know, in the philosophical literature, people, you
know, bodies that have all the same attributes as us, except consciousness,
they typically call them conscious. So they call them zombies. And so
so here's a picture of some zombies who play Scrabble.
Okay, so
but going back to the argument against epiphenomenalism, since the word
consciousness does appear in most dictionaries, we conclude that the
behavior of matter can be affected by the ontological elements that are
responsible for consciousness. So from the Cartesian Julius point of view, you
can tell a story in which the mind acts on the brain, and thereby imparts
information into the physical world, and somewhere down the line that will
lead to certain configurations of atoms of ink atoms in a dictionary.
So in order for that to happen, it seems clear that atoms that are actually
inside the brain would have to violate the laws of physics, the standard
laws of sort of the material world. So if that were true, then in principle, we
could look inside the brain, I should say brain there, we could look inside the
brain and see these atoms behaving in a different way. You know, we could
look inside the brain and see these atoms behaving in a different way, you
know, see them violating the standard laws of physics. An experiment like that
will be very, very difficult to do. First of all, the brain is an incredibly messy
environment. Atoms are not isolated. So it's difficult to know exactly how they
should behave according to the sort of fundamental laws of physics. And further
more, you need to be sure you know what the correct laws of physics are for
this situation. So this is a, although in principle, you should be able to do an
experiment like this. In practice, it's very difficult to imagine doing an
experiment where you look inside a brain and see the atoms behaving a
different way and positive that as evidence for my materiality. So we
need a different kind of approach. So an approach like this was given by the man
shown in the in the picture on the previous slide. So this is the the
Turing test, which I'm sure everybody knows, but let me just go over it once
more. So here we imagine a situation where we have an interrogator, some
person, and he has an interface, a computer. In this modern version, he has a
laptop. But when Alan Turing wrote that down, they didn't have laptops, it would
have been some different kind of a computer interface. And then there's a
screen. And on the other side of the screen, there's either another human,
also having a laptop or some AI system. And now the interrogator asks
questions across this interface and tries to establish whether or not there's a
human on the other side or or AI system. Okay. And after a while, the interrogator
says, okay, I've come to my conclusion that this is a human or this is an AI
system. And indeed, I think it's an there's an annual I think an annual
competition for software programmers to attempt to outwit interrogators with
their their programs. And so far, I think the humans are still winning. But
but eventually, maybe computers will be better than humans. We'll be able to
convince interrogators that they are they are human over this interface. There's
something a bit odd about this experiment, because the AI system, in some
sense, has to be programmed to be fundamentally dishonest. It has to
intimidate the human. And, you know, if it's asked a question like, are you a
human, it will certainly say yes, because otherwise it would fail. So there's a
sort of audit kind of experiment. But nevertheless, there's something compelling
about this, because you have this simple interface, where there's classical
information flowing backwards and forwards. It seems like a very good way to
avoid, you know, having to look inside the brain and see if atoms are behaving in
a different way. So Alan Turing himself, of course, believed that you could
ultimately program a computer to behave, to pass this test, so that there isn't
fundamentally any difference between, you know, brains and suitably programmed
computers. On the other hand, if you read his paper, it's a very beautiful
paper, and he's incredibly open minded, and he discusses all sorts of, you know,
crazy explanations, including, you know, ESP, he also discusses ESP in this
paper. So it's a very open minded paper. So if we take the basic idea that Alan
Turing had, and we can talk about a more general category of tests, so I'm
calling these Turing type tests. So here's the idea, we take people or
artificial, or some sort of artificial devices, and we put them inside boxes.
So figurative boxes, we don't have to actually put people inside these boxes,
but they're just meant to indicate that we have them in a separate kind of
chamber. And we may have more than one person, you know, in the previous slide,
you only had one person being interrogated. And then we allow classical
information to pass in and out of the boxes. So this is a more general
category of tests that we can consider. And now if real people can do something
that the artificial devices cannot do, then we have evidence for mind
matter duality. On the other hand, if real people can always be imitated by
these artificial devices, then that speaks against mind matter duality.
Okay. So now I'm going to come to the actual proposed experiment. Well,
first of all, some background. So I think probably most people watching this
talk are familiar with this, but let me go through it anyway. This slide's
we're initially prepared for a more general audience, but I'll stick with
them. So a Bell experiment looks like this. We have a source and a pair of
entangled particles are emitted one in each direction towards some
apparatuses. And then at each apparatus, we have a choice of setting. Okay, so
we have either setting A for this measurement or sorry, either one setting
or another. So we have a choice of setting for the setting A that can be
usually chosen to be one of two values. Then at the other end, we have a choice
of setting B that's usually chosen to be one of two values. And now we make an
assumption, we assume locality. So we assume that the outcome at NB does not
depend on the choice of setting at end A. And likewise, the outcome at end A does
not depend on the choice of setting at NB. So under that assumption, John Bell
was able to show that a certain correlation function is bounded. So here
we have the correlation function is bounded. It has to be less than or
equal to a certain value two. So this correlation just measures a certain,
you know, it's just a certain correlation function on the outcomes, the two
ends for different settings. However, quantum theory predicts that this
correlation will take the value 2.8. So quantum theory seems to violate
these assumptions of locality. It seems in quantum theory that one end
seems to know what the setting of the other end is. Okay. So in these kinds
of experiments, people worry about imposing locality conditions. So we
argue that there's a need to switch the setting at one end. So there's no time
for the information about the new setting to reach the other end. So we switch
the setting at end A. And then here's a light speed signal traveling out in
red. And we want to perform the measurement to NB before there's been
time for information about the new value of the setting to reach the other end.
In actual experiments, the switching is usually done by a random number
generator. So the first experiment actually to use switching was done by
Alain Aspect in 1982, I think. And he used quasi periodic switching. It was
a sort of opto acoustical modulator that would, so that the light would get
sent either one way or the other. But it was actually periodic, instead of
being random. And unfortunately, as was pointed out later by Anton Zeilinger,
the switching was just exactly such that by the time the photon would have
reached the other end from the source, the switch would have been set back
to its original value. So that seemed unfortunate. And it shows that you
have to be careful in thinking about how to do these kinds of things. But more
generally, so starting with, I think Anton Zeilinger was the first to do an
experiment where switching was done using some kind of random number generator.
And since then, many experiments have been done like this. But there's a
problem with random number generators. What if the random number generator is
really a deterministic machine? Okay, so you might think it's random because
you can't predict what the choice is going to be, what the number that
comes out is going to be. But actually, there could be some kind of hidden
state, some earlier hidden state that the machine has that can be used to
predict the future state. So if that's the case, then the earlier hidden state
could be broadcast so as to reach the other end in time. And so then you'd
have the information about the actual setting available at the other end that
it will be inferred from this hidden state. So in this case, random number
generators are not sufficient to impose the locality conditions. So this is
where the idea of using humans comes in. So if the interventions of mind on
matter cannot be anticipated by the laws that operate at the physical level,
then the locality conditions can be imposed in a Bell experiment if we use
humans to switch the settings. So here's a sort of Gedanken version of the
experiment. We imagine that we have a human at each end. They make a choice
between one of two settings by pressing one of two buttons. And then you
have to get the timing such the information about the choice of
measurement from each end hasn't reached the other end whilst the
measurements are being made. So the key thing here is that these choices
that humans make are in some sense interventions. Now, certainly if they
are free choices, if humans have free will, even though the physical world
is, say, deterministic, then that would count. But it could also be that the
humans are deterministic, but the deterministic rules that govern human
behavior are, so to speak, in a different realm and so cannot be
anticipated at the physical level. So this sort of argument, it would provide
evidence for mind matter. So it would provide evidence for free will, but it
wouldn't entirely prove that there was free will. Okay. So so far, of
course, no experiments have actually been done with humans. It's interesting
because if people often talk, you know, just as a matter of speaking, they say
things like, well, you switched the setting at one end, and then, you
know, then you switch, someone else switches the setting, and people often
talk in those terms. But that's just a way of speaking. You know, people often
say things like, you know, you set the initial conditions, but no one actually
sets the initial conditions. You know, like with these experiments, people
often talk in these terms, but actually, that isn't what's done. And it's
actually very difficult to do the experiment with humans, as I'll discuss.
So so far, the experiment certainly hasn't been done with humans. Anyway, before
we proceed on to the actual proposal, it's worth looking at how this fits in
with the remarks I was making earlier. So here we have, we can imagine an
experiment in which we have either humans doing the switching at each end, or we
have some sort of AI devices doing the switching. And so here, the AI stands
for artificial interventions. So they could be random number generators, or
they could be more complicated computers that are that might be used to pass
the Turing test, whatever system you want, you could put in here whatever
artificial system you want. And then we want to contrast the two situations. If
it's the case that when we have humans doing the switching, we start to see a
violation of bells and equalities in the direction, sorry, we start to see a
violation of quantum theory in the direction of satisfying bells and
equalities. And of course, if we if we managed to impose the locality
conditions in every case, then we would exactly satisfy the bells and
equalities. If we see that, then we would have the kind of evidence we're
looking for some evidence from mind matter duality. I'll talk about that in
more detail later. Yeah, so this is indeed a Turing type test. It belongs to
the category of tests I outlined earlier, where we put humans or artificial
devices in boxes. And then we only allow classical communication into and out of
that box. Actually, in this case, we only need to have classical communication
out of the boxes. There's no need to send information into the boxes.
Okay. One difference between this test and the test that Turing proposed is that
it's objective. So in the case of the Turing test, the interrogators have to
make a subjective decision as to whether they think it's a human or a
computer, an artificial device inside the box. In this case, it's an objective
matter of the fact as to whether the bells and equalities are violated, not
least as to what the value of the correlation function is. So if it
worked, it would be a stronger test of this kind of hypothesis. Okay. So that
was a sort of Gedanken version of the experiment. Now let me discuss an
actual proposed experiment. Well, first of all, we need to get human inputs. We
could imagine having humans push a button. So here's an example of a human
who has one of two buttons to push, the one on the left or the one on the
right. Now, it turns out that you can predict about one tenth of a second
earlier than the button is actually pressed, what choice a human will make.
So this has been done in the context of typing. If you have people typing and
you attach EEG headsets to them, then you can predict from the EEG signal one
tenth of a second earlier what they're going to type with about 90%
accuracy. In one tenth of a second, a light speed signal can travel several
times the radius of the Earth. So that means that in order to impose locality
conditions where people press buttons, you'd have to have an experiment that
was on the level of the solar system. You'd have to have people or a
person somewhere else, not on planet Earth, but somewhere far away. And
that's certainly quite a difficult experiment to do. So what I propose
instead is to use EEG signals directly. So the idea is you engage people in
some appropriate kind of behavior where you imagine they're making
choices. It doesn't really matter what the choices are, although maybe it would
matter what the choices are, but that's something to be discussed. So maybe
they're doing calculations, maybe they're pressing a button where they choose
one of two options, some kind of appropriate choicey behavior. And then
you use the EEG headset to collect the signal directly, and then you
take that electrical signal and you feed it into the switching on the bell
experiment. You may want to do some appropriate pre-processing of the
signal first, although any pre-processing of the signal shouldn't induce
too much extra delay, because if you do, you lose the advantage. So I wrote
an explicit proposal of how to do this in a paper in last year, almost a
year ago. And so the idea is that you have a bell experiment. At each end,
you have a box that chooses the setting, and then that box has maybe
there's some antenna and there's a relay station. And then you have a bunch
of humans, each of them are wearing EEG headsets, which say Bluetooth
enabled. And so the outcome from their EEG headset is sent via radio
frequency to the relay station and then re-broadcast so that it goes into
the switching. And so you do that at both ends. I proposed in the paper that
we'd have, excuse me, we'd share entanglement over 100 kilometers between,
you know, this could be at altitude between two remote locations, then you
could have the people at each end on either side of the experiment in
some in towns, and then you relay the signal up via radio frequency, and you
have like 100 people at each end. So total of 200 people, 100 kilometers. If
you assume that each person has an intervention rate of 10 hertz, so if you
assume that people are able to, you know, have 10 acts of free will or 10
interventions, whatever it is, per second, 10 acts of, you know, mind on
matter per second, then in the experiment I'm proposing here, you'd see about a
1% effect. So in 1% of cases, the locality conditions would be satisfied so
that there was, so you'd be doing it in some sense, a true Bell experiment. And
in those 1% of cases, Bell's inequalities would be satisfied under
these assumptions. And so we see a 1% violation of quantum theory, at least
1% violation of quantum theory. So that was May in 2017. But now there's a
beginning of an actual experiment because in July of 2017, this paper appeared
on the internet. So this is a satellite-based entanglement distribution
over 1,200 kilometers. So the 100 kilometers I chose earlier, I based that
number on the rough distance that was achieved by Anton Zilinga's team using
entanglement distribution in the Canary Islands, so using a telescope to send
one of the particles over about 100 kilometers. This experiment is kind
of a game changer. This is entanglement distribution over more than a
1,000 kilometers. And so I contacted the team, so the team leader is Yan Wei Pan,
photographed here. And the first author on the experiment is Yuan Nian, who's
down here. I contacted them and we have a sort of very preliminary
collaboration on an experiment like this. So let me explain what the technology
is that they have and how it might work. So these slides incidentally, the next
few slides were provided to me by Yuan Nian from China. So in August 2016, they
launched a satellite. So here's the satellite. And on this satellite, there's
a two-photon source, a source of entangled photons. The satellite goes around
the planet, goes around the planet Earth once a day. And at a certain time every
day, actually, it's in the early hours of the night, at the morning, so it's about
one o'clock in the morning or something. The satellite is in the right position to
send photons down to these two receiving telescopes in two distant towns. The
distance between these towns is 1,200 kilometers. And it's in the right position
at about one o'clock in the morning every night for about 90 seconds. And during
those 90 seconds, about 90 or 100 pairs of photons are detected. Okay, so that's
the kind of data that we have. So the proposal is to have 100 people at each
end in the way I described with EEG headsets, which is used to switch the
setting at each end and to do the bad experiment. So if you take these numbers,
if we have 1,200 kilometers, we have 100 people at each end, and a 10 hertz
switching rate per person, then we'd expect to see close to a 100% effect. That
the switching, the locality conditions that I talked about would be imposed in
roughly 100% of cases. Of course, this calculation may be a bit naive. There are
many other considerations, but at least it tells you that we're now in the right
kind of ballpark. And so the experiment starts to become feasible. Okay.
The next question is, what if? What if quantum theory were violated in this experiment, in the
direction of satisfying bells and equalities? So what if when you did this
experiment with humans switching the settings, you started to see, you know,
rather than 2.8 for that correlation function, it went down in the direction
of 2. Well, this would be truly profound and significant. The consequences for
quantum foundations would be very significant. It would show you that
actually contrary to what we've thought, we do have locality. So bells and
equalities are actually satisfied when you do the experiment properly, where you
impose the conditions, locality conditions properly. It would also
indicate a kind of super determinism, because the only way to account now for
the violations of bells and equalities that we've seen in all the existing
experiments would be to say that the earlier state of the switch at each end
is fully determines the later state of the switch and that this earlier state is
communicated to the other end. So you'd have a world which was, you know,
deterministic in a very strong way. So those would be the consequences for
quantum foundations or for physics more generally. These consequences would
pale into insignificance compared with the importance of such a result for the
study of mind. A result like this would provide, I think, very strong evidence
for Cartesian duality, although we can think about other explanations. So yeah,
I mean, when you have an experimental result, the actual interpretation of
that is always open for discussion. So it seems to me that a radical result like
this, where you see a violation, but only when humans or maybe other animals
are involved, but not when artificial devices would suggest that there
was something different going on, you could attempt to account for this kind
of result in fully materialist terms. So here's a way you might try and do it.
You might say that in order to impose the locality conditions, you need machines
that are complex in just the right kind of way. In particular, they are complex
in the kind of way that happens inside brains, you know, brains of humans and
so on and animals. And it's only when you have that kind of complexity that
you're able to impose the locality conditions. The problem with that kind
of explanation is that it seems like a very sort of holistic kind of
explanation. If nature is local, then you would expect it to be described by, you
know, local micro physical laws, in which case it's difficult to see how
this kind of holistic property could arise when you have sufficiently
complicated systems. Nevertheless, one could explore those kinds of explanations
as well. But to my mind, a result like this would be quite strong evidence
for Cartesian duality. One thing I want to point out is that this is a different
way of discussing consciousness in the context of quantum theory, context of
quantum foundations. So I think everyone is used to this idea that you might use
consciousness to solve the measurement problem. So the idea that the wave
function will collapse only when a conscious observer looks at it. So that
idea has been around for a long time, going back to people like von Neumann
and others. So there's a long history of thinking about this sort of invoking
consciousness in quantum foundations to solve the measurement problem. There's
also the many minds interpretation outlined by Michael Lockwood. And then
also many people would say that the Copenhagen interpretation is in some
sense a Cartesian dualist point of view. So Nicholas Gisan makes that point in a
paper he wrote a year or so ago on the interpretations. So what we have here is
very much of a different flavor. We're invoking consciousness in choosing
settings, not in measuring outcomes. Okay, so this idea of using humans to switch
the settings in a Bell experiment is an idea I had, you know, almost 30, well, the
idea I had 30 years ago. And then I wrote two papers on it in 1989. The first
paper I typed up that was before I knew how to use latex. And then the second
paper I start I wrote when I once had started my PhD. The reason incidentally
I went to my PhD with you and Squires was because he also had an interest in
consciousness. And so so it seemed like a good fit. Here's a figure from the paper
I wrote in in 1989, the first one. Back in those days, you couldn't use computers
to draw figures, or at least I couldn't. So this was drawn, you know, with pen and
ink. And the letters, you'd get these transfer kits and you'd rub so that the
letter would stick to the paper. Okay, so that's the figure out there. And you
can see the idea that the signal is collected via EEG headset to the
switching device at each end. You and Squires wrote a book called Conscious
Mind in the Physical World. And I've lost my copy and I fear that I've been
plugging this book so much that now if you want to buy a copy on Amazon, there's
no there's not it's not currently in print. It's actually quite expensive, I've
been told. Anyway, the book is it's a nice book, it's quite a nice read. And it
sort of it's written from a physicist's point of view. And he talks about, you
know, conscious, how you might talk about consciousness in the context of
physics. So he did discuss in this 1990 book, My Proposal. And so you look at
that if you look at this quote at the end, he says, unfortunately, the time
scales involved suggest that they would be very difficult to perform. And
suddenly back in 1990, that was true. There's also a paper by John Bell in 1990,
where he didn't mention the idea of using humans or observers, he called them to
experiment experiment lists to choose the settings. I think this was very much a
remark he made in passing. He didn't discuss the issue of mind or consciousness.
He was more concerned with imposing locality. And if you read that paper, it
doesn't seem that he he would have taken very seriously the idea that that
anything would come of using humans as opposed to random number generators in a
Bell experiment. Anyway, since I since I wrote since I thought of this idea 30
years ago, three things have changed. So first of all, attitudes have changed. I
think now, when you discuss these ideas, people take them more seriously. The idea
of using humans has been mentioned in a few of the experimental papers that have
been published in recent years. There was this experiment, this while it was more
of a sort of public outreach exercise called the big Bell experiment that was
done a few years ago, where there were Bell experiments all over the world. They
were separate sort of local experiments in laboratories. And they asked people
over the internet to send in information, like to send in signals. So in some
sense, this information that was going to decide the switching was coming from
humans. So in that experiment, no attempt was made to impose locality conditions.
But I think it's sort of in the same spirit as the sort of proposal I'm
talking about. The other thing, of course, is back in back in 1989. I didn't
have tenure. And in fact, I very quickly got the sense that it wouldn't do my
career any good to be publishing papers on consciousness. I did attempt to
publish both those papers, but they were very quickly returned by the journals.
And so I gave up after a short while. Back in 1989, I was very confident that if
the experiment was performed, a positive result would be seen. But by now, I think
it's far less likely. So by now, I would say maybe 3% is the is the chance of a
positive result. And when I say 3% to my colleagues, they usually think I'm a bit
crazy. That's much too high. Most people would give a much lower percentage.
Nevertheless, even if you if you think the chance is one in a million or one in
10 million, the if you if you multiply that by the sort of payoff in terms of
our understanding of the world, where a positive outcome seen, then I think we
get a very big number. The implications of some experiment that really shone
some light on the issue of consciousness would be would be very important.
Okay. Often, people say that Cartesian dualism is not a valid scientific
point of view. You know, that often the point people say implicitly or or
explicitly, that really scientific points of view have to be materialist in
their conception. But if you can propose an actual experiment, then it shows you
can address the issue of dualism scientifically. And this is true, even
if the experiment were performed and and negative result was seen, so quantum
theory continued to be satisfied. Even in that case, the mere fact that you can
talk about an experiment shows that one can discuss things like Cartesian
dualism in scientific terms. Okay, let me just see how much time I have. I've been
speaking for about about what time about 50, about 15 minutes. Yeah, so I think I
would say you have at least 15 minutes left. So, okay, good. 34. Yeah. Yeah. Good.
So then in that case, so the remaining slides are a little bit more technical.
But I think they're potentially interesting. So let me just go through
those. So let me first of all define a concept I call retarded settings.
So what are retarded settings?
See, if you look at this space time diagram here, imagine we have some
intervention. Okay. And I'm thinking of, you know, a human making a choice of
some mind intervening on matter, whereby you have an intervention. And that
intervention switches the setting in a bell experiment. Okay. Incidentally, can
you see the cursor when I do this? Yes. Okay. So here is the signal from the
intervention to the to the switch of the setting.
Okay. And then you can imagine that information about this intervention
spreads out at light speed. So here's a light cone. So here's the light speed
signal reaching the other end. So this switch is used to set a measurement
which is performed here to this time here. And likewise, there's a measurement
over here. So you can see in this case, you have satisfied that the locality
condition that the information for the switch for the setting and a has not
reached and be in time to influence the outcome of that measurement. And you can
do the same thing in the other direction. So what is a retarded setting?
Well, let's imagine the state of the switchbox and a time t is alpha t. This
is the sort of hidden state. So it may consist of quantities, variables that
appear in the fundamental theory that are not directly accessible to
experimentalists. So this state can describe any physical systems that can
locally influence the setting and a. So when I talk about the switchbox,
potentially, this is a broader category referring to, you know, all the physical
the physical part of the world that can influence the choice of setting and a.
Now, according to the assumptions, we have in the absence of interventions,
this state, this, sorry, this, this state evolves deterministically like this.
And so the setting at time t is going to be given by the hidden state at time
alpha, time zero. This is alpha zero. And we can choose time t equals zero to be
the last time that the light speed signal can communicate the state and the
machine and a to the measurement event and be okay. So alpha zero is some
information that could be sent from and a to NB.
If an intervention happens at a time t prime after t zero, then actually the new
state alpha of t prime is not given by the state alpha zero. Okay, and this is
what we mean by an intervention. We mean something external that it cannot be
predicted at the other time.
Nevertheless, we can still define what we might call the retarded setting. So this
is the setting that's chosen. Sorry, the setting that would have been chosen had
then not been an intervention. So this is a function of alpha zero. So this is the
setting at time t that would have been chosen had there not been an intervention.
Okay, so that's a slightly odd concept. But basically, the retarded setting is the
setting that NB believes the setting is going to be at N A.
Okay.
Let's see. Okay, so we can now derive Bell in the qualities using these retarded
settings. So the outcome of NB can depend on the retarded setting at N A. It can also
depend on the local information at NB. So the actual setting at NB and the retarded
setting at NB. So the outcome at NB can be given by a function of these things and also
by some hidden variables, as is usual in derivations of Bell's inequalities.
And similarly, we have the same thing at N A. So now the outcome at N A can depend on the
retarded setting at NB. Okay, let me just say that again. Right. So now we can derive Bell
in the qualities. So we do that in the usual kind of way. So we use this mathematical result.
We put, we substitute in these choices for these X's and Y's. We integrate over lambda.
And then you get these Bell in the qualities. So these are retarded Bell in the qualities
because they have in them not just the actual settings, but also the retarded settings. Okay.
If you look at these inequalities, if you force your actual and retarded settings to be equal,
then each of these terms has to be the same thing. Okay. And then because you have a minus sign here,
you just get two times the given correlation function. And since the correlation function
can take a maximum value of one, we just get something which has to be true. Okay. So if the
actual settings are equal to the retarded settings, then there's nothing to test the Bell
inequalities. Don't teach us anything in this kind of situation. Even if the setting is different
at one end, you can make an argument that there's nothing to test. If the setting is
different at both ends, then there is something to be tested. So that's the situation we want to
realize. Okay. So what we can do is now we can build a model. If you look at Bell's original paper
from 1964, he had a model in it. And so emulating that, we can build a model. So this model, I
haven't used the local retarded setting. So it wasn't necessary.
So in this model, we have a hidden variable lambda, which is just an angle. It takes values
between zero and two pi. And we imagine it wraps around. So if you add a number on it,
which takes outside that range, you just put it back into that range, treat it like an angle.
We have a flat distribution of this hidden variable. And now we have these choices for
these outcome functions. Well, if you substitute that into the expression for the correlation
function, then you get this expression. Okay. So these angles, theta r and theta l are things that
we can define locally at each end. And in particular, we define theta l, this is on the angle on
Alice's end, in terms of the actual and retarded setting at that end. And likewise on every end,
then we obtain this value for the correlation function. Now, if the retarded settings are
equal to the actual settings, then this just gives us the usual quantum results. So you can see here
that by taking account of these retarded settings, you can get agreement with quantum theory.
On the other hand, in this model, if A is not equal to AR and or B is not equal to BR,
then you start to disagree with quantum theory. So in this model, it's sufficient to have the
actual setting and the retarded setting different even at one end. So if A is different from AR,
then you will get a violation of quantum theory.
Okay. So now I come to the conclusions. So I proposed an experiment. The experiment's
difficult, but it seems like it's feasible. One thing this experiment depends on is this
switching time. So I was assuming that people are capable of 10 hertz. So 10 switches per second,
10 interventions per second. If that's not true, then it would be more difficult to perform the
experiment. If people are only capable of a lower switching rate, then it's more difficult.
Nevertheless, it seems like this kind of experiment is in the realm of the feasible.
To perform an experiment like this would act as a kind of stretch goal.
It's very difficult to do this, and so it would push the technology you have.
It would open up the field of, I call it BQI, brain quantum interface experiments,
in particular where timing is important. It's very unlikely that quantum theory would be
violated. I think most people think quantum theory will sail through this test just like it sailed
through previous tests, but it's possible. For me, personally, it's super determinism,
which is the thing that's hardest to believe. So personally, I would put a fairly high credence
on something like mind-materiality. Maybe I would give it somewhere in the range of 30 to 50%.
It seems to me that we need some radical change in physics to account for consciousness.
The hard problem of David Chalmers is a very significant one,
and even though mind-materiality doesn't seem very scientific from the current point of view,
that's just a lack of experimental data. I put a fairly high credence in that.
It seems to me that this super deterministic account of nature is unpleasant,
and I would rather believe in non-locality than super determinism.
So I find that hard to believe in. And suddenly, my work in quantum gravity moves goes very much in
the opposite direction. It seems that arguments, seems that indefinite causal structure,
fundamentally indefinite causal structure would be completely inconsistent with super
determinism. Nevertheless, it's not for me to decide the actual nature of nature that's for
experiment. If experiment was done and a violation of quantum theory was seen, then
we would have to deal with that result. It would be a tremendously significant result,
especially because of the issue of mind. If we saw a violation of quantum theory,
then we'd have to perform more experiments with more complex inanimate systems, more
complex computers. Maybe we could find some software that would also get the same result,
and also other types of animate systems. So what are the odds? I'm saying 3%, although
if you say 1 in a million or 1 in 10 million, that seems fine as well. Of course, in the end,
having probabilities over different physical theories is kind of a nonsense.
It's a sort of meta probability. It doesn't really make any sense. So in the end,
we just have to do the experiment. So this question, I think I just alluded to this.
Do we need to use humans, or will penguins do? There's this rumor that Roger Penrose,
who has worked on consciousness, of course, has a pet penguin, and indeed this looks like
some photographic evidence for that. He was telling me at this conference I went to a short
while ago, it was a conference on consciousness. He was telling me that there was this rumor that
was on his Wikipedia page that he had a penguin, but he stated that on his Wikipedia page. Then
eventually, the moderators took it off his Wikipedia page, and he was very disappointed
that he'd lost his penguin. Anyway, here's some evidence in favour of that.
Whenever I want to think about consciousness, often I think back to this picture I saw in
Roger's book, I'm sure everyone has seen it. Here's a quote from him,
platonic, mathematical, physical, and mental. So each has its own kind of reality,
and each is deeply mysteriously founded in the one that precedes it.
I'm not sure anything I had to say today directly bears on this picture. Maybe it would indicate
that the arrow, at least one of the arrows is pointing also in the other direction.
But consciousness is certainly a very mysterious subject, and it would be nice if we could make
some empirical progress. Okay, and I'll stop there.
