In this lecture, I wish to look at the bonds of society in the early Roman Republic, which
cemented the various classes, or as I prefer to call them, orders, ordinance, and Latin,
as well as the Italian allied communities into a society, into a wider Roman Republic,
or race publica, as the Romans would call it.
And this gets us to the major issue of patrons and clients, or in Latin patronus clientes.
We took the words over directly from Latin.
And how important those social bonds were in dictating political life, the success of
the Romans in mobilizing citizens for military service, also explains the peculiarities of
the Roman institution of slavery.
As we shall see, slavery is one of the major means of assimilating the conquered into the
Roman body politic, because the Romans had a form of slavery that is quite different
from the more modern experience in the West since the 16th century.
So this lecture looks at the issue of the bonds of patron and client, and all of the
social-political implications they involved.
Now these bonds were inherited.
Once a group of clients put themselves at the disposal of a patron, those ties would be
transmitted from generation to generation.
And the bonds were reciprocal.
That is, the Romans saw society as very hierarchical, and your rank in society always carried obligation.
So if you were at the top of the social pyramid, there were a whole series of obligations that
went down to that very bottom, that base.
And there were rituals and traditions that sanctified it.
One of the best documented ones that comes from the late republic, especially from the
letters of Cicero, is the salutatio, that is the mourning, salutation by clients.
They came to their patron, saluted him at the front of his door, would walk with Cicero
into the forms, singing his praises, if it had to do with political activity.
These would be people trying to mobilize the vote and getting their fellow tribesmen or
members of their sentry, depending on whether they were in the tribal or the sentry assembly
to vote, for their patron or the candidate the patron designated.
So you can see the immediate interaction between the social and the political here.
As I mentioned, it's also very important for military service.
One of the great commanders of the late republic, Pompey the Great, I mean he was great because
he took the name the Great, in imitation of Alexander the Great.
And Pompey claimed that he could tap his foot anywhere and Italy in three legions would
appear.
And generally that was right until Caesar crossed the Rubicon and the legions didn't show up.
But until that point, Pompey had the clients, the ties, the connections, the influence, that
Latin word, octauritas, which is really a combination of influence and charisma, to get
his fellow tribesmen, that is people registered in those residential districts in the tribal
assembly, to turn out for the draft.
And patrons expected this type of reaction from their clients.
And in return, the patrons gave a great deal of protection advantage to their clients.
And this was expected.
They could not violate, they could not turn deaf ears to the appeals of the patron.
This took various forms.
One of the most obvious ones was legal protection.
The Roman court system, especially in the republic, is sometimes been called essentially
institutionalized self-help.
That is a court will give a verdict on your behalf.
But if you were one of the lesser people, or as modern Italians would say, populo piccolo,
one of the little ones, you had the right to get back your farm, which had been, you'd
been dispossessed by a powerful Roman senator, but you didn't have the ability to do it.
The senator took the farm, he had his armed clients keeping you out.
The only way to enact that legal decision was to go to your patron, a fellow senator,
to the guy who just dispossessed you, and ask him to represent, to intercede for you.
And that meant that a great senator would go to another great senator and say, look,
you cannot handle these people this way, these are my clients, this is not proper.
And so Roman society was very much built on this notion, you had a wall of friendships,
and those obligations ran up and down.
So very often patrons were required to take on actions, but maybe they would rather avoid
or dodge, because it brought them to conflict with other great patrons who had their own
clients.
But nonetheless, these obligations were powerfully felt, and they were sanctified by what the
Romans called most maiorum, the custom of the greater ones, of the ancestors.
And the one point that comes through in the political process, as well as in the social
bonds, is the Romans were an innately conservative people.
If you could find precedent, if there were traditions that sanctified the action, that
explains the reluctance to abolish any political institution if it was sanctified by tradition.
Even if it was a fossil, a relic, and some newer institution had taken over its function,
they never quite got rid of anything.
This is one reason why the British in the 19th century are so good at starting the Roman
Constitution, they just understood this outlook.
Patrons could also accept not only individuals and families, but whole other types of groups.
In the Middle and Light Republic, we find them accepting what are known as colleges,
these would be originally burial societies or organizations, but they essentially evolved
in something like guilds.
It could be a group of silversmiths who had common rights, dinners, put in money for a
burial fund.
That whole colegium, or in plural colegia, could go to a patron and ask him to represent
them in legal actions to make sure that they got proper contracts, especially if there
were involved in supplying armies overseas.
These ties had numerous implications in economic activity as well.
The depths of these ties are very well revealed by the extremely wealthy record of inscriptions,
public inscriptions and private inscriptions, set up from mostly the 1st century BC to the
early 3rd century AD.
Numerous clients thanking their patrons, these could be colegia, they could be cities,
whole cities, later on become clients of great Romans, they could be individuals, they could
be ex-slaves, expressing their gratitude to their patron for some reason or another.
The Romans put up more public inscriptions and private inscriptions than any other people
in the ancient and medieval world, and they are a major source for understanding much
of the social history of the Roman world, and much of my information about the social
history of the Roman world comes from the inscriptions, which is called epigraphy, the
study of inscriptions or epigraphy.
Now let's look at a couple of important implications for this particular course on Roman the Barbarians
of what these social bonds meant.
It explains a great deal of the political conservatism in Roman assemblies.
As I mentioned institutionally, the assemblies were set up so they didn't have the kind of
initiative and action that one would find, for instance, in the Athenian assembly, where
the Athenian citizens could vote and change the government at will.
In fact, the Athenian assembly is the only assembly I know that actually voted itself
out of existence briefly for 10 months, but that's a strange instance in the Polyponnesian
war.
The Roman assemblies had far less initiative.
Furthermore, the electorate was very conservative because the voters were tied to patrons, and
those patrons were the political elite, the great senatorial families, the people who
had established themselves as those with the right to hold high office and the priesthoods.
These would be the patrician and plebeians known as the nobles, the nobolecs, families
whose ancestors had held curial offices, the high offices of state.
Now, very seldom, and this will occur as the empire expands and the republic encounters
tough barbarian opponents in northern Europe and in Spain, there will be instances where
new men, in Latin that would be a novus homo, that is a man without any kind of ancestors
who had held high office, could get elected.
And such new men, however, were extraordinary.
They were the exception rather than the rule.
They made it because of a particular crisis in which the electorate broke the conventional
rules of patron and client and voted for someone who was seen as a popular, popularized figure.
He represented the interests of the people.
But ordinarily the Romans didn't do this.
The Roman voters tended to be very conservative.
And that can be borne out very simply by one statistic.
From 367 BC to 46 BC, 367 BC, when the consulship was redefined, that it could be held by patricians
and plebeians both, down to 46 BC, which is when Julius Caesar, JC, the first JC, as I
always call him, rewrote, essentially was a dictator and started putting his own supporters
in his consul.
In that period, there is a potential of 640 consulships that could be held.
In that period, only 21 were held by new men.
And of those 21, they only represent 11 individuals.
One of them is Gaius Marius, who's a leading figure in fighting the northern barbarians,
who's elected consul seven times.
Another was the new man Cato, who held it twice.
In the late republic, in the period of the Roman Revolution, only two new men ever held
the consulship.
One of them being Marcus Tullius Cicero in 63 BC, who's an extraordinary exceptional
election.
So, the social bonds of Roman society meant that the electorate was not going to elect
any kind of consul or preter, a high official, who didn't have the connections, the auctoritas
and the traditions behind him to hold that high office.
It also explains the relationship among the Roman senatorial elite themselves.
There's a whole discipline called prosopography, which is a rather fancy term of saying the
study of faces.
That's what it literally means in Greek.
And that is finding out what the connections of patron and clients was among the aristocrats,
because there was a top, small elite who held the consulship, a wider aristocratic group
that could hold the pretership, that is the office below consul, and then a group of others
who were essentially the back benches of the senate.
They could get to the lower offices, but never hold the consulship.
Even with the elite themselves, there was this gradation, and there were notions of
patron and client.
And those new men who broke the rules and got elected really started out their careers
as the client of some greater political figure, particularly Gaius Marius, who violated his
position as a client to Caicilius Mattelus, the man who was supposed to be his patron
in order to get himself elected.
The nobleness among themselves often spoke of amikitia, we get a lot of words from this,
it comes from the Latin word amicus, meaning friend, that is there were friendship ties,
there were marriage connections, and there were also bonds of patron and client understood
between the very great top political families and the lesser ones.
And this is what bound together the political elite classes of the Roman Republic, so they
played according to the rules of that aristocratic constitution.
And that is an extremely important point to make.
Then those bonds of client and patron and the friendships began to dissolve at the end
of the second century BC as a result of social and economic change between the lower classes
and the upper classes, and within the political elite themselves, then the Republic was in
trouble.
And that is probably the most dubious gift from the overseas expansion, the successful
wars, the dissolving of the social bonds, which then in turn led to what we call the
Roman Revolution or the breakdown of the Roman Republic.
I mentioned that the social bonds in Roman society were also seen very much in slavery.
This Roman institution of slavery has to be understood as an extension of the family initially.
Now I have to draw distinctions here between slaves who were state slaves, as opposed to
slaves who were attached to individuals.
By one count, say in 100 BC, the Roman state probably had 200,000 slaves, and some of them
in very dangerous occupations such as mining whose life expectancy was very low, and were
treated in very brutal and harsh conditions, is different from those slaves and the great
families that were attached to the household, who were also rural slaves.
Their condition could be quite harsh.
These would be people who rallied later to Spartacus and the great uprising in 73 to 71
BC.
But many of the slaves attached to the households were slaves because of the condition of just
being captives in war.
Some were purchased on the slave market, but ultimately most of them turned out to be captives.
So the Romans didn't attach the kind of racial connotations that came to characterize slavery
in the early modern age and modern age.
There wasn't the sort of racist theory behind it.
You just can't find that in the Roman texts.
And furthermore, slaves, especially in the great households, tended to be liberated quite
often.
Manumission rates are extraordinarily high for certain classes of slaves, and there was
a whole slave hierarchy just as there was a hierarchy of the free.
And what happened to a slave who became free, became a freedman, Lieberitus, is he effectively
became a super client.
And he and his family, slaves could assemble their own money, purchase other members of
their family, their freedom, became clients of their former master, they took his name,
and that would then be, that bond would then be inherited by his descendants.
So that what happened is slavery became a way of assimilating large numbers of foreign
captives into the Roman body politic.
And the numbers are really quite extraordinary from what we can tell.
There was, Romans, one good point about the Roman, they were very good on record keeping
as people went in the ancient world.
These numbers are sometimes subject to interpretation.
But between 200 BC and 50 BC, at least one million people were captured and sold on the
markets in Italy.
And in 225 BC, perhaps 500,000 out of 4.5 million residents in Italy were slaves.
By 50 BC, probably 2 million were slaves out of a population of 6.5 million.
That is over close to a third.
And in that 6.5 million of Romans, citizens, many of them were at least in part of servile
origins because at least some of their ancestors were slaves that had been captured in Spain
or the Greek world or in Gaul and brought into Rome and eventually liberated.
So slavery was a odd way in our notion but very common in Roman notion of taking these
foreign peoples into Italy and eventually using their skills, rewarding themselves with
freedom and citizenship.
And this is an extraordinary aspect of Roman society.
When you were freed, you were at the same time given, enfranchised.
You were given the Roman citizenship, which is not what most ancient societies did.
And in Greek cities, for instance, when you were freed, you went back to the citizenship
or the status you were before you were enslaved.
And in the case of the Romans, no, slavery was a way of bringing in all these freedmen.
So the great households of the Roman Republic and the early Roman Empire had attached to
them this widening apron of clients, of freedmen, of slaves, all tied through these social bonds.
Now there were dangers in this arrangement and that is seen in the late Republic.
The great wars of conquests overseas in Spain, in the East, in Gaul, in North Africa brought
so many slaves into the Italian markets that it created certain changes in that schematic
social structure I had mentioned earlier.
For one, there was a very powerful property order that emerged between the political
elite, the noblest, the men who held office, and the massive voters.
This group gets recognized in Roman law in 129 BC as the Ordo equestria, the equestrian
order, the knights.
Sometimes older texts try to equate it with the middle class, that's a deceptive turn.
Best term for them is the gentlemen outside the Senate.
These were people who made money in contracts, government contracts, especially as we'll
see that the Romans have at least 150,000 guys serving overseas, they've got to wear
togas and get their weapons from somewhere, and there's a lot of money to be made in supplying
and equipping and feeding the armies.
They were also involved in Roman justice as the Romans acquire more different peoples
under the control, they have to expand their legal systems to handle all these non-Romans,
their junior officers and the expanded Roman army.
So there's a number of different types of public activities that led to the rise of
equestrian order.
They're also involved in commerce and shipping, especially in the higher end of it, in investments.
So this class became a very powerful, moneyed order below the great political elite that
held office and sat in the Senate, the so-called senatorial order, they too could acquire clients
and slaves.
And their emergence in the late Republic, probably their impact in undermining the
Roman Republic is overstated, but they become an extremely important administrative class
under the later Roman emperors.
And they were fitted in to the Roman social order very conveniently in this notion of
hierarchy.
So you can see that the Romans from the start had a sense of fitting in new groups as they
came in into the social hierarchy, there were a series of obligations reciprocal, inherited,
and that is the cement that kept Roman society together.
The late Republic however saw some very, very dramatic changes in economic and social arrangements
and that is by 150 BC the profits of conquests are so great that the political elite could
essentially buy villas, buy Greek education, and begin to separate themselves physically
and socially and culturally from the mass of their fellow Roman citizens.
This was a warning, there were warnings about this, Cato the Elder, the famous censor of
the early 2nd century BC, the guy who called for Carthage must be destroyed, Carthago de
Lenda S, rather priggish and difficult man in a lot of ways, but he pointed out don't
lose contact with the soil, retain that connection with the italic countryside and the mass of
your voters and clients.
And this was a warning that was ignored in the generation after Cato and was as more
and more of the great families assembled so many slaves and so many of the educated
slaves were Greek speakers, acquired Greek culture and separated themselves more and
more from their fellow citizens and ignored the bonds of clients, took over traditions
and handed them out to their personal slaves and this is one of the great causes for the
breakdown of that political consensus that led to the collapse of the Roman Republic.
And that would be one of the poison legacies that comes from this successful imperialism
and conquest of the various barbarian peoples in the middle and late republic.
Well, those were the ties that bonded together the various classes and groups within the
Roman Republic.
It's also important to look at those ties and patrons and clients and how that related
to the foreign people to the barbarians and you have to remember the barbarians are the
other component of this course.
Here we have a fair amount of information because the Romans are extremely interested
in understanding these foreign peoples that they conquer and come to administer.
There's also this tradition they get from Greek authors that anyone writing a history
should understand the ethnography and geography of the area they're conquering.
Now some of these descriptions are very stereotypical and some of them can really be questioned.
We'll talk about that in regard to Julius Caesar, whether he really understood what he
was doing when he was conquering Gaul or Tacitus when he was writing about the Germans in the
first century AD.
But nonetheless the Romans are quite keen in understanding who these people are.
The bonds of client and patron were very easily extended to the defeated.
Not only those were enslaved but those who remained in their homeland and were now under
the power of the Senate and people of Rome.
One of the first areas the Romans start to extend this is northern Italy.
That is to Salpaine Gaul, Italy north of the Arno and the Rubicon line which had not exclusively
but many Celtic tribes settled there at least since probably the late 5th century BC.
Here the Celtic warrior elites very quickly began to understand that there were these
ties of patron and client that the Celtic warrior elites who had fought the Romans,
fought a Roman consular preter upon surrendering could in effect become the representative
of their tribe to the Roman patron.
The Roman patron in turn was expected to represent the interests of these now-provincials and
that included legal support, protection from the injustices of later Roman magistrates
and it is a remark about how quickly these former barbarian foes of Romans now turned
into provincials learned to manipulate the system.
We find for instance the Spanish tribes very quickly learning in the early 2nd century BC
if they want to get justice done for themselves as early as 171 BC you went to Rome with your
leading men of your tribe, you approached an important senator, usually a senator who
had himself defeated your tribe or was the son of the man who defeated your tribe and
got him to represent you before the Roman senate and you might get a chance at justice.
Now this was very time consuming, you had to travel to Rome, you had to have the connections
and the money and the ability to do this and so these ties of patron and client between
former barbarians now-provincials and the great Romans defended very much on the local
elites and so the patron-client arrangement when taken out of Italy and applied to the
barbarian people actually reinforced the hierarchical orders of those traditional societies and
so Celtic warriors, the Celtic Iberians of Spain, later dramatic tribes, Arab shakes,
Berber princes ruling in North Africa, they all began to learn, look we want to get something
done in Rome, we have a powerful patron, all we have to do is go to that patron and he
can represent us and by the way I become extremely important in my own society because I'm now
the agent through which my people negotiate with Rome whether it be the senate or later
the Roman emperor.
So this patron-client system which was the cement that tied Italian society together
was a peculiar way of assimilating conquered peoples in who had been enslaved is also an
extremely important way in which the Romans extend their control over the Mediterranean
world and push the frontiers of that Mediterranean world deep into central and northern Europe
making Mediterranean civilization much broader base than it would have been otherwise.
It's extended to areas where olive trees and vineyards didn't grow which is really quite
a remarkable feat from a logistical viewpoint which we'll get in later.
Therefore you get some very, very peculiar situations on this.
For one, the most dogged opponents of Roman armies, the great rebel leaders remembered
in Roman literature, most famous is Arminus whose name was probably Hermon who led a German
revolt against the Romans in 9 AD.
The famous massacre of the legions of the Tuttenberg vault was an ex-Roman soldier and had Roman
citizenship and had been a representative of his tribe.
In fact, he was married into a very powerful family that had all sorts of connections and
there's a famous speech recreated no doubt by Tacitus but it bears the point out very
well from both viewpoints Roman and German where Arminus' brother Flavus who remain loyal
to the Romans tells his brother before a battle with the Romans this is after the disaster
this is in 16 AD where he says you know Arminus you betrayed your patron the emperor Tiberius
also the emperor Augustus when the disaster took place I remain loyal to my oath as a
client and soldier to the emperor and this was understood by both sides as a very, very
powerful argument and most of Arminus' family actually remain pro-Roman and they're members
of his family who administer the imperial cult at the later city of what became the
city of Cologne so that attitude was very, very important that whole social outlook of
incorporating these people it also explains how the Romans could break out of the notion
that you didn't have to be necessarily Roman or even Italian you could enfranchise the elite
classes of the provincials and eventually the provincials themselves this is captured
very vividly in a speech in 48 AD of which we have two versions one is the version reported
by the emperor Tacitus the historian Tacitus sometimes you wonder about Tacitus whether
he really wanted to be emperor or not but in any event the historian Tacitus of the emperor
Claudius that very sympathetic doddering pedantic emperor who was wife ridden and well sympathetic
to us most Romans held him in contempt but Claudius makes the argument that the worthy Celtic
Gaelic nobles should now be admitted to the Roman Senate because of their loyalty they've
been dutiful clients of Rome they didn't revolt when the Romans put the census in back in
16 BC you have to understand the Roman passion for counting and taxing people is very disconcerting
to most people usually as soon as the Romans census officials show up you're bound to
have a revolt but in any event the Gauls didn't do that back in 16 and therefore they should
be allowed in the other version is actually Claudius' version that he wrote himself which
survives an inscription found in the 17th century near the French city of Lyon Lugdonum
and that one actually probably really is Claudius' speech because it's it's pedantic
it's rambling it's not to the point you really read Tacitus to get to the argument and Claudius
to get to the words but in any case both speeches come off with the same main point they have
been worthy clients they have followed the Roman social rules they are now wealthy men
in their own right these descendants of former barbarian foes are now Romans and could be
admitted to the Senate now some senators protest oh you're bringing in trousered Gauls into
the Senate no that was in the case these people had Romanized themselves and they were fully
worthy of that and so that notion of taking barbarians you know former foes in as as as
clients and then assimilating them to the body politic some historians have gone so
far as to argue that you essentially can understand all of Roman foreign policy in terms of patron
and client that tribes kingdoms city states nations peoples they mean people all of them
were seen in this sense of client and patron that the Romans only understood one relationship
you surrendered to Rome if you surrendered freely you became a client if you didn't the
Romans beat you up and then made you a client with even harsher terms this position has
been perhaps overplayed in some of the older literature the Romans were actually much more
adept at diplomacy than sometimes credited they understood how to dodge relationships
are they very quickly learned in the third and second century BC to take over the complicated
diplomacy of the Greek world and and and deal with how to avoid commitments how to come
up with nuance treaties and the like but in the end there is a great deal of truth to
this notion there is this thing that runs through Roman dealings with foreign peoples
with barbarians that the world did divide up into clients and patrons that the Romans
weren't so worried about neat administrative this is a this is a province this is a client
king they were all somehow tied to Rome they all were somehow tied to the majesty of Rome
whether it be through the great senators whether it be through the emperor and it even explains
the very peculiar situation I mentioned in an earlier lecture that even in the late Roman
world when the barbarians enter the late Roman world in the fifth century that cut up the
Roman Empire they all came in originally thinking that while all they were were clients looking
for employment and when the Roman emperor didn't provide that employment and let them down
as their patron they went into business for themselves and had to take the lesser job
as king of the Goths and the Franks and the like
