Lecture 7 Romans and Carthaginians in Spain
In this lecture I plan to deal with the initial Roman intervention and eventually conquest
of the Iberian Peninsula, Spain.
And I use the word Spain in its Roman sense, Hispania, to refer to the entire of the peninsula.
Those would be the modern countries of Portugal and Spain today.
The Romans understood it as a geographic term and did not denote a uniform culture civilization
at all.
In fact to the Romans arriving in Spain in the 3rd century BC they would have seen the
kind of diversity that they encountered in Northern Italy that I lectured about not too
long ago.
And there they would find a mixture of different languages, cultures, varying degrees of contact
with the wider Mediterranean world, furthermore they would have found a peninsula far greater
in diverse and size, absolutely daunting than they would have encountered in Northern Italy.
In some ways the Spanish Peninsula overtaxes the Roman Republic.
The wars that are fought in Spain are very important for the transformation of Rome economically
and socially and also contribute directly to the breakdown of the political consensus
at Rome that leads to what is often called the Roman Revolution, that is the collapse
of the Roman Republic and the emergence of the peculiar Roman imperial monarchy we call
the Principate.
And therefore it's proper I think to spend three lectures dealing with the Roman experience
in Spain, not only because these different Spanish peoples were mostly classified as
barbarians and some of them were related to the Celts I've just lectured about, but also
because the peninsula turned out to be so important to the development of Rome in its
mining and mineral wealth in the number of Spaniards who came to be assimilated and joined
the ranks of Roman provincials it will be a Spanish provincial, a fellow by the name
of Cornelius Balbus from the city of Gades, modern Cadiz, who will be the first non-Italian
to hold the consulship at Rome in the late Republic.
He was a banker who bankrolled Julius Caesar during the Civil Wars and it's a testimony
to the importance of Spain to Rome and that connection established in the third century
BC between Italy and Spain between those two peninsulas holds true to this day, the intertwining
of those peninsulas becomes a major theme in western history.
So what I wish to do is to look at what the Iberian Peninsula or Roman Hispania Spain
looked like just before the Romans arrived there and as I mentioned earlier the Roman
visitor going to Spain would be encountering a really diverse group of people.
The name Iberia, Iberian Peninsula was applied because it was the name given to the earliest
people dwelling there, indigenous populations.
Some of these languages are known to us or dialects of a common language through inscriptions,
inscriptions on coins as well as funerary monuments.
Iberian was used as a language in a number of Italian towns, in a number of Spanish towns
into the Roman imperial age.
The languages seemed to be part of a wider language group I mentioned earlier, it included
people in parts of Italy and southern Gaul.
It perhaps is linked exactly how is still a matter of debate to the language of Basque
today spoken in northwestern Spain.
So what you had were a group of languages that were spoken over this wide area on the
western rim of the Mediterranean.
Now that didn't mean that these people identified themselves as belonging to a single nation.
Certainly speaking related languages makes communication easier in terms of trade and
exchange.
But many of these languages and dialects had evolved to the point that they were probably
mutually unintelligible by the time the Romans arrived.
So people coming from the known as the Vascones or the Contabarii that is in northwestern Spain
in the region that is today where the Basques live would have great difficulty in understanding
Iberians living on the coast who would have been in contact with Greek colonists or Phoenicians
for generations.
The languages had changed considerably.
So the culture and the pattern of settlement had divided these people into a variety of
different groups in the time that the Romans arrived.
In 300 BC the Iberians still occupied a great or Iberian speaking people still occupied
a great deal of the southern and eastern parts of the Spanish peninsula and the far northwest
where the Basques are in the very, very mountain districts where later there were important
gold mines discovered but those mines were only exploited in the Roman age.
Much of the central portion, the Meseta that is the high plateau, the core of the later
medieval kingdom of Castile, the modern regions of Portugal and southwestern Spain were occupied
by people the Romans called Celtiberians.
Again an amalgam of Celts coming in from Gaul bringing with them the La Tien civilization
and native people with whom they intermingled.
So here again you have sort of a composite Celtic civilization, some of its features would
have resembled contemporary Gaul but other aspects of it had taken on a particular Spanish
dimension because there's constant intermarriage and exchange going on.
What was important to the Spanish peninsula again was the contact with the Mediterranean
world which is very old and apparently older than that contact of the Gauls of central
Europe.
As early as 1000 BC Phoenicians and these are people coming from the modern region of
Lebanon on the Levantine shore were already active trading in southern Spain.
This would be around the modern city of Cadiz, Gades is the Phoenician name and later the
Roman name of the city.
There was a kingdom there known as Tartisus which is a native kingdom engaged in tin and
copper trade.
Spain was particularly rich in mineral wealth or at least it was rich in mineral wealth
until the Romans got there and essentially stripped Spain of its metals.
I always say the Spaniards had to conquer the new world because after the Romans got
done with it there wasn't much else left, perhaps an exaggeration.
But the mineral wealth of Spain was legendary through the whole of the ancient world and
the Phoenicians arrived to tap into that trade.
They were followed by Greeks perhaps a couple of hundred years later.
The Greeks themselves never managed to break into the Spanish market.
If you're familiar with the geography of Spain, most of the rivers of Spain rise in the central
mountain ranges and flow into the Atlantic.
The Tagos particularly is the key river that bisects the peninsula and the mountain ranges
on either side form sort of boundaries or cultural group.
The Baitis River as the Romans would call it, the Guadalajara today, that is in the
far south that would be in the region of Granada.
That's an area that's very much a Mediterranean climate where you would have Phoenician and
later Roman settlement.
In the northeast is the Ibro River which rises in the Pyrenees and flows into the Mediterranean
and the Ibro River which is in the modern area of Catalonia associated with Barcelona
today.
The eastern region is very much closely tied to southern Gaul, southern France and so the
Greeks who settled in Marseille had colonies in the north eastern corner of Spain.
There were some important cities there engaged in trade but the majority of cities on the
eastern shore that is the Levantine, the Mediterranean shore of Spain and in the far south at Cadiz
in the future region of Granada, those areas were settled by Phoenicians.
The Phoenicians came first primarily as merchants, they were interested not in establishing large
agricultural communities, some of these communities are clearly nothing more than merchants who
set themselves up in a separate community where they traded with the native settlement
and Iberian settlement and then the goods were transported along trade routes developed
by the Phoenicians that followed the north African shore, there were Phoenician colonies
in the Blyric Islands and Sardinia but the key city in the western Mediterranean with
Carthage which in Phoenician meant new city, a colony of Tyre, the city in Phoenicia that
founded Carthage, reputedly in 814 BC, the Queen Dido remembered in Virgil and the Aeneid
as a very clever gal who managed to really bamboozle the poor Libyans into handing over
the city and Carthage in the course of the 5th and 4th century BC emerged as a great
commercial republic with a constitution that gained admiration from the Greeks and a city
at the time of the First Punic War in 264 BC which would have been far more familiar
and far more accommodating to Greeks than Rome would, Rome would look very drab to most
Greeks in 264 BC, in fact it would look dismal to sophisticated Athenians whereas Carthage
would be a bustling Hellenistic city, a several hundred thousand strong with a wide-flung commercial
empire stretching into Spain with the, she had taken over the Phoenician colonies, maintained
a professional fleet, a mercenary army and tapped into all of this wealth and the Carthaginians
were very clever about this except in Sicily where they battled for control of Sicily
with the Greeks, the Carthaginians were content with controlling the points of trade, they
didn't need to subject the tribes of Spain, they didn't need to go into North Africa and
bring all of the different Libyan, that's what they call the native people under control,
so long as they controlled the points of contact where commerce would take place they could
profit, tax it, raise their mercenary armies, so the Carthaginian presence while important
in Spain and influence the development of towns in the regions where the Carthaginians
were settled, it didn't stretch and reach deep into the Spanish peninsula.
On the other hand, the Carthaginians offered great potential markets for goods from Spain,
many Celt Iberians, that is the Celts settled in central and western Spain, found mercenary
service in Carthage attractive, the Carthaginians paid well, we hear as early as the fourth
century BC large numbers of Spaniards are being brought into the mercenary armies that
are fighting in Sicily against the Greeks.
So Carthage has set up a commercial empire which influence these indigenous Spanish groups.
What changed the situation was the Carthaginians got defeated in the First Punic War against
the Romans and this is a subject that we really can't go into but the simple fact of the matter
is the Romans defeated the Carthaginians on their own element, the sea and in 241 BC at
enormous cost.
After 23 years of fighting and I think the Romans by my count lost 700 ships, most of
not due to naval action but the fact that the Romans didn't understand things like tides
and currents and fleets keep getting sunk by storms, 200 ships go down and they build
another 200, typical Roman method you overwhelm them by the sheer force and determination
rather than the tactics and a couple of instances where the Roman tactics and naval battles
were so unconventional the Carthaginians couldn't decide whether the Romans were being incredibly
clever or incredibly stupid, they don't know how to react to it but in any case the Romans
won this titanic struggle and as I mentioned this war turned Rome into a Mediterranean
power and Carthage was faced with the problem of paying off that indemnity, there were two
of them that were slapped on Carthage, 241 and 238 BC and by my reckoning that was 17
million denari and the denarius was the basic Roman silver coin struck at this point and
you must think of that coin as probably representing the equivalent of a week's wage to a Roman
legionary, this is a high value coin, they were 17 million of these that had to be paid
off to the Romans and the only way for Carthage to get that after losing her fleet, her possessions
in Sicily and Sardinia was to develop an empire in Spain and this was the work of a very
powerful family in Carthage, a family that had a long reputation of military service,
the Barqued family, they had produced generals in the Carthaginian armies for well over a
century before the First Punic War and the Carthaginian army comprised tough professional
officers and veterans drawn from the citizen body but the vast majority of their soldiers
were mercenaries, were men not of Carthaginian origin but recruited in Africa, Spain and
elsewhere who were whipped into professional status by these Carthaginian generals.
Most Carthaginian citizens who served served in the fleet whether Carthaginians had paid
very well but after 248-238 B.C. under these treaties Carthage couldn't build a fleet,
they were prohibited under the treaty obligations.
Well Hamaclar Barca, the general who had fought so brilliantly in Sicily in the later stages
of the First Punic War, in 237 B.C. landed in southern Spain and established a base
at New Carthage, Carthagina, today on the eastern coast of Spain and that became in
effect the capital of the Carthaginian Empire and he followed by his son-in-law, Hasdrupal
and above all, Hamacar's brilliant son Hannibal who took over as sort of the governor general
of Spain in 221 B.C. they built effectively Carthaginian Empire in Spain.
Now this was again not committing the Carthaginian senate or government to the kind of central
administration officials that we would associate with the colonial power.
These were very much done as with Romans by ties of patronage and clientage.
It helped that in Carthage the political and the military were very very much divided
unlike the Roman Republic.
Carthaginian generals were generals, they were not politicians, they were not annually elected
officials like Roman consuls, they were mercenary or professional soldiers.
They were subject to the close scrutiny of the Carthaginian senate and the Carthaginians
played hardball, if you have a general screwed up you got crucified as a lesson to the later
generals to perform well.
And furthermore you could be rotated out but you could hold command for a number of years
and furthermore these generals, especially Hasdrupal, the uncle of Hannibal, they married
local women.
They could intermarry with the Iberian families, they cemented ties of close hospitality and
friendship with the Celt Iberian tribes and the Barkid family developed a network of alliances
that were largely personal that tied the tribes of the interior to the Carthaginian
administration at New Carthage to provide soldiers, infantry and cavalry.
These were the core of the army that Hannibal marched off to Italy.
They also established relationships that allowed the Carthaginians to go in and exploit the
mineral wealth.
Now the mining was done by Spaniards largely but the Carthaginians acted in the carrion
trade, they brought in the food, the supplies and the wealth poured out of New Carthage
and allowed Carthage to pay off the indemnity.
So ironically, and there's so many ironies like this that run through Roman history,
what the Romans did was force the Carthaginians to get into the empire building business to
transform traditional Spanish society into a Spanish colonial empire for Carthage and
once the indemnity was paid off, Carthage had the money and the army to take on Rome
in the Second Punic War and that's essentially the whole irony of the Second Punic War.
By the very nature of the treaties, the Romans assured it.
The treaties were unduly harsh, the Romans had really humiliated Carthage, the Romans
do not believe in treating any foe gently and while you might be defeated and become
a client in the eyes of Rome, there was always a sense that some clients were more loyal
than others and Carthage had fought Rome and Carthage as later Macedon in the east
were regarded as former foes that never really became dutiful clients and there was always
going to be a day of reckoning with them.
So in any case, into 18 BC Hannibal reopened the Second Punic War.
Well, the war had profound consequences for the various quote unquote, and I really use
it, barbarian peoples of Spain.
I mean, the variety of cultures and levels of sophistication were so diverse, the term
is really used in the Roman sense that the other people, that is the foreigners in Spain.
At the start of the war, as Hannibal invaded Italy, one of the due councils of the year
who was assigned the task of defeating Hannibal was a man named Publius Cornelius Scipio.
He is the father of Publius Cornelius Scipio, the younger Africanus who eventually defeats
Hannibal and in all of these Roman names, there's three elements to it.
It's that middle name that's important.
That gives the name of the against, the clan, the extended family.
The third name, the last name is what we would call a family name and the first name is obviously
a first name, but it's that he's from this very, very powerful patrician Cornelian family
that could count ancestors going back into the early republic.
He realized when Hannibal invaded Italy that the best thing to do was to call the other
council who was supposed to invade Carthage to come back and oppose Hannibal in Italy
and he sent his army on to Spain, by sea, assisted by the Greeks of Messilia and their
Celtic allies and that Roman army landed in Spain under the command of Scipio's brother,
his first name was Ganius, Ganius Cornelius Scipio, who defeated the Spanish fleet in
Spain on the battle of the Ebro and set up a base at Taragana today in northeastern Spain
and began to wage a war to reduce the power of Carthage in Spain.
And Publius Scipio at the start of the war realized that the only way Hannibal could
be reinforced, the only way the Carthaginians could pull off this war is the fact that they
had this colonial empire in Spain and the Romans really entered Spain not with any thought
of Romanization or even manifest destiny, it was dictated by the strategy of the Second
Punic War.
They had to break Carthaginian power and so when they arrived, they arrived with that
notion in mind.
As I mentioned in an earlier lecture, the Romans found in Spain that their city-state
institutions were very quickly taxed.
At the earliest stages, the first phase of the Second Punic War in Spain pointed that
out immediately.
Even in northern Italy in Cisalpangol, which is some distance from Rome, you could still
function largely as a city-state.
That was true in the naval war against Carthage in the First Punic War, where the fighting
is largely at sea in Sicily and around Italy.
But once you got into a region such as Spain, which was considerably distant from Italy,
that meant any annually elected magistrate going out there, he wouldn't have enough time
to do anything in the year he had as political office when he would have to lay down his
office and give command to someone else.
And when you're engaged in a life-and-death struggle with Carthage, you don't have the
luxury of doing that.
There has to be some sort of continuity in command and structure.
Publius Cornelius Scipio, when his consulship was up, was sent to Spain to join his brother,
and he and his brother held what I had explained earlier, some kind of pro-consulor imperium.
That is, their right to command armies was extended each year by the Senate.
They had the power of a consul without holding the office.
And so what the Romans had to do was devise a way of enabling their annually elected magistrates
to serve in effect as military governors or commanders of far-flung theaters in the province.
The term province is being used now as a regular term in Latin to designate a region that was
a theater of operation.
Spain forced this on the Romans.
They really had to figure out a way of how to handle this type of war.
There were other implications in this, and that is the Romans walked into an area, or
fought their way into an area more accurately, where there was a whole diversity of different
people.
On the shores, there were towns.
There were Greek cities in the northeast.
There were Punic colonies stretching from New Carthage to Gades.
There were Iberian towns that were fast-acquiring walls.
The original war broke out in a dispute over one of these towns, Seguntum, which claimed
to be a Roman ally, but it was in the Carthaginian sphere of influence.
It was really an excuse to precipitate the war on both sides.
All of these areas could be more or less negotiated with treaties.
Beyond them were a variety of different peoples, especially Celtic Iberian tribes, with a martial
ethos who had found honor in serving with Carthaginian armies, and now the Romans were
going to try to win these guys over as they are allies.
Well, Scipio, both Scipios, the two brothers, Ganias and Publius, immediately found the
only way they could win the war was to cement relations with the towns, which would provide
the supplies and the bases, and to contact these Celtic Iberian leaders who would provide
soldiers and large numbers of soldiers.
The Roman army fighting in Spain in the Second Punic War was at least half Spanish.
Celtic Iberian allies as infantry and cavalry became vital.
They were necessary for reconnaissance, the towns were necessary for supplies, and the
two brothers essentially ran the Spanish Punic Theater, the Second Punic War Theater in
Spain as a private enterprise.
The only way this worked is because the two Scipios, Publius and Ganias, could cement
ties of friendship and took on these people as clients.
They signed hundreds of treaties, committing the Roman Senate to all sorts of obligations,
the Roman people, the assemblies, and when the two brothers were killed independently
fighting in 211 BC, the only way to restart the offensive was to send the son, Publius,
Cornelius, Scipio, the younger at the time.
He has the same name as his dad.
We usually call him Scipio africanus, Africa, that is, he defeated the Carthaginians, he
defeated Hannibal, and we now call him Scipio africanus, even though he doesn't get that
until after the war is over, but Scipio africanus was sent because he had the name.
He was the son of the senior commander who had made all these deals, and Scipio africanus
arrived in 210 BC at the time he was in his early 20s.
He was holding pro-console power, the power of a consul apparently, he had a senior advisor
from the senate, but he was holding the power of a consul, which in ordinary circumstances,
he would never hold that office until 20 years later, at the age of 42 or 43.
So he's given extraordinary power in this war.
He turned out to be a charismatic figure.
He was compared to Alexander the Great, and making comparisons like that does not win
you friends in Rome, where you have a senior set of Roman senators, most of them in their
40s and 50s, who have no like of a young Cornelian aristocrat upstaging him by jumping
over the sequence of offices and upsetting the aristocratic balance of the republic.
Scipio proves a brilliant general.
Through daring, he takes New Carthage in 209 BC, assaults it with a combined naval and
land assault.
He captures all these Spanish hostages, he treats them properly, he releases many of
them, and he wins over the Spanish tribes through ties of patronage and clients.
He tactically innovates on the Roman army, won some really brilliant victories over the
Carthaginians.
He is saluted by the Spaniards as king, Rex.
And that's another point that comes out of space.
That's dangerous.
Using the title king to a Roman aristocrat is a sure enough way of getting you into trouble
back at home.
In fact, regicide is a legal act in Rome.
Not aspiring to be a Rex, a king, we would think of that as tyrant or dictator in our
sense.
If you were killed, well, that's in defense of the state.
That's not murder.
That's just, that's what the assassins of Caesar claim.
They were regicides.
They were killing the king who had overturned the republican revolution.
And so the war in Spain pointed out all sorts of weaknesses and constitutional problems.
Now Scipio-Africanists themselves probably never posed a threat to the Roman constitution.
By upbringing and outlook and the very nature of Roman politics at the time, what he aspired
to was supremacy or primacy in Roman politics.
And sure enough, he got it.
He came back from Spain in 206 B.C., a hero.
He was elected consul at about the age of 29 or 30, so that is about 12 years earlier
than anyone had any right to expect.
They later on had to reintroduce laws to prevent that from happening and get violated again.
But it was seen as a very, very bad precedent.
He was sent into Carthage against Carthage.
His invasion of Africa forced Hannibal to go back and fight him and it led to the final
defeat of Carthage.
But a number of important lessons were learned by the Romans in Spain that taking on this
area was going to be far tougher on their institutions than they ever imagined.
They also faced a region that presented a problem of control and diversity that was really
quite beyond Roman imagination.
The Celtiberian tribes were tough warriors.
They had proved their valor on the battlefields of Italy and in Spain and Carthaginian service.
Furthermore, the hinterlands to that Mediterranean zone in the South Coast was studded with all
sorts of Celtiberian and Iberian towns that were well fortified.
The countryside of Spain would impose logistical problems of campaigning that made northern
Italy look like a cakewalk.
The famous comment that was made by Napoleon is that large armies starve and small armies
get defeated in Spain.
They would face a war of sieges, a guerrilla warfare against tribes who had been taught
by the Romans to attack Carthaginian allies and Carthaginian cities and when the Second
Punic War was over, the Romans then tell these Celtiberian tribes, well, thanks guys.
We don't really need you for mercenary service.
We've got our own legions.
And by the way, stop attacking and raiding Carthaginian possessions because they're now
under our control.
You can't get these guys used to raiding for a decade and then say, well, it's time
out, don't do it.
The Romans immediately found themselves saddled with the problem of securing these frontiers
in Spain, protecting the very Punic cities and Iberian cities that just a couple of years
earlier they've been fighting to take.
So that the victory in Spain, which was just essentially to break Carthaginian power in
order to protect Italy, now saddled Rome with the first serious barbarian overseas province.
How do we maintain control?
What are we going to do in sending out magistrates, the problem of shipping and equipping armies?
These armies are recruits, citizens were brought in under the draft, they expect to be discharged
after the war is over.
The Romans are facing the possibility of forging a professional army.
And in the meantime, the Spaniards themselves are beginning to wonder, what does this Roman
administration entail?
It is not like the easy arrangement they had with the Carthaginians.
Romans are not going to intermarry with the local elites, at least not the commanders,
the people, the way the markets did.
The Romans do not want the Celtic Iberians as mercenaries for overseas service.
And what forced the Romans to stay in Spain was its wealth.
They could understand that the great mineral wealth in Spain meant they couldn't pull
out.
The Second Punic War dictated.
But Rome was now saddled with an overseas possession when Scipio-Africanus left, which
was going to tax the Roman constitution.
The Roman army was going to profoundly change Rome in that direction, and at the same time
would contribute vast amounts of wealth, which would feed the rising population in Rome
and the economic transformation of Rome, so there's no way the Romans could get out of
it.
So the lessons the Romans had learned in Cicelpingol in assimilating and bringing in non-togated
peoples couldn't just be mindlessly applied to the Iberian Peninsula.
The Romans were going to find it a much tougher job to do.
They would have to devise new constitutional methods, new methods of dealing with these
different tribes and coming to arrangements with them.
And that story, which is going to be the story of the next two lectures, would force the
Romans to come to terms with the fact that now they were truly a Mediterranean power
with an overseas empire, and it was no longer a city-state, a traditional republic of Italy.
Rome had wider responsibilities and demands facing her.
