In this lecture, I plan to introduce a new group of barbarians into the already rather
varied stew of barbarians. And that is the first group of peoples who apparently were
dramatic speakers. These are the Tuttonese and the Kimberi, northern barbarians whose
homes were probably in what is now called Jutland or Jutland, the Danish peninsula.
The Kimberi in particular were remembered in the name of Himmerland, which is a district
in the Jutland peninsula today. The name apparently goes back to these early Germans.
We also bring on these barbarians with another important figure, a Roman figure, Gaius Marius,
who was so important in defeating the desert nomadic king, Jugurtha, and advancing the
Roman frontiers along to new distances in North Africa, the Numidian regions.
So we have a new set of barbarian players, as well as a very familiar Roman general.
However, how these barbarians and Marius ended up fighting a series of important battles,
which would shape not only the direction of Roman foreign policy, but ultimately reshape
Roman attitudes towards northern barbarians, is a story that brings us back to the Celtic
homeland. I've dwelt for some time on Spain and North Africa, regions that were subject
in part to intensive Roman settlement and colonization along the Mediterranean zones,
and then a variety of different barbarians, Celtiberians in Spain, Berber speakers in
North Africa, who were then assimilated to varying degrees. I want to move our focus
back to Central Europe, and to again remind you that the Celtic-speaking peoples dominated
most of Central Europe, stretching from the British Isles, well, deep into the Danube
basin, middle and lower Danube regions had Celtic tribes dwelling there. Furthermore,
it's important to stress that the Celts of Northern Italy, Salpengol, certainly by 125
BC, were becoming integrated into a wider Italy. And that's where I would want to essentially
start the story, that is, in the 2nd century BC, how did the Romans get drawn over the
Alps into Gaul, the region where the Romans knew most of the Celts originated from this
area, and how did this involvement in Gaul also get the Romans involved with peoples
coming from Northern Europe, apparently the first dramatic-speaking peoples. Well, that
requires us first to look at the development of what the Romans would have called in 125
BC, Transalpine Gaul, Gaul on the other side of the Alps, and particularly the southern
regions that are defined by the Mediterranean shore. These would be today the regions of
Provence and Langdok, also the regions around Toulouse and shading into the Aquatain. Those
areas of what are now southern France, and really the northwestern corner of Italy, those
areas in some ways were not really part of the whole Celtic-Litian civilization. Most
of the populations dwelling there in 125 BC were descendants of Iberian peoples, people
who spoke languages related to the people in Spain, the Ligurians in Italy. There were
a lot of Celtic tribes, but they were relative newcomers. They had come in in the last hundred
200 years, migrating from central Europe, bringing the distinct opidum that is the fortified
town construction, the iron metallurgy we associate with the Celtic sites of central
Europe. And so that southern France, what we would today call southern France, was a
really mixed culture. Furthermore, zones of southern France were really quite inviting
to Mediterranean peoples. This would include the lower reaches of the Rome Valley, especially
around the rich alluvial lands in the vicinity of Marseille today. That had attracted Greek
colonists as early as 600 BC. A Greek colony, these are Greeks from Asia Minor, from the
shores of Turkey today, set up a Greek-style city, a polis, about 600 BC, naming it Messilia,
from which we get the name Marseille. And they developed a string of colonies running
from the Ibro in northern Spain to the modern city of Nice, or in Greek Nicaea, Nice is
just a French rendition of the old Greek name. A group of Greek entrepene and emporia, which
were tied into the trade of the interior. Along that coastal zone, there was also the
region of the valley of Carcazon today, which extends into the upper reaches of the Garonne.
You have very fertile areas. This is a region that can be put under terrace farming. You
can do grains, you can also have olive plantations, and of course vines, vineyards, wine.
So that zone where you have a Mediterranean-style economy attracted the Greeks, and the Greeks
really intermingled very successfully with the native populations there. Some archaeologists
go far as to say that you had a kind of Greco-Iberian or Greco-Celtic culture. The Iberians there
adapted a lot of Greek techniques, the Greeks vice versa. I mentioned that there were already
Celtic people settling in these areas, certainly by 250 BC. So in addition to this mix of Iberian
types of languages and the Greeks, you had people coming in from Central Europe, Celtic
tribes related to the tribes that had migrated in Cisalpangol. And again, in some instances,
the tribes that move into Southern France have a lot of the same personal names, undoubtedly
the similar gods, and fell to kinship with their Celtic relatives in Cisalpangol, true
at least the third in early 2nd century BC. The Celts came down the Rhone. They were starting
from that heartland of the Latian civilization, that region which would today be Eastern France,
parts of the Rhineland, Switzerland, where the densest concentration of Apita is located.
One of the most important tribes that we hear from the Greek sources were a group known
as the Saloui, who settled the lower Rhone, in the region stretching essentially from
Lyon to Geneva today, along the upper Rhone River would be the Alobrigues. The Upper Seon
River would be occupied by people known as the Adui. And the regions of Central France
today around the Massif Saint-Crawl, that important mountain range in Foothills, that
was the homeland of the Averni, another Celtic people. And their name survives in the region
known as the Avern today in France. So those are four critical tribes that will reappear
not only in this lecture, but in later lectures with the Roman conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar.
There are other Celtic tribes that moved down into the Aquitaine, and others who migrated
into Spain. So again, you have to think of these Celtic settlements as not even migrations
of a whole group of people who take over a district and transform it, or an invasion.
Instead, Celtic tribes moved into areas that were suitable for their way of life. Hillforts,
they needed a certain amount of farming land, they did not go into mountain zones, they
could move near the Mediterranean zones, especially you have a symbiosis, the city of Toulouse,
to lose today in the Garonne. That was a largely Iberian urban population, heavily influenced
by Greek civilization. Around it were Celts settled, where they could exploit the farming
and the stock raising potential. And so it's really a very, very quilt pattern here. You
have Celts living next to Iberians, you have mountain people who may be related to neither
one, you have Greeks on the cities. It is a really very, very mixed demographic pattern.
And I have to stress that in all of these migrations, they shouldn't be thought of as
a case of one linguistic group just displacing another entirely. It's a patchwork of settlement.
So in 125 BC, the Romans would have found a really very diverse area. The Romans came
to understand this, and they also came to understand that what today we would call Southern
France, in which the Romans initially designated as Transalpine Gaul, was a region really quite
distinct from the rest of Gaul, where the Celts were undoubtedly in the majority. This
was the region conquered by Julius Caesar. And already you begin to get a distinction
between Transalpine Gaul, or after it was organized as a Roman province, the Proincia.
And the modern name of this region, Provence, simply comes from Proincia, the Latin word
for province. And when the Romans referred to Gaul outside of Italy as the province,
they meant Southern Gaul, and it came to become the geographic designation. From the rest
of Gaul, the Gaul divided into three parts by Julius Caesar, which often became called
Gaulia comata, which means the long haired Gaul. The Gaul where the Gauls wear around
long hair and trousers and all the crazy Celtic barbarians. That is the usual stereotypical
images, which may or may not be correct. In the regions of Southern Gaul, already the
Celts who moved into that area very quickly came to appreciate the potential of the existing
civilizations they found. There is an important site known as Entremont in the Rhone Valley.
It's just off the Rhone Valley on the east side. It was a Celtic settlement. It's very
typically Celtic. We know it because they have all sorts of typical Celtic decorations,
such as heads nailed to dedications. The Celts were notorious for taking heads of their
opponents. We find plenty of those examples of heads of obviously defeated members of
the other tribe, but we also have a large number of Greek products, Greek ceramics, and
imitation of Greek ceramics. That is local artisans making imitations of the Greek for
the Celts. These were probably not even Celtic craftsmen, but they were catering to a Celtic
warrior elite. Entremont gives us a very good example of how quickly the Celts could come
to appreciate the Mediterranean goods, even before the Romans were ever on the scene.
We also know a great deal of the Greek interest in these people. We know that a Greek explorer
by the name of Pythias traveled up the Rhone in the Saion to discover who these Celtic
tribes were. He ends up in Britain and may have actually journeyed as far as Scandinavia,
which he calls Thule, a Thule in Greek, may have been the coast of Norway as far as we
can tell. The arrival of the Celts into this zone, it could be disruptive in some areas.
We brought in this warrior elite with a very effective iron technology and great carts,
but it also linked the southern regions of France into that wide trade network of Celtic
Europe, in which all parties exploited and prospered. When the Romans move into this part
of southern Gaul, which begins to be known in later times, it's called Narbonensis after
the city of Narbo, or Narbon today, into that region, they found a very, very sophisticated
culture with a lot of institutions in place, impressive towns, trade routes, upon which
the Romans could build an administration in urban civilization very quickly. That region
will be Romanized, it will attract heavy Roman settlement, just as Southern Spain did, just
as the coastal towns of North Africa did, and you'll end up getting very quickly Roman style
buildings, everything from arenas to the kind of public buildings we associate with temples
and the Basilica, which is the town hall. On the other hand, much of Gaul was still in
that very much Latent civilization, so the contact with the Mediterranean was more limited.
And there were always the potential of pressures, that is, a Gaelic tribe or some tribe moving
out of northern Gaul, central Europe, into this region, and then setting in motion other
migrations that could disrupt trade routes and political arrangements. And essentially
that's how the Romans got involved in this area. The Romans came to depend very heavily
on the Greek city of Messilia for its dealings with the northern barbarians, as they would
call them in Gaul and central Europe. The Greeks of Messilia, as Greeks were consummate
diplomats, they had the connections, they were actually responsible for informing the
Romans of Hannibal's movement in the Second Punic War, because these Greek merchants had
friends all through the Celtic tribes. They knew exactly when Hannibal's army was crossing
the Pyrenees and what routes they would take, and they had very, very good information on
that. And the Greeks also had very powerful clients in Rome, among certain leading senatorial
families, so Messilia was a very privileged town. And also, Messilia and her satellite
colonies along the shores of southern France provided the logistical support for all those
Roman armies in Spain. Therefore, when the Romans received our urgent news that the city
of Messilia was under attack by the Salui, that Celtic tribe in the Rome Valley, they
took it very, very seriously. And what had apparently happened is Turto Modulus, the
leader of this Celtic tribe, had amassed the wealth and the forces to attempt to take that
Greek city, Messilia, put it under siege, somewhere around 124-123 BC. This required
the Romans to send in armies. They could not allow this. Eventually the Celts were driven
off and pursued. They fled up the Rhône into the lands of the Elobrigues, that important
tribe that's on Lake Geneva in the upper Rhône Valley, trade routes going into Switzerland
and essentially Europe. And eventually the Celts were defeated by a series of engagements.
The last man who's responsible for the final victory is a fellow by the name of Ganius
Demitius Aheno-Barbus, who came in as consul and in 122 BC won a very important victory
over the Elobrigues and set in place the alliance networks that were supposed to protect
the province. He particularly concluded close alliances with the Aedui, which is the leading
tribe of central Gaul. It's on the upper Seon River. He brought the Elobrigues into some
sort of client relationship. He secured the Rhône Valley. We know of a number of Roman
soldiers who apparently on discharge started to settle in the towns of southern Gaul. Informally
it wasn't a, there were garrisons put in. Demitius Aheno-Barbus is prorogued for another
year and in 121 BC as proconsul, he organizes a province. This fellow is important because
well, the Demitius Ahena-Barbi, and the name refers to the red beard of the family. They
had red beards and dark hair. They were known as the most irascible of Roman aristocrats
and very proud. Aheno-Barbus celebrates his triumph over the Gauls. He's the first Roman
commander to ride an elephant through the gates of Rome. The next one to attempt it is Pompey
and unfortunately he tried to do a four horse elephant triumphant. The four elephants couldn't
get through the gates and he had to substitute horses. It wasn't one of Pompey's better
days. Aheno-Barbus is also a direct ancestor of the Emperor Nero and to Romans that would
make sense. Irascible, proud, riding around on elephants, a regal sumo, obviously Nero
just by his blood was going to go bad. Aheno-Barbus extended franchise, made a lot of clients
among the Celtic chiefs, and set up a web of alliances and a set of arrangements that
would have been pretty similar to what we saw in Sassalpane Gaul, that is in northern
Italy. And this system really much, pretty much held in place for a generation. It worked
quite well. It broke down because of an unexpected set of migrations out of northern Europe.
This has caused a great deal of controversy among archaeologists and historians and the
way this, these migrations are assessed and the way they're interpreted to some extent
depends on one's own training. I as a historian grounded in literary sources tend to take
the literary sources quite seriously on this. Archaeology doesn't give us the kind of evidence
we would like. The Kimberi and Tutones, as far as we can tell, were the first dramatic
speaking peoples to enter the Mediterranean world. That is speaking a distinct dramatic
language, which had evolved independently, probably as early as 500 BC, in the Baltic
regions, in southern Scandinavia, northern Germany, which is the cultural heartland of
the eventual Germanic speaking peoples. Why they moved out of the peninsula of Denmark,
we do not know. We archaeologically really can't trace their movements. There is evidence
that sometime in the second century BC, or the early first century BC, the Celtic settlements
on the upper Danube, that is in southern Germany, which were the heartland of the Celtic world,
are disrupted. A number of the settlements are abandoned. It's difficult to know why.
Were they sacked by Germans? Did the Germans come in as allies and mercenaries? Did the
Celts battle themselves to exhaustion? All we can document is the settlements were abandoned
and that the La Tien civilization there went into sort of a decline. Could be any of a number
of reasons. Unfortunately, migrations of this nature are not easily documented, especially
if they're tribes that are moving rapidly, burning fields, moving on, constantly in search
of food. They're not likely to leave an archaeological record. Fields go under cultivation in the
next year and all traces gone. There aren't the kinds of cities that are sacked. There
are no literary records. The Celts did apply Greek and North Italic alphabets to their writing
system. The druids, the priestly cast, reputedly had writing, but none of this comes down to
us. So depending on where you stand on this issue, one is to say, well, this is an exaggeration,
another example of literary sources conjuring up barbarian and we really can't document
them in the archaeological record, but the other is to take these literary sources at
face value as they do and say there was a migration and it was a migration that had
come out of the north and brought in a new people that the Romans had not encountered
before. Some of the Celts would have known who they were in central Europe, but to the
Celtic populations in southern Gaul in what was now a Roman province, these were frightening
newcomers. By 113 BC, Kimberi and Tutanis had entered a region the Romans would have
called Noracum. Today that's roughly equivalent to Austria. It's an area rich in iron and
gold deposits. Magdalene's Burg, a very important Austrian site, has produced all sorts of Celtic
tools, also shows that the Romans had moved in to exploit the mines, that this whole area
was associated economically to northern Italy. There is an embarrassing defeat. A consul,
a Papyrus Carbo and his army are defeated. The Senate downplays the issue. The dates
important. In 113 BC, when this consular army is defeated in the late summer or maybe in
the autumn, there is already the crisis brewing in North Africa and popular outrage is building
up over Jugurtha. In the next year, 112 BC, the Roman public's attention is locked on
this struggle in North Africa, which I explained in a previous lecture, was really far more
important to Roman internal politics rather than any threat posed by the barbarian King
Jugurtha. Nonetheless, the Roman intention was riveted on this whole political battle
and this dirty war in North Africa, this dirty little war. If there ever was one in Roman history,
that was the Jugurthine War. Meanwhile, these dramatic tribes began to move across the Alpine
areas and eventually end up in southern Gaul and primarily they're looking for food. It's clear
from the sources that they pick up other tribes along the way. That is, they set in motion or
dislodge groups, Celtic groups join up. It's clearly a mixed group. They divide in columns.
Primarily they're looking for food and if not food for a homeland to settle and exploit the soil.
And so, again, they should not be looked upon as some sort of grand column or strategy or invasion
route. The problem is, by moving into these regions, they disrupted very well-established
trade patterns. This had immediate financial repercussions in Missilia. They also broke
up the Celtic political alliances. I mentioned tribes such as the Aedui, the Arvarni, and the
Elobrigi, who were important in central Gaul, either as Roman allies or potentially Roman
opponents. But those were the leading tribes within a rather extended network of client tribes.
And if a group of newcomers arrives, Germans, with a reputation of being good fighters,
some of these local tribes are going to hire them to try to cast off the control of the Aedui,
the Arvarni. So there's a whole political mess going on and the Aedui, particularly, who have
very good connections in Rome with the senatorial families start lodging protests. Look, we're
friends of Rome. We have alliances. Rome's got to protect us. And sure enough, the Roman Senate
finally responds. There's a couple of embarrassing revolts. Celtic tribes aren't obeying their
orders. And in 105 BC, a major army is put into southern Gaul to deal with this new threat of
these Germans. At Arausio, today, Arrange, in the Rhone Valley, the Kimberi and Tutones run
into two separate armies. And this is a case of the usual typical Roman military incompetence
with their system. One was commanded by the consul of the year, a guy by the name of
Malleus, Ganius Malleus, who was a new man who had no reputation. He was the consul. The other
was commanded by a pro consul who had been the consul the year before, Ganius Caipio, which is
a family notorious in Spain for ripping up treaties and going triumph hunting. So he was
right in a family tradition. He wanted to fight these guys. And the other thing is Caipio hated
Malleus because Malleus has represented a new man and wouldn't obey him. And if a consul and
pro consul operate together, the consul's higher, so he would command. And so what happened is
the army of the pro consul and consul engaged the Germans separately, and they were both in
turn destroyed separately. The Germans massacred one army, then turned on the other. 80,000 Romans
and allies reputedly fell in the battle. There's stories that the locals were still using the
bones of the Roman dead to decorate their fences a generation later. We also get a report coming
from a much later source, which could be suspect since it's written in the 5th century AD by a
fellow called Erosius, who was a Christian who argues after the sack of Roman 410, you think
things are bad now that we're Christian and we have Goss? Well, look at how Roman history was
even worse before we became Christian. Not a particularly good argument. Saint Augustine
has a better response to the sack of Rome by the Goss. But in any case, Erosius records that after
this Roman military disaster in 105 BC, the enemy, he means the Kimberley, captured both camps
and acquired an enormous quantity of booty. In accordance with a strange and unusual vow,
they set about destroying everything which they had taken. Clothing was cut to pieces and cast away,
gold and silver was thrown into the river, breastplates of men were hacked to pieces,
trappings of horses were broken up, the horses themselves drowned in whirlpools,
and men with nooses around their necks were hanged from trees. Thus, there was no booty for the
victors and no mercy for the vanquished. Now, if this is an accurate report, it's the earliest
report we have with probably a dedication to the war god of the Germans, later known in Scandinavian
legend as Odin or Votan or Woden. And again, if an accurate report, and I suspect it is,
it's come down from earlier sources, another indication that at least part of this barbarian
force were Germans from Northern Europe. Well, this was a political nightmare and wrong.
It conjured a new tumultuous, new barbarians out of Northern Europe, unknown before, and in 105
BC at the time of the disaster, Marius had just concluded the war in North Africa, came back
to Rome, stood for the consulship again, was elected, and he was elected consul for 104,
and elected consul four years after. That is five successive consulships totally in violation of
the Constitution. He was called in to meet the menace. Now, Marius crushed these invaders in
important battles in 102 and 101 BC. These German tribes were destroyed. We do not know the size
of these tribes or the size of the number of fighting men, but these victories were hailed
as great victories by Marius. The last one was actually defeated at Vircelli in Northern Italy.
Some of these Germans had actually crossed the Alps and gotten into Northern Italy.
So this was looked upon as a frightening menace and was remembered two generations later
when Julius Caesar was out conquering Gaul. You remember when they got into Italy,
that's why I'm conquering Gaul. We've got to close down the factory of barbarians that are
attacking Italy. This resonated with a lot of the North Italians, people in what was once
the Salpangol who are now clamoring for Roman citizenship. Marius came off as a hero. He had
made an alliance with political radicals in Rome, fellows by the name of Apuleius and Glaucia,
who had put together a political coalition backing the popular general so they could carry out
reforms in Rome based on the reputation of Marius, who was seen as respectable in the eyes of most
of the property classes and they were willing to override the constitution and elect Marius
consul five times. That's in total violation of Roman tradition. You're supposed to hold the
consulship once, wait 10 years, maybe hold it again. Marius again proved his ability as a general.
With these wars against the barbarians, a number of reforms were associated. He drilled his army
again, recruited from volunteers, no property requirement. The men got land on discharge,
a number of them were rewarded land in North Africa by a bill from that radical fellow Lucius
Apuleius Saturninus. They came in, they had to be drilled to professional level.
The Marius carried out several reforms we know of for sure. One was henceforth legions had their
own eagle. They had apparently fought under different standards before that. Henceforth,
each Roman legion had its eagle, an aquila, we get the word aquiline, and that was the
Newman, the religious power of the unit. It was an important step in creating unit integrity and
cohesion and also an important step in professionalizing the army. Many of the legions of the high
empire could trace their origin back to these legions of the late republic where they first
got their eagles. Furthermore, the soldiers now fought with the expectation of booty,
of donatives, that's bonuses at the triumphs and above all grants of land. As I said,
land was now a reward, not a requirement. And above all, these soldiers were drilled to the
point where they were known as Marius's mules. That is, you get rid of baggage trains and wagon
trains, they carry their own kit and equipment. Marius recruited large numbers of auxiliary units
and there's on the battlefield at Warcheli, that last battle where he destroyed the barbarians.
Marius actually gave citizenship to two Campanian cohorts, that is Italian allies. For bravery
on the battlefield, this becomes a usual way of rewarding allies fighting in Roman ranks.
And so the result of these victories by Marius over the barbarians was to
really to professionalize the army. Marius, however, did not use that army to put himself
in power at Rome. As a man of humble origin, a man who had come from no account, he wanted the
respectability and legitimacy of joining the Senate. And one of the most peculiar feature of
Roman politics in this period is in 100 BC, after the barbarian threat had disappeared,
the radicals in Rome had resorted to violence that led to rioting in the streets of the city of Rome.
And Rome at this point essentially had no police force, the population could have been 400,000
strong. And in that emergency, Glaucus and Saturninus, who for five years had delivered the vote
to get Marius elected consul and to provide the volunteers for his army, were stunned when
Marius came into the city with his legions and restored order on behalf of the legitimate
government on the Senate. Now that move ultimately condemned Marius to political obscurity for the
next 12 years, but it also pointed that while the army was professionalized, doesn't necessarily mean
that it would turn on the state. It would have to take another type of commander, another imperator
sulla, and above all Julius Caesar, to take the implications of that army and turn it on the
government in Rome. And that is for a later lecture.
