These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled, Rome and the Barbarians, Part 2.
Chapter 13, The Price of Empire, The Roman Revolution.
In this lecture, I plan to deal with the question of the price of empire.
That is, what were the results for Rome of all of these overseas conquests and the wars
that were fought against various barbarians?
And I think it's important for a moment to take stock of where we've come and where
we're about to go.
I started this series with a sketch of Roman institutions in 264 B.C., outlining the constitution,
the army, bonds of society, and then we looked at the wars that drew Rome into contact with
barbarian peoples in northern Italy, in Spain, in southern Gaul, and also in North Africa
where the Romans encountered the first of the nomadic peoples of the desert that they
would meet.
Another group is coming up in Syria.
The first 12 lectures, in effect, have taken us from about 264 B.C. to, let's say, 60 B.C.
That is, the year before Julius Caesar becomes consul and then goes off in 58 B.C. to begin
the conquest of Gaul.
I think it's important to sum up what the Roman political experience was and to bring
on to the stage Julius Caesar.
This lecture and the next lecture, dealing with Caesar's conquest of Gaul, is very important
in understanding the transition from the Roman Republic to the Roman Empire.
What we're going to do in these two lectures, in effect, take you from an imperial republic,
a republic that expanded far beyond its Italian homeland and was ceased to be a city-state.
Its institutions were under enormous stress and then the career of the man who essentially
ended the republic, Julius Caesar, never really officially known as an emperor or king, but
clearly was the man who invented the monarchy of Rome and set in place the institutions
of an imperial monarchy, which we later call the Principate, as organized by his successor
Augustus.
And that will bring to a close the first third of these lectures.
In the second third of this series, we're going to be studying very closely the new
barbarian peoples, the Romans come into contact with, under this imperial system, this Principate,
this empire, the High Roman Empire, and then in the last third of the lecture series, we'll
be looking at the relationships of the Romans with these barbarian Germans, Iranian-speaking
peoples of the nomads, Iranian-speaking people who are nomads of southern Russia, various
desert peoples, their rivals in the east, the Kingdom of Parthia and later Persia, and
then how those wars and those relationships brought about the transformation of the Roman
Empire and ultimately the breakup of the Roman Empire in the west.
So what we're doing is starting from the Republic and moving into the imperial age
in these two lectures.
Well, with that said, what I want to sketch out is some of the costs that the Romans paid
politically, constitutionally, and socially by acquiring this empire and by defeating
all these tough barbarian foes.
And that requires us to look at essentially three issues here.
We call this issue the Roman Revolution, but think of it as a series of crises that
brought about emergency situations, violence, and ultimately civil war that did in the political
consensus that had allowed the Republic to function so successfully for so many centuries.
And the first point I want to make about these changes are what were the benefits and what
were the costs of the overseas empire.
Then we can look at efforts by the Romans to address some of these changes.
Clearly the Romans understood something was going wrong.
And the turning point that everyone remembers in their textbooks is a bill that was brought
forth in 133 B.C. by a young tribune, Tiberius Impronius Gracchus, a land bill.
And that bill is often remembered for the wrong reasons and in popular traditions.
Some have even speculated it was a democratic move and there was never democracy in Rome.
But that bill initiated a number of efforts to reform Roman society from within along
constitutional procedures.
They were thwarted.
Those efforts ended in violence and ultimately in the outbreak of essentially a civil war.
And that failure of the Roman Republic to reform itself from within its own institutions
brought on the final phase and the third point I'm going to bring in this lecture.
And that is how did the Constitution then break down into these series of civil wars
and why in a way did Rome fight these remarkably savage civil wars and not just collapse altogether.
That they retain their empire came through the civil wars with a very, very stable political
and social organization.
Not only retain the empire they had won in the previous 200 years but actually expanded
it.
Part of that is the credit of the Emperor Augustus who essentially doubled the size of the Roman
world, largely at the expense of all these barbarian peoples who are now on the frontiers
of this Mediterranean Imperial Republic.
So let's look at the first phase of this and that is the first point of this lecture.
And that is, well what were the costs?
Well I've alluded on a number of occasions, especially in the wars in Spain, that the
bloodletting was really quite beyond our imagination.
All casualties alone for the decade of 190 to 180 B.C. in Spain and then a few of the
casualties in the 150s, about a 15 year period, at least 46,000 Romans and Italians and Latins
reported have been killed in action.
If you add to the fact that those numbers probably represent a third of those who died
because you have disease and attrition, you're beginning to get staggering numbers up to
150,000 dead.
There were also horrifying statistics coming from Northern Italy, Sassalpengol, the reports
of two consular armies slaughtered in 105 B.C.
You can just add these statistics.
It's clear that the burden of the cost of acquiring this empire fell on the majority
of Romans, Italian and Latin allies, who were of modest property status, they were
the ones who were drafted into the legions and had to do the bulk of the fighting.
These are reports of Roman and ally dead, not of all the other types of allies the
Romans might have assembled.
There was also the fact that at least 150,000 men were serving overseas in the fleets and
army in any one particular year, even when they didn't have a major war going on.
Well a state cannot sustain this effort without suffering certain consequences.
The most obvious were the mutinies erupting in Spain in the 180s, the low morale of the
140s and 150s, the screw ups in the Jugarthine war, the embarrassing inability of the legions
to put down several minor revolts in the east.
By the end of the 2nd century B.C., the fighting quality morale of the Roman legions had sunk
quite low.
That was probably one of the reasons why King Mithridates was so sanguine about the idea
of going into a war with Rome, that what he had seen in the last generation was not very
impressive.
There were efforts of the states to address this, and again these were temporary expedience
measures, you started signing up volunteers.
We also know for instance that the property qualification for legionary service was lowered.
In 200 B.C. to about 160 B.C. it was lowered by 90 percent and this is in a period of inflation
where I suspect prices doubled or tripled, and that is because of my studying of economics
in this period of the Republic.
What happened is the Roman state went much, much deeper into that draft pool, dragging
men into military service who had very little or no property and could expect that if they
returned from six years service in Spain they would return to a ruined farm and would have
lost their status altogether.
That brings us to the second point about this great rapid change and that is the economic
change I've mentioned.
It can be measured in several ways.
One was the enormous number of slaves taken in these wars.
Ironically the legions were capturing their replacements on the labor market.
By the best estimates between 200 B.C. and roughly say 50 B.C. at least 1.5 million people
were removed from their homelands, enslaved and dumped on the Italian markets.
There could be enormous gluts of slaves at a very, very short time.
For instance, the father of Tiberius and Pronius Grachis, the man who issued the land bill.
This is the same Grachis who settled the situation in Spain back in 178 B.C., he is responsible
personally for enslaving 60,000 Sardinians and putting them on the Roman slave market.
These were all tribes and central Sardinian.
The Romans just moved in and deported everyone and the archaeology seems to bear it out.
The best expert on Roman Sardinia is that they just simply moved all the villages out.
And we get reports of 100,000 people being slaves, 50,000 people.
This was common on the part of the Romans and all of these people were dispersed into
the Italian labor market and many of these slaves were extremely skilled people.
Some of them were put to work in mining and heavy agricultural labor, others were used
as herders and stock raising.
Many of them had skills and were set up in the manufacturing shops and were producing
all sorts of finely craft goods, ceramics involved in the export trade.
And the Roman upper classes had an incentive to use slaves and to develop new ways of making
money because they got the vast majority of the profits, the money, the slaves, and were
allowed to go and were able to go into commercial farming.
That meant that when Rome undertook these expeditions, these overseas expansions, most
of their citizens were probably engaged in some sort of form of subsistence agriculture
with very little marketing beyond what you need for the consumption of the family and
the immediate needs.
And what happened in the course of the second century and first century BC is steadily those
men who practiced that were assidue, they were eligible for the draft, they were swept
up in the draft, and it could not only just be the head of the household, but all of his
sons and collateral relatives they were brought in, and meanwhile the farm fell apart and
the great figures of the republic, the senators, the equestrians, the people making money in
the overseas war, had the money to buy out the farms, to move them in, develop commercial
farming.
This would take the form of vineyards, it could take on stock raising, and so what happened
is there was a major transformation of the Italian economy.
It was fueled by the fact that you had 150,000 men serving in the army, they had to be fed,
they had to be clothed, and all of these dispossessed peasants who once were eligible for legionary
service ended up going into the cities, particularly the city of Rome.
And as I mentioned in 200 BC, Rome was maybe 50,000, by the time of Cicero's day in 60
BC, it was at least 600,000.
The city was doubling in population about every generation at a staggering rate.
And most of the people flooding in there, if they weren't slaves of the great household,
they were dispossessed Italians, Latins, and Romans who had lost their position in society
as a result of the military service, or the consequences of members of that family engaged
in military service.
Now this had serious political and social consequences.
For one, senators and equestrians were perceived as violating Roman traditions.
The ties of patron and client were violated as peasants were pushed off the land.
And peasants, by which I mean Roman voters, Roman legionaries.
And there are a number of reports of this going on.
Furthermore, the other upper classes gaining all this wealth bought the Greek-style culture
of villas, of leisure, and increasingly separated themselves from the majority of their citizens
by their attitudes, their tastes, their aesthetics.
In a sense, violated warnings given back by Cato the Elder at the beginning of the second
century BC to the Roman ruling classes, do not lose touch with the soil.
That stay in contact with your fellow citizens.
That meant we have many voters going into Rome who had no patrons anymore.
Now in the Centurion Assembly, the Property Assembly, this didn't matter so much, but
in the Assembly based on residents, the Tribal Assembly, that meant there were many dispossessed
voters who had no patron they would vote according to traditions and the rules.
And they become increasingly vocal, increasingly violent.
There are riots, the issues are raised over the mutiny, and a aspiring political figure,
a young senatorial posing as a champion of the people, a popular race, not a Democrat,
but champion of the people, could gain enormous amount of political capital and prestige by
sponsoring bills that would be passed in the Tribal Assembly, and now the situation was
such there were a lot of angry voters willing to pass these bills.
They were assisted by the fact that secret ballot had been extended in elections and
in voting procedures.
They were assisted by the fact that many of these dispossessed peasants who were supposed
to be registered in urban tribes were still registered in their old rural tribes that
were voting.
There were all sorts of voting legal operations going on in irregularities.
In the political meetings of the Tribal Assembly, you're essentially one step away from public
disorder every time you call an assembly.
And that meant there was a real breakdown of any kind of sense of concord, as the Romans
would say, concordia, Cicero always brings this up, among the classes.
And this was a very, very serious measure.
Now the Roman upper classes, many of them probably didn't pay much attention to this
for at least a generation and a half, but they finally had to pay attention as they
began to suffer military defeats, especially in Spain, North Africa, the barbarian threat
that called Marius in.
And it was the military threat, the breakdown of the levee, more than the political injustice
or the social suffering of the majority of Roman citizens.
And I can't imagine what conditions on the countryside could have been for some of these
people by the end of the second century BC that led some members of the Senate to carry
out reform.
The first one proposed in 133 BC.
Now the man who proposed it, Tiberius Impronius Gracchus, was of a very distinguished family
and at the time he was a junior figure.
He probably, well we didn't, we know, he represented a senior group of senators who hoped to carry
out a very modest reform, restore land to the dispossessed public land, land that was
in the hands of the Roman state, and in so doing make these men eligible for military
service.
Essentially it was a very conservative looking reform, well the old social political order
broke down, well how do we fix it, well we recreate it without taking into account that
maybe putting all these people back on the line wasn't going to work because, well there's
economic reasons why they failed in the first place.
See that as it may, the bill was extremely popular, it was the first serious effort to
address some of these issues and Tiberius Gracchus brought it forth in very, very moderate
terms.
It only involved the distribution of public land, land to the Roman people, there was
no assault on private property, it didn't involve any kind of restructuring of the Roman
government along democratic lines, far from it.
The guy who wrote the bill, a person I think who wrote the bill, Publius Musius Skyvola,
Gracchus was just proposing, extremely conservative and well respected jurist, Gracchus's father
in law who was behind the bill, Appius Claudius Polker was his leading man in the Senate,
he was regarded as a great commander and a very, very traditional Roman.
The problem is, as in almost any political structure that involves consent of the citizen
re-invoting, whoever sponsored this bill would gain enormous number of clients who were likely
to vote for him in the future.
And in the case of Gracchus's bill, this bill was going to profit hundreds of thousands
of Romans and possibly Italian allies, we're not sure if the Italian allies were getting
any redress under this bill, and that meant it could upset the political order in Rome.
Gracchus himself used some techniques to pass the bill that were hardly endearing to
the majority of the ruling elites, there was violence in the assembly, a tribune was deposed,
Gracchus misappropriated funds in the opinion of the Senate to carry out the land distribution
and he attempted to run for second tribune eight to protect his legislation and he was
killed in a riot.
That demise of that particular land bill sent a signal that reform, efforts to reform the
Roman constitution were extremely difficult because to do so, to carry out any kind of
moderate reform would benefit the reformers to such an extent that the political structure
and the voting patterns of the republic would be endangered because one clique could dominate
so many voters and ergo could potentially threaten the state and threaten that understanding
among the great ruling families that all aristocrats had an equal shot at high office, at clients
and voters, and that one individual and what they claimed Tiberius Gracchus was his aspirations
were for a regna maternity, a dictatorship, it probably wasn't, but that type of battle
cry could be raised by the conservatives to thwart different types of reform, and that
attitude, the optimate attitude, the attitude against reform was posed against the popularists.
Now this didn't represent political parties anyway in our understanding, it meant different
approaches to handling these crises in the Roman state, one that was to benefit the people
that is the voting electorate of Roman citizens on the one hand and those who upheld the traditional
order and particularly the position of the senate at the head of the Roman constitution.
The people proposing these, the political figures are all from the same families related to
each other in many instances, they're all part of the same nobility.
There was an attempt at a more comprehensive reform by Gracchus' brother 10 years later,
in 123 and 122 BC he held two successive tribunates, reactivated the land bill, which had been essentially
had been dropped in 129, made efforts to address other issues such as the provisioning of the
city of Rome, he stumbled on the issue of giving citizenship to the Italian and Latin
allies who comprised, well at least two thirds of the population of Italy were not Romans,
these people were now beginning to clamor for Roman citizenship and that was so they
could participate in the land bills, they could get part of this public land, also to
get the protection of Roman law in regard to the military service that they had before
them, the right of appeal and many of these Italian allies had served in Spain, they were
the sons, the grandsons of veterans who had increasingly come to identify themselves with
Rome.
The younger Gracchus, Gaius Gracchus and Pronius was killed in a riot in early 121 BC and both
efforts at reform were seen as thwarted by conservative elements.
The way the reformers took their revenge was to wage the war against Jugurtha, which I
had discussed at length, and the Jugurthine war fought against this nomadic opponent in
North Africa who was really an ugly way of settling scores among the competing political
factions in Rome.
This anger, this outrage over the failure of addressing these issues and even though the
two Grocki brothers in no way represented Democrats and in many ways were just leaders
of a much larger senatorial faction, more senior people, they were enshrined in the
memory as those who had fought and stood for the Roman people.
And this conjured up images going back into the early republic, the struggle of the orders,
earlier legislation to benefit the Roman citizens and it led to this breakdown of a political
concord or consensus among the Roman classes, the Roman orders.
The popular race blundered in a way, they started championing guys like Marius who used
this outrage to further their careers.
The last serious effort at reform was in 91 BC by Marcus Livius Drusus who proposed a very
comprehensive bill to give citizenship to the Italian and Latin allies.
This would have more than doubled the size of the citizen body, most Romans were afraid
of it, Drusus was murdered by an assassin we don't know and the result was by the spring
of 90 BC the Italians rose in rebellion, especially in south central Italy headed up by the Samnites.
This war was in effect the first of a series of Roman civil wars.
Technically legally these people were not Romans, they were allied to Rome under ancient
treaties going back to the fourth and third century BC, culturally, linguistically in
many ways they were Romans.
The 150,000 Italians put on the battlefield, most of them fought in Spain, they knew their
Roman counterparts, they all knew the same tactics.
It was for all intents and purposes a civil war and it was for the first time that Romans
got accustomed to killing people who looked like themselves.
The social war was particularly brutal, the fighting raged on, the only way it could be
won was by giving political concessions and that was to enfranchise the Italian allies
and the result was more than doubling of the Roman population potential voters and even
complicating the situation far more.
Now that unfortunately didn't solve Rome's problems, simultaneously to this political
disorder and the failure of reform in the sense of the part of the popular race tradition
that they had been repeatedly let down, that every constitutional reform had ended in a
riot and the murder of a tribune, obstruction by the Optimate group and that playing by
the rules wasn't going to get you anywhere and that increasingly popular race reformers
were going to have to resort to violence and if possible hook up with a popular commander
who could support and back tribunes and give the military, if not threat, at least the
possibility of coercion to push reform through.
That is what happened in 88 B.C. when Marius tried to support the initial enfranchisement
bills.
It provoked an immediate reaction where his old rival Sulla marched on Rome with the Roman
army, kicked Marius and his supporters out of Rome and then initiated a series of brutal
reprisals, the so-called prescription list where people lost their property and their
citizenship, were declared enemies of the state and could be killed on site and that
in effect ushered in a second civil war right off the social war where the population of
Italy aligned not along the legal issue of who's a Roman and who's an Italian lie, but
who was standing in the popular race camp and who was standing in the Optimate camp.
Well eventually Sulla won and Sulla won and the Optimate caused one because Sulla had
the veteran army that he acquired by fighting in the east and as the republic goes into
these civil wars, you have to keep in mind that the frontier wars, the threats on the
frontiers aggravate and propel these civil wars because anyone with aspirations of great
ambitions could go out to the provinces, win great battles, especially against a barbarian
opponent, Mithridates Apontus, Julius Caesar with the Gauls, forge a seasoned veteran army,
acquire provincial clients, vast amounts of wealth and come back to Rome and reorder
the state the way he wishes and so upset the whole balance of politics and that's essentially
what Sulla did. As Sulla came into Rome in 82 B.C. he took a position as dictator of Rome,
he held it until he retired in 78, he rewrote the constitution along conservative lines
and then retired. The experience of Sulla was profound in several ways. Essentially
marked the end of normal functioning government in Rome, starting with Sulla. When he retired
he died in 77 of some unknown disease, a rather strange disease, a wasting disease, all sorts
of symptoms reported, we're not sure what it was. But when he died in 77 B.C. the Senate
he left behind him no longer had the prestige or senior members to govern the state. And
furthermore it became increasingly clear that the annually elected magistrates could not
meet the crises and obligations of empire that threatened to bring down Rome's supremacy.
And with Sulla, especially with Sulla's lieutenants, Pompey, Crassus and a young man that Sulla
thought was the most dangerous of popular arrays, Julius Caesar, who was by marriage
a nephew of Gaius Marius and Sulla almost had Caesar executed. He was dissuaded by relatives
and friends of Julius Caesar and he said there's many a Marius and that young man and never
did that prove truer to the optimate opinion. All of these great commanders followed Sulla's
example. I mean Sulla couldn't abolish the example. There was no way of putting back
in place a constitution and reforging those bonds of understanding. These are the rules
by which we play in the late republic. And so what happened was a series of civil wars
among the great leaders, imperatories, some representing themselves as popular race, some
as optimates, but ultimately it was a competition of several great figures that eventually simplified
into one. There would be a set of civil wars in the 40s brought on by Caesar's conquest
of Gaul. Caesar would find himself in a position as dictator, would start to put monarchical
institutions in place. He would be assassinated in 44 BC. That would then set off another
set of civil wars which produced Mark Antony and Octavian as Caesar's two potential heirs.
They defeated the assassins of Caesar who called themselves liberators. And then in
the end Octavian, the emperor Augustus, did in Mark Antony. And in 31 BC he brought the
civil wars to an end as Caesar's heir. Now the breakdown of the Roman state in that
last generation and a half, starting with Sulla's seizure of the city, the rewriting
of the constitution and the success of extraordinary commands voted to his former associates Pompey,
Brassus, Lucullus, these were figures that we've already encountered in the wars against
Mithridates, and ultimately to Julius Caesar set the stage for the emergence of a potential
monarch or dictator. However, the irony of this is that the monarchy that came out of
these wars was a peculiarly, well, if not constitutional, at least disguised monarchy.
No one who aspired to this position of primacy in the Roman state could afford to pass himself
off as a king. This was this mistake Julius Caesar made by putting his image on the coins,
by taking on titles that offended the Roman upper classes, by toying with the idea of
becoming king Rex and Latin, it got him assassinated. Because the only way this far flung Roman
empire could be run would be through the traditional political classes at Rome. Someone was going
to have to turn that political elite into an administrative elite of a king, and the
person who would pull this off would be Augustus Julius Caesar's heir. But to do this meant
that the successful Roman monarch would have to pose as a republican magistrate, that he
would have to in many ways look like nothing more than an extraordinary elected official
with traditional powers. There were plenty of precedents from Sulla on down to vote a
single man, all of these special powers in emergency situations, particularly emergency
situations brought on by frontier wars, threats by barbarians, social disorder at home. And
then in that guise as an effect, a leader without a title, an emperor without a crown
would run the Roman world by courting the traditional political elites as his social
equals. So that would come out of this Roman civil war would be a very, very stable monarchy,
in which the social and economic position of the elites was respected. Many of the grievances
raised in the first half of this Roman revolution in the violent tribunates would be solved
by rules of colonization, creating a professional army and all sorts of social reforms. And
at the same time, the guise of a republic was preserved. It was essentially Rome in
a new package. It was still the race puplica. It was still the senate and people of Rome,
except now the senate and people of Rome would be headed by a prinkeps, a first citizen,
a leading man of the state, and the person who would pull this off would be the last
of those great commanders, Augustus. And it would be Augustus who would institute the
great expansion. And with that, it's a good point to stop because our next section is
going to deal with the conquest of Gaul by that most charming of imperators of the late
republic, Julius Caesar.
