All right, so back to science and the topic for today.
So I'm going to begin with a conversation with Cumberbuffa,
and then I'll segue into your questions.
We'll take your questions during that session as well.
Cumberbuffa is the Hollis Professor
of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy at Harvard
University.
He has won so many awards that it would take half of our time
to list them all.
The breakthrough prize is certainly one of those.
He's well known for tremendous ideas
that have set the course of many areas of research
into string theory.
Again, we'll talk about some of them,
but perhaps those of you who've read my books
are familiar with the work that he
did with Andrew Strominger, giving us
the first microphysical calculation
of the entropy of a certain class of black holes, which
is rightly regarded as one of the real crowning
achievements of string theory.
So let me bring in now my friend, Professor Cumberbuffa.
So welcome, Cumberbuffa.
Nice to see you, Ryan.
Good to see you.
Thanks for joining us.
I know you're coming from home at the moment, I think.
And just to get into things, your professor at Harvard,
and Harvard just recently announced, as many places are,
that it's going fully online with its education.
Have you done online, perhaps, in the spring?
Did you do online teaching of your students?
Sabatical leave on spring prevented me from teaching.
So I'm having the experience that I've given lectures by Zoom,
but not the class, which would be an interesting experience
beginning this fall.
Yeah, most people, in fact, this even
came up at a meeting at Harvard, because you
know that I'm on one of the overseers committees there,
that there's a general sense that teaching via Zoom
or online is always a pale reflection,
a poor approximation to the experience in the classroom.
But I was sort of the lone voice in that meeting,
and I said, I kind of feel like the teaching can be just as good.
It's different than engaging one-on-one.
But in small ways and large, I'll give you one small thing.
I don't know about you, but I never
can remember all my students' names.
I really wish I could, but I can't.
But in Zoom, all their names are like right there,
so I can call on Jim or call on Mary.
And it actually adds a personal touch
that I can't do in the live class.
I can't actually remember, so that's sort of a minor thing.
I'm going to have to Zoom account.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
But yeah, I think it will be interesting to talk to you
after some of your sessions to see how you're thinking
about things.
I also want to just announce to folks
that you've got a new book out.
Well, that's the wrong side of it.
There we go over here, a beautiful new book,
Puzzles to Unravel the Universe.
And I was fortunate to receive a nice advanced copy from you
and enjoyed reading it tremendously.
So just to sort of get into things,
it's a question that many authors are asked.
Every book interview that I've had often, they ask,
what is it that drove you to write this book?
So let me just start in that way.
What was your motivation?
Well, part of the motivation was to try
to communicate with the public about the things that excites
me about science.
And I felt that maybe there is room
for hands-on kind of relation between the public and the science.
And I thought puzzles is a good vehicle
to try to bring this connection a bit more hands-on experience.
Instead of just reading, they will get to do something
and feel what is going on really.
And in fact, it's based on a course
that I've been teaching.
Actually, originally, I just said by my wipe off,
I need to originate this course to kind of communicate
with freshmen at Harvard, this course
called Physics, Puzzles, and Math.
And based on this special seminar,
which has been going on for about 10 years now,
I gradually developed more and more puzzles and tools
to kind of communicate with people who are not necessarily
going to be physicists, but are interested in learning
about how the physics goes about,
what are the basic ideas.
And I thought puzzle is a fun way
to get them into seeing what are these deep ideas.
And the puzzles don't have to be complicated to kind
of illustrate some of the points.
And then the nice thing is that even simple puzzles
can relate to the latest things we're doing in physics,
modern physics, what are the latest and most interesting
aspects of the fundamental physics
can be connected to simple looking math puzzles.
And this was both a fun way as well as educational way
to bring this about.
And that was through this experience from this course,
I decided that it would be great to have this in the form
of a book that others can also benefit,
even those who are not possibly students in my class.
Were you a puzzle solving kid?
I mean, is that something that fired you up
when you were young?
Yes, I love puzzles.
I always love puzzles.
And I always tried to, it was always fun thinking about them,
but I also had this view about things around me,
which later got me interested in science,
which also was a way like viewing the whole thing
as a big puzzle.
And to me, from the childhood kind of questions like,
why is this thing moon up there and it's not falling?
And why is this and that and this way and that way?
So these kinds of things that are around us,
even as childhood kind of got me started thinking.
And then puzzles was kind of a more simpler
and more well-structured way of asking a simple question.
And it was much simpler than the complexity
of the reality around us,
but it was a way to kind of get me started
and thinking about things that I found amazing
about our universe and this and that later on,
but it started from my interest as a child.
Now, sometimes when people hear the word puzzle,
they think in terms of, it's fun, it's a game.
Sometimes when we think about the questions of the universe,
we use very different language
that has a more sort of probitas,
more profound quality to it.
Do you find with your students that there's any tension
between those different sort of levels of profundity,
the gamification versus sort of the profound investigations
into the nature of the world
or do they seamlessly come together?
They actually seamlessly come together, I would say,
because even as physicists, even when we do research,
and you well know this, of course, Brian,
that when we see something gets understood,
it's always in simple terms.
If something is complicated,
we don't feel we have understood it.
So it should eventually be,
the profound ideas should be so simple
that quote unquote, the kids should also be able to understand.
Otherwise we don't think we have understood it.
So this simplification or understanding
in simple terms is a requirement,
requirement really to say we really understood something.
And it's not like if you have something
which is profound, it should look complex.
In fact, it's the opposite.
If it is complex,
means you really haven't quite understood it.
You have to bring it down to spare bones, to simple terms,
and only then can you really feel you have understood it.
So most puzzles that we get set by, you know,
in school or even in your book,
they're made up by a human being.
When we are investigating the sort of the puzzles of nature,
do you feel that that is ultimately a wholly human quest
that we kind of look at at the world
and we puzzle about things
and we frame our questions perhaps in a mathematical language,
but ultimately, as you say, it's just a puzzle,
or is there come some kind of deeper source for these puzzles?
It's a good question.
I have thought quite a bit about the relation
of puzzles, magic, and the universe and how this works.
To me, universe has this magical quality
and like puzzles, which are sometimes magical.
And we try using scientific methods
to try to explain this magic.
And there's a difference between the regular magics
and the universe as a magic.
Scientific explanation of it does not make it less magical.
In fact, it adds to its spell.
So it's kind of a little different from regular puzzles.
So it's not something like we made it up.
It's kind of there,
and we try to understand it with our own terms.
It has a different quality of a puzzle.
It's a different quality of a magic to it
than regular things that we can make.
Of course, we get inspired by things around us
and we try to parallel what we see around us in the universe,
but I would say that it's not like something we have imposed
from us to the universe,
rather we are just mirroring what we see in some form,
in some obviously imperfect way in our way
to try to model it in some form.
Right.
We thought it'd be fun since it's a book on puzzles.
In a moment we'll turn to questions of string theory
and space and time,
but we thought it'd be kind of fun during that conversation
if there's some folks out there that want to puzzle
over a puzzle and see if they can come to the solution.
If you can pose one of your puzzles,
and our thought was for those of you who are out there
that are interested to try to solve it,
the solution should take the form of a picture
that shows the solution to the puzzle,
and in the chat, World Signs Festival posts,
I believe it's an email address or some other place,
you can see it, where you can post your solution,
and among those who get the right answer
will do like a little random draw
and you'll get a signed copy
of Kerman Vapha's new book as a prize
that the festival will provide to you.
So give us one puzzle that you think fits into this category
of interesting things for people to ponder.
Sure.
Well, one puzzle is the following.
Take, consider four cities.
I gave them name A, B, and C, and D,
and the four corners of a square.
So they are equally distant,
I mean, the neighbor ones are equally distance,
A and B and A and C are the same distance
and they form corners of a square.
And the task is to find the highway system,
which connects all these cities.
Now, the highway system that you find
should have the shortest total length.
It should be able to connect every city to every other city.
It does not have to be a direct connection
between every city and every other city.
As long as you can go from any city to any other city,
that is fine, and we just want to know
what is the shortest highway system
that connects all the cities.
Of course, shortest highway system is useful
because you want to have,
you want to spend least amount of money
if you want to connect all cities.
And so that's the puzzle.
And what it has to do with physics and so forth,
perhaps we can explain afterwards.
So the form of the solution will be,
someone's got to write down,
draw a highway system connecting the four cities,
take a picture of it, send it in,
and really specify the details of the directions
that those various roads are taking.
Exactly, no need for proof of it,
just the drawing and the specification
on the drawing is sufficient.
All right, so if anyone's still paying attention
to our conversation,
as opposed to trying to solve the puzzle,
we're going to move on from there
and we'll come back to the solution
toward the end of discussion.
So your line of research,
mine as well for a long time
has been in the area of unified theories,
string theory, of course,
as many people who are listening to us well know,
Einstein himself was in search of a unified theory
toward his final days on planet Earth
and never really found it.
For you, what's the motivation?
What's the drive to find this sort of final theory
or this unified theory?
Well, I think that I enjoy it
without understanding why I enjoy it
and I don't think it's an aim to find the final theory
because I don't think I will for sure
not be able to succeed, I'm sure about that.
I don't think it will be something
achievable in our lifetimes.
So it's not a precise goal
as a final quest of something for me.
I think it's a kind of a journey more than anything
and I feel that the thing that amazes me
is that discovering something beyond us,
discovering and connecting something bigger than ourselves,
discovering that there's something out there
which resonates in us
and we can kind of understand pieces of it
and make sense out of it,
which is longer than our short lifetimes
and much, much bigger in space and validity
than the tiny place like Earth that we live in.
It's applicable to the whole universe.
Understanding these laws allows us to feel a little more
connected to the meaning of the whole existence
and the broader term.
That is really what I want.
That's what gives me satisfaction.
Of course when I try to connect things
and try to see the connections,
it's like seeing a piece of art or enjoying it
and just even if I'm not doing it
and if somebody else is doing it and just watching it,
it's already inspiring and makes me really enjoy it
and so that is also another aspect.
So it's just beauty of it,
beauty of appreciation of what's going on
is another aspect.
Of course being part of it
and doing minor contributions here
and there makes it even more fun.
Sure, so I've asked and answered the following question
like 10,000 times over the course of the last decade or so.
So I'm happy to seed it over to you.
Can you give us a, just for those who perhaps don't know,
what's the basic idea of string theory?
I've always wanted to ask that question.
I've always answered it.
I've never asked it before.
You are the expert on it.
I'm explaining it beautifully.
I cannot do any anywhere than you for sure, Brian,
but I don't know what is the easy way
to say what string theory is.
I would say that, well, I would start perhaps
by describing a little bit about
what is the basic questions
before I get to what string theory is.
Of course, from old days, we know gravity.
From Newton's day, he understood the quantity
of understanding of how gravity works.
And later we learned about particles,
fundamental particles, things like electrons.
And when we understood electrons
and how the atomic structure works,
we found quantum mechanics is crucial.
This was last century, beginning of last century.
And so when people tried to put together Newton's theory,
which was beautifully extended
by a geometrical idea of Zeinstein,
when he wanted to combine that piece of physics
with quantum mechanics,
which described the tiny pieces of atoms,
it didn't work and it came accidentally.
It was accidentally discovered by physicists
trying to do something completely unrelated
that if you start talking about vibrating tiny objects
instead of point particles,
instead of tiny little spaghetti loops,
but very, very tiny,
then you somehow managed to get rid of these contradictions
that Einstein theory had with quantum mechanics
which described how electrons work.
So this was the emergence of the idea of string theory,
basically as a way to resolve the paradoxes
between Einstein's theory and quantum mechanics.
So the Einstein theory,
which is great in describing how things work
at large distances and quantum mechanics,
which was great with short distances,
got unified using this extra ingredient
that fundamental objects are not points,
not point particles,
but extended little loops and these vibrations
of these loops give rise to different kinds of particles
and different kinds of interactions emerge from strings.
Now let me just jump in right there though.
I wanna ask you a question on that.
Freeman Dyson in an article that I read
in the New York review of books,
but I think he had said it in different locations as well.
He questioned whether we should ever even worry
about the contradictions
between general relativity and quantum mechanics.
He said, there's no reason to worry about that.
They're just describing distinct realms of reality
and the contradictions are arising
because you don't want those realms
to be described in the same language.
Does that hold any water for you?
Well, I'm not sure exactly what he might refer to
because we already know that there are many pieces of science
which emerge from contradictions.
In some sense, we welcome contradictions
because contradictions point towards something
we don't understand and potential resolution of that
leads to new ideas.
However, there's one sense in which I can perhaps understand
what he may have meant
and that is in the context of what we call
duality and string theory.
So occasionally we come up with two completely different
pictures which look contradictory,
contradicting each other in some way,
but this contradiction gets resolved
by viewing it in a very novel way.
So it's kind of like a different viewpoint.
So you have two different things which look like
there's some inconsistency, but there is not.
Of course, trying to figure out why it's not is the key.
It is the key to understanding what is going on.
So the apparent contradictions are there,
but not the real contradiction.
And I think maybe that's what he's referring to.
So we shouldn't be bothered by apparent contradictions,
but we should perhaps welcome them as an opportunity
to get to understanding deeper reality behind
why they are the same
or why there are no contradictions at all.
Yeah, no, certainly.
I mean, you think about special relativity
emerging the contradictions between electromagnetic theory
and Newtonian mechanics.
You can think about quantum mechanics emerging
as a contradiction between observational data
of certain particular systems
and the classical description of those systems.
So I totally agree that contradictions have been
the most fruitful things that we physicists have encountered.
I think what Freeman Dyson was referring to,
he didn't believe that gravitons exist.
He didn't think that gravity would ever need
to be quantized.
I'm not exactly sure how he justified that thinking
because, I mean, we'll talk about it in a minute,
but when you think about things like black holes
or the big bang, it seems quite clear
that to gain the full understanding,
you need to put general relativity together
with quantum mechanics
because there's extreme realms of gravity
and tiny realms of space.
And it's very hard to imagine a description
that wouldn't unite them.
But I guess he was thinking that we would one day
just have distinct descriptions
that would never require gravity and quantum mechanics
to talk to each other.
Again, it's hard for me to understand
where he justified that thinking
and I gathered it's hard for you to see it as well.
Yes, I think that the quest we have
in science is unification of ideas.
To us having different realms
which have nothing to do with each other
and describe reality is not the happy ending
for understanding what is the ultimate goal
or how do the things relate?
It's kind of giving up.
I don't think I will subscribe to that viewpoint,
but of course we have understood much more,
I think, especially in recent times,
about connections, you mentioned black holes.
And for example,
fundamental things that we mentioned, electrons.
You might think, what does an electron,
fundamental entity, this tiny thing,
have to do this massive singularity
in space which I have a picture of,
like a little black hole,
how could they have anything to do with each other?
And now we have learned via string theory
that they are related.
And the simplest relation to explain is that
we have learned the following fact is from string theory
that gravity is always,
no matter what kind of university you might imagine,
is always the weakest force.
So for example, the electron has a repulsion,
if you have two electrons, they have repulsion,
electric repulsion force,
which is much stronger than their gravitational attraction
by a factor of 10 to the power of 40 or something.
So it's a huge difference between these forces.
Gravity is always the weakest force.
The electrons really strongly repel
compared to the tiny attractive force they feel.
And the question is why?
And we learned that this has to do
with the properties of black holes.
So understanding black hole,
that thing which has nothing to do with this tiny little
electron gets to explain the fact that there are always,
gravity is always the weakest force.
So these kinds of connections come from quantum aspects
of gravity and gravitons existing and all that,
which are crucial in hanging the whole thing together.
So these elementary excitations like electrons or gravitons
and these big excitations like big black hole
are actually intimately deeply related.
And we have seen many examples of that by now in string theory.
Yeah, and a number of the chat comments
and just quickly looking at them
by a number of the listeners like Raju Radhi
and one listener whose name indicates the question at hand
their name is Luke quantum gravity.
So a natural question is,
so string theory is an approach
to putting general tippiting quantum mechanics together.
There are other approaches that have been put forward.
What do you think about Luke quantum gravity?
I think no approach is on par with the amount
we understand in string theory.
So I think it's fair to say that the other approaches
are many of them, they're not too many attempts,
but none of them are as developed
as in context of string theory.
And perhaps there's some connections
and we may discover between some pieces
of these ideas within string theory,
but I would say that they are not on par with string theory.
Right, yeah, I hold a similar view,
but I think we're both perhaps biased.
The other community might have said the same thing
in reverse, but let them have their own discussion
if they want to.
You're in the finch at the end.
Exactly, exactly.
So, you know, when I was a graduate student
back in the 80s, which is more or less the time
when you were, when did you get your degree?
85, 1985.
I got my 86, yeah, so around the same time.
You know, there was a general sense
that we both came recall that some people were saying,
okay, the end of physics is near, right?
We have this new theory.
It's just going to unify gravity
and quantum mechanics together,
give us the final description of everything.
And at that time, the older physicists,
I think knew well that this was over-exuberance
that I remember talking to Ed Whitten at the time.
And, you know, he was like, this is extremely exciting,
but he was like, you know, slow it down a little bit
in your expectation for where this is going to go.
Now, we are, say, 35 years later.
What's your view in terms of how far
string theory has gotten?
I mean, if you were to grade string theory,
what grade would you give it?
Well, string theory is like opening a room
which is totally dark and beginning to shine light
on pieces of it.
And you don't know how deep or how complicated,
what shapes you're going to find.
So, I can easily see that 35 years ago or so,
we might have thought, you know, the room is tiny.
You know, one flashlight, the whole thing is done.
We get all aspects ready and understood and ready to go.
But of course, if you don't know if it's a tiny room
or it might be actually a big tunnel
or it could be completely complicated.
So, I think it's hard to give it a grade
because we don't still know what is the totality
of this thing that you're calling string theory.
We have, it's like really walking and, you know,
shedding light on this piece and that piece and saying,
oh, no, no, this is not just a little room.
It's actually a big cave or this big this and that.
So, we're beginning to get pieces of it understood.
And so, it's going to take a while for us
to really delve into all aspects of string theory.
What I would say is that we have discovered
so many little corners in that room
that are so exciting, each little thing.
Each little thing is like a gem.
And we have, you know, we said, wow,
look at this little thing here, isn't it cool?
Let's try to understand what it means
about the rest of physics.
And we got, we get to absorb this for a few years.
And I said, oh, no, no, no, no,
there's just other gem over there and so forth.
So, it's like a kid walking around in this little,
that is a candy store and discovering this and that
and so forth and putting all together.
And you might ask, okay,
so are you done with this candy store?
No, no, no, we're still continuing our journey
in this way.
And what grade I can give,
I would say we have found so many exciting stuff
in string theory that you could give a grade of A plus.
But if you ask, have you been able to connect
to any single experimental result
that you can actually explain using your theory,
the grade is not A for sure.
We have not been able to do that.
So therefore, depends on what is the exact aim
and we can only be modest in that we can do,
continue this journey, understand pieces of it.
We have connected many different aspects
of physics together.
We have understood how quantum theory
and gravity can be consistent.
We have seen how gravity is could be related
to a manifestation of forces
like electromagnetic forces or generalizations of it.
We have seen how dualities work,
something which is looks one way could be completely
related to completely different things.
So these kinds of different aspects
have shed huge light about what we understand.
We have learned so much more about black holes.
We have learned many, many things.
And of course, the longer this journey is,
perhaps the more we are going to learn
more new exciting things.
So therefore, maybe we shouldn't aim to have a short journey.
So longer journey may not be so bad.
But of course, it would be nice to get a few experiments
on the way as we walk on this journey.
Well, some string theorists have said,
I wonder what your view is.
They point to the developments that began
in the late 1990s that showed a very deep
and unexpected link between string theory
and the more traditional way that physics
has been able to describe elementary particles, namely
quantum field theory.
And the deep connection between string theory
and quantum field theory, some string theorists
that I've spoken to, take the position
that the experimental program of testing string theory
needs to be seen in a different light.
They would say, hey, once you find this deep connection
between string theory and quantum field theory,
well, quantum field theory, you already
know that certain quantum field theories are spectacularly good
describing real world physics.
And once you have the link between string theory
and quantum field theory, then in some sense,
the experimental program isn't as crucial as you perhaps
once thought it was.
What's your view of that?
I would not agree with that.
First of all, we would need to have,
to just to say that some kind of gravity theory
is consistent with our understanding of string theory.
And therefore, let's not worry about the details
of our universe.
That's basically not giving up on interesting things
that could be related to the universe we live in
or universes that could be possibly consistent
and perhaps even reachable from our universe.
So I would say that saying that something is consistent
unless they're not dealt any further
is basically again giving up.
So I would say that to say that gravity might be related
to other forces is of course great.
String theory unifies them, but we would like to know more.
We would like to understand what aspects of our universe
is related to the consistency of gravity
with these other forces.
Can we make further predictions?
Are there other kinds of particles that they should be there?
Can we learn anything about dark matter?
Can we learn anything about dark energy
from the string theory perspective?
We know that there's this non vanishing energy
permitting the whole space.
What does it have to do with Einstein's theory of gravity?
What does it have to do with the fundamental forces?
Are there any relations between them?
Can we make a prediction about the fate of the universe?
All these exciting questions that we need to understand
and I think they're extremely exciting
to understand for our universe
and understanding what predictions we have about universe
that we live in rather than some hypothetical
possible universe that we don't even know
whether it's relevant for our universe.
So understanding more specific things about our universe
is something that we still lack
in our understanding of string theory.
So do you consider string theory, you say, to be falsifiable?
String theory is falsifiable in many ways,
but to make it very falsifiable,
you have to have a very specific universe in mind.
So for example, I would say that if you just would be
an aspect of falsifiable,
you suppose you have an accelerator
which can produce energies
which are 10 to the power of 20,
let's say higher than the energy of a proton.
Suppose you go to that high an energy
which is if you can arrange such a huge amount of energy,
then if you don't see any evidence for extended objects
of one form or another,
I would say that falsifies the theory.
So there is a prediction
that you have to be able to see something coming up there.
Of course, that's very far from the realm of experience
we can do today.
By many, many orders of magnitude in energy
or even the large Hadron collider
is a very tiny energy compared to the energy
we need to reach to falsify string theory.
So falsifiability of the string theory
is at least technologically,
we are not at the point where we can actually do it now,
but theoretically, we could see it falsified.
Of course, otherwise it won't be a piece of science.
Sure.
You know, when I look back on the papers
that I've written in my career,
I'd say that, I don't know,
90% of them rely on something called supersymmetry
in one way or another.
And many of us who have the same perspective as you,
that in principle, you can test string theory.
If you have a big enough accelerator,
you can actually, in principle,
try to detect the extended nature of a string.
And as you say, if you don't see it,
then that would be pretty good evidence against it.
If you do see it, that'd be pretty good evidence for it.
But of course, we don't have those machines.
We have to deal with what we have.
And many of us thought that supersymmetry,
this quality of nature that for every known particle,
there'd be a partner particle,
many of us almost took it as a foregone conclusion
that the Large Hadron Collider would discover
these super partner particles,
and that way it confirmed supersymmetry.
It didn't happen, or at least it hasn't happened.
Was that, did you find that disappointing?
What's your reaction?
It's disappointing, but I wouldn't say
that we were predicting it necessarily.
So let me say that, just like you,
I actually was hoping that we will see some evidence
for supersymmetry in the Large Hadron Collider,
but evidence was against it.
And in the sense that the amount of things
that we saw from other experiments
did not point towards being able to see supersymmetry.
In string theory, we believe supersymmetry,
this amazing symmetry between different kinds of particles,
bosons versus fermions,
should be true at some energy scale in string theory.
That energy scale has to be something
that is measurable in some sense,
but may not be at the low energy
that we can prove in the Large Hadron Collider.
It could be all the way up to the energies
which we call the Planck energy,
this huge energy that,
this ultimate energy that we can reach.
So it could be that you need to get so high an energy
to see the evidence for supersymmetry.
We were hoping, who knows, maybe we are lucky,
that you could see it at low energy
and then we'll be happy.
We didn't see it, but I wouldn't say that that
dismayed me in terms of believing in string theory,
let's say, or to say that it had to be seen.
No, we were just hoping that if it is there,
then maybe we can get more insight
into the inner workings of string theory
and how it connects to our universe.
So it's disappointment in that sense.
I wouldn't say it's a theoretical disappointment.
It's just like circumstantial disappointment
of the universe we live in,
which does not have supersymmetry
realized as such a low energy.
Of course, it's not still over.
They could, you know,
the large Hadron Collider experiment is still going on
and, you know, they could have some evidences for that,
but it's getting, I would say, as you say, less likely.
And I wouldn't bet on it as I would say,
it's less likely even than before the experiment,
but I would say that that does not change my view
about string theory.
So turning away from, say, the experimental side of things,
which, you know, as we've indicated is less successful,
but not necessarily a black mark against string theory,
and turning towards some of the great successes.
So your own work on black holes, an enormous success.
More recently, there's also been a tremendous amount
of activity trying to understand the true nature
of space and time in a quantum mechanical theory
of gravity within string theory.
Have you been impressed by those developments?
Any thoughts on where you think the promising avenues
of research are in trying to understand a question like that?
Well, there are aspects of trying to understand
deeper questions about black holes.
How does it, for example,
if you throw something to the black hole,
after the black hole evaporates and goes away
by halting radiation, what happens to the information
of the things that you sent in?
That was one of the puzzles that we expect the answer
to be a way to resolve it and to get the information out,
but it wasn't clear, and still is not, to be honest,
it's not clear how does the information come out.
So there are some simpler models
in which how the information may come out
can be understood in those cases.
So lower dimensional examples,
there are some toy models which do that.
So there's some progress in that.
I wouldn't say that this is a case where I would say
that we have to make a big breakthrough
and really understanding the big issue of black hole,
but there are incremental steps in that direction.
I would say there are many other directions in strength there
which are, I would say, still ongoing.
And it's actually one of them,
which I personally am interested,
relates to the supersymmetry again,
which we already mentioned.
So in fact, I would turn it around.
The fact that we didn't discover supersymmetry
and the fact that our universe does not enjoy
this amazing symmetry between bosons and fermions,
this supersymmetry is telling us something
about our universe, which is deep.
And that deep fact is the following.
In strength theory, we have two type of universes
that can exist.
The universes that can last forever
and the universes that are temporary, that will decay away.
And of course, we would like to know
which one of these two universes we live in.
It turns out all the universes that we know of
in strength theory that last forever
enjoy supersymmetry.
An unbroken version of the supersymmetry should be realized.
In our universe, at least in the low energy,
it's not realized, which implies we do not live
in the universe which will last forever.
Therefore, our universe is going to be going away.
It's gonna decay away.
So that's a fundamental lesson
that lack of supersymmetry is teaching us.
Our universe is not gonna last forever.
So therefore, the next question would be,
what is the fate of our universe?
When is it gonna go away?
How is it gonna go away?
So all these questions are exciting.
And so this is just leading us
to the deeper question about the nature.
So I think these kinds of questions I find
among the most amazing questions in strength theory
that can actually teach us something concrete
about our universe.
That's what those are the kinds of questions
I find most exciting.
And I'm working on those kinds of questions myself.
I remember the first time you told me about those results.
I don't know if you recall,
we just happened to run into each other
in a cafe in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
And it's funny because I was in the midst
of finishing my own recent book until the end of time,
which has to do with possible,
well, part of the book is possible endings of the universe.
So I remember you told me about that way
of thinking about things and it certainly made it
into a book as an end note.
I wasn't able to work on it into the main text itself.
But yes, I mean, thinking about the ultimate fate
of the universe and to have any theory
that can give you insight into questions of that sort
is of course inspiring.
Again, for those of you who are just joining us,
I'm speaking with Kermyn Baffa.
This is his new book over here,
Puzzles to Unravel the Universe.
Those of you who are here early on note
that Kermyn posed a puzzle early on
and in about 10 or 15 minutes,
he'll describe the solution to that puzzle.
But those of you who wanna try to still solve it,
feel free to write down your solution
for the most efficient highway network
between four cities that are at all the corners of a square.
So what highway system would you use?
If you were charged with doing it
for the least amount of money and your highway system,
the cost is proportional to the linear length
of the highway itself.
So back to questions of string theorem
and cosmology and unified theories.
But one thing before we get to that one relates to puzzle.
I'm going to give you another puzzle as well,
but this puzzle I'm gonna give the solution to.
Okay.
So it's not part of that one,
but I think it's interesting because it also illustrates
the point about what does puzzle have to do with physics?
Yeah.
In a simple way.
So this is the puzzle.
Can something be falling and not hitting the ground?
That's the puzzle.
What is falling?
What could be falling and not hitting the ground ever?
Yeah.
Now, this sounds like-
Are you asking me that question?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
I'm sure you can say it immediately,
but this is a puzzle.
This is a puzzle that you would think,
okay, something is falling and it's not hitting the ground.
What could it be?
What does it mean?
Yeah.
And so this sounds like it can be some kind
of a word puzzle.
It's not, it's actual puzzle.
And it's a puzzle that Newton solved.
Newton solved in the following way.
So this is a question that you could raise,
is that there's a moon.
And first of all, the question is,
why isn't the moon falling?
And the second question is that,
okay, if it's falling, then why is it not hitting the earth?
So those are the questions.
So those are the questions.
And the answer that Newton gave was so elegant,
which is the solution to this puzzle.
So Newton should get the prize for that.
Is that, no, actually moon is falling,
but it just avoids hitting the earth.
Now, how does that work?
And this was, this is beautifully illustrated
in this book in principle of mathematical,
which shows that if you start, if there's no earth,
if you get rid of the earth,
and if you look at the moon,
and if the moon is moving in some direction,
it will continue going straight.
But if you had an earth, instead of going straight,
if you have anything going straight,
if you have like, for example, a cannonball,
shooting going straight,
if you had an earth, it will fall on it.
So if you have an earth,
and if you have a cannonball shooting from it,
it will fall somewhere on the earth.
If you, if you shoot at the cannonball
with a higher speed and go farther down,
and farther and farther,
you can go from the North Pole, let's say,
all the way onto South Pole of the earth,
if you give it enough kick.
But if you really give the huge kick,
it will go all the way around,
and it will continue going around.
So what's happening is that,
that ball is falling down,
because if it wasn't before the earth,
it would go straight.
So having the earth causes that cannonball
to try to hit the ground, it's falling.
Namely, instead of going straight, it's falling.
Just going not straight, it's falling towards the earth.
But since the earth is round,
it keeps on missing, hitting the earth.
So the cannonball or the moon itself
is the answer to the puzzle.
That's, that is falling.
If it wasn't for the earth, it would go straight.
So it is falling, but it's not hitting the earth
because the earth is round.
So it's like a game between the roundness of this earth
and this falling of this moon.
So this is an example where the puzzle
and the poetry and physics all melt together.
And of course, they can be beautifully explained
by mathematical formula that Newton discovered.
But the whole thing is simple looking puzzle
that kind of illustrates the basic link
between physics and puzzles.
Yeah, it's a beautiful, it's a beautiful example.
And it's perhaps worth noting that there was a period of time
when you and I and a few other of our friends
would find ourselves at the same Christmas party every year.
And our, you know, Tracy and my wife, your wife
would all leave us because we'd all start to talk
about these puzzles in one little corner of the room
and they're off, you know, drinking and partying
and having a good time.
And there's one that you told me, one Christmas party
that was the following.
I'll just ask it to the audience.
And again, it's one that people can try to solve,
which is you have a picture and you wanna hang the picture,
but you're gonna hang the picture from two nails,
not from one nail, such that it's completely stable
if both nails are secured to the wall.
But if you remove one nail or the other
and you just leave the other in the wall,
the picture will fall.
And it's a, for those of you who are more mathematically
inclined, this puzzle gives you insight
into a subject of mathematics called homotopy.
And it has to do with non-homotopy groups
and the non-homotopy nature of the homotopy group
but the plane punctured at two points.
So for those of you who speak mathematical language,
that's what this is about.
So again, it's a, so the puzzle that Kermin gave
is a beautiful one that puts the poetry of physics
and motion in the universe together.
And here's one, again, that Kermin gave me
that I went home after that party,
we got home at like two o'clock in the morning
at six o'clock in the morning I was up
and my little daughter who was like five at the time,
we did it, we took a picture, we put it off.
Yeah, and you know,
we're getting that picture, yes, absolutely.
Yeah, exactly.
You gave me some good puzzles,
in fact, some of them my book about the glasses
and the symmetry breaking, which is part of that book.
So yes, we have had good fun with puzzles
and the relation between physics and them.
Absolutely.
So I wanna turn to one other thing that's in your book
which was quite unusual
and for me, quite inspiring,
which is you have a section on science and religion.
And you know, it's interesting,
you know, at the World Science Festival,
which is what this program is part of,
on various occasions, we've had programs
on science and religion,
and we do them because we find it a fascinating conversation
between various distinct ways of looking at the world.
We also have conversations between artists and scientists,
artists and theologians and philosophers.
So we like science to reach out to the world more broadly,
but I have to tell you,
there were a number of scientists
who came back at us really hard, really angry,
that we were having a program on science and religion
at the World Science Festival.
They said, what in the world
does religion have any role there?
And basically our answer, and you know, Tracy Day,
you know, who's the co-founder with me at the festival,
our view was, what are you afraid of?
I mean, any conversation that's rich
that allows scientific ideas to be in dialogue
with other qualities and perspectives on the world
is a good thing.
It's not something to shun,
but nevertheless, there can be a recoiling.
And so were you concerned about having science and religion?
Like what led you to include that section in your book?
Well, I think that religion and science
have many commonalities.
So I think that the deeper truth is what one is after.
And so, of course, as described in the book,
I don't think that, I think there are ultimately
different realms of experience,
religious experience and scientific experience,
and I kind of describe them in different ways.
And I kind of, I wanted to share that, you know,
scientists also have views on this.
And I gave examples, you know, Newton,
how religious he was and some more recent ones,
how they viewed, for example, Einstein,
how did he view religion and so forth?
Not so much as to try to come to a conclusion really
about what is the meaning of, you know,
what should we do about religion,
what should we do about science and so on,
but to say this interplay between the two.
And I view, in fact, more broadly,
what you just mentioned about the role of religion
and what scientists view.
In fact, even more broadly,
I feel that there's this anti-philosophical bend
in which I would say religion is an example
of that same thing among scientists,
that somehow the scientists feel that these should not be,
this kind of thing is bad for science.
And I think that's, as you just said,
and I completely agree, a little bit of immaturity,
not to be able to describe and discuss it
and learn from aspects of it.
I think this attitude that, you know, we know it all
and it's kind of like everything else,
which is not, can be not formulated in this scientific form
is the waste of my time and so on.
I think that attitude is a little bit, I think, short-sighted
and I think the human experience is much wider
and I think we should benefit from it.
We should incorporate it.
We should not be antagonistic.
We should be welcoming and try to understand it.
And if there are pieces we can say something,
science has shed light on some aspects, we should.
And vice versa, if there's some shortfalls
about the scientific methodology,
we should bring in other aspects.
And so I think we should be open
and I don't feel that we should be worried
about the dialogue between different domains
of human thought or experience.
So in your book you do, as you mentioned,
go through in some very nice sections,
Einstein and religion, Hawking and religion,
Feynman and religion.
What I didn't see there was Vafa and religion.
If you were to have included a section of that,
what would it have said?
It wouldn't have said much, it would be empty blank page.
I think that I want to leave that to the,
it's a personal, I view that as a personal feeling
about what it is.
I think the part of the problem is that
the word religion is not definable.
And you might say X and somebody might think,
what do you mean by X is a Y
and somebody might think it's a Z and so forth.
And you might say something about X
and they might misinterpret you about it
as if you're saying something about Y
and that there would be complete misunderstanding.
So I think anything I would have said I felt
is to be so qualified, it would not be possible to explain.
So I rather in fact, generally not share my specific view
because it's not possible to say it accurately enough.
But I would say that the view that religion
is in conflict with science
or science is in conflict with religion,
I don't buy that in general.
So I think that there's more harmony
in religion and science,
not any specific religion or a specific science or something.
I think in general, the modality of humans thinking
is not inconsistent with different views.
Of course, you can take a narrow view of one thing
and then you get contradictions,
but broadly interpreted, they are not contradictory.
And an example is this Lamats
trying to getting motivated by religion,
by the experience about how the universe
could have come from a tiny,
small, little primordial thing,
which was ultimately led to the big bank theory
that he was advocating, even though Einstein was against it
and he thought this is kind of mythology
of maybe religious mythology of some kind.
So these kind of views that other perspectives brings,
we should welcome, we should not necessarily
be antagonistic towards.
And my view is let's be open.
That's generally, that's my bottom line
is to be open about this.
So there's a lot of resonance between what you're saying
and my own views.
And sometimes when I discuss this in a public forum,
some have come back to me and said,
well, you have the luxury of saying things like that
because you live in a country that, by and large,
has certain kinds of, not completely.
I mean, this also said that presidential candidate
succeed if they're willing, for instance,
to say that they're not religious,
that they don't believe in God.
I mean, that issue has never really been fully tested,
but putting that to the side,
you are in a unique position, right?
Because you come from Iran.
When did you leave Iran?
What year?
Well, I came from Iran just before my high school, 1977.
So if you hadn't left Iran,
do you think that your views would still be the same
as what you just described?
Yes, I still go back to Iran, incidentally.
I visit Iran, I give lectures there in physics,
I love visiting Iran, they're very much interested
in science, beautiful universities
and educational centers and so on.
So there's, I mean, one of the things I find about science
is that it's borderless, really, it doesn't matter
where you are, what time you live,
and so it's a borderless and timeless adventure in a way.
And I view me as an example,
I don't feel like might be Iranian or American now,
or both Iran and American has any impact
about my view about science.
I could have been there, I could have been here,
it's just I happen to be in the US working here,
but I find this borderless adventure of science
is what's universal.
And I think it'd be great to use science as a vehicle
to go between different cultures
and stuff clashing and stuff confronting.
So I think that science in general, for me, is a glue,
gluing between different cultures,
different domains of human experience,
like religion, like philosophy, like art, like poetry,
all these things can be glued together via science
rather than science being as differentiating and saying,
this is right, that's wrong, this is this, this is that,
and so forth.
So I think in a way, I find science as a refuge
in terms of the craziness that we see around us,
in terms of all these conflicts that we see around us
and culturally or otherwise.
So I think I don't see any contradiction
and I feel science can bring things together
rather than differentiate.
No, I totally agree.
In fact, I got a letter,
I've mentioned this in other settings,
but it brings to mind what you just mentioned.
I got a letter years ago from an American soldier
who was in Iraq in the craziness of everything
that was happening there.
And he wrote me that he had a copy of one of my books
and that it gave him the refuge that you're talking about.
He could sort of shut off the bombs
and all the deaths that was around him
and all the fighting and the strife
and just enter into quantum mechanics
or enter into relativity.
And it felt like a universal glue
to use the language that you're using
that just allowed him to cope with the difficult situation
that he was thrust into by virtue of the problems
that beset the world.
So one final error before we get to the solution
to the puzzle.
You know, I know that the question of time
is one that's very close to your heart,
close to the heart of many physicists.
What is it?
Where does it come from?
Is it fundamental?
Where do you think we are on that journey
to try to understand the true nature of time?
Well, it's a very difficult and important question,
of course, and we don't have a deep understanding
even of space, which is something simpler.
So I think that understanding how what space really is,
we have learned at least enough
about the nature of space and string theory
to know that there is no universal answer.
That is, different corners of standing string theory
lead us to different pictures of what is space
and these are what we call duality corners.
One corner and the other corner,
they're compatible, different descriptions
of what really space is.
They look in contradiction.
They look not, they cannot be possibly both be true,
but they're both true.
And we have learned not to say what is the right viewpoint.
That is, we have learned that for the notion
that what is the best viewpoint is not a good question.
That question of what is the best viewpoint
depends on the question being asked.
And so for example, what is space?
We learned that that is not a good question
because what is space ends up having good answer here
or a good answer here, which looked contradictory.
So we have learned that much about space,
which is I would say much easier question
than the harder question and more interesting question
that you're posing, which is what is time?
So for time, we don't even have those corners
as well navigated as space,
but I would expect you will have the same kind of things
emerging for understanding time.
The time will not be a unique answer of what is time.
It will be different like snapshots, pictures.
And for one question, that's a good answer.
For the other one, the other snapshot is a better one.
We're going to have these pictures next to each other
and with the totality of all these pictures
we'll get a feeling about what is time.
Not for a single one of them, not for one or two of them,
but the totality.
That's what physics is being driven towards.
That's what string theory we have learned from,
the notion of duality and the fact that this fabric
of different kinds of pictures come together.
And there's not the one thing that is the right thing,
but the totality is what explains it.
So for space, the recent results that link together
the spatial fabric and quantum entanglement,
is that a direction that you think is going to be,
continue to be a promising one going forward?
That's certainly one direction that has been explored recently
and has good results about it.
I would say that is among other things,
they're both, that's one of the corners
that I was alluding to.
There are different corners that are interesting.
So I would say each corner has to be explored.
Not that any one corner is the answer.
I'm not expecting the answer that this is the answer.
I'm expecting more totality of the experience
that string theory is teaching us,
which is this duality picture
that all of them are perfectly fine
depends on what question you want to ask.
If you want to ask question A,
that's the best way of looking at it.
If you ask question B, you go the other way.
So yes, the entanglement and how the space
and degrees of freedom about individual bits of information,
how did that come to describe the geometry of space
and so on and how they are entangled
is certainly an example of one of these corners.
Right.
So let's now turn to the solution to the puzzle
that we gave at the beginning of the discussion.
So maybe just quickly,
because there are many more people with us now
than were at the start.
So maybe just reacquaint us with the nature of the puzzle
and now you're gonna give us the solution.
Yeah, so we have four towns, four cities, A, B, C and D
on the four corners of a square
and the puzzle is to find the shortest highway system
which connects all cities together.
And the highway system does not have to directly connect
any city to any other city,
as long as you can get from one to the other
to this highway system, that would be sufficient.
So that's the puzzle.
All right.
What's the solution?
The solution is the naive solution.
One might think is, let's go to the next slide, this one,
right?
The most naive solution is like, well, you just go like X.
Now, before we go to the next slide,
I would like to say, why would we even guess the solution?
Well, because it's symmetric, right?
You start with a square
and so the X is one of the most symmetric ones
and it gets you from any place to any other place
you wanna get.
So that seems like the answer.
So what is guiding us is the symmetry.
The symmetry of the square is guiding us
towards the solution.
Or we might think there might be another symmetric solution
which is the next one, which is this one.
This is also symmetric, you know, you have four towns
for cities, you can have a whole edges
that will be another possible symmetric solution.
So you say either this or that.
And then you begin to think, you say, wait a second,
it cannot be this one, because if it's this one,
you can delete one of the roads
and you still can get from any city to any other.
So that's shorter.
And you say, in fact, you can put that city AB
because the road can go from any other place like the middle.
So you might say, well, that looks the same length,
but actually you can put that road a little inwards
and you can put it a little inwards to be like that
with making an angle 120 degrees.
And this turns out to be the shortest.
And this is surprising, this is confusing
because you start with a problem which is symmetric,
the four cities on the corners of a square
enjoy the symmetries of a square like 90 degree rotation,
but this highway system does not enjoy the symmetry.
In other words, to get from city A to city C
is a shorter path than getting from city A to city B.
Even though city A and city B and city A and city C
have the same distance relative to each other.
So that's a puzzle.
So why is it that the solution
does not enjoy the original symmetry?
This fact we call in physics, spontaneous symmetry breaking.
And this underlies a lot of amazing phenomena
around us in the universe.
Spontaneous symmetry breaking is a key
to understanding many things.
And in fact, the ideas go farther back,
much longer history than we think.
We originally thought we discovered this idea
in the past century, the physicists,
but actually it goes farther back
to the Greek philosophers.
So early Greek philosophers already had,
they are very smart.
They had already discovered that the earth is round
and they thought it's at the center of the universe
and it's not moving.
So these are their observations was this.
And so they were a bit puzzled why it's not moving.
So they had to come up with an explanation
of why it's not moving and they try to use symmetry.
So this is how they reason.
Go to the next slide.
We see is the picture of the earth.
And they said, well, okay, suppose it moves.
If it moves in some direction,
let's say some direction, let's move it to the next slide.
It goes somewhere, it breaks the symmetry.
So it cannot move because it doesn't want
to break the symmetry.
So they explained that the earth is at the center
of the universe and it's not moving
because if it were to move in any direction,
it picks out the direction.
And the very nature of picking a direction
breaks this spherical symmetry around the earth.
So it's not allowed.
So that's one of them said, this is a proof.
Earth is not going to move.
And then Aristotle didn't like the argument.
He said, no, not a good argument.
Why is not a good argument?
They asked.
Said, he reasoned as follows.
He said, well, suppose you put a person
at the center of a circle and you put loaves
of bread around that person,
symmetrically located on a circle.
Now the person is at the center of the circle
and you ask them whether or not that person
is going to move.
Well, you would say, no, it's not gonna move
because at the center of the circle,
it breaks the symmetry, the circular symmetry
if it were to move.
Of course, you know, that's not the answer.
After a while, the person feels so hungry.
Person will move in some direction
to get that loaf of bread.
So therefore, the person breaks the circular symmetry
because that's not an optimal place to be in.
Being near the bread and eating it is much more optimal.
So they say, who cares about the symmetry?
I'm gonna get my bread.
I'll break the symmetry.
That's exactly what happened with that highway system.
This shorter highway system breaks the symmetry
and that's what the highway system chooses to do.
So it's broken symmetry.
Now, what does it have to do with physics?
You might ask.
Well, first of all, I would say that spontaneous symmetry
breaking is imprinted on our bodies.
You see, we live in a year on the earth
which basically has a 360 degree rotation symmetry
around us generally speaking.
So you would think that our body should also enjoy
a 360 degree rotational symmetry.
Like we should have our eyes all over a circle
around rather than just in the front.
But we only have it in front.
You might ask, why?
Why do we have our eyes only in the front
and not all over the circle, which would be more symmetrical?
So somehow our body has broken the symmetry of circular
360 degree rotation as only in one direction.
Why is that?
Well, the answer is Aristotle's answer for the same reason.
You wanna see where the food is to go towards it.
In other words, the motion to go from one place to another
is optimal in a given direction
and not you don't need the 360 degrees.
So with all the availability of evolutionary system
of how the body is designed,
it says it makes sense at much more better uses of resources
to just put the eyes in the front
because that's really where you wanna go anyhow.
So the symmetry is broken
because you need to get to the food
and more details related to more aspects of modern physics.
This was the discovery of what's called the Higgs particle
or the God particle or what is the origin of the mass
is exactly the same circle that Aristotle drew,
it turns out surprisingly, a few thousand years ago
he already had the same picture that we now draw
in our books or in papers talking about
how particles get their mass.
Namely, if you think about the potential that is around us
it looks like a valley, it looks like a hill and a valley
and the top of this hill area is a more symmetric point
that person is standing
is a more symmetric point but it's not an optimal point
and it turns out that the optimal point
of course will be down on the valley area
and if you go down in that valley area
it turns out that there will be a mass related
to how far away you are from the symmetric point.
So being away from symmetry translates to giving mass.
So breaking symmetry means picking up mass.
So this picture about how we have the eye,
how we get the mass, all are related into this
and they woven into this simple idea of this puzzle
about the square.
So the Higgs gets hungry, the Higgs field gets hungry
and goes for the bread on the room of the valley.
Higgs is hungry, it's your face are hunger
and that's why we come massive.
That's good.
In fact, Abdul Salam said nicely that one of the fields
in his model ate another one, another field
that became massive, that's called Higgs Park
who gets his mass that way.
This is literally this picture.
That's fantastic.
Well, that's great.
Thanks for that mini discourse on connecting a puzzle
with real stuff in the world around us.
Those of you who were able to solve that puzzle,
I don't know how many it is,
but maybe World Science Festival people will let me know.
I don't know if it was-
They have written already, we have a winner
from the audience.
We have a winner.
Wow.
From the chat, I see we have a winner, Priyab Dash.
Is that right?
He's a regular in these gatherings.
So that's a congratulations.
That's a good picture.
Yes, absolutely.
Congratulations.
I'll be glad to send my book to you, Priyab.
That is well done.
Well done.
So we will work out the details of that.
So again, the book that we're talking about,
and we have a slide for it,
but just so you can sort of see it straight out,
puzzles to unravel the universe by the guest today,
Professor Kuman Vafa from Harvard.
It is available all over the place.
You should get a copy.
It's a wonderful way to introduce yourself
to deep ideas of physics through an interactive
and a real active as opposed to just sitting back
and letting the author preach to you,
which is how most books are.
This is one where you can get in on the action
and do things,
and in that way really gain a intuition
for the ideas that Professor Vafa is describing to you.
So Kuman, thanks so much for joining us
for this conversation.
Thank you very much, Brian, for the session.
I really enjoyed it,
and it's great to connect with your audience.
And good luck with all the great work we are doing
with connecting science to the wider public.
I appreciate that.
Thank you, and we'll be in touch,
and no doubt our paths will cross sometime soon.
So thanks a lot.
Maybe in the cafe somewhere.
Very good.
All right, guys.
So we're gonna now just move into the more ordinary Q&A
that we do in these discussions here.
I hope I have.
I do have,
maybe one of you out there one day
is gonna send me a pair of glasses.
These that I have today are cracked and broke,
and they're not my wife's glasses,
at least she is using them,
but at least now I can see for half a second.
So again, sorry for looking ridiculous
in one way or another.
And yes, Pryogdash, congratulations
on getting the solution really well done.
And let me just scroll through
and just take some general questions.
So Ramse asks,
is Allah personified by the Higgs Boson?
I'm not sure.
Maybe this is one that I should have kept
the Kermit Vapha on to answer.
But when one uses the phrase God particle,
when describing the Higgs particle,
perhaps it's worth mentioning
that there's a story behind that.
The particle physicist and Nobel laureate Leon Letterman,
who was instrumental in many of the ideas
associated with the Higgs particle, Higgs field,
and so forth, people were trying to find the Higgs particle.
For instance, at the Fermilab accelerator,
where Leon Letterman was associated for many years,
and it was very difficult to find the particle,
nobody was finding it.
So there was a general joke going around
that it was the goddamn particles,
because it was so goddamn difficult to find this particle.
And I think the story goes that when Leon Letterman
was going to write his book and call it the goddamn particle,
the publisher, or the editor, or audience surveys,
whatever, suggested that the God particle
would be a more poetic title than the goddamn particle.
So it's just to say that no one is really associating
the Higgs particle with any religious tradition,
with any real religious outlook.
It is, in some people's mind,
a more fundamental particle than any other,
because it endows other particles with mass.
Remember how this goes.
The Higgs particle is the smallest piece of the Higgs field,
and the Higgs field is meant to be a field,
a substance, an invisible substance.
I like to think of it as an invisible cosmic molasses
that fills all of space.
And as a particle tries to go through space,
it has to plow through the cosmic molasses,
and that creates a resistance.
And that resistance on the particle's attempt,
say, to accelerate is what we call the mass of the particle.
So it's a universal mass-giving field,
and the universal quality can bring to mind
the universal quality of God, if you will.
So some people draw the connection in that way,
but again, it is just a field of physics,
like the electromagnetic field,
like the other fields that we make use
of the gravitational field and so forth.
And it's a very special field,
but mathematics is just one more field.
So I wouldn't look for any theological connections
any deeper than the poetic ones that I just mentioned.
Okay, heading onward.
Sanjay Pawar, what is dark energy?
And again, I think this is a question
that we've taken up a few times during these various sessions,
but I'm always happy to cover familiar ground.
It's important.
Dark energy is another kind of field, we believe.
It's a field like the Higgs field that does permeate space.
It's very related to what I was just describing.
But the difference with the dark energy
is that the amount of energy density in the field
is such that the field has a significant
gravitational influence on the universe.
The Higgs field does not have
a significant gravitational influence.
I mean, it does endow particles with mass,
so you've got gravity in that story as well.
But in terms of the intrinsic source for gravity
that the Higgs field is, it's modest, it's minor.
Whereas the gravity sourced by dark energy is not modest,
it's not minor, it's significant, so significant
that we believe it gives rise
to the repulsive gravitational push
that is driving space to expand ever more rapidly.
So it's again, in some sense, analogous to the Higgs field,
but in terms of its impact on the way
reality unfolds, it's quite different
because of the vast store of energy
that yields an important gravitational contribution
that yields this accelerated expansion.
And having said that,
let me not leave you with the wrong impression.
The amount of energy in the dark energy,
while enough to yield a gravitational influence
that's observable, is still a small amount of energy
by everyday standards.
I did a calculation, and it's in my latest book,
it's a calculation that you can do in the back of an envelope.
I could probably do it in the top of my head,
but I'll just try to remember the result.
If you look at the amount of dark energy
in a given cubic meter of space,
the energy in there could light a 100 watt light bulb,
like the old variety, right?
Well, 100 watt doesn't matter the technology,
but I'm having in mind not the 100 watt equivalent
of an LED, but actually a 100 watt light bulb,
it could keep it illuminated for about one,
about five trillionths of a second, I believe,
is the answer.
So that's a tiny stretch of time
to keep that light bulb illuminated,
which is just to say that even though the dark energy
has enough energy to yield
an observable gravitational influence,
the amount of that energy on everyday scales is tiny,
absolutely tiny, but that's what that is.
So Anas Abu-Salham asks, what is DT DX, DT by DX?
And that's an interesting question.
We all know what, well, I hope we all know,
what DX DT is, right?
That's the calculus expression for the change in position
divided by the change in time,
and the change in position over the change in time is speed.
That's what we mean by speed.
How far you go divided by the duration,
the interval that it takes you to travel that distance.
What if you flip it upside down and consider DT DX?
And DT DX is a number, well, obviously it's one over speed,
but you might ask yourself,
does that come into physics in an interesting way?
And it kind of does, because,
and I won't go through it in detail,
but there's an analogous version of that,
which is DT Tau DT, where Tau is the invariant interval,
the invariant space-time interval.
So you can talk about DT Tau DT or DT DT Tau.
And that basically is the rate of change of one clock,
relative to the clock that's on your wrist.
The clock that's on your wrist measures invariant time.
It is intrinsic time, if you will.
And you can have other clocks
that are not moving relative to you.
And you can ask yourself,
what's the rate of change of your space-time interval
compared to their space-time interval?
And that is one way of thinking about Einsteinian time dilation
and why it holds true.
Because in some sense,
we are all traveling through space-time
at the same invariant speed,
which is equal to the speed of light.
And if I get up and start to move,
I divert some of my motion through time
into my motion through space,
because I'm now moving through space,
I'm not just sitting still.
And that notion of moving through space,
affecting your passage through time,
naturally emerges by considering things like DT DTau
and DTau DT, which is quite related to DT DX.
So if you want the details on that,
I can send you to a little end note
in my book, The Elegant Universe.
I think it's, I forget which end note it is,
but it's in chapter two.
So you can see how sometimes flipping
the calculus expressions upside down
can give you important and deep insights.
And that's one specific example of that.
All right, let me,
I've been only looking at the Twitter questions.
Let me see if there are any interesting,
not Twitter, the YouTube questions.
I get my social media sources mixed up.
But let's see, John Olson asks,
and this is from, this is from,
I guess this must be from Facebook or Twitter.
A black hole question,
can two or more massive black holes
change the geometry of a small black holes,
gravitational field in a way that mass can escape?
So it's certainly the case,
if you've got multiple black holes around,
the geometry of space time at a given point
is dependent upon all three of those black holes.
So oftentimes when we write down a picture of a black hole,
we show a schematic of the geometry,
but we show it on its own.
We don't show what it would look like
if there were a bunch of black holes together
with all the various warpings of space time
overlapping in interesting ways.
And we can do that.
It's harder to do.
Sometimes you don't even have exact solutions
in these multi-body versions
of the general theory of relativity,
but you can certainly approximate the solution quite well
in many interesting circumstances.
And it's not that the new geometry
allows the mass of a previous black hole to escape,
but it does change, for instance,
the trajectories that hawking radiation,
which can escape from any black hole,
the trajectories that those particles
that are emitted by a black hole will take.
So the detailed dynamics in any given circumstance
does intimately depend upon the masses
and the positions of whatever black holes
might be in the environment.
And that can affect the ways
in which those black holes evaporate,
but it does not affect the classical picture
that mass can't escape from a black hole itself.
All right, so what else do we have here?
Chavuk Mondal, again, and I'll go back
to the YouTube feed in a second,
but from our social media feeds.
How can we verify the predictions
given by string theory?
We don't understand the quantum behavior fully.
How can we look inside a quantum world?
It's too bizarre.
So a lot of questions in there, but the primary one,
how can we verify the predictions given by string theory?
Right, that is a question that Cameron Vaff
and I discussed just a little while ago.
And as he mentioned, in principle,
if you built a sufficiently large accelerator,
not one like the Large Hadron Collider
that can reach, depending on whatever units you look at,
10 to the four times the mass of a proton,
that kind of scale, as Cameron mentioned,
you need a detector that's within an accelerator
that can reach 10 to the 20 times the mass of a proton.
So that's 16 orders of magnitude more powerful
than the Large Hadron Collider.
Now, where did that number come from?
Well, within string theory,
a key number is the Planck mass.
And the Planck mass is about 10 to the 19,
10 to the 20 times the mass of a proton.
And it's at the Planck mass
that in conventional string theory,
you would expect the extended nature of strings
to be visible.
So that's why Cameron mentioned that 10 to the 20 number.
And so, right, so if we could build an accelerator
with that magnitude of energy,
then at least in principle,
we would be able to test string theory.
So when people say that string theory is untestable,
they really should qualify it
in a way that they might roll their eyes
and say, well, yeah, of course I mean that,
but they should qualify it by saying,
we can't test string theory right now.
But that does not mean that string theory is untestable.
And to some, that is a distinction
that doesn't matter much,
but for those of us within string theory,
it's a distinction that really does matter
because if string theory were permanently untestable,
if there were a quality of string theory that said,
this is fundamentally not testable by any means,
then we really wouldn't be doing physics any longer.
You know, some people say, you know,
psychoanalysis is fundamentally untestable
because regardless of what the patient says,
you can interpret it within the rubric,
within the framework of Freudian analysis.
And in that way, there's effectively nothing
that the patient could say
that would fall outside that template.
But that's not the case with string theory.
It's just that we have limited experimental capacities.
We advanced human beings here in the 21st century
that have limited experimental capacities.
And string theory is such a bold theory.
It is such an ambitious theory
that some of its most iconic qualities
just don't emerge at everyday energy scales.
The theory is so bold and ambitious
that some of its key qualities emerge
at fantastically larger scales,
such as the scales that Kerman Vafa was mentioning.
So how do we test string theory?
We may get lucky.
Excuse me, have a second here.
We may get lucky.
And one day, some clever Einsteinian level string theorist
or Einstein squared level of capacity,
that person comes along and says, look at this.
And they do some fancy mathematical manipulation
and out pops some prediction of string theory
that we could test with existing technology.
And we thought that we might have that with supersymmetry.
That's a quality of string theory
that might be measurable at energies
that like that of the large Hadron collider,
but we've not succeeded.
And that might mean that that quality of string theory
is wrong and Kerman mentioned some of the implications
of that if string theory is fundamentally not realized
in a universe that is governed by string theory.
That's the big assumption that string theory is right,
but the flavor of string theory relevant,
say to our universe is a flavor
that does not involve the supersymmetric quality,
at least that accessible energies.
That might suggest that the universe is unstable.
And it might suggest that,
I don't think he Kerman mentioned the number,
but it could be that within a factor of 10,
100 or 1,000 times the current age of the universe,
our universe disintegrates.
And that is a possibility that I explore in my book
and in the book until the end of time.
The specific version that Kerman mentioned,
as I noted there is just really an end note,
but the possibility that our universe might disintegrate
in that timeframe is one that we may have to
at some level accept.
But the point for Shavuk Mandal's question
is that supersymmetry was one of those qualities
that emerges from the mountaintop of string theory
and rolls down and in principally thought
might come to rest at energy scales
accessible to the Large Hadron Collider.
But that seems not to be the case,
but there may be other qualities.
But if there are no such other qualities,
or if we don't have the brain power
to extract those other qualities,
then the real way to test string theory
may be to wait until we have fantastically powerful
energetic accelerators or whatever kind of machine
takes the place of accelerators in the far future.
So it's very much up in the air.
Now you can ask yourself,
so does that mean that you shouldn't work on string theory?
And clearly someone like Kerman Bapha says,
that's the wrong reaction.
There are the corners of reality
that he made reference to which string theory can illuminate.
Now you might say, well, how do we know it's reality?
You don't.
You don't.
But that's what being at the cutting edge of science is.
Regardless of what subject you're in,
you're pushing into frontiers that you don't know,
at least if you're doing theoretical work,
whether they're relevant to the real world that we live in.
And you take a chance.
And some people find it very exciting to take that chance.
And they go on into string theory,
other speculative fields.
There are other scientists that want,
hey, I'm working on a project
and I want it to be done in two or three months.
And regardless of what the answer is,
I want it to be interesting enough to write a paper on it.
And there's a lot of science that can be done that way.
Interesting science.
It's just a different way of engaging with reality.
So it's all a matter of personal choice.
OK, Deepak Ponwar, what is an axion?
An axion is a hypothetical particle
that naturally emerges from certain attempts
to solve famous long-standing problems in particle physics.
So there's a problem called a strong CP problem.
It afflicts our understanding of the strong nuclear force.
C and P have to do with certain symmetries
of the mathematical equations, charge conjugation,
parity symmetry.
And when you look in the strong nuclear force,
the equations that we study, there's
certain terms that in principle could be there.
But they seem to be highly suppressed
based on the impact that they would
have on experimental predictions that are not observed.
And so the question is, how do you
argue that these terms should be suppressive
or a natural way to suppress them?
And it's an interesting long story,
but one way of suppressing them is
to look at a certain kind of symmetry, a U1 symmetry,
for those of you that like mathematical analyses.
And associated with that solution
is this particle called the axion.
And the reason why the axion is spoken of
in more recent descriptions of the universe
is that it may be a dark matter candidate.
It may be the dark matter is perhaps a better way of saying
it.
It is a dark matter candidate.
And the more traditional candidates
that people have thought about for decades,
weekly interactive massive particles,
or so-called wimps, not the nicest of names
for these particles.
But these particles naturally emerge
from supersymmetry, which again may or may not
be relevant to low energy physics.
But we've searched for these wimps,
and we haven't found them.
Or I don't know if that's the best description.
There have been moments when we thought we found them,
and then the experiments could not
make a sufficiently convincing case
that the community of physicists had come around
to believe that the dark matter had been detected.
So just about everybody in physics
is of the mindset that we don't know yet what the dark matter is.
And with all these experiments looking
for one class of particles called wimps
and not finding them to most people's satisfaction,
other candidates have bubbled up to the surface.
And this axion particle is one such possibility.
So that's what an axion is, and that's
why we're interested in them.
We just have to wait and see whether additional information
comes around to perhaps convince us
that axions aren't indeed the dark matter.
So Diego asks, is symmetry a property of the universe
or a property of our understanding of the universe?
And that's a variant on the deep question.
Is mathematics a quality of the universe
or is mathematics simply the language
that we humans use to describe the universe?
And both questions, Diego's question and my variation
on that question, are questions that people
argue about all the time, right?
I mean, you look out and you see patterns in the world
and in order to encapsulate those patterns
in succinct descriptions, one of the things that you do
is look for symmetries, right?
I mean, a circle is the prototypical example.
And a circle is highly symmetric in a sense
that if you rotate it through any angle around its center,
it looks the same.
And because it looks the same, that
means you don't have to describe every single point
on the circle.
If you have described one point on the circle,
you've described all points on the circle
because via the symmetry, they all look the same.
And that's a very simple example of the power of symmetry
allowing you to reduce the complexity of your description.
You can just describe one point on the circle.
Describe its distance from the center
and you are done because every other point
is the same distance from the center
and therefore you don't need to talk about them
in any explicit manner and they're
all related by a rotational symmetry around the center.
Now, is the circle a real thing?
Plato had in mind that there was this other meta universe
or perhaps real universe where perfect circles
lived and perfect triangles and squares
and all of the perfect versions of the shapes
that we describe, they are out there, they're real,
but they're in this other parallel reality.
Others think about circle as a figment of the human mind.
It is something of our own making
that we impose on the external world.
And when we find things in the world that look like circles,
we impose this pristine version of the circle upon them.
And in that way, we model stuff that's
out there in the world via these constructs
of the human mind, so simple example.
So right here, I got this little bottle top.
It looks pretty circular and if I were to describe it,
I'd say the two-dimensional projection of this,
I would say it is a circle.
But in keeping with Diego's question,
we all know that this bottle cap is not really a circle.
If you were to zoom in on it, I'll
get closer and closer and closer.
You see that it has rough edges associated with it.
If you took an electron microscope in there
and you'd even be able to see the ridges
or even see the atomic constituents that
are rag tag arranged in something that approximate a circle.
We're not a real circle.
So that's the question.
Are these ideas of symmetries talking
about real stuff in the external world
or is it our description of the external world?
So if I was to give you my answer, Diego,
I would say it's our description of the world.
I've come to the viewpoint in recent years
that mathematics is a powerful language of human invention
for describing things in the world.
And within that mathematical language,
there are certain idealized qualities.
And among those idealized qualities
are things that are known as symmetries.
Circular symmetry is one, but they're
more abstract symmetries that we usually
use the mathematical field of Lie groups and Lie algebras
to describe those symmetries.
And I think that these are powerful tools
that we invented to describe the patterns of reality.
But to just say that they're actually out there in the world,
that's a step that I used to take,
that I don't take at least at the moment.
So Diego, long answer to a short question,
I would say that the symmetry is a property
of our understanding of the universe
and that understanding is sufficiently powerful
that it can make predictions about things that are out there.
So it's not as though it's solipsistic.
It's not as though it's all happening in here.
We can use that symmetry and that math to make predictions
and the predictions are borne out by experiment.
So it's not as though it's all limited to stuff
that happens inside of our heads,
but I do think that the description
is something of our own making.
Okay.
Local Titans asks, is there a possibility
of more fascinating undiscovered behaviors of space time
that might even be more complex than our imagination?
And local Titans, I like that name local Titans.
I think the answer of course I have to say is yes,
is that possible?
Yeah.
I mean, the history of physics is a history
where we're astounded by the concepts
that the mathematics forces upon us.
I mean, black holes are absolutely beautiful example.
Einstein writes down his general theory of relativity
in 1915, a mathematical description of space time.
Within a handful of years,
we learned say from Carl Schwarzschild,
who solves the equations.
First one to solve the equations.
We learned about this possibility of black holes.
They weren't called black holes back in 1917,
rather they were called dark stars or frozen stars.
But this idea that there might be
this monstrous structure in the cosmos
that sucks in matter that gets too close
and doesn't let anybody escape this ultimate warp
in the fabric of space time.
It comes out of the mathematics.
It does not come out of imagination.
And in fact, it was so shocking
that Einstein's imagination couldn't really cope with it.
Einstein wrote a handful of papers.
I think the last one was 1948,
where he was trying to argue that black holes
would not be real,
that they were just a mathematical figment
that emerges from his equations, but not real.
But as you all know, I don't have a picture here.
I don't know how if our team can grab ahold
of the famous picture of a black hole
that was just taken a couple of years ago, right?
That's not the only evidence we have for black holes.
We had the orbit of stars
around the center of our Milky Way galaxy.
And we had other, we had gravitational waves.
The particular ripple in the fabric of space time
that we detected back in 2015,
the supercomputer simulation showed
that it had to emerge from the collision of two black holes.
But now we actually have, in some sense,
photograph of a black hole,
Shep Dolman and the Event Horizon Telescope.
They took this famous, there it is.
We took this famous photograph, right?
So look at the journey from Einstein in 1915
through the imagination of Carl Schwarzschild, 1916, 1917,
through the observations of many
and culminating with the image that you just saw.
So yeah, local titans.
I think that pattern will be played out again and again
as we go forward.
And there will be increasingly strange and weird ideas
that don't come from human imagination,
that come from the mathematical description of the world.
And some of those ideas will be wrong
and some of them will be right
and some of them will be experimentally confirmed
just like the idea of black holes was.
So I do think that that is the pattern
that we will see persisting going forward.
Little doubt on that.
Okay, let me go back to our questions here.
Nilesh asks, sir, can you please explain Bell's experiment
and hidden variables?
I can, I can.
I'll give you an abbreviated version.
It's a beautiful story.
It's one that, you know, as I'm wondering,
have we actually done a full world science festival program
on Bell's inequality and entanglement?
It's certainly been mentioned in many of our programs.
It's certainly in a theatrical piece
that we are now developing a new on quantum mechanics.
It's called spooky action, the drama of quantum mechanics.
So those of you who liked light falls,
our theatrical exploration of the general theory of
relativity and those of you who have not seen it,
again, I'm not supposed to do this, but I don't care.
There's a, if you go to this YouTube channel,
they should not have it up.
It's called the documentary channel.
I don't know who it is.
We didn't put it up because we weren't allowed to.
They're not allowed to either, but whatever.
So you can watch it on the documentary channel.
That's a theatrical exploration of the discovery
of the general theory of relativity.
If you like it, leave a comment there.
I always love to see.
If you don't like it, don't leave a comment, please.
But if you do like it, leave a comment.
I love to see those, those positive comments.
But we're developing a version of that kind of presentation
for quantum mechanics, but anyway, back to the question.
The spookiness and spooky action, the title of that piece
is quantum entanglement.
And here's the story very, very quickly.
Here's the story.
So Einstein himself in 1935, now in the 85th anniversary
of that famous paper, Einstein and two colleagues showed
that according to the math of quantum mechanics,
you could have two very distant particles
that behave as though they are one.
The canonical example, this is not the example
that Einstein used.
This is an example that comes from David Bohm,
a wonderful character in the unfolding
of the history of quantum mechanics.
But a given particle can be either spinning up
or spinning down.
That's the nature of particles.
And in Einstein and colleagues reworking of that idea
with this Bohmian version, you can have two distant particles
that are both spinning up and spinning down at the same time.
They're both in a fuzzy mixture,
spinning up and spinning down.
And here's the thing.
You can go and measure one of those particles
and cause it to snap out of the quantum haze.
According to the math that Einstein and colleagues showed,
the other particle would also snap out of the quantum haze
at exactly the same moment,
even though you didn't do anything to it.
So let me see if I can get in front of the camera here.
Correct me.
So up and down the same time,
you measure say the one in my right hand, boom,
snap up, the one in my left hand snaps down.
Oh, come on, be in the frame.
It's so counterintuitive how to move these things.
So it's weird, it's spooky.
You do something in one location
and it influences a particle in another location.
Einstein said, no, no, no, no, no.
There's no such thing as spookiness.
He said, but this experiment is really showing you
is that these particles that you thought
were in a fuzzy mixture of up and down at the same time,
they were not.
They were always up or always down.
And when you measured it and you found it spinning up,
it always was up.
And the other one, when you measure it
and you find it spinning down, it was always down.
And if it was always down, then there's no spooky connection.
It's not like when you measure the particle in New York,
it affected the particle in California
because the one in New York was always up.
The one in California was always down, period end of story.
No spooky connection between them whatsoever.
So who's right?
That's the question.
Is there spookiness, as the math of quantum mechanics says
in quantum entanglement, or is there no spookiness?
As Einstein's interpretation of the experiment
would suggest.
And many people at the time thought this was not a question
that could really be answered.
Wolfgang Pauli, I think, described this as a question
that was no better than asking how many angels
can dance on the head of a pen.
It's just not answerable.
Why is it not answerable?
Because Pauli was saying, look, if you
want to know if this particle was spinning up and down
simultaneously and when you measured it,
it snapped out of the haze.
Or if it was always up and when you measured it,
it was just revealing its pre-existing characteristics.
Pauli says, how can you ever test that?
Because the test that you've got to measure it,
and the point is once you measure it,
it's always spinning up or down.
You can never catch it in the act of spinning up and down
simultaneously.
John Bell, to answer your question,
and whose question was this?
This is Nye Lesh's question.
John Bell came along and found, surprisingly,
found an observational consequence of a particle being
in a fuzzy mixture of save up and down at the same time,
even if you're not measuring that particle.
There's an indirect influence of a being in that fuzzy mixture
of up and down that is measurable.
You have to be more clever.
You can't just brute force measure the particle
and say, well, it's up.
And therefore, I don't know if it was up and down beforehand
or if it was just up beforehand.
You got to do something more involved, something more clever.
And that's what John Bell did.
He found a more clever experiment that
could give you insight into whether particles have
definite features before you measure them
or whether they're in a mixture before you measure them.
And to most people's satisfaction,
that proposed experiment, which is then carried out,
concludes that Einstein was not right on this idea.
The particles really can be in this fuzzy mixture,
and it only becomes definite upon measurement or observation
or interaction of some sort.
And to really understand the details in that explanation,
you have to really look at it more closely.
And in chapter, I don't know, chapter 4
of Fabric of the Cosmos, I go through,
I think it's that chapter a long time ago now,
I go through a very detailed analogy
that I believe really captures the heart and soul
of John Bell's inequalities and the experimental state
of checking those inequalities,
yielding the insight that I just described,
that at least when it comes to definite properties,
Einstein's view seems not to be borne out
by the observations.
That's one place where you can learn about it
non-mathematically.
But the math is not hard.
So for those of you who are familiar with linear algebra,
a little bit of quantum mechanics,
you do not need much to really understand
the original papers.
So I would encourage you to do that.
But nevertheless, I hope that gives you the basic idea
of John Bell and quantum entanglement.
Okay, so just trying to find a good question
to take us in a different direction.
So Siamak Rajabhi asked,
can you explain Eric Verlinde's theory
versus the general theory of relativity?
And again, that's an involved story to describe in detail,
but I can give you the flavor for it.
So often we talk about general relativity
as a fundamental theory of the world.
Now, earlier we discussed what does that really mean?
Is it stitched into the fabric of the world,
the general theory of relativity,
or is it a human description of the stuff
that happens out there in the world?
And again, I don't know the answer to that question,
but a related question is,
is the general theory of relativity
a fundamental theory of the world,
or might it actually emerge
from yet more fundamental considerations?
And with Eric Verlinde and others, Ted Jacobson,
maybe it was the first who started along
a very similar trajectory, asked themselves,
could it be the case that just understanding
statistical mechanics, thermodynamics,
in a gravitational setting might be enough
to extract Einstein's equations
as opposed to posit Einstein's equations.
And these studies have been successful in certain ways.
So without even knowing Einstein's equations,
but knowing certain very basic features
about thermodynamics
and certain very basic features of quantum mechanics,
these folks have been able to extract
aspects of Einstein's general theory of relativity,
and thereby come to the conclusion
that Einstein's theory is an emergent theory,
an effective theory, a theory that comes into play
in certain contexts,
but rests upon more fundamental physical principles.
And that's an exciting idea.
It's resonant with a lot of things
that we think about and discuss
and work on in string theory.
I mean, Verlinde is a string theorist.
I think he would call himself a string theorist at heart.
I don't think that is a description
that he would consider inaccurate,
although much more broad and is thinking about things.
But in string theory, there are many
who have come to the conclusion,
as we began to talk about with Kermit Vafa
in the first hour,
that space and time are not fundamental,
that they themselves are emergent.
That's a spectacularly interesting idea
because every formulation of physics,
you go back to anything that Newton wrote down
or anything that Galileo was thinking about
or anything that really happened after,
and all of these theories certainly assume
a pre-existing spatial environment,
a pre-existing notion of time
that allows for a dynamism,
that allows for things and systems to change over time.
You can't talk about change over time
without time being part of your description from the get-go.
But these newer ideas are suggesting
that space and time are not fundamental.
That there's a description of reality
where when you look at the basic vocabulary,
you don't even need to use the word space and time
to get the theory off the ground.
And then space and time come into play
when you apply that theory in certain domains of reality,
such as the domains that you and I
are inhabiting at the moment.
But the space and time and the description
that comes from the general theory of relativity
of space and time may all be emergent,
may all come into play in certain environments,
but are not fundamentally part
of how the world is put together.
That's the basic idea.
Andrew Hania asked,
will you present a general relativity course
on world science, you?
And Andrew, I think the answer to that is yes.
And just putting all cards on the table,
you know that I have this special relativity course.
And you may also know,
although some of you may not be aware,
we just released the video of the non-mathematic,
mathematical version of the special relativity course.
It's called space time and Einstein.
We released it just a few weeks ago.
We filmed it a while ago, of course,
but we took it out of the World Science U universe
and put it out just on our YouTube channel,
put it on two YouTube channels actually,
the World Science Festival YouTube channel
and the World Science U YouTube channel.
It's out on both.
And yeah, yeah, I was surprised it's gotten
a lot of activity, a lot of views.
I think between those two channels
gotten over 300,000 views in the last few weeks.
That's fun to see, people are interested.
And that sort of motivates me to go ahead
and maybe create the general relativity course
and also the quantum course.
I'm thinking the quantum course I might do first.
We're actually building a little studio up here
where we are huddled, waiting for this virus to pass.
And if we can get that studio built,
hopefully it's in the next month, ideally,
one of the projects that we'll do in there
is to film a quantum course for World Science U,
analogous to the special relativity course
that already exists and the general relativity course.
So I will give you a tentative yes, Andrew.
I don't know the time scale for the general relativity course
but I'm gonna go out on a bit of a limb here
and I'm gonna try to get the quantum course
done by like December, January, something like that.
And again, I'm gonna try to do a non-math version
that's embedded in the math version
so that those of you who don't like the math
can take the non-math version.
And if you feel motivated,
you can then watch some of the surrounding material
and see the mathematics behind some of these ideas.
So that's certainly a project that is moving
from the back burner heading toward the front burner.
So we'll see how that affects things going forward.
So Amjad asked,
can the chasmere effect describe gravity
at the quantum level?
And that's a very interesting idea, Amjad,
because the chasmere effect,
I think, I hope, well, maybe I should say what that is.
I don't know if I don't have any show and tell with me
so I just have to use my hands.
But if you take two metal plates
and you bring them very, very, very close together,
there's an interesting force that comes into play.
If these plates,
I mean, forget about gravity just for the moment.
If these plates have no electric charge,
you wouldn't expect there'd be any force between them.
It doesn't matter how close together,
how far apart, if they're neutral objects
and you're forgetting about gravity,
then there's no other force that would act.
But quantum mechanically, there is a force
and it has to do with the undulations
of the fundamental fields like the electromagnetic field
because the quantum undulations of the field
outside the plate is fundamentally different
from the quantum undulations
that quantum mechanics allows inside the plates
and that difference creates an imbalance
that in certain circumstances can force the plates
to come together or in other geometries
can force the plates to push apart.
And that force is called the chasmere force,
the chasmere effect.
And the beauty of it is, it's measurable.
Chasmere did these experiments in 1948.
Dutch physicist, I'm pretty sure it's Dutch physicist,
did these experiments in 1948.
So it was measuring the difference
between the quantum undulations in the vacuum
between the plates versus exterior to the plates.
And so it's this beautiful macroscopic way
of testing quantum effects.
Can you use those ideas to test gravitational effects?
And the answer is definitely yes.
The question is, is it detectable?
And there's a beautiful relevant paper to these ideas
that I just was reading by Nobel laureate Frank Wilczek
and an old friend of mine.
I guess I can call him an old postdoc of mine actually
named Malik Parik who is now in Arizona.
Is it Arizona State University or University of Arizona?
I'm not, I get this mixed up.
I think it's Arizona State University.
And they've written an interesting paper
trying to see whether quantum effects,
quantum effects analogous to the chasmere effect really
that come into play when you measure gravitational waves.
Could those subtle quantum effects be used
to perhaps gain insight or detect gravitons themselves?
Gravitons are the quantum of the gravitational field.
Photons are the quantum of the electromagnetic field.
But you're seeing me right now
because photons are emanating from your screen,
traveling, banging into your eye, hitting your retina,
causing a cascade of other particle interactions
inside your eye, sending a signal down your optic nerve
to your brain.
That's how you are seeing me.
It's all coming from the seed of photons
interacting with your eye.
Gravitons do for gravity,
what photons do for the electromagnetic field.
So there's a debate among some physicists
as to whether gravitons are actually real.
This is where that remark I mentioned in the first hour
when I was talking to Krumman-Baffa
that Freeman Dyson seemed to not think
that gravitons are real.
But if they are real,
then what Wilczak and Malik Parik have suggested
is that these kind of gravitational wave
like technologies properly used and interpreted
might give us insight into the nature of gravitons
or even the reality of gravitons.
So yes, in principle, the answer to that question is yes.
Sanjay says, I'm like a team physicist, young Sheldon.
Thanks for sharing Sanjay.
I'm not sure how to respond to that,
but I guess that's a good thing.
So I will leave that at that.
Anas asks, what's the natural log of a matrix?
And that's a slightly technical question.
But what we do in physics or mathematics more generally,
when you wanna talk about operations on a matrix,
the operations that we know easily for matrices,
we know how to add matrices,
we know how to multiply matrices,
those are the easy things to do.
And so what we do is when we look
at more complicated functions of a matrix,
where like with a natural log,
you don't really know what to do
when you apply that to a matrix.
We do know how to create a series expansion
that approximates the function
that you might be talking about.
For instance, for an exponential,
which is the inverse of the natural log.
Well, how do you exponentiate a matrix?
Well, we know how to have a series expansion
for an exponential, e to the x.
That's one plus x, plus x squared over two factorial
plus x cubed over three factorial.
That's a series expansion for an exponential.
If you were to now put a matrix up there
in the exponent for an exponential,
you'd say, what is e to a matrix?
I don't know, but if you plug that matrix
into the series expansion, you do know what it is.
One becomes the identity matrix.
x is just the matrix itself, plus x squared over two.
You know how to square a matrix, square matrix.
You multiply it by itself and so on.
So if you have a series expansion,
then you can use that as the definition
of that function of a matrix.
And you do have a series expansion within limits
for the natural logarithm.
And that's how you define the log of a matrix.
So thanks for that question.
Hope that wasn't too technical.
But that is how typically people interpret
the natural log of a matrix.
Mr. Space asks, hello, Mr. Green.
Is spaces expanding everywhere?
Does this mean that at the nano scale, or even smaller,
that the distance between atoms is also expanding?
And the answer to that question is yes and no.
What do I mean by that?
Well, when you talk about space expanding on large scales,
you're talking about scales that are so large
that the gravitational influence between entities
within space is so small that the attraction
between them is not influenced by gravity,
or in fact, any of the other forces of nature.
And therefore, you just focus upon the movement
that comes from the dynamics of spatial expansion itself.
And indeed, that can drive distant galaxies
to move away from each other.
When you talk about the same ideas on small scales,
like nano scales, or you don't have to go that small,
talk about these scales, right?
Are the atoms in my broken glasses,
are they moving apart from each other
because of the expansion of space?
And generally, we say no.
Why do we say no?
We say, no, God, my glasses are so dirty, it's kind of gross.
We say, no, I'm gonna clean my glasses
as I'm answering the question.
We say, no, because my glasses are held together
by the electromagnetic force.
Not strong enough to hold this arm on.
The electromagnetic force was overwhelmed there
by my dog's teeth or something sitting on my glasses,
cause it to crack.
But the atoms in my lenses,
they're held together by the electromagnetic force,
which is stronger than the outward swelling of space.
And that's why the atoms in here are not moving apart
in the way that you suggest, Mr. Space.
But if the expansion of space were to get stronger,
and that's possible, if the expansion of space
is not only speeding up,
but the rate of speed up is speeding up,
then it's possible that in the future,
the outward swelling of space is so powerful
that it would cause the atoms in the lens
to move apart, shattering my glasses.
And it would indeed cause the electron
orbiting the nucleus of an atom
to expand away from the nucleus,
causing the atom to disintegrate.
And if that were the case,
then that kind of expansion would destroy everything.
So as of today, the answer to your question, Mr. Space,
is no, atoms are not being driven apart
by the swelling of space.
But in the future, if the expansion picks up
in its ferocity, then individual atoms
could be moved apart from each other,
and even electrons within atoms
could be driven apart from the nucleus,
causing everything to fall apart.
That is a potential future that we potentially face.
Okay, so what else?
I'm gonna go back to my other list of questions
that comes in from social media things,
anything from there?
Let's see.
So Kapil Sharma asked a question just like Mr. Space,
but I'm not gonna answer it again, but very close.
So Nomad asks, in inflation or cosmology more general,
we imagine that the Earth is 13.8 billion light years
away from the Big Bang.
I'm not sure I would exactly say it that way,
so I'll come back to that in a second.
And that means that the age of the universe for us
is 13.8 billion years, I'll buy that.
What about celestial bodies that are farther away
and can't be seen by us?
So a number of questions in there, Nomad, Nomad,
which is your full name.
So I wouldn't say that we're 13.8 billion light years away
from where the Big Bang took place.
I would not say that.
I understand what you mean by that.
What you mean by that is if we were to see the Big Bang,
like let's be concrete, when we look at the cosmic microwave
background radiation, which was released just a few hundred
years after the Big Bang, those photons have been traveling
toward us for on the order of 13.8 billion years.
So they emanated from a point in space
that is 13.8 billion light years away,
at least when that photon left at that point in space.
So what does that mean when we talk about a photon
that's been traveling through space for so long?
And I just realized what I just said was a little bit wrong,
so I should really clarify that.
So when we see something in space,
we are seeing it, of course, as it was a long, long time ago.
And when we say that the universe is 13.8 billion years old,
what we mean is that the Big Bang happened that long ago,
and therefore, were we to actually see that event?
You'd be seeing an event that happened far away
in the distant past.
But you see, I wouldn't say that the Big Bang happened
at a distant location.
What I would say is all locations that are now separated
were on top of each other at the moment of the Big Bang.
So the Big Bang happened where you are, where I am,
where everything is located,
because all those locations that are now distinct
are the same location.
So clarification number one,
I would not say that the Big Bang happened 13.8 light years
away from us.
There was a bang that happened there,
but we don't need to distinguish that bang from our bang
because those locations were the same location.
But in terms of the second question,
in terms of celestial bodies that are even further away
that we can't see, yeah,
we make a very sharp distinction in physics
between the universe and the observable universe.
And the celestial bodies that we can't see,
nomad, nomad, are in the universe,
but they're not in the observable universe.
And so we make assumptions about
what those celestial bodies might be like.
We generally assume that they're pretty much like
what we recognize by close examination
of things in the observable universe,
but that could be wrong.
It could be that the observable universe
is completely misleading.
It suggests that there are stars, galaxies and planets
and things of that sort.
And we imagine that well beyond that,
there are stars, galaxies, planets
and things of that sort.
But it could be that beyond the observable universe,
I don't know, maybe there's nothing.
Maybe there's all sorts of other stuff
that we've never even thought of.
That's quite possible.
Since we can't see it yet or perhaps ever,
depending upon how the universe expands,
it's difficult for us to say anything.
Our theories are well commensurate
with this assumption of homogeneity
that what we see here is a good guide
what we see out there.
Just like you look at one little chunk of a circle,
even if you weren't looking at the rest of it,
if you know it's a circle as we discussed before,
that one chunk gives you a lot of information
about other chunks on the circle.
We're looking at one chunk of the universe right now.
Does it give us insight into other chunks
that maybe as Nomad asks too far away for us to see?
And we don't know.
The inflationary theory allows
for an incredibly large distances
for the universe to be quite different.
It allows for us to be part of a multiverse
where those other universes
might have radically different properties
from the properties of our universe.
So the homogeneity might be a local homogeneity
that sort of works in our environment.
But if you go into other environments
that emerge from other universes
that come from other bangs in the inflationary theory,
the physics and properties of the universe
might be quite different.
And that's an exciting idea.
And one that has been harnessed in string theory
to give answers to questions like,
why does the dark energy have the particular value
and our universe that it does?
We've not been able to answer that question
through a straightforward first principles calculation
in our universe.
So what have some people suggested?
Well, they suggest, hey,
what if there are other universes as Nomad, Nomad notes?
And what if, as Nomad's question suggests,
those other universes have quite different properties?
And in particular, what if those other universes
have different amounts of dark energy?
And moreover, what if the spectrum
of possible amounts of dark energy
out there in this multiverse varies enormously?
Such that, in effect, every possible value
of the dark energy is realized
in some universe that's out there.
Now, in that totality of universes,
that would mean that every possible value
of the dark energy is realized,
which means that the value that we have
doesn't need explanation.
It's just one value of the spectrum
of all possible values that are out there.
And therefore, it had to be that there was one universe
with our particular value,
and here we are living in that universe.
The analogy that I like to use, it's imperfect.
But if you go to a suit shop,
you're looking for a dinner suit,
and they pull one off the rack and it fits,
should you be surprised that they had a dinner jacket
that fit you?
Well, if they had only one size,
then that would be incredibly lucky
and you should be surprised.
But most doors don't have just one size.
They have all possible sizes, you know, within reason.
You know, they don't have a continuum of sizes.
They have all possible discrete sizes
between some small and large.
And within that spectrum of possibilities,
of course there's gonna be one that pretty much fits you
because they've got all possible suit sizes on the rack.
So in a realm that had one size, surprise,
in a store that has one size, you should be surprised,
in a store that has all sizes,
you should not be surprised that one fits you.
Now take that idea to the universe.
If there's a multiverse,
then all possible sizes are out there,
so you shouldn't be surprised that our size,
by which I mean our amount of dark energy is out there.
If the universe was not a multiverse,
if we were more like that suit shop that had one size suit,
then yeah, we should be surprised
by the particular value of the dark energy
that we've measured.
It's some strange number
that we don't have any insight into.
But here's where Nomad-Nomad's question helps us out.
If the other universes exist,
and if they've had different values for the dark energy,
we're just one of the collection.
And that's a potential solution
to the amount of dark energy in our world.
The solution is, you don't need to worry about it.
We're just one of the complete collection
that is out there.
All right, back to questions on our YouTube feed here.
Rob Vandenberg asks,
where do you stand on the existence of karma or luck?
Well, what I would say is,
we like to use that language
and we like to impose those concepts.
And those concepts as high level human ideas
for some are useful.
Some like to think, hey, you know,
I do good to the world
and that is good for my karma
and some good will come to me.
And when that good comes,
people in this way of thinking about things say, yeah,
they're like, oh yeah, that confirmed it.
I did that nice thing last year
and now this nice thing happens to me
and there's a certain kind of coherence
and explanatory satisfaction
that comes from that way of looking at things.
If you view karma and luck in that light
as higher level human ideas
that some people find useful and satisfying and gratifying,
then I think that's a fine kind of structure
to give coherence to experience.
But fundamentally, do I believe
that there truly is something called karma?
Do I fundamentally believe that collections of particles
come together and do something good today
because collections of particles came together
and did something that we humans consider good yesterday?
No, I don't.
I think the particles that make up matter,
that make up us, that make up our brains
are doing what they do because of the laws of physics,
not because of some higher level conceptual framework
of luck or karma.
Those ideas are what we humans employ
to try to make sense of experience.
And in that regard, they can definitely play a role
of helping people make sense of experience.
But fundamentally, no, there's no such thing as karma
that you'll find in the fundamental laws of physics.
There's no such thing as luck
that you'll find in the fundamental laws of physics.
Particles do what they do
because they are following the fundamental laws.
Now, whether we have those laws or not,
I don't know, I've said this before.
It could be that we have those laws,
or it could be that we don't.
It could be that we have a mere approximation
to deeper laws that will be revealed
through experiment and observation and research
over the next 10, 20, 100,000, 10,000 years.
I don't know how long it's gonna take.
But I have confidence that in whatever laws
we come up with, whatever laws our future brethren
come up with, I do not believe that fundamentally
within the laws, there will be anything
that we can identify as karma or luck or consciousness
or good or evil or wonder or love or surprise or anxiety
or any of the qualities that are vital
to understanding ourselves as human beings,
navigating the reality that we are within.
Rather, these higher level concepts
are manufactured by the human brain or other brains.
May manufacture them to our other ideas,
may come from other brains.
But the point is, these concepts are manufactured
certainly by human beings
because they're useful when human beings
come together in communities
and want to have an effective and efficient way
of navigating the environment and surviving.
And so these ideas are powerful, they're useful,
but they are not fundamental in the same way
that Einstein's equations or Schrdinger's equations
are fundamental, they're just different.
Josh Bakshi asks, are you vegan?
Yes, I am vegan.
I'll leave that at that, follow up if you'd like.
Strumento asks, can we upload our brain?
Well, certainly not today, we cannot upload our brains.
Obviously in many sci-fi scenarios,
people have imagined that you might be able
to upload your brain.
And I don't see any fundamental reason why we couldn't.
Now look, there's a big assumption in there.
I'm assuming that our brains and our thoughts
and our consciousness and our sense of self,
our personal ability to conjure inner worlds
of self-reflective experience.
I believe that all of that is nothing but the motion
of particles coursing through a particular structure
that is the template within which those processes happen
and the substrate within which those experiences
take place.
Not everybody agrees with that, right?
I mean, there are some who suggest
that consciousness is out there.
There's kind of like a consciousness field
that we tap into.
I don't see any evidence for that.
Can't prove it wrong, but I do base my views on reality
on the things that we have confirmed
through observation and experiment.
And so focusing upon the things that we've established
with experiment and observation,
that leads me to the materialist,
physicalist view that I just articulated.
Now, if that's the case,
if the physicalist stance is correct,
then in order to upload my brain or yours,
we just need to replicate the physical structure
and we need to replicate the physical processes
taking place in that physical structure.
So if you're able to do that,
then I don't see any reason why the resulting
artificial manufactured structure would not think and feel
exactly say as I do,
if it was modeled upon my brain at this particular moment
and similarly for your brain.
Can we do that?
No, it's hard.
Will we be able to do that one day?
I don't see any fundamental obstacle,
but whether we'll gain the expertise
to do that with adequate fidelity
to really reproduce the brain that's inside your head
and my head right now, I don't know.
But fundamentally, I don't think the laws of physics
as we understand them stand in the way of that.
So Gulab asks, what are time and space
and can string theory answer this at a deeper level?
So I don't know if Gulab, if you were with us
in the first hour,
where we had a conversation with string theorist,
Kumram Vafa, and that was one of the things
that we discussed.
And as Kumram was saying,
there are a lot of insights into the nature of space
and time that are coming from string theory.
One of the most striking is one that we're gonna do
a full World Science Festival program in the coming weeks.
I see with quantum entanglement,
which is the answer to an earlier question
on the nature of Bell's inequalities
that I described before.
But quantum entanglement suggests that the threads
stitching the fabric of space
may actually be the threads of quantum entanglement
that in some sense connect distant particles
in the manner that I described before.
So that would suggest that we are heading
toward a deeper understanding of space and time
because we are beginning to identify the threads
that stitch them.
But as Kumram and Vafa described,
descriptions of space and time in one domain
and one theoretical framework can be distinct
from and even contradict the descriptions coming
from other corners of the illuminated landscape
of string theory.
So it's not to say that we have an answer,
the answer for what space and time are.
Much as Kumram said, it may be that
the best we'll ever be able to do is say,
in this and this circumstance,
according to this and this way of describing
that circumstance mathematically,
here is how you should think about space and time.
And then in the same or subsequent breath,
I may say, but in this circumstance,
according to this theoretical framework,
using this mathematical articulation,
this is the way you should talk about space and time.
And it may not be that one of those is right
and the other is wrong.
I mean that both are right.
It may be that both are right and complimentary.
And maybe the full of story comes from this mosaic,
this amalgam of distinct descriptions.
And it's only by taking in the full mosaic
that we'll have the deepest and fullest understanding
of what space and time are.
Okay, I'm gonna head back here to your YouTube question.
So I know that a lot of you are watching
in different channels.
I'm focused right now on the World Science You YouTube.
I probably should have said that.
Those of you who are watching on the World,
no, no, the World Science Festival YouTube.
It's very confusing, isn't it?
There's a lot of properties out there.
So in the World Science Festival YouTube,
that's where I am right now.
Ask any questions that you want.
If you're on the World Science You YouTube,
I'm not looking at those.
I can't look at multiple feeds,
but maybe someone on our team will pick out some questions
there and add it to my alternate feed
coming from the social channels.
So it's up to you where you're looking at this,
but I am focusing on the World Science Festival YouTube feed.
And given that, what do we have here?
Okay, so Darryl Dawkins asks,
how is it possible to express the age of the universe
using years since years referred to the Earth
going around their sun?
How are the years calculated before star even existed?
Yeah, good question, right?
So we talk about 13.8 billion years.
What does that mean if you're talking about a measure
that's tightly tied to the motion of the Earth
around the sun and the Earth's only been going
around the sun for the last five billion years?
So what we do, Darryl, is we use the duration of year
as defined by the duration it takes right now
in the common era for the Earth to go
on a full orbit around the sun.
We use that duration as our fundamental scale of time,
and then we use our mathematical equations
to work out the duration back to the Big Bang,
and we express that duration in terms
of how many times an Earth would have had to go
around the sun at the speed that it currently does.
And in that way, we express the duration back
to the Big Bang in this particular unit called the year.
We're not literally imagining that there were 13.8 billion
orbits of the Earth around the sun since the Big Bang,
because as you rightly point out, for instance,
at the moment of the Big Bang, the Earth didn't exist,
the sun didn't exist.
Rather, we're being a little bit more abstract
than that we're imagining the Earth going around the sun
as just providing us a definition
of a standard duration called the year,
and then relative to that standard duration,
we calculate the time back to the Big Bang
and calculate how many times the Earth would have had
to go around the sun to exhaust the duration
back to the Big Bang, and that's where the 13.8 billion
years comes from.
You know, there's a related question to that, which is,
you know, we learn from special relativity
that time varies depending upon your motion,
and the general theory of relativity,
we learn that time varies depending
upon the gravitational field that you are experiencing.
So when we talk about 13.8 billion years,
what do we really mean by that?
Which clock are we using?
Are we using a clock that is in motion
and therefore would differ from other clocks and so on?
And the answer is, going back to the question before,
we imagine that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic,
which means that it looks the same
in more or less every direction if you average things out,
and every chunk of the universe that's sufficiently large
on average looks like every chunk of the universe.
And because of that uniformity,
we imagine that we have clocks that are experiencing
that average motion of expansion,
that average gravitational influence
of the things in the environment.
And because the averages are the same everywhere,
every clock is experiencing the same relativistic effects,
and therefore every clock is ticking off time
at the same rate.
So using those universal clocks that are experiencing
the average density and the average expansion motion
of space, we are calculating that the duration
back to the Big Bang would be 13.8 billion years.
That's what we mean by that.
All right, a few more, what time is it now?
We've been going about two and a half hours,
so I'm gonna probably wrap this up relatively soon
as I am starving.
And thanks for coming at this different time, by the way.
So as I mentioned last time that we met,
I have to teach at our old time
of 2 p.m. Eastern Standard Time.
So this will be our new time going forward.
I think, I don't know, maybe we'll move it around
and get people in different time zones.
I don't know if that'll be more confusing than it's worth,
but we'll see.
So a few more questions though.
Arnav asked, where do you teach?
I teach at Columbia University.
Columbia University in Manhattan.
And it was just announced that Columbia University
is going to be fully online for the undergraduate education.
So I will be teaching fully online.
So in principle, yeah, no matter where you are,
you could take my classes.
I don't think it works that way though.
Columbia gave every class a way like that.
They might have, I don't know, trouble attracting students
to pay tuition, especially if students
are not coming to campus.
Wow.
Difficult, interesting questions
that people need to deal with in this era.
But yeah, so I do teach at Columbia University
and I'm actually teaching a course.
I'm not teaching a technical course.
So maybe you guys wouldn't even be interested.
I am teaching a course on my new book,
on the book until the end of time.
And I do take the students right from the beginning
of time to the end of time.
And there's a bright spotlight that we shine
on the emergence of life, the emergence of mind.
And that spotlight continues to illuminate
what conscious minds do.
They develop language, they tell stories,
they develop myths, they develop religions,
they engage in artistic and creative expression,
and they develop science to try to be able to tell
the most accurate story of the objective physical reality
that allows for all of these life-like activities
to take place.
So that's what the course is about.
It's sort of a blending of science and the humanities.
And yeah, maybe you guys, if you're interested,
some of you can audit that course.
I don't know how that works, so I can't promise that.
But sure, that's what I'll be teaching
starting in a week or two.
All right, what do we have here?
Time Traveler asks, who first came up with the idea
of string theory and how?
The very initial ideas of string theory,
I think are usually credited to the work
of a very nice physicist, friend of mine known
for decades, Gabriele Veneziano.
And as the story goes, Gabriele Veneziano
was trying to understand experimental data in the 1970s,
or even 1960s, I'm sorry.
Yeah, having to do with the strong nuclear force.
And noticed a pattern in the data of the interactions
of strongly interacting particles
that could be described by a particular interesting formula
that he wrote down.
And others, I guess, may have written down too.
And when other physicists began to study this formula,
that was very good at describing the data
of the strong nuclear reactions.
They studied this formula, and this is people
like Leonard Suskind, and people like,
I think Holger Nielsen and others at the time,
they began to see that in the mathematical description
of the nuclear force, you could see vibrating filaments
in the mathematics, or the qualities
of vibrating filaments were embedded
in the mathematical description,
and this began to lead people to think about
a theory based on strings.
And it's interesting because the data
that Gabriele Veneziano was trying to describe
was subsequent, and I was wrong with my speech
at the moment, I guess two and a half hours in,
I began to get dry mouth, so hang on, have a second here.
The data, that's better.
The data that Gabriele Veneziano was looking at
was subsequently described by a completely different theory,
the theory of quantum chromodynamics.
So the motivation for the formula that Veneziano wrote down
was undercut by these subsequent developments
in quantum chromodynamics, but nevertheless,
the formula had already been written down,
and the conclusion that that formula
described vibrating strings had already been met,
or made is perhaps a better word.
And so string theory carried on,
even after the motivation to describe
the nuclear reactions evaporated,
and that mathematical endeavor ultimately revealed
a vibrating string that had the properties of the graviton,
the hypothetical graviton, you could see that
right inside the vibrating filaments,
which themselves were right inside the formula
that Veneziano wrote down,
and with that, people started to think,
wait, if you got a graviton,
this must be a theory not of just the nuclear force,
but of the gravitational force.
And that's where the development of string theory
as a quantum theory of gravity really took off.
Mm, excuse me.
Okay, a few more questions,
and then we will call it quits for today.
So Anas asks, does the Ramanujan summation
have real life implications?
And I guess it depends on what you mean by real life,
but a lot of the insights of Ramanujan
have had a role, say, in string theory,
string theory of real life, I don't know.
But certainly the idea of the number of dimensions
in string theory, the ideas associated with certain
mathematical formulations make use of modular forms
whose properties go back to insights of Ramanujan.
So I would say that a good deal
of the mathematical framework of string theory
has an intellectual root that trellises back.
That's probably the wrong verb there.
Intellectual root that kind of digs its way back
to the insights of Ramanujan.
So that's a very interesting and exciting link
between abstract mathematical ideas
and those of cutting edge physics.
Okay.
Abhishek asks, can more than two black holes merge
to form a single black hole?
And absolutely.
So if you have a collection of black holes
that come together, ultimately as they,
when they come together, they will shake the fabric of space.
But as those merging black holes ring down
as the fabric of space carries away enough energy
from that collision, they will coalesce
into a single big black hole.
So yes, although we often describe the merger
as a binary operation between two black holes
in principle, it doesn't need to be that.
It could be sequential, right?
Two black holes come together, yield one,
and then a third black hole joins with those
to create an even larger black hole.
Or it's unlikely, but it's conceivable for three black holes
to just come together.
In principle, there's nothing that would prevent
that from happening.
Lahanash asks, can quantum entanglement be used
to transfer information faster than the speed of light?
And most of us believe that the answer
to that question is no.
And I understand exactly where that question is coming from
because as I described before,
if you have these two distant entangled particles
that are kind of in this state of entanglement
where say one is up and one is down,
you measure one, the other pops out and spins down,
that according to the math, the quantum mechanics
is an instantaneous process.
So you measure the particle in New York,
you find it up at the same moment,
the particle in California spins down.
It feels like there is an instantaneous transfer
of information, but actually there's no information
to be extracted whatsoever.
And the reason is because, look, in New York,
let's say you do this experiment over and over and over again,
and you look at your data, what would your data be?
Well, you go and you measure the electron in New York
spinning up on the first run,
and then you measure it and spinning down on the second one,
and you measure it and spinning down on the third one,
and then spinning up on the fourth one.
So you have a random sequence of ups and downs
and ups and downs in New York.
If you look at the data in California,
it will also be a random sequence of ups and downs,
with the only interesting fact being
that when this one in New York is up,
this one in California is down.
When this one in New York is down,
this one in California is up.
Now, that's an interesting correlation between the data,
but you can only recognize that correlation
when you bring the two data sets together.
You get on the phone and you talk to the person
at the distant location, you say,
hey, my data was up, up, down, down.
What was your data?
They say, hey, mine was down, down, up, up.
You're like, whoa, complete correlation
when yours is up, mine's down and vice versa.
Or you could take your data set
and you got an airplane and you fly
to the other side of the country
and you compare your data set in person.
My point though is you have to do that comparison
in order for you to extract anything informationally
interesting about the data.
But that comparison is through an ordinary,
classical, slower than light channel.
So the only time you extract anything informationally
interesting about these two data sets
is through that slower than light comparison.
And that's why there's no faster than light information
that's being transferred or can be extracted
from quantum entanglement.
Okay, I think guys, I'm gonna wrap it up today.
I am still getting my ability
to go three full hours back into shape, right?
I have to sort of exercise more to do that.
So thanks for joining us today.
And I don't know when our next session is,
it's either next Friday or the Friday after,
sort of play it by ear.
Some of these times we'll have a guest as we did today
and many of you thought that was interesting last time.
And let me know if you thought it was interesting
and useful today.
I had a good time speaking with Krumavatha,
Krumavatha about his book.
And next time we'll venture forth into again,
whatever directions you'd like to go.
I love to hear from you guys through social media.
Again, I'm Be Green on Twitter, I'm Be Green at Facebook.
I think I'm Be Green too,
but I haven't used it in a while.
So I have to figure that out.
You should subscribe.
I don't know where the subscribe button is.
It's like somewhere at the bottom of the screens here.
I'm not gonna try to use, oh, is there a subscribe button?
I don't know.
I hope there's a subscribe button down there.
But if there is a subscribe button, do join him
because then you'll be alerted when these sessions
and other programs are happening.
And yeah, keep abreast of what we're doing.
We're gonna have some new courses
coming out on World Science U.
We're gonna talk to many of the faculty
on World Science U whose courses we will be releasing.
And I'm always here to answer any of the questions
that come to your mind,
be they in quantum mechanics, cosmology,
general relativity, basic physics, string theory.
As you see, I'm happy to talk about certain aspects
of philosophy, religion, consciousness, mind, brain.
If you find what I say interesting, fantastic.
If you don't, that's fantastic too.
But I hope that you do.
And until next time then, keep your interest going,
keep the questions coming.
And I look forward to having our conversation
either next week or the week after.
Until then, take care.
