Hi, everyone. Welcome to this live discussion brought to you by the World Science Festival.
I'm Brian Green. I am coming to you live from my office in the physics department at Columbia
University, the Center for Theoretical Physics. And our discussion today will be with Stephen
Wolfram, a name that many of you are quite familiar with from so many contributions from
Mathematica, which has had such a profound influence on the kinds of science that
we are able to undertake, Wolfram Alpha, the Wolfram Language. Of course, Stephen is a physicist
at heart. That's where his initial training began. And our conversation will focus on some of the
work that he's been doing recently in trying to give us a perhaps different way of thinking about
the fundamental laws. And before I bring Stephen on, I just want to quickly say, look, you know,
those of you who have followed physics and science more generally, perhaps through World Science
Festival events or books, your own studying, look, you know that our goal, which really was articulated
perhaps most succinctly by Albert Einstein, is, you know, trying to figure out the fundamental
laws of the universe. As Einstein said, did God have any choice in the creation of the universe?
And he wasn't talking about God in any conventional sense. What Einstein meant was,
is there any freedom in the way the laws of the universe are constructed in the form that they
take? Or is there some principle that we're still struggling to find that would lead us
ineluctably, inevitably, to a unique description of physical reality? And that's an important
question because look, we have developed over the course of the 20th century, the 21st century,
general relativity, quantum mechanics, quantum field theory, string theory, far more speculative,
of course, but I can't help but throw it into the mix. And as we go ever deeper toward grasping the
fundamental laws of fundamental mathematical equations in the way that we typically frame those
laws, there are two questions that come to the fore. Number one, have we got the fundamental
laws? Of course, that's vital. And we all agree that that's an ongoing search, an ongoing process.
No one would say that today's laws are the laws. But even if sometime in the future we do have those
fundamental laws, a key question will be, why those laws and not some other laws? And if we can
show that there's a unique set of laws that meet some very basic set of criteria, and that would
certainly help answer that question, or perhaps we'll be forced to go the other direction and say,
well, it's not why this law instead of that law, perhaps all possible laws in some sense are out
there. And we as particular observers of the world only have access to or only are aware of
a certain slice of reality that's well described by the particular laws that we have developed.
That's a possible direction that this all will go. And Stephen Wolfram has been developing
ideas which perhaps it's fair to say, intertwine and thread through all of those interesting
scientific and philosophical ideas. And our goal today will be to tease out exactly where
Stephen Wolfram's program is at the moment and where it might be heading. So with that, let me
bring in Stephen Wolfram. Hey, Stephen, how are you doing? Just fine. Great to see you. Nice to
see you too. And where are you at the moment physically? Concord, Massachusetts. Are you home?
Yeah. Excellent. So I've been a work from home guy for your whole life. Yeah, right. Long before
it was fashionable. You know, speaking of that, I just do have a quick question completely irrelevant
for our conversation. But somebody asked me the other day, and I did not know the answer to it,
across all of your endeavors, Wolfram Research, Mathematica, and how many people work with you?
I mean, what's your grand total employee base? Yeah, it's about 800 people. It's a fairly small
operation. And it's my basic principle has been automate as much as possible. So we've been kind
of over the years, you know, what we can do with just 800 people is lots of leverage from lots of
automation. And it's, you know, I built the tools we've been developing for so long, partly because
I wanted to use them myself. And turns out, you know, I've managed to alternate between doing
basic science and building technology out five times in my life so far. And it's pretty neat,
because, you know, you, you build a bunch of science, you see what tools can be built,
you build the tools, then that lets you build another level of science and example of things,
things I've been doing recently in physics. They are the result of multiple rounds of this kind
of science, technology, iteration, so to speak. Would it be fair to say when it comes to early
on in your career? And again, maybe I'm not framing it in the way that you was. So please feel free
to correct. But would you say that your goal at some point was to drill down in computation and
find the fundamental ingredients that underlie all computation in some universal manner that would
allow you to create a system like Mathematica that would be widely applicable because it wasn't
stuck on any particular computational framework, but rather was the the ur, the basis of all
computation. Yeah, I mean, you know, I, what I thought I was doing at the time when I did it
is not what I've understood I was doing decades later, but, you know, projecting backwards.
When I, you know, I had done physics when I was a teenager and so on, and particle physics and
cosmology and things like that. And, you know, the one of the, one of the things that is always a
challenge there is doing the calculations and I had wanted to automate that. And then sometimes
end of 1979, so ancient times, I kind of was like, I want to make it as automatic as possible to do
the kinds of computations that I and other people want to do. And the question was, how do you do
that? And I guess from my life in natural science, kind of the obvious thing to do was try and find
the primitives, the underlying sort of atomic elements of computation. But what I mean, projecting
backwards, so to speak, one of the things that's a challenge is what is computationally possible
is vastly broader than what we humans care about. Yeah. So what, you know, first step is how do you
represent what is computationally possible? That's actually rather easy. Much more challenging is to
build the bridge from the way that we think about things to what's computationally possible. And
that's been kind of my lifetime activity of sort of building a computational language,
a notation for computation that is convenient for us humans and that can tap into this kind of
reservoir of power in the computational universe. And that's been, so that will be my kind of way
in modern times of explaining what I've been doing for the last 40-something years.
Yeah, for sure. You know, I think many people who are watching this or will
watch this subsequently, they have made use of the tools that you have built, but perhaps for
the one or two in the audience that perhaps have not. Let me just note, you know, from a personal
perspective, it's not just that the tools that you have provided, I'm speaking of Mathematica in
particular, allows us to do things more easily. It allows us to do computations that we would not
have the boldness to even contemplate doing without having the tool in place. And I'm taking
this specifically years ago, when I was doing work in string theory that was trying to use something
that I thankfully played a role in developing called mirror symmetry to calculate what were
known as a number of rational curves on certain Kalabiow manifolds, right? The calculations,
we could set them up, but without a tool like Mathematica, it would be virtually impossible
to actually carry forward with them. But, you know, with what you had, we could set it up and
hit a button and sit back. And the machine would just spit out number after number after number,
calculating exactly what we were seeking. So, yeah. But the beautiful thing is,
what you're willing to attempt to undertake can be profoundly impacted by the tools that
your disposal. It's a very nonlinear process between the two.
Yeah. I mean, the way I see what I'm trying to do is to give people a way to think computationally
about things. It's kind of like the analog in mathematics was before, kind of 500 years ago
or something, when you wanted to talk about mathematics, you'd just be using words in natural
language. And then people started inventing mathematical notation and plus signs and equal
signs and things. And then it all got very streamlined. And you could start to actually,
you could have a mathematical language in which to think mathematically. And that's,
you know, got algebra and calculus and then all the mathematical sciences and so on.
And, you know, kind of what I see as our mission is to provide that kind of computational
notation, that kind of computational language, the thinking about things computationally.
And I think the thing that when we say, what does it mean to think computationally about things?
It's kind of like we define rules for how things work. And then we see the consequences of those
rules. And that's a very general kind of activity. And the question of sort of what types of rules
are ones that, for example, relate to the kinds of things that we humans care about.
That's kind of the art of designing a computational language is to be able to represent those kinds
of things. But do you imagine, and we'll get into this when we turn to physics in just a moment,
but just speaking more generally, you know, at some point, we have some conversation with some
extraterrestrial civilization. And we ask them about, you know, how do you go about trying to
quantify or to think more deeply about the nature of the challenges that reality presents you?
Will they, do you think, have the same computational basis as we do? Or is it just a quirk of our
evolutionary process that we think about the world in a particular way? And that gives us one
slice through the computational universe? Yeah, I mean, this is a this is a bigger conversation.
But I think this this whole kind of idea about, you know, can you think about the world being
built from rules? I think that's a very general idea. I think that the way in which you package
those rules and the way that you kind of perceive and think in terms of those rules, that's pretty
specific. And so my my tendency is to say, for example, you say, well, we talk about the
extraterrestrials, you know, the alien intelligences and so on. My feeling is, there are alien
intelligences all around us, you know, the weather famously is supposed to have a mind of its own.
And I think in many real senses, it does. It's just that that mind is not well aligned with
the kind of mind that we have. If we look at, you know, the neuron firings in our brains,
they're following physical laws, they're doing what they do. If you look at the fluid dynamics in
the atmosphere, it's following physical laws, it's doing what it does. And the question is,
can we say that the stuff going on in our brains is in some fundamental sense more sophisticated
than what's going on in the atmosphere? I don't think so. I think the issue is that what's going
on in our brains is kind of our perception of kind of this this notion of intelligence,
it's aligned in a particular direction, it's different from the alignment of,
you know, the fluid dynamics in the atmosphere or whatever else. So I tend to think that this
question of you ask, sort of, will the aliens, so to speak, have the same view of computation?
I think at the lowest level, it's kind of things are operating according to rules.
If you ask kind of how would what is the internal narrative of the aliens, the internal
narrative of the weather, the internal narrative for our brains, those are different. And, you know,
this is the sort of the essence of what we do when we do science is we try and take the natural world
as it is out there, and we try and kind of put it into a narrative that we humans can understand.
I mean, that's what when we say we're making a theory for something, you know, the thing out
there is just doing what it does. The question is, do we have a way within our minds, within our way
of thinking about things to kind of talk about what it's doing, so to speak? Along those lines,
I can't help. And I hope that you're willing to sit for a little while, because I'd like to pursue
this just for a moment and then get to the real topic of our conversation here, because I don't
think they're separate. Actually, I think there's a deep connection between it all. But you talk about
the internal representation or the internal experience. And I think that is, for most people,
what distinguishes our kind of computation from the computation of the weather, right? I don't
think most people, I mean, Thomas Nagel had this famous dictum that if you're wanting to describe
consciousness, you should ask the question, what is it like to be that thing? You know, what is it
like to be a human? We have a reasonable good understanding of that, because we are of that
category. What is it like to be a bat, right? Does a bat have an inner world of consciousness?
And we can certainly imagine that the answer to that question is yes, even though it's very
difficult to put ourselves into the mind of a bat. But when it comes to the weather, I think
most people would resist the idea that there is a what it is like to be the weather. Do you think
there is a what it is like to be the weather? Yes. I mean, I think that, you know, if we look at all
any of us ever know is our own personal internal experiences, even the extrapolation to, you know,
another human's experiences is just an, you know, empathetic extrapolation. And by the way,
when you are imagining what a human with a different coming from a different time in history
or with a different kind of set of educational cultural backgrounds and so on is, it's not
completely trivial to take your inner thinking patterns and project them. And, you know, if you
start thinking about, you know, what's it like to be a computer? You know, you start thinking about
what is the experience of a computer from the time it's booted up to the time it crashes,
kind of like a human lifespan, it remembers certain things, it has certain experiences,
maybe somebody, you know, plugs a peripheral into some portnet has some horrible trauma,
all kinds of all kinds of things like this. It is as you trace it through, it is surprisingly
and bizarrely similar in external description, the kind of thing that that we feel. And I think
it's one of these things where this question of, for example, you talk about laws of physics,
and there's this question of we are projecting what is actually happening out there in the world
into our particular kind of internal representation of what's going on. And, you know, you were
talking about sort of the inevitability or not of the laws of physics. One of the things that's
been a huge surprise to me in the last couple of years is that from what I can tell, there is in
some sense a complete inevitability of the core laws of 20th century physics for observers like us.
In other words, if we were not as we are, if we had different characteristics, we would believe
that the world has laws different from the ones that we believe that it has. But the thing that's
been a big surprise to me is that it turns out that the, you know, you might say, well, does it
depend on the fact that we have two eyes? Does it depend on this? Does it depend on that? It depends
on sort of two very big things and one subsidiary thing. It depends on the fact that we are
computationally bounded observers of the universe. That is, there's all this computation going on
in the universe. But to stuff it into our finite minds, we need to sort of simplify it a lot.
That's one thing. The other thing that is, is that we believe we are persistent in time. That is,
even in, you know, we'll talk about in actual models of physics, we are in, you know, our models,
we're made of different atoms of space at every moment in time. Yet, we believe that we have the
single thread of experience going through time. And there's a third thing, actually, which is,
we're a certain size relative to the underlying stuff in the universe. For sure. You know, we're
not, and the fact that, for example, to give an example sort of close to the kinds of things I
think you've thought about a long time, you know, our notion of time and space depends a lot on how
big we are. That is, the fact that, you know, we look around and we see, you know, 10, 100 meters away.
And light comes to us from that distance. Speed of light is pretty fast. And that means that,
you know, in a microsecond, a millionth of a second, we'll have seen what's around us.
Our brains process things on more like thousandth of a second time scales. So, for us, we see the
world as a series of kind of frames of this is what space is like. We say, we say it's out there,
because we see it sort of all at the same time. Right. If we were, for example, if we thought a
million times faster, replace our brain hardware with, you know, digital electronics, we'll think
a million times faster, we would have a different point of view. Because then, you know, the scene
that we're in, if we were in the same size scene, it would be coming to us in time short compared
to the time it takes us to process it. We think of space more like time, presumably, if we... Yes.
Yes. I mean, it's a... So, I mean, there are these aspects of kind of the way we are as observers
that cause us to perceive the world the way we perceive the world. The big surprise to me has
been the very technical fact that the big laws of 20th century physics, statistical mechanics,
second law of thermodynamics, you know, general relativity and quantum mechanics,
seem so far as we can tell to be not optional. They are inevitable features of observers like us.
This is what observers like us will have to see as they sort of try to understand what's out there
in the world, which is, to me, remarkable. I mean, we'll talk about this maybe more, but, you know,
this idea that it is conceivable to not just wheel in the laws of physics as a, oh, it happens to be
that way, but to be able to say that at least for observers like us, the laws of physics,
as we have discovered them, are inevitable.
Along those lines, though, and again, we will get into some of the details, but
to characterize the phrase observers like us, you've made reference to a few qualities.
Yes. You've made reference to computationally bounded. You've made reference to the timescales
over which we process information, say, being very slow compared to, say, the speed of light.
Those feel very general to me. It's almost hard for me to imagine a non-computationally
bounded observer. I'm not sure what that observer, now you'd say this, of course,
is a limitation of the fact that I am a computationally bounded observer, I presume.
But do you envision what a non-computationally bounded observer would be?
Well, I'll give you an example. In this room, there's air. There's a bunch of gas molecules,
a large number of gas molecules. They're all bouncing around. They're all essentially computing
what they're going to do next. They have these collisions. There's a little computation going
on. For us, there's no way we can imagine following all those gas molecules because we are
computationally bounded. If we were not computationally bounded, we would say I've got all those
gas molecules. I know what they're going to do. I know that in five seconds, all this particular
collection of gas molecules that were over here are going to wind up over there. Then I wouldn't,
for example, say, oh, it's just a gas with a certain pressure and so on. I would say,
I know my friend, this gas molecule is going to do this particular thing.
Right. But we could be computationally bounded and still be able to do that. It's just the
bound on our computational processing would have to be much larger than what it currently is. That
was the distinction. You don't need to be computationally unbounded to do that. You just
need to be able to take in a kind of data set that's beyond our capacity.
You can, and this is where it gets mathy, but if you start thinking about, as you increase the
size of the thing you're looking at, as you increase the amount of time that is elapsing and so on,
you very quickly get into the situation where if you are of any bounded size,
you will blow out your abilities. This is the question of whether, for example,
if we look at the long future of the universe, one thing people are sometimes kind of disappointed
about is, oh, there'll be a heat death in the universe. Eventually, all these processes, all
these organized things that are happening in the universe, it's all going to just grind down into
random heat, random sort of motion of molecules that are just completely random. People say,
that's terrible. That's the end of everything that one might care about in this kind of random
soup in the universe. But if you were not computationally bounded, you wouldn't think that.
Of course. You would say, every molecule I know where it's going to go.
It's got a whole history that you can sort of read out from it.
That's an example of what it would be like to be not computationally bounded. You would have a
very different view. A thing that I find very challenging is to think about what it's like
to not be like us, so to speak. I've tried, for example, these days, we have AIs that
are well aligned with the way we humans think about things. I did an experiment recently.
You take an AI that's been trained on a few billion images that we humans have put out on the web,
and it can generate images. So you say, show me a picture of a cat and a party hat,
and it will generate something which is sort of typical of what we humans would think of
as being a cat and a party hat. Say, okay, that's a concept that we humans understand.
Now let's move in kind of concept space, which we can do inside this AI. You can say,
let's move in concept space away from the concept of cat and a party hat. Let's move into
what I was calling inter-concept space, the space between the concepts that we humans have named.
What's out there? Well, you can have the AI just generate a picture of what's out there.
What's out there is something that looks like it's a picture. What does it mean to us? Right now,
pretty much nothing. It's just some elaborate pattern, some complicated picture. What is it?
Well, we can kind of yak about it for a bit, but it doesn't really have a resonance for us.
And if we even go beyond that and we say, let's modify the AI, let's change its mind,
so to speak, change the way its mind is built, and say, what does it then think a cat and a
party hat looks like? You get these weird pictures, which are very non-human. They kind
of begin to sort of show us a little bit what it's like to be a mind that is not quite like a human
mind. And for me, it's a great exercise in imagination, which I don't think I've
sort of succeeded in mastering. I will say one thing, though, about the sort of inter-concept
space. One of the things that's really, really interesting about that is even the most basic
way of sort of exploring inter-concept space. The concepts that we humans have come up with
represent one part in a trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion. I have to go on with
a bunch of trillions there of what's possible. And then we ask ourselves, well, will we ever get
there? And what we realize is that's what the progress of science and the sort of arc of
intellectual history is all about. We are gradually expanding our domain in kind of the
space of concepts. We're gradually sort of expanding the paradigms that we think in terms of and so
on. It's a slow process, but that's kind of the journey that we can think of as being kind of the
journey of science and mathematics and these other kinds of areas. Yeah, for sure. Now, look,
when I began as a physicist, and I have since changed or shifted or matured, I don't know what
the right word is, but when I began life as a physicist, I thought that what I was engaging in
was a search for the abstract and objective laws that were kind of out there governing,
formation of stars, the big bang, black holes and things of that sort. And many of my colleagues
still speak that way and they feel deeply that is what the charge of being a physicist or a
scientist or generally is all about. I have shifted to a place where it feels much closer to what
you're saying. I've shifted to a place where I view what I do and my colleagues and you do as
trying to describe in concept space, in the language that makes sense to us as human beings,
what's happening out there. I no longer feel like the equations that we write down for general
relativity and quantum mechanics are kind of operating out there, which is certainly the
prejudice that I had as a younger person. If I understand correctly, you are saying something
quite similar that the goal of what we do as scientists is to find the description that makes
sense to us as say these computationally bounded observers with brains that operate on timescales
much shorter than the speed of light and so on and so forth to describe what's out there.
But do you think that there is an out there that is operating according to some laws, rules,
whatever we want to describe it that is at work? Of course, we're part of the out there,
so I don't mean to sort of juxtapose the two in that way, but is there some fundamental set of
rules that's really operating or is it all about finding the set of rules that do a good job at
describing your perceptions? Well, so I think there is a thing that's out there. We call it the
Ruliad and it's a weird, very abstract thing. It's not surprising that it's an abstract thing
because it's sort of a very conceptually big thing. What is it? It's essentially this object
that is the entangled limit of all possible computations. That's a very weird kind of concept
because usually you say, what is a computation? Well, you set up these rules. There might be
the rules for the way that the microprocessor in your computer works. You feed in some input,
you let the thing go crunch, crunch, crunch for a while, and then you get the output. That's
essentially the process of a single computation. One of the things that we can then ask is, well,
let's say we change the rules for the computation and we do the same thing. We feed in some input,
we get some output, we get different things going on. Let's imagine that we could look at what
happens with all possible rules, all possible inputs. One of the things is you say, well,
how could you ever conclude anything from that? Turns out that thing has a rich structure,
not least because two very different inputs and maybe even two very different ways of computing,
rules for computation, can wind up producing the same thing. You get this complicated entangled
object that represents all possible computations running, let's say, even for an infinite time
and looking at the sort of entangled structure of all these possible computations. It's a very big
abstract thing. One thing about it is there's only one of it. It's unique. It is the case that,
in a sense, once you have this idea of describing things according to rules,
you inevitably get this object. It is the limit of sort of describing everything in terms of rules.
And so it's not like you get to say, oh, I'll have Roulier number one. No, actually, I'll pick
Roulier number seven instead. There's only one of it. And it's kind of as inevitable as once you've
defined what two and two are and pluses and so on, it's inevitable at two plus two equals four.
It's not a thing where you get to say, might it be that way? Might it be a different way?
It has to be the way it is. So, Jessica, I understand that space well enough and perhaps
how it relates to things that have been articulated previously. You know, when I was a
student of Robert Nozick's philosopher at Harvard, he had this idea that he was developing at the time
called the principle of fecundity. You know, sort of like all realities are out there in some way.
I don't know if he framed it precisely enough to draw a relationship, but Max Tegmark, you must
know from MIT, had this idea of the larger reality being all possible mathematical structures.
They are just out there and we are cognizant of a small slice of it. Is your Roulier
commensurate with those ideas?
Who knows? I mean, I know what the Roulier ad is and it's a very nice, precise thing.
I have to say, you know, it's interesting because one of the things that's happened is,
you know, we got to this place by doing computation and physics and science and so on
and we've ended up with these constructs and concepts that are sort of deeply philosophical,
almost theological in some ways. And in many cases, they sort of, they peel back, you know,
the last 300 or so years, it's been kind of science has been out ahead. But some of the
things that we end up talking about are things which, you know, theologians have talked about
for centuries, but have been kind of submerged in modern science. So, you know, the thing about
sort of the thing we built with the Roulier ad is it's a nice, precise, very well-defined thing.
So, how it relates to, I mean, people have asked me the particular, let's see, I mean, I should
keep the inventory of all the things that people ask, is it related to XYZ? Because by the time
you have this object that purports to be the underlying thing of all possible realities,
so to speak, it better be related to a lot of stuff. But so, the answer is, I don't really
have a great way to address that. I think that the concept, I mean, the thing that you're asking,
kind of, what's, is it out there? And one of the things to realize is, and this is kind of a brain
twisting kind of thing, as you were alluding to, there's no out there, we're in it. It is everything,
and we are part of it. So, the question is really, how does an observer within the Roulier ad made
from the same stuff that makes the Roulier ad, what does that observer perceive about the Roulier ad?
And that, the answer to the fact that there's anything reasonable one can say about that,
I consider remarkable. And the point is that with, you know, for an arbitrary observer, there's not
much you can say. But for an observer with these limitations that we seem to have, being the way
that we are, there are a bunch of things you can say. And what's really exciting is the things you
can say seem to align almost perfectly with the big things that we were able to say in 20th century
physics, which is super surprising. I mean, it's not what I thought was going to happen at all.
And I think the, you know, this question about how do you perceive a thing when you're in that thing
is a, you know, that's something where we've sort of been lucky that, thanks to mathematics
physics, basically, we have some of the tools necessary to actually talk about that. We understand
things like reference frames from relativity. We understand various things about measurement
from quantum mechanics. These are the things which are sort of the raw material that gives us a hope
of sort of turning what would otherwise be some kind of vague sort of philosophical, you know,
concept into something that we can actually sort of do hard science with.
So I'd love to jump in to some of the details, but I'm wondering if at the outset we could set
expectations, really my expectations is perhaps more than anything. I mean, the reason I believe,
that's not even the right word, the reason I have confidence in quantum mechanics,
of course, is I know how to sit down with the basic mathematics and give it enough time and
computational power. I know how to calculate things like a scattering amplitude or the anomalous
dipole moment of the electron, you know, so I can calculate things. And I know that when those
calculations are done correctly, they agree to fantastic precision with things that we actually
observe in the world. I know how to sit down with general relativity and calculate the bending of
starlight by the sun just to go all the way back to 1919. So where does your program stand before
we get into the details? Can you calculate like the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron?
No, not that. But what we, you know, so here's where we're at. We can, in the case of, okay,
so we've got these three areas, statistical mechanics, general relativity, quantum mechanics.
Statistical mechanics is actually the easiest to talk about, and maybe we'll talk about it later.
Which one is? Statistical mechanics is actually the easiest to talk about. It has just, but in
general relativity, for example, we can calculate, so for example, we have a nice calculation now of
the merging of two black holes. And it seems to agree well with the predictions of general
relativity. In fact, it seems to agree well enough that the method that we have of computing,
so normally, as you well know, when you're computing something like merging of two black
holes, you're studying kind of the, all these differential equations that represent the kind
of curvature of spacetime and so on. And when you actually do it on a computer, after you probably
pre-processed it a bunch with Mathematica, but eventually you try and discretize the spacetime
so that you can put it on a digital computer. Yes. In our methods, and we'll talk about this
in more detail, we're starting from the discrete underlying structure of spacetime,
and we're then aggregating up to see what consequences that has on a large scale. And
turns out that the thing we built seems to be a very good way of just computing what happens in
general relativity. So, Francis, could you calculate, you know, the gravitational waves that say
LIGO observed, say, from the first black hole? Looks like it. Yeah, looks like it. It's very
convenient that black holes, oh yeah, we've got a nice little video there that, yeah, we can show
this video. Yeah, what are we seeing here? Yeah, that's what we're seeing. We're seeing two little
very, very tiny black holes, close in size to the elementary length in the universe, and there
they merged. And if you sort of analyze this a bit, you'll find there are gravitational waves
that came out of that merger. And, you know, it's looking good in terms of agreeing with what
is predicted from general relativity and observed. Do you mean like the surface area is
non-decreasing of the merge black hole, that sort of agreement? Yes, but also you can look at the
actual ring down, and you can look at, and it seems right. And it's, you know, I think this is
something that is now getting much more precisely validated because people actually want to use
our models as a scheme for doing numerical relativity. I mean, it's kind of funny because
the people who say, this is a good scheme for doing numerical relativity. And for them, if it
disagrees with standard relativity, it's like, oh, that's a really bad thing. For us, it's really
exciting because it gives us a kind of a sort of a crack through which to see kind of things
like the discreteness of space. So in the case of general relativity, we're in, I think, pretty
good shape. We have good agreement with what you would expect from in the domains where you expect
agreement with general relativity. And we have a lot of weird effects, which we haven't yet been able
to compute quite what their magnitude should be, quite how they work. They depend on one parameter
whose value we don't know, but we have a bunch of funky things. We'll talk about it, things like
dimension fluctuations in the universe. Before we go there, just so on that, on the image that you
showed, you mentioned that the size of the black holes was on par with the elementary size of,
so these are tiny black holes. The tiny black holes. So what sets the scale? And just again,
for the audience, in general relativity, we have various numbers that come in, Newton's constant,
if we're including the speed of light, that's a useful number to come in. If we're doing something
that has quantum aspects to it, we bring an H bar from quantum mechanics, we put those together,
and we can get a fundamental length scale called the Planck length about 10 to the minus 33 centimeters,
a fundamental energy scale, the Planck mass about 10 to the 19 times the mass of a proton,
a fundamental time scale about 10 to the minus 43 seconds of Planck time.
Where does any of that come in to the universe? That all comes in. Let me give a little bit of the
status report, because you asked for that, and then let's get into explaining how the model
actually works. So general relativity, nice check mark. We can really see how things align
with general relativity. But with those tiny black holes, do they hawking radiate?
That's a good question. We are just working on that. It's looking very promising. But now you're
asking, and again, I have to explain a bunch more, because what we saw there was a classical picture.
We actually have the sort of full quantum version, but it is, for the universe, that's the computation
the universe does. For us, it's very difficult to do that computation. It's a lot of computation.
Yes, in our models, there absolutely is. We can't yet say we get the hawking temperature and all
that kind of thing. It is pretty promising that we get ER equals EPR, which we can explain what
that all is. It's very clear how the ADS-CFT correspondence works in our models, things like
that. Again, technical stuff we can get to it. How about the singularity? How about the black hole
singularity? Do you get any insight into that? Yes. Because we have discrete spacetime, the world
of singularity is a bit different than it is in continuous spacetime. So for example, topology
change is very easy in a discrete spacetime, and we absolutely see that. Just in terms of where
we're at. So generativity, pretty good shape. Quantum mechanics, we can do a good job of
reproducing standard quantum information, quantum circuits, type quantum mechanics. In fact,
you can even take a quantum circuit and you can compile it into our models, do computations at
that level, and actually you get somewhat better, more efficient ways to optimize quantum circuits
than we've had before. So that works okay. Quantum field theory. Wait, can you do particle in a box?
I'm just wondering, can you do the basic? Okay, so the one thing I kind of elided there,
particles are tough for us. We don't yet know, and we'll explain how this works, but kind of
particles for us are like if you had a fluid like water or something, you have a little eddy on the
surface of the water, and those are kind of like what we think particles are in our models, and
figuring out what the spectrum of particles like electrons and photons and quarks and so on is in
our models. No, we have not been able to do that yet. We know the path to do that, but it is technically
complicated and we're just working up to it. I think that the, I mean, one of the things that's
amazing about these models is usually you make a model for something, you kind of compare it with
experimental data, say, oh, whoops, that piece of the model doesn't quite work. Let me tweak the model
to fix that and so on. We're now at, you know, three and a half years out, and we are at zero
tweaks. That is, there's not a single thing where we've said, oops, you know, the model doesn't agree
with this, that's changed the model. It is very hard work to go from the underlying model to the
actual observable characteristics of physics. But the thing that's just amazing, as far as I'm
concerned, is that, as I say, we're at zero tweaks. You know, there's no, oh, whoops, you know, the
thing predicts we have different number of dimensions than we do, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
There's no, I mean, having said that, we don't know why the universe has, appears to us right now to
have three dimensions. We can't derive the number three. Three or three large dimensions, perhaps.
Yeah, three large dimensions, right. And we, you know, we can talk about what,
the question of, so one of the things that has happened is a lot of different approaches in
mathematical physics, like, you know, causal set theory, spin networks, higher-
Dynamical triangulations, I presume. Yes, dynamical triangulations. These are all
things that we can see are limits of our models. The one that's still out there, a string theory,
which I'm pretty sure is also a limit of our models, but that just, that mathematical physics
hasn't been done. It'll be very nice when it is done. And what's really cool about seeing
this correspondence with existing work in mathematical physics is that, you know, there's
a lot that's been achieved there. And so we can just sort of plug in the things that have been
achieved and learn more about our models, and also provide interesting foundations for what's
been done in other areas of mathematical physics. I mean, like, for example, in causal set theory,
for example, people just say, oh, there are events that happen in different places in space time.
It's always been kind of confusing. Why would relativity work, given that there's sort of
these random events in different places in space time? In our models, there are events
at different places in space time, but they are kind of algorithmically generated.
And the way in which they're generated inevitably gives relativity. So you get to kind of talk about
things using the sort of machinery of causal set theory. But now you've got a foundation that says
there isn't this big problem that there used to be, and you can kind of, you know, work from there.
But briefly, you were about to say something about quantum field theory. So could you finish that?
Yeah, yeah. So I mean, the thing that, as I say, we can, the next challenge we're working on right
now is doing the same kind of thing for quantum field theory that we've been able to do for general
relativity. That is starting from the underlying model, and just doing a bunch of computation
and being able to reproduce features of quantum field theory. And it's pretty clear what the
roadmap for doing that is. It's just technically difficult. Can I say a quick question on that?
And again, we're going a little nonlinear here, but that's fine. Our audience is used to that.
To me, quantum mechanics is quantum field theory in zero plus one dimensions. And quantum field
theory, as you normally describe it, is therefore just quantum mechanics in, say, a signature n comma
one reality, an n plus one dimensions. For one, I understand that you're going to describe
dimensionality is so fluid in your approach. I would have thought that going from quantum
mechanics to quantum field theory is like no problem at all. Okay, so here's what happens. And
we're now, we are definitely jumping around here. When we think about quantum mechanics,
we're thinking about these many possible parts of history. And that's kind of the defining feature
of quantum mechanics is it's not that definite things happen. It's that there are many parts of
history, and we just get to observe certain aggregates of those parts of history. So in our
models, the simplest case that corresponds to sort of minimal sort of quantum information style
quantum mechanics, looks at those different parts of history and just says, take the whole
universe and say there's this part of history for the whole universe, take the whole universe,
these kinds of things. That is a very wasteful way to represent things, and it doesn't deal with
the spatial degrees of freedom of what's going on. If you try and do that sort of more less
wastefully, and you say, no, I don't just want to say there's a whole complete state of the
universe, and it branches to another complete state of the universe, but you want to get inside
there and say, well, actually, it's just this little tiny piece of the universe that's different
between these two branches, and you're dealing with space, which is the thing that, so what's
happening is most of space is unchanged. There's just this tiny part of space that's changed.
It's just technically more difficult to do that. And so that's why there's a distinction between
kind of quantum mechanics in the sort of quantum information style of doing quantum mechanics,
and this quantum field theory, where there is a spatial extent that one has to deal with,
and one actually is talking about scattering processes and particles that are moving,
I mean, for example, in our models, we maybe come to this, the idea that motion is possible
is non-travel. In other words, the fact that you can take a thing and move it to somewhere else,
and it's still the same thing is not obvious. In traditional general relativity, if you're
close to a spacetime singularity, any material thing that you try and move there is going to get
shredded, and it's probably not the same thing. But in our models, the possibility of motion
is something you have to derive. And so we can derive it for things like black holes,
we need to find out for what other things we can define it. And those other things for which we
can define it, those are particles, basically, because particles are the carriers of identity
that survive under through time and through space. But finding what those are is
technically difficult. So can you take us back now more to the beginning? And this is sort of a
good summary chaotic, though it may have been because of my random questions, and I apologize
for that. But if we take a step back now, where does it begin? I've done a little bit of reading,
but no doubt I am incompletely read in on the subject, but presumably it begins with
just some collection of nodes. What's the universe made of? And that's been a thing
people have discussed since antiquity. And is it made of discrete atoms? Is it a continuous thing?
That was something much debated. What is matter made of? We discovered 100 and something years ago,
it's made of discrete molecule. We definitively know that. Light, same way. We can think of it
as made of photons. Space, on the other hand, we have tended to assume as continuous. We've assumed
that space is just this background thing, and we can put stuff anywhere we want in space.
Kind of the starting point for our models is space is not just this background thing.
Space is actually made of stuff. And in fact, everything in the universe we can think of
as being features of space. And so in fact, the way that there are many equivalent ways to think
about this, because it's a deeply abstract thing. But the way that I think is most kind of we talked
about what is the role of science about sort of converting what's out there in the world to human
understandable narratives. The best one I know for explaining this is the following, to just say
what space is made of is kind of these discrete atoms of space, which are things where the only
thing you can say about them is they have an identity. They are distinct from each other.
And then the other thing you can say is how those atoms of space are related to each other.
So in other words, we can say this atom of space is related to these two other atoms of space.
What do we get when we have this whole big collection of relations? We can represent that as
a graph, where we're saying it's kind of like a friend network. What's the friend network of the
atoms of space, so to speak? And maybe in our universe today, there might be 10 to the 400
atoms of space, we're not sure. But it's a very large number.
You're talking about in the observable universe, presumably?
In the observable universe. And the full Rulliard is much bigger than that.
Yeah. The universe as we've sliced it and so on. But then this, so we've got this giant network
that has these atoms of space related in these ways. And so then, and that's kind of what we think
everything in the universe is made of. And so, for example, particles are these, well, black holes,
for example, are particular regions that have certain characteristics that correspond to the
way that black holes work. Particles are these things that are kind of like topologically
knotted up pieces of that network, we think, that have some kind of, you know, continued identity.
So that's kind of the idea of that's what the universe is made of. It's kind of interesting
to me as a historical matter that back, you know, beginning of the 20th century, many people
had the belief that space was discreet. In fact, I keep on discovering that many of those famous
physicists that we both know about, you know, I keep on discovering, you know, Heisenberg thought
that space was discreet, Bohr thought that space was discreet, Einstein thought that space was discreet.
It was 1916, Einstein has this nice letter where he says, in the end, it will turn out that space
is discreet. Really? But we don't yet have the tools necessary to see how that works.
Huh. I mean, I would understand it well for all the other luminaries that you made reference to,
because the discreteness of reality was emerging with the vengeance through the studies in quantum
mechanics. Einstein, too, photoelectric effect, you know, the discreteness, but I had no idea
that he actually thought that when it came to space time. I'd love to see that. So I'll get the
right. No, it's a, but so, you know, what happened at the time was nobody could get kind of their
discreet models of space to agree with relativity. Yeah. And it was, you know, and I'm not surprised,
given what we now know, it required another few layers of kind of paradigmatic thinking,
so to speak, to be able to get something where that was not difficult to achieve.
But, but so, okay, so in our models, sort of, what's there in the universe is this giant network
that represents kind of the state of the universe, the state of space,
everything in the, in the universe is a feature of space. So then the question is, what about time?
And, you know, one of the things that was sort of the, you know, people have tended to say is,
oh, space and time are the same kind of thing. I don't think Einstein actually thought that so
much. Minkowski was the, was the. But he bought into Minkowski's view pretty, pretty quickly and
pretty fully. Right, right. Minkowski, though, was the one who was like, we can make this spacetime
object and it has very nice mathematical properties and so on. But, but so I don't think space and
time are anything like the same kind of thing. I think they're very different kinds of things.
I think time, we can think of as sort of the inexorable progress of computation. So time is
this thing where we're applying the rules and we keep on applying and we keep on applying them.
That successive application of rules, that is the progress of time. And so in the case of these
models, what happens is you've got this giant network and you have these rules that say if you
have a little piece of network that looks like this, rewrite it to a piece of network that looks
like that. You just keep doing that over and over again. And time is defined by those progressive
rewritings. So then the question is, when you do that for a very big network and you do that for
a very long period of time, many, many rewritings, what is the aggregate, what do you see in aggregate?
It's kind of like asking, you know, these molecules are bouncing around at a microscopic scale.
What will be the large scale sort of behavior of the system? And we know in the case of molecules
bouncing around, oh, it's fluids like water and so on. That's what you get from this sort of large
scale structure. So the question is, what do you get from this graph? It's actually a hypergraph
we tend to use. And, you know, these rewrite rules and so on, what do you get? What's the
large scale limit? Well, with various footnotes that we can talk about, the answer is the large
scale limit is Einstein's equations for spacetime. And are you talking about the vacuum equations?
No, it's the full equations. But you have to say what, so okay, so just to fill that in.
So I mean, remember, I'm saying everything in the universe is made of space. So when we get energy,
for example, a matter, they are just features of space. And we have to characterize what it means
to have a piece of space that is representing matter and energy and mass and so on. And turns out,
and this is something really surprised me, that energy turns out to be basically the density
of updates happening in this network. And there's a slightly more formal definition
that's a flux of causal edges through space like hypersurfaces. But basically, it's the amount of
updating that's happening in the network that characterizes the density of energy associated
with that part of the network. And so then, then we ask questions like, okay, here's an example
of something that you could ask is you say, let's, let's talk about gravity. How does gravity work?
Well, so, you know, we can talk about if in the absence of gravity, you know,
things move on shortest paths. So, you know, we have gd6 shortest paths from here to there.
In a graph, it's pretty easy to define what a shortest path is because it's just from every node,
you just have an edge, you follow that until you get to some other edge. So you have this
the shortest path. Now you ask, in this model, what happens when there's a bunch of activity
in the network? And it turns out that that deflects shortest paths, the gd6 have changed
by this activity in the network. And the way they're changed is exactly according to the
Einstein equations, according to standard laws of gravity. And that's so, so can you
just abuse me have a couple of worries that immediately come to mind. So worry number one
is, again, you know, we'll talk at various levels of sophistication. So I hope the audience will
bear with us. But, you know, in general relativity, as many in the audience know, we describe space
time continuously as some manifold on which there's a distance function, so-called a metric.
And usually, as we describe it, we try to solve the Einstein equations to figure out what the
metric is, the distance function of that space. But of course, we could always say that any metric
is a solution to the Einstein's equation, simply by defining the right hand side to be what comes
out of the Einstein tensor for the given metric that you put in. So trivially, any metric is a
solution to the Einstein's equation from that perspective. The only time it becomes non-trivial
is if you have an independent definition of the left hand side and the right hand side.
But if everything for you is a feature of space time, do you have an independent definition on
the left and the right hand side, or is it just topology? Right. So the fact that I'm describing
what energy is, is that independent, so to speak. And also, the fact that, for example,
in that black hole simulation, those are vacuum solutions to the Einstein equations.
There is no separate kind of, you know, separate place where we're identifying, I mean, you know,
where we're- It's subject to particular boundary conditions. Exactly. Yes. Yes, that had to be
set up with very particular boundary conditions. But I mean, just to give some kind of sketch of
how things emerge. So we've got this giant network. And the question is, how do you extract from that
something that seems like continuous space? Okay. So first thing you have to do is this network,
it just says how all the atoms of space are related. It doesn't, for example, tell you
like where the atoms of space are. There's nowhere yet. And so first thing you have to do is start
defining, you know, what is the effective dimension of the space that this represents.
So you can do that by saying, start at a particular position in this network,
go to all the nodes that are distance one from that in terms of just following one edge in the
graph. Oh, and calculate the volume or something of this here. Calculate the volume of the GDC
ball, the volume of what you get to if you go R steps. Right. And as that grows, if the leading
term is R to the power D, then you can identify D as the dimension. Okay, then you look at the
subleading term, and there's a correction to the R to the D growth. And that correction is proportional
to the Ritchie scalar curvature. So that's telling you that that correction tells you the,
you know, a measure of the curvature of space. So by doing things like that, you can kind of
see how to tease out from this ultimately very discrete structure, you can kind of tease out
kind of the standard continuum things. And you get to the, you know, the Ritchie tensor, for
example, comes out in a nice way. It's again, a little bit more tricky because you're dealing with
the space time Ritchie tensor, you're dealing with these light cones that you have to construct
in this kind of space as a function of time and so on. So it's, you know, there's some technical
now, just to explain the technical complexity of this is when you talk about a manifold,
a manifold is kind of a representation of geometry, where you look microscopically,
microscopically, microscopically, it's just geometry in the way that you could define
geometry, it's Euclidean space. In our case, you look microscopically, microscopically,
there's just a hypergraph down there. There's no underlying Euclidean like space. And so
we kind of have to build our own new version of geometry, we're calling it for now,
infrared geometry, where we start from this, this underlying structure, and we have to build up
the features of differential geometry from that. And we're, we're sort of midway through
doing a fairly rigorous kind of development of kind of what is, you know, what is geometry like
when it isn't based on a manifold based on Euclidean space. And by the way, that answers
questions like, what is the curvature tensor like in three and a half dimensional space?
Nobody, there is no literature. I'd be thrilled if you tell me there's literature on this.
We found no literature on the subject. I mean, this is, this is not a thing people have ever,
you know, had, had reason or ability to explore. Yeah, we can analytically continue, you know,
sometimes you need to do that when certain integrals are not well defined, but I don't think
we've ever really grappled. No, I mean, in quantum field theory, you know, we do a little bit of
dimensional, you know, four minus epsilon dimensions and so on. But, but in the, in the case of
differential geometry, that's not what's been explored. And here's worry number two, if you
don't, if you don't. Yeah, please go ahead. So Einstein famously spent 10 years writing down
or figuring out what ultimately are the Einstein field equations that he famously gave the world
in November of 1915. When we look back on what Einstein wrote down with hindsight, of course,
it's kind of pretty obvious that it had to be once, once you're dealing with curvature,
and once you're dealing with energy momentum is described by this particular symmetric two tensor,
there aren't that many things that you can put on the left hand side. So in fact, you could put
them all there and just label them by the number of derivatives that they have, keep the ones with
the lowest number of derivatives, then just impose some conservation equation and pretty much that
gets you to the Einstein equation. So what worries me is getting those equations out,
perhaps is less impressive to me than it should be. And maybe you can get me to the point of
being really impressed because there's not much that it could have been, because presumably,
you're going for the lowest order piece. We could talk about higher order corrections as well.
Absolutely. There's not much that it could have been, besides arm you new mind to have G mu new
R on the left hand side. Yeah, you're right. The thing that we didn't know is how to go from
something lower level to that. In other words, it's just like saying, you look at the fluid
equations for how a bunch of gas molecules or liquid molecules or something, what the aggregate
behavior of those things is. In that case also, there's not much else it could be. The Navier-Stokes
equations are sort of inevitable given certain characteristics. But in that case, it was a
non-trivial thing. Even given the Navier-Stokes equations, they were known long before we knew
that molecules existed. But knowing that what's underneath there is a bunch of molecules bouncing
around, that's the thing that's worth knowing. And you're right, that for me also, the Einstein
equations seem obvious. And in fact, the same is true of quantum mechanics. In our models,
quantum mechanics seems obvious as well. But the fact is that the fact that it's been possible to
derive this from something, first of all, lower level, just this kind of discrete machine code,
and more extremely than that, this Roulillard object that is kind of a necessary thing,
the fact that it's possible to derive these things from that, that to me is rather remarkable.
And let me just to fill in a little bit about how to think about this. Let's talk about the thing
that I said was going to be the easiest one of the three big theories of 20th century physics,
namely statistical mechanics. So the big result of statistical mechanics is the second rule of
thermodynamics, the law of entropy increase, the rule that says, the law that says, if you start
systems off in a kind of orderly state, they will tend to degrade to disorder. Or they will,
if you have a bunch of molecules and they're all going in the same direction and kind of doing
mechanical work pushing in the same direction, chances are things will randomize and it will
turn into heat. And so that's the second law. And people have wondered, could you derive the
second law? In fact, Einstein, interestingly, something I just learned, you may have known
this for a long time. In 1905, Einstein wrote these three amazing papers that established
narrativity, quantum mechanics, and Brownian motion. The size of Adam's model. So it's
really four, I'd like to count the fourth one. But anyway, go ahead. Okay, that's interesting.
Okay, the question is, what were the papers that Einstein wrote in the three years leading up to
that time in 1905? The answer is, Einstein wrote papers trying to prove the second law of thermodynamics.
And the papers were wrong. They were philosophically interesting. They very much followed Boltzmann,
who had been kind of the person who was originally pushing the idea of sort of molecular theory of
gases, early derivations of the second law and so on. And Einstein sort of thought he could
derive the second law. He didn't succeed. He used the same kind of almost philosophical approaches
to science and applied them in these other areas and, you know, amazing results, so to speak.
That's just a footnote to history. But you know, people believe that the second law
will be derivable. That is, if you knew the mechanics of the molecules, it would be inevitable
that you would get this tendency towards randomization. It's very confusing, like Boltzmann,
for example, had his H theorem that said, oh, well, if you have these molecules bouncing around
this quantity H, which is, well, basically the entropy will increase with time, well,
H will decrease with time, the entropy will increase with time. But the problem is-
But he put in the input, the output, if you look at it more closely.
Yes. Yeah, right, exactly. I mean, the thing that's mysterious about this is that if you look at the
individual collisions of molecules, they are reversible in time. There's nothing, you know,
you look at the little movie of the Billy and Bulls bouncing, you could run backwards,
you would know the difference. But in aggregate, when you look at all those gas molecules,
you absolutely can tell things go from orderly initial states to disordered final states.
And the question is, why do we believe that? And the answer is, because we are observers
of the kind we are. And here's how to think about it, I think. That is, because we are
computationally bounded observers, even though there is, in principle, we can think of it as
sort of an encryption process. We start off with a simple initial condition, then we're doing all
this computation, and that's grinding up that initial condition into something that looks to us
encrypted and random. If we were sufficiently computationally sophisticated, we'd be able
to say, hey, I understand what that is, I can just reverse it and see that it came from that
simple initial condition. But because we're computationally bounded, we don't get to do that.
And so, in fact, the phenomenon of the second law is a consequence of a very computational kind
of thing. It's a consequence, okay, so there's one more piece that I have to explain.
But before you get to that detail, and I hope I'm not throwing you off track, but there is
something that's confusing about what you just said, maybe you can clarify it in half a second.
So I agree with you that this being that did not suffer from the limitations that we have,
would see all the molecules and all the trajectories and be able to immediately reverse it and
recognize where it came from and so on and so forth. But that being would also have the capacity
to say, hey, there's a more useful way to think about this too. I'm not going to erase my capacity
to see all the molecules and their trajectories, but coarse-graining seems to be a useful tool for
me to use so that I can have a language that talks about the molecules just filling the room,
as opposed to the trajectory of each individual molecule. And for some discourse, it's useful
to have that approximation, that coarse-graining. The being would still be able to do that. They
would not necessarily be wedded to the level of detail that would put the second law of thermodynamics
out of business. That's true. But the issue, and this relates to kind of the march of paradigms,
there are things that we would now say, oh, it's obvious you described this aspect of the world
this way, but looked at with different instruments, looked at without a telescope, looked at without
whatever, we would just describe the world differently. And I think that the saying that,
oh, yes, you could aggregate this and say, oh, well, it's just roughly this going on,
the computationally unbounded being might say, why would you want to do that? I can figure out
everything. Why would I need to look at this aggregate thing? That's irrelevant. I mean,
it's kind of like there are plenty of situations where as we've in the practical world where we
get more and more data about things, one might have said, oh, I don't know, take some medical
finding, you might have said, oh, you look pale today. Well, okay, that we can convert that in
modern times to this is the precise metabolomics that we can measure of this and that and the other.
And then the, oh, you look pale today, it doesn't seem like the most relevant thing to say, so to
speak. And so I think it's hard to project. You're absolutely right. There's nothing that
would prevent sort of an entity that can do this unbounded computation from deciding to aggregate
things in that way. On the other hand, it's the fact that we are led to aggregate things in the
way that we do is a consequence of the way that we are. But I should explain one other very important
piece, which is this phenomenon I call computational irreducibility, which is something that I started
figuring out in the early 1980s, actually, and it's the following thing. So one of the kind of
sort of ideas that one gets from mathematical physics is once you've got the equation,
you've solved the problem, more or less. I mean, that is that the equation, it's like I've got it
now, and I can work out every consequence from that. When you're in the computational world,
that's no longer true in the same sense. You've got some rules, you start running the rules.
You say because you run the rules will take so long that you can't do it any faster than
running the rules. Right. And so this fact that you can't jump ahead and say, and the answer
is going to be X, you have to just run every step and see what happens. That's kind of a new
feature of the computational world, a little different than we'd ever understood in the
mathematical world. I mean, by the way, it's not like people hadn't intuitively understood this.
I mean, Newton, for example, famously said, when you're talking about many planets in the
solar system, he says he's now got the equations, but to work out the motion of all these planets
is, I think he said, if I'm not mistaken, beyond the capability of any human mind,
he thought God could do it, but no human mind could do it. So he already had this idea of kind
of the sort of irreducible computational difficulty of working out the consequences of
things. But we see that much more extremely in these computational settings. And that's,
by the way, that's sort of the, that's what time, that's the sort of hard aspect of time,
so to speak, that time, the passage of time means something because it is an irreducible
computation. We get to live our lives and do all the things we do. And we can't just jump ahead
and say, and the answer is going to be 47 or something. We have to kind of live the time to,
it means something to live the time, so to speak. So we can lack free will, but we can never predict
what we're going to do. So it all works out. Yes, exactly so. Right. I think, but so, so the,
you know, in this case of the second law, the thing that's very critical is this underlying
computational irreducibility. If it wasn't for the fact that it is difficult to do that
decryption of what happened, if that was still easy, then there wouldn't be any, we wouldn't
say, oh, it looks random. We just say, oh, it's obvious, you know, I can, I can see it's this.
So it's this interplay between the computational irreducibility of what's going on underneath
and our computational limitations in our ability to observe things. And that's what,
that's what kind of gives us, in this case, the second law. Now, you know, once you've understood
those principles, it's kind of obvious the second law has to work. Right. But before you understand
those things, I mean, if you read, I spent a bunch of effort really untangling the history of the
second law and the incredible confusions that developed because people didn't understand these
kind of essentially computational principles, because they were 100 years too early to understand
those things. And yes, you know, the thing that's great, and, and always, you know, very encouraging
when you have some model and you figure things out and so on, if you can go back at the end and
say that was obvious, that's a huge win. Right. You know, if you say, no, you know, you have to,
you know, pile all these stones up in just exactly this way, and then eventually you'll get this big
tower, that's much less satisfying than if you say, well, I should have been able to see that long
ago. And that's kind of more the situation we're in now. Now, having said that, the, you know,
when you ask about like, what are the experimental implications and so on, figuring out, you know,
what is the dimension, do the consequence of dimension fluctuations, that's a bunch of just
difficult physics work. So let me give you an example of how that works. So in our models,
probably the universe started infinite dimensional. And gradually, it kind of cooled down to be
effectively three dimensional. So as if we had this initial network where everything was connected
to everything, and then gradually it got to be more like three dimensions where, you know, there's,
it's things can be far apart, so to speak. But when you say early, just kind of get a feel here,
do you envision early on, there's like a primordial node? Or is there some primordial
configuration? How does it begin? Oh, yes. Well, that's, that's a fun thing in the life of the
Ruliad, because it's, okay, so if we, okay, there's a, the Ruliad, in a sense, has no beginning.
But in a sense, it is, you have to talk about it. The object itself is just,
what can I say, it's kind of like a circle. Where's the beginning of the circle? It's like, well,
if we are actually going to draw the circle on a piece of paper, then there's a beginning to it.
But conceptually, there's no beginning to it. It's, it's just is. And it's the same thing here.
And when we, a thing to understand about this is that, that we're, as, as we are observers
embedded in this Ruliad, we can be at different positions in the Ruliad. So let's talk about
that in terms of ordinary space. So we have physical space, and we have a certain view
about what's happening in the universe. Our view of what's happening in the universe depends on
where we are. You know, we're on this planet and this galaxy, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
If we were somewhere else, we have it, it would have a different view of what's going on.
Now, more abstractly, in the Ruliad, we, a mind, so to speak, is at some place in the Ruliad.
Different minds are in effect at different places in the Ruliad. Different minds attribute,
in a sense, different sets of rules to what happened in the universe. There is a
notion of motion in the Ruliad, just like there's motion in physical space, just like
as we move to a different place, we're still the same us. There is a similar kind of concept
of motion in the Ruliad that we can say there is this entity, and there's another entity nearby,
and these two entities will have sort of corresponding views of what's happening.
You know, when we talk about sort of alien intelligences, we can think about that as
more distant things than the Ruliad. It's like all humans are clumped in this little,
little, just as we are clumped on this little planet, so to speak. We're also clumped in a
small region of the Ruliad. All our minds are concentrated in this small region of the Ruliad
as we go to, you know, your cat or dog or something, so a little bit further away.
As we go to the weather, for example, it's much further away and sort of communicating across
the Ruliad, translating from one place in Rulial space to another is not so easy,
and so that's why kind of it, you know, there's not good alignment between these different things.
But I think in, let's see, you were asking about sort of the beginning of things.
So if we stick to physical space for a moment, can you describe to us how in your approach
a space resembling ours can be built up? And I saw some animation that you had
that made assist in giving people... Yeah, right, we can look at, let's see, what was this? This was
number one there. So tell us what we're seeing here. Okay, so this is just a possible beginning
of our universe. So if we start it again at the very beginning, it'll start off from just one
node, and it'll keep on being rewritten, building up new nodes and new nodes and so on.
And this is, you know, a ridiculously small amount of effectively time at the beginning
of the universe. And there's a very simple rule for starting with a node and what to do next.
Exactly. And you keep going long enough, and you will get, even with this particular rule,
you'll get something which has kind of an aggregate, seems like continuous space,
just like if we had enough molecules bouncing around, it would seem like a continuous fluid.
And in here, you can apply your technique for working out the dimensionality of the space.
Like you're saying, you start to give a node, consider all the one-edge motions or two-edge
motions, look at the volume of the space that you fill out, and in that way get some notion of
dimensionality. And so in this particular case, the answer is about 2.6. And so do you imagine,
you know, I don't even know if this is the right language in the approach you're taking,
but if we think about the Big Bang, does it start with a node? I mean, like, what is it?
Okay, so you can, this is why I was starting to explain about different places in rural space
and so on. There is, in standard relativity, we're talking about different reference frames,
different ways to slice what counts as space, what counts as time and so on. Same story in
rural space. So you can, it's the same kind of thing. There is a view of the universe in which
it starts with one node. And that view of the universe may be a useful view of the universe
for a mind of a particular kind. It's not the only possible view of the universe.
That's a possible, that is one reference frame, essentially, one rural reference frame.
That is the co-orientation of the universe in that particular way of sort of
foliating rural space, that particular way of picking reference frames. And so that's a reasonable,
I think it's a reasonable way to start talking about things. It's not the only possible way.
Just like in relativity, you could pick a different coordinate system and so on,
and you would have a different kind of narrative description of what's going on,
even though in an underlying sense, it's the same stuff going on. So it's a little bit slippery.
Now, it seems, again, I have to admit, I'm fairly naive on the questions I'm asking. So if you want
even correct my questions, I'm perfectly fine with that. But it would seem from the picture that
you showed us, the animation that you showed us, that the notion of expanding space seems
fairly visible and intuitive. Is that a reasonable way of articulating in some gross,
continuous geometry sense what we're seeing happening?
Think so. I think so. I mean, I've been wondering about that sort of the expansion of space
and how to think about that. And it certainly echoes for me, Einstein famously had written down
his equations and said, oh my gosh, these equations imply that the universe expands. I better add this
cosmological term as a correction to prevent that happening. But actually, the universe does expand.
And I have to say, in what we've got, the obvious conclusion is the universe expands
because there are more nodes getting made. But there's a more bizarre possible thing that's
going on, which is that as time goes on, you're generating more and more nodes, and the universe
is in a sense getting finer and finer. Our length scale is fixed, but the universe is getting finer
and finer. And in fact, one of the more bizarre possibilities when you ask is the universe
discrete or continuous, for example, one of the more bizarre possibilities, which we can't yet
exclude, is that if you say, OK, I'm going to measure, I'm going to measure the elementary length,
and I'm going to take a certain amount of time to measure the elementary length.
It could be that by the time you've done that measurement, the universe has subdivided itself
to the point where that measurement no longer makes sense. So I don't think we fully understand yet
what the notion of the expansion of space and so on. So just to be a little bit more technical,
one of the things we've been very interested in, in standard relativity and cosmology and so on,
there's the Roberts and Walker, Friedman, Roberts and Walker, whatever. The more names
have been added to that since I first started studying. Lemaitre deserves a place in that list.
I know he has a good history, right? But anyway, so in any case, that's kind of an aggregate
description of the universe, which just says the universe is roughly this big. And we're not going
to, we're going to assume that everything about the universe is otherwise homogeneous.
We would really like to extend that to include dimension as a dynamical parameter. In addition
to curvature, size of the universe, we want to include dimension. And I think we will understand
a lot more about how this works when we have that kind of aggregate dimension changing equation for
the sort of aggregate evolution of the universe. But presumably, your dimension changing quality
settles down pretty quickly. Otherwise, it's hard to imagine how we get stars and galaxies,
at least in our little corner of this picture. Yes. Yeah. Well, I mean, okay. So one of the things
that I am suspecting right now is that the universe is only three dimensional for observers like us.
And that, and I don't yet know what attribute, you know, observers like us have all kinds of weird
attributes. You know, we assume that we're, you know, we're persistent in time. We assume that we
are in a sense localized in space. We assume things about free will, for example, we assume
all kinds of stuff, which seems so obvious to us that we don't even identify it as an assumption.
But it is my guess that some aspect of the way that we exist as observers causes us to parse the
universe as three dimensional. I mean, I think I understand what you're saying. But of course,
we have all these very precise experimental results in terms of, you know, how the gravitational
field falls off with distance. And, you know, and these are all consistent with, you know,
three dimensional space, but you would want me to interpret those as something which an observer
like me would necessarily measure because of my own constitutional. Yeah, because you're measuring,
you know, what are those measurements? Those measurements assume things like, okay, let me,
let me start taking apart those measurements. Okay. You're right. You've got material objects,
distinct objects. You think you can put those objects at arbitrary positions from each other.
That is an assumption about free will. It's, you know, there's a whole raft of assumptions
being made. And, you know, the experiment you're doing is a highly worthwhile experiment to do,
but it's an experiment with all kinds of stuff that's been put into it. And, you know, so in
terms of what we expect for the universe, the, the, you know, we expect that there will be dimension
fluctuations. That is, that, you know, in aggregate, the universe, we don't know why it's three,
but the universe will appear to observers like us to be three dimensional, but we would expect
that there will be fluctuations. Places left over from the early universe where the universe was
about 3.01 dimensional, let's say, and gradually kind of calmed down to being three dimensional.
We don't know why it's three, as I say. But so a big question is how long did the dimension
fluctuations last? And we're starting to do simulations to try and figure that out. The
obvious thing from a practical physics point of view is that they last until the cosmic microwave
background was formed and could we detect them in aspects of the cosmic microwave background?
Of course, we don't know the answer to that yet, but it's certainly, and we don't even know,
what would a dimension fluctuation look like in the cosmic microwave background? I mean, the,
the most extreme thing that would be, yeah, this is a good physics question, right? It's, it's,
this is where, you know, there's sort of an underlying model, but there's a whole, you know,
big tower of actual physics that has to be done to connect it to experimental observations. And I,
you know, one of the things that's cautionary tale again from history, you know, if, if the
bending of light around the sun from general relativity had been measured in 1616, in 1916,
as, as it was originally sort of might have been, Einstein had the wrong results at that point. And
it was only like, before then, so, you know, 1914, I guess, probably, right, when the teams
went out to measure the prediction of 1911 or something, that he had the wrong equations.
In fact, those astronomers, they got arrested as they went into Russia.
Right. And that's why they had their equipment, you know,
confiscated. Right. You're right. Had they done the measurement,
Einstein would have been in the uncomfortable position of crying wolf
in 19, you know, a little bit later, because this first predict would have been false.
Right. So it's always, you know, going from an underlying theory to a measurable prediction
is always a challenge. And, you know, one of the things that, that is sort of a bizarre possibility
is, you know, the phenomenon of gravitational lensing, where, you know, you have a massive thing
and you've got light being bent on either side. And you can see, you know, you can,
in, you know, you get these two different images of the same galaxy from different sides of
gravitational lens. Now, the possibility is, if there was a fractional dimensional
gravitational lens, what might happen is, we don't know if this happens, but it would be
cool if it did, that the image of the galaxy is shattered, so to speak, into lots of little sort of
fractal pieces. And that if we could get the right transform, we just say to, you know,
our space telescope friends, take this image of the sky, apply this transform to it, and
you'll reconstruct those pixels and you'll get images of galaxies. That would be, that's kind of
the fantasy version of what, you know, how you would detect a dimension fluctuation. And, you
know, it'll be more difficult than that. But that's the type of thing that we'd like to be able to
figure out. Now, you know, one of the questions that comes up in all of this is, okay, are there
lots of parameters? Are there lots of knobs and switches and so on in these models? For our models,
there's just one, which is the elementary length. What is that? What is, we have two atoms of space
and they have a relation between them. What is the translation between that distance defined by
that relation and the thing we measure with meter rules and so on? I mean, it sounds very,
it sounds very string theoretic in that way. I mean, I mean, the one parameter that we have,
of course, is the, you can frame it in many ways, the string tension, the string length,
or the square root of alpha prime, however you want to frame it. But it really is this one parameter
that you put into the story. And for your particular case, I gather you just leave it as a free
parameter. Well, we've tried to estimate it. Okay. So I don't know, we have a very hokey estimate.
Is that how you got your 10 to the 400 that you mentioned early on? Because that felt to me,
like I would have said more like 10 to the 200 if I was thinking about plank lanes and plank volumes
in the observable universe. Yeah. So our elementary length is certainly significantly
smaller than the plank length. Right. So it's, you know, more like 10 to the minus 90 meters,
rather than 10 to the minus 34 meters. But why, where in the world do you even get that
height notion that it's smaller than a sink rate from? Roughly, roughly what happens is in our models,
there's a factor that occurs, which is the number of essentially parallel threads of history that
exist in the universe. And that number is pretty big, you know, maybe it's 10 to the 120 or something.
And essentially that number is you end up dividing the plank, plank, you know, units by that kind
of number. And so for example, one of the mysteries in plank units is why the plank energy is so big.
The plank energy is the energy of a lightning bolt or something, which seems very non,
you know, elementary. I like the thing that is a massive a dust moat. But yes, I'm sure they're
similar in some way. Right. But, but so the, you know, in our models, the elementary energy is
actually very small. And it's, you know, this question of how big is the elementary length,
the elementary length, the elementary time, the elementary energy, they're all related
by standard plank units. So there's really only one parameter. Now, you know, that parameter,
it's a question of, are we going to be in luck in having that parameter be something that can be
measured in our lifetime, so to speak. You know, when people were talking about molecules,
it might have been that theoretically atoms and molecules exist. But, you know, it might not have
been the case that there was a phenomenon like Brownian motion that allowed people to say, yes,
we can actually see the effects under a microscope of those individual molecules.
By the way, Brownian motion was discovered, I think in the 1830s, long before its interpretation,
as revealing the fact that it was showing individual molecules.
And so the real question is, right now, for example, can we detect an analog of Brownian
motion in space? What is the sign of Brownian motion of space? That will be a sort of the
analog of discreteness of space. And I have a guess, which actually is a very new guess. So
it's still very fresh from, and it leads me to a rather bizarre aphorism, which is back in the
1800s, when people were studying heat. Nobody knew what heat was. And so people invented this idea
of caloric fluid, which was, you know, heat must be this fluid that would flow from this place to
that. Okay. So now we have a phenomenon, you know, in gravity, which is things like dark matter.
We have this, you know, something that causes gravity, but isn't matter that we can see what
it is, so to speak. And so my aphorism is, you know, dark matter is the caloric of our time.
And what I mean by that is, people say, what could dark matter be? Well, what is matter?
Matter is made of particles. Let's go look for particles that make up this dark matter.
Just like back in the 1800s, people said, what could heat be? It must be a fluid. Let's go study
the properties of this fluid. My guess, my current guess, and this is a very new guess. So this is
like, this is the first time I've mentioned this guess anywhere other than, you know, sort of to
myself, so to speak, is my current, my guess, not yet worked out, is that dark matter is the kind of
spacetime analog of heat. And what do I mean by that? I mean that the structure of space, just
like heat, is really the microscopic motion of molecules, that in a sense, this thing that
produces gravity, but does not have the characteristics of standard matter, is a feature
of the structure of space. And in particular, when you look at, for example, that simulation of
black holes, what you could see in the background there was the knitting together of the structure
of space. That was a bunch of spacetime heat. The space wouldn't exist, were it not for the
fact that the atoms of space are all interacting in these ways and so on. That is what makes space.
The question is, is there a, is there an effective temperature, so to speak, to that, you know,
is there a sort of an activity level and so on to that? And I think, you know, this is the question
of what are the effective equations for the, you know, for the structure of that kind of
spacetime heat. So this is a, this is, you're hearing this for the, this is a very uncooked,
even though uncooked idea. It's an interesting idea. I mean, obviously the one thing I would
stress to the audience is that there are indirect signatures that the dark matter plays by the
rules of matter, just that it doesn't reflect light or emit light, but I agree. We've been searching
for dark matter particles for a long time and we haven't actually been able to find one that we can
collapse our hands. What you say plays by the rules of matter. What you're saying is that
its gravitational effects are, you know, it has gravitational effects. I mean, and it has inertia
and things like that. And the way that it exerts or doesn't exert pressure seems to comport with
our understanding of how ordinary matter exerts or does not exert pressure, for instance. So it's
a little bit more than, than just that, but, but yes, I can't sit here and nobody can say what the
dark matter is, but how would you distinguish dark matter and dark energy? That is dark energy also
a feature of the structure of space, probably. I mean, you know, again, this is, these are
what we have is a, is a kind of a, you know, we have a paradigmatically different way of
thinking about space and knowing what the consequences of that are is not trivial. And you
know, I think that one of the things that given, for example, that we had a paradigmatic way,
a different way of thinking about matter, namely that's made of molecules, then one had ideas like
that heat could be microscopic feature of the motion of molecules and so on. And so similarly,
now that we have a different paradigmatic idea about the structure of space, we get to ask all
these questions. And, and for instance, and you know, the questions that I suppose are the most
pressing as far as I'm concerned are, you know, how do we actually know, how do we know that we
know what we're talking about? You know, how do we get sort of, for example, sort of bizarre,
completely unexpected phenomena that go out and look for and they're actually there. And that,
that's, you know, that, that's what, that's when you feel really good about theories is when, I mean,
to me, what, what's made me feel really good about this theory is that everything just seems to line
up, it seems to fall into place. It's like, I didn't understand how this worked. And now I do.
Actually, one thing we should talk about is quantum mechanics.
Yeah, I'd love to get to that. But before we do, just kind of press here on that point a little bit.
So you showed us an animation a little while ago, starting with, you know, a very simple structure
like a node and presumably behind the scenes, there was some rule for updating and take this
node and replace it by two nodes that are connected in some way and so forth. So do you have a very
specific rule for updating a graph, which is the rule that gives rise to, you know, features like
general relativity on some aggregate scale? No. And that's the, that's the whole point, in a sense.
This is what I wondered about. It's like, okay, we're looking for the rule. And then one day,
we might say, gosh, we got the rule and we hold it up and we say, this is the rule for our universe.
And then the next question is, well, why did we get this rule and not some other rule? And that
really confused me for quite a long time. Until I understood this idea of the really add, which is
the idea that all possible rules are being used and that we are merely seeing a slice of that.
Right. But I'm saying we beings, we computationally bounded beings whose processing is so slow compared
to the speed. Is there a rule that we beings are somehow focused upon from the language that you're
using? Yeah, I mean, there'll be some, my guess is there's a class of such rules. So for example,
let's do the analogy in fluid dynamics. The equations of fluid dynamics work for water
as well as for air, even though the structure of water molecules and air molecules is completely
different. And that's, it's the same thing here that there are, we already know this. I mean,
there are many different underlying rules that inevitably, for observers like us,
have these characteristics. So now, if you ask, depending on what kind of question you ask,
if you're asking questions about air and water, there's certain detailed questions you might ask,
which will distinguish molecular structure of those two materials. And so similarly here,
there's something where presumably, as we become more precise about what kind of observer we are,
we will home in on saying, oh, it's this rule that we're attributing the behavior of the universe
to rather than that one. But that's, you know, I think what we've, what we've observed is that
there are, you know, there are at least wide classes of rules that have this characteristic,
just like there are in statistical mechanics of, of leading to sort of the kind of behavior that
we, that we expect to see, so to speak. So for example, the rule for that picture of the, of
the merging black holes is not the same rule as they used for the other picture, slightly different
rule, but it's a simple, they're both incredibly simple rules. And, you know, the one for the
black hole merger could have been that same rule, but then we would have had to just,
as you correctly observed, setting up the initial conditions for that is not trivial,
as it isn't trivial for the Einstein equations either. And it's just, you know, the technical
difficulty of doing that was made easier by choosing a particular rule to look at rather than,
rather than that other rule. But again, not to get too far in the weeds. Are there
particular rules that say, give you Einstein's equations plus, say, a higher order derivative
expansion where you maybe have curvature squared or curvature to the fourth terms where other set
of rules don't do that? I mean, is it, is it that level of precision between? Eventually, yeah,
eventually you will get that just as if you look at fluid flow, and you look at, for example,
hypersonic flow, eventually you see down to the molecules, and then it matters what the molecules
are like. But so we can't distinguish. So you give, you know, at the level of general activity,
we can't distinguish when we're looking at the higher order corrections. And that, you know,
by the way, the, the, the, the downer about the higher order corrections is the scale that determines
importance is the elementary length. So when we're looking at, or the elementary energy or
whatever else. So if we're looking at something that's 100 orders of magnitude bigger than the
elementary length, those effects are pretty small. We have a something of a hope that in critical
black holes, black holes, you know, whether, whether the effective sort of, I hate to call it
angular momentum, because it's, it's all, it's all such a fake in black holes, the spinning of
black holes, but you probably have a better way to explain this. But the, you know, the parameter
that determines essentially the rotation rate of black holes, yes, the, you know, at the critical,
you know, at the j equals m critical black hole point, what happens in our models, which is pretty
cute, is the essentially a piece of the universe is hanging by a causal thread to other parts of
the universe. So if you were to increase above that, you would essentially break off a piece of
the universe. And so what happens right at that point is that the sort of the piece of the universe
that might break off is attached by only a small number of causal edges. And so there's the possibility
that there will be sort of the effect of discreteness will show up in that case. And for example,
sort of lumpiness in the gravitational radiation emitted by black holes in that state, things
like this, because one is sort of, it's like having a gravitational microscope where you've,
you've pulled things apart right to the point where you're kind of seeing down to the underlying
structure of space. But again, that these are, these are all, you know, the question of when,
and when it comes to effects like that, yes, they absolutely depend on the specific rule that
you're using. But when you're looking at the overall black hole, you know, the merger of two
big black holes, it doesn't make any difference, just as it doesn't make difference in the case
of flow dynamics. Right. So let's turn then having beaten away at Einstein's equations in general
relativity for a while here, if we turn to quantum mechanics, quantum mechanics is of course,
in many ways, a sloppy or messy subject compared to the pristine beauty of the general theory
of relativity. It certainly took a lot of hands over many years to put together what ultimately
we're going to be celebrating, I guess, 100th anniversary in 2025, 2026, you know, Schrodinger's
equation, Heisenberg's matrix mechanics, wherever you wanted data. But there's a lot in quantum
mechanics today that many of us, well, I should say some of us are not particularly comfortable
with. We have the issues of the measurement problem in quantum mechanics. We have the
question of the interpretation of quantum mechanics. So when we talk about quantum mechanics,
obviously, I'm so deeply interested to hear your approach, but also maybe at the outset,
you can tell us, will it give us any insight into the questions that are still faring the
brows of quantum mechanicians who think about the foundations of quantum mechanics worldwide?
Yeah, I think so. I mean, you know, I feel more comfortable with quantum mechanics. I almost think
that I understand quantum mechanics. My friend Dick Feynman, who'd worked on quantum mechanics
his whole life, was very fond of saying nobody understands quantum mechanics. And I think I
am getting closer to the point where I can say I actually understand quantum mechanics.
So let me explain what I think I understand. I mean, so we talked about what's the universe
made of. It's made of this giant network, and this network is getting updated, and these little
rewrites are happening. One of the things that you can ask is there's a rule that says how to
do these rewrites. The question is, is there a unique way that these rewrites can happen,
given a particular state of the universe? And the answer is no. There are many possible
orderings, many possible different, you can say, I'm going to do this update now,
and then I'm going to do this update, I'm going to do that update first and so on.
There are many different orderings for those updates. And each of those different orderings
defines a different microscopic history for the universe. So in a sense, what you have is
you can have a state of the universe, you can have two different possibilities for how you
update it, they lead to two different branches of history, somewhat less obviously,
they can also be something where you have two different states of the universe,
and when you rewrite them, they end up being in the same state. You can have this branching,
merging structure that you get. And we call these things multi-way graphs. And actually,
it's turned out that after we sort of discovered that they're relevant for physics,
we've been finding multi-way graphs everywhere. And in fact, the very fact that they seem to
describe some aspects of physics, we've been able to export ideas from physics to a whole bunch
of other fields, like mathematics, like distributed computing, maybe like biology,
all kinds of areas. So it's been really interesting to see that this structure of
so many things can happen, you have branching and merging. Give it a very simple example.
You play a game like Tic Tac Toe, and you start with a board in a particular state.
Now you can make one move, or you can make another move. And you can build up this graph,
this game graph of all the possible moves that you can make in Tic Tac Toe,
and eventually somebody wins, somebody loses. But there's this graph, and sometimes there can be
different moves you make, which end up with the same state of the board,
even though the moves were different. So it's kind of this picture of many branches of time
that are happening in the universe. And so then the question, the idea of quantum mechanics,
ends up being kind of you're looking at those many branches of history. And when you ask a question
like, well, okay, so let's speak, and we can go in different directions in quantum mechanics.
But one question is, what does the observer of quantum mechanics, what does the observer do?
Well, the thing you have to realize is the observer is embedded in the system.
So the observer, the observer's mind is also branching and merging. So quantum mechanics
becomes this bizarre story of what does a branching and merging mind believe is happening in a
branching and merging universe. And this is where this idea that we are persistent in time
becomes critical. Because if we were just flowing through all those branchings and mergings,
we wouldn't have a view that we are, we wouldn't have this idea that we have a definite experience
through time. But as soon as we assert ourselves, we're having a definite experience in time,
we have to kind of conflate many of these branches of history. And the fact that it is consistent to
do that as a non-trivial thing you have to show is the case. And the extent to which we see the
effects of there being many branches is essentially the essence of seeing that there are quantum
effects. That's kind of a very rough picture. I mean, I can't help but jump in, as I suspect
many who are watching this would think as well, and again, disabuse me. It feels like Everett.
It feels like the many worlds of quantum mechanics. Is it just that? Or is there something different?
I don't think so. I think the big thing that those guys didn't have was merging. And I think
merging is really important. No, you can definitely have merging. I mean, if you do
double slit experiments and you're superposing the distinct trajectories, I think merging
is definitely part of that story, too. Well, I don't know. I'm always really bad about,
okay, so my way of talking about other people's theories tends to be this. I either really do
the history and try and understand in great detail what actually happened, or I think I have nothing
to say. And this is a case where I really have not done the history. So I don't really know.
But my impression is the popular version of many worlds tends to be kind of our consciousness
could flow on one of these possible branches. And it is sort of arbitrary which branch we're on.
And that's kind of why we see things probabilistically. That's kind of not a picture.
And again, it may not be fruitful to go down this, but I think many Everettians would say that our
consciousness itself divides and flows along distinct trajectories. And in some sense, the
probabilities, which is a very subtle question, emerge because somehow there's a greater measure,
a greater weight placed on our consciousness observing one outcome versus another. And this
is a great deal of controversy in how you define that measure and how to really operationally
make sense of probabilities in a universe where everything happens. But yes, I think that would
be closer to the spirit of an Everettian. Yeah, but so I think maybe the difference here is that
we're talking about sort of a, the observer is an extended object in what we call branchal space.
The observer spans, the individual mind spans many different branches of history. And so it's
not that, and the individual mind, which believes that it has a single thread of experience,
spans many branches of history, and is having to make, you know, is having to enforce consistency
conditions to say, yes, it's really true that there's just one thread of experience. And
it's not, it's nontrivial to establish all those consistency conditions and make sure that they
work out, so to speak. And how do you do that? I mean, how do you impose those consistencies?
Is that just from a rule from the outside where you say I need to impose?
Interesting question. Okay, so this is, we don't know all of this. In fact, I'm just a thing that
I'm just writing right now is about what I call observer theory, which is an attempt to have sort
of an idealized version of what an observer does, just as things like Turing machines are idealized
versions of what computers do. And the fundamental thing that observers do is the equivalence things.
You know, there's all the complexity of the world. And the observer is taking some sort of
digest of all that complexity in the world and stuffing it into a finite mind. That's basically
what you look at all kinds of different observers. And it's, it's, it's nontrivial. So for example,
in the case of gases, you can say an observer could be a piston that's measuring the pressure
in the gas. And there are lots of different particular molecular impacts that could happen.
But to the piston, all it cares about is the aggregate of all those impacts and how the piston
is going to be pushed. And it's a matter of physics that the piston has a, you know,
there's a, it's a much more rigid object. And so even though every time a molecule hits it,
it deforms a bit as kind of, so, so you can kind of, but, but the big idea of observers is
the equivalence things. And it's a little bit confusing because in quantum mechanics, the,
the big, oh, I measured that, that bit, that qubit or whatever, it's very much more like a,
it's the different kinds of measurement. And really, I think about two kinds. One is things
that aggregate stuff. And the other is things like weighing balances, where it's either heavier on
one side or heavier on the other side. And a lot of what's done in kind of the quantum information
style of quantum mechanics is more like weighing balances than it is like the kind of the aggregate
thing. What, what people do when they extract chemistry out of quantum mechanics and say,
yes, we really have a water molecule that really has this shape, even though quantum mechanics
is talking about lots of different shapes, that's more of the aggregation kind of kind of measurement.
Yeah. This, this question of, of what kind of, okay, so what is the dynamics of measurement?
In our models, there certainly is an underlying dynamics to measurement, the cost of measurement,
so to speak. We don't really know how that works yet. In fact, I'm literally just the,
the section right up on my computer is called the cost of observation. So it's, it's the,
the, but what we can roughly see is this, there are, let's say you're trying to make a quantum
computer and you're trying to use the fact that there are many threads of history. That's kind of
what the, the big idea of a quantum computer is, you get to sort of run lots of computations in
parallel. Yes. The, the, the thing that's difficult with a quantum computer is reading out the answer
and getting, and getting it to fit in that single thread of experience that we humans have.
Yes. Now, normally in quantum mechanics, we just say, it's a measurement and it's just sort of a,
you know, an instantaneous thing. We don't talk about how it works. It's just a mathematical
construct. In our models, we do get to actually talk about how do these equivalences get established.
We don't have a great model for that yet. We can say sort of how many elementary operations
have to happen to make these equivalences occur. We can kind of try and count those.
And so for example, if we do start counting those, it's not, doesn't look good with kind of the
formal success of quantum computing. It seems like what you gain in those many threads of history,
you lose in knitting together the threads of history so that we as humans can conclude
that a definite thing happened. So that, that's a, but, but kind of this, this idea,
you know, can we, can we look inside the measurement process? The answer is a bit,
but I'm not happy with how far we've got on that. But presumably you can say with, with certainty,
or correct me if I'm wrong, that you do not have anything like collapse of the wave function.
That is not the way. Yeah. Gosh, it's so hard to say because, because, you know, the
when our observers aggregate sort of different parts of history, I, I don't know how does,
I don't know how to relate that necessarily. Do you have unitary, do you have global unitary?
Yes, yes. Then, then it's pretty, yeah. So I suspect that, you know, the, the old ideas of
collapse of the wave function probably are not going to be, going to be singled out in the
right. But so by the way, just to give another piece of what, what's going on. So
we have this multi-way graph of all these different parts of history.
And one of the things you can do is say, let's look at what state things got to at a particular
time. Let's make a particular sort of cut through this multi-way graph. And then we ask, well,
what's, you make that cut, what's the kind of spatial direction of that cut? We know time is
going down, let's say, what's across? We call that branch shield space, the space of quantum
branches. And we say again, what is branch shield space? One more time. It's the, it's the, it's,
you make this multi-way graph. So imagine you're playing tic-tac-toe, you've got all these different
possible, possible moves you can make. Now you say at a particular time, let's just slice across
all those possibilities. And we've got a bunch of those little ends. If this is the move that
got made. Now, what is the coordination of branch shield space? What we tend to do is to say, what
is the common ancestry of those? So we've got two little, you know, states here, we say states that
were, had a common ancestor one step back, we say those are connected by an edge in a branch
shield graph. And then we look at that large-scale branch shield graph. And that gives us a space
just like we're constructing physical space out of this hypergraph. We construct this branch
shield space. And so then the question is, what's the interpretation of branch shield space? And
okay, our, in certain approximations, our guess is that branch shield, that position in branch
shield space is quantum phase. So in other words, what, in standard quantum mechanics, one of the
things that one sets up in the mathematics. You literally mean the phase of a wave function?
I mean the phase of a wave function, the phase of a quantum amplitude. So that, in other words,
that, that what, you know, standard quantum mechanics, you know, complex numbers are a big
thing. And, you know, there's this idea that we don't describe things in terms of probabilities,
we describe in terms of quantum amplitudes, quantum amplitudes are complex numbers.
My guess is that the packaging of sort of magnitude of the, of the, of, of the quantum
amplitude and phase of the quantum amplitude into a single complex number is the same mistake that
Minkowski made, packaging space and time into a single space-time object. So my guess is that,
that the, the magnitude is associated with the counting of paths in the multi-way graph,
and the phase is associated with the position in branch shield space that you end up.
So now his work, his work gets really wild. So now the question is, how do you think about
gd6 in these, essentially in the multi-way graph? You're thinking about kind of shortest paths,
and you're thinking about how do the shortest paths get formed, and what deflects the shortest paths?
So what, and again, I'm alighting a bunch of sort of technical detail, not all of which I would
say we're, we're, I consider we've completely nailed down, but the qualitative picture is the
presence of energy momentum deflects these paths in this multi-way graph or effectively in branch
shield space. And so what we're saying is that, that energy momentum is sort of moving around where
we end up in branch shield space. So in other words, energy momentum is, is changing our quantum
phase. And so that, you know, what, what, and in quantum mechanics, the path integral is precisely
saying that the presence of relativistically invariant, you know, energy momentum, the action
is what changes the quantum phase. And so what we're saying is that, which I find very amazing,
is that what in physical space, gravity is the effect of energy momentum on deflecting gd6 in
physical space. In the, in branch shield space, the energy momentum deflects, also deflects gd6,
but it deflects effectively gd6, which are associated with, with position in branch
shield space. So in other words, what, what in physical space is gravity deflecting things in,
in branch shield space is the path integral associated with the way that energy momentum
changes quantum phase. Is it just a technical detail? I mean, the action is not quite energy,
right? Indeed. So indeed, is that, is that, that's a technical detail. I mean, you can,
you can, you know, it seems to work out correctly. I mean, it's, it's this, you know,
you get the right sign, you get the right sign, you get the right sign between
kinetic and potential. And yes, I think so. I mean, I, you know, I will say that, that
the, you know, let me, let me rank the kind of ways in which these derivations have been done.
Okay. Physicists have a way of doing derivations, which mathematicians say are hopelessly
un-rigorous. Okay. And, and for example, the derivation of, you know, the gas laws or something
from molecular dynamics, that is hopelessly mathematically un-rigorous. It, it, it, I think
can be made more rigorous by thinking about computational reducibility and so on. But it's,
it's in the traditional way of doing it. It's, so the thing, the derivations that we have are,
I would say on the slightly more risque end of physicists derivations. Okay. And we are working
hard to fill those in with things that are more mathematician, you know, style derivations. But
that particular thing, I, that particular thing is not an issue because Lagrangian density is what,
why is that? That's because I'd have to think about this. I haven't thought about this for a
while, but, but that, that particular thing is not an issue. So let me turn to maybe a more
conceptual issue that I'm unclear on. Where would something like the Born rule come from?
Yeah, good question. You know, just again for the audience that, you know, Max Born famously
1926 gave us the, what we believe is the right interpretation of a quantum wave function in
terms of what it means for our observations. You take the norm squared of the wave function or
the amplitude, as Steve was saying, and, and from that you get the probability of getting this or
that result. But that sort of comes from the outside. You know, it's not in the basic equations
that, you know, they're, they're dynamics of the system. So how does it show up or does it show
up? We have arguments, right? We have arguments for it. I do not think they're mathematically
adequate. And actually we're just, that's something just one person who's been working on this has
just been working on that and seems to have made some progress in that, that area of being able to
sort of rigorously derive the Born rule. I mean, you can, we can argue for it, but I would say that,
that, you know, we should be able to just outright derive it and we haven't been able to do that yet.
Now let me give an indication of something like the double-slut experiment, a typical quantum
experiment of roughly how one thinks about that in these models, because it's a little weird.
So, you know, what happens? You've got this photon, it can go through either one slit or the other.
One of the mysteries is that it can have interference, where destructive interference,
where, you know, you'd say, well, the photon must have gone through this slit or that slit.
How can it be the case that at some particular place on the screen behind,
there are just no photons arriving? Yeah. Okay. So in our models, what seems to happen is that
these two photons wind up, they, you know, they go through these slits and they wind up at some
place in physical space. They also wind up at some place in branchial space. And both photons
go through slits and they wind up in a particular place in physical space, a particular place in
branchial space. And what seems to happen is the following. But I'm sorry, why two photons? I don't
mean to get, but I mean, I would love you to explain this with one photon. Okay, okay, okay. We
could say one photon that lets, you know, this question of, okay, we could say one photon and
its, you know, its amplitude, to use the traditional way of thinking about it, winds up
partly in one place in physical space, partly in one place in branchial space. Okay. So this
question of what qualitatively is destructive interference? I think the picture is this. The
observer is an extended but localized sort of thing in branchial space. So it is observing a
piece of branchial space that's extended, but it's finite. But now what ends up happening, I think,
is that these two sort of possibilities for the photon wind up at two different ends of
branchial space. And so an observer who is a bounded observer in branchial space just says,
I don't know what happened to the photon because I can't construct a reality in which I see both
pieces so to speak. So, and that's kind of where did the photon go? Well, it got lost in branchial
space. And I mean, that's a very qualitative way to put it. But can you give me some feel for where
I get the interference fringes in the double slit from that? Yeah, I mean, okay, so you have to dig
much deeper into kind of this mapping between quantum phase and position in branchial space.
And as I say, I mean, this is another one of these things where the mathematics we have a kind
of a hokey derivation of this, which I'm not satisfied with, in which one does get interference
fringes, but I'm not convinced by it. It's really it's this question of
the understanding of what branchial space is and how it works is complicated. It's a different kind
of space than people have seen before, kind of understanding how it relates to the Hilbert space
that one sees in quantum mechanics is not, you know, those pieces are not put together. So,
you know, I can give, you know, it is interesting to see in our models, what I find one of the
interesting things is that there are phenomena in physics where we can give kind of logical
arguments for why they are that way, but we've not been able to give mechanistic arguments for
why they are that way. So for example, another one is time dilation and relativity. So here's a
way to think about that in our models. So, you know, it's for other people's benefit, I mean, it's
more or less the, you know, things that are going faster, time seems to run slower for them.
So in our models, what is, you know, the running of time is this computational process. So a thing
stays in one place, and it computes its next state, next state, next state. Now let's say the
thing is moving. In order to move, it has to reconstruct itself in different places in space.
That reconstruction process costs computational effort. There are computations needed to do that
reconstruction of the thing at different places in space. So what happens is you're using up
computation, your computation budget, repositioning yourself, reconstructing yourself at a different
place in space. So you have less computation budget left over, so to speak, to update yourself in
time. And that's the sort of, in our models, that's the mechanistic explanation of time dilation,
which is, to me, I mean, you know, it's, we can derive time dilation easily by sort of logical
arguments, so to speak. But you get like the right, the right factor? I mean, you get gamma,
gamma over the square, one minus v squared over, absolutely. So you must put in the speed of light,
right? I mean, that certainly is not something that your model gives you from the outset.
That's just a, but there is some ratio that naturally is the speed of the object to the
speed of light. Yes. Yes. And the reason that happens, okay, is when you, in, in space, there's
this big network, but the thing that really matters in space-time is the causal graph that says,
this update happened here, how is it related to some other update that happened? So some updates
are time-like related in the sense that the next update can't have happened until the previous
one has already happened. Some updates can be space-like, separated in the sense that they're,
you know, they could happen simultaneously. And so what's happening is in this causal graph,
effectively, all the causal edges are in some sense going at the speed of light.
And these causal edges are, by definition, kind of light-like edges. And so what you're,
what you're looking at is then, then the derivation is actually rather straightforward.
I see. It's just like a geometrical factor then at that point between how you slice the,
yes, yes, that's right.
If you don't, can we go back to quantum mechanics?
So, yes, there's a question there. Do you have any means by which you take the classical limit of,
I mean, because, you know, the, if I understood correctly, the starting point for getting to a
quantum description was this fact that you could have these, these different branches from applying
your rules, say, in different orders. I don't see how you sort of continuously get rid of that,
which is normally how we think of getting to the classical limit. You know, we have this
idea of h bar goes to zero, which is a weird idea since h bar is actually dimensionful,
but we can make sense of it. So, how do you take that limit?
Right. So, I mean, it's the same thing as in space. So, you know, getting to,
in, in space, there's this, it's a question of how big is the observer relative to the,
the elementary length in space? Yeah. And so, similarly here, how big is the observer in
branchial space relative to kind of these elementary sort of distances between branches?
And so, h bar is roughly, I mean, qualitatively, not some, is roughly just as the speed of light
is associated with, you know, given, okay, so given a certain amount of time, given one
elementary time, how far did the causal edge go in one elementary time? Answer went the speed of
light times the elementary time. High definition. Right. And so, roughly, it's the same kind of
thing that after one elementary time, the branchial edges are roughly h bar away from each other
in branchial space. Okay. So, so by the way, that means that in the way our model is set up,
just as there's a speed of light that governs the maximum rate of, which information can propagate
in physical space, there is an analogous quantity, the maximum entanglement speed that is the maximum
speed that information can propagate in branchial space. And that's a new thing that hasn't, hasn't
been a story in quantum mechanics before. And that's a thing which we are kind of wondering
whether when, for example, black holes merge, whether there is a sort of the rate of merging
is partly limited by the speed of light and partly limited by the maximum entanglement speed.
And so, that's, we don't know. Again, as I said, there's this one parameter in our model,
so elementary length, elementary time, or maximum entanglement speed. You can pick any of these.
We don't know the maximum entanglement speed. But, you know, that's another thing that, for
example, limits the rate at which black holes can merge, that quantum black holes can merge.
But does it also, again, maybe I'm again interpreting it too much of a face value,
but if we have a typical case of an entangled pair, are you saying that if I measure the spin of
particle 1, that particle 2, say, would have the opposite spin in the canonical setup,
but somehow there's a propagation speed, which is to do with this entanglement speed?
Yes, but it's not in physical space.
Sure, I understand that, yeah.
Yeah, right. So, there's a, I mean, these are good questions and, you know, this is sort of
stuff we're actively trying to figure out. I mean, in other words, there's a bunch of these kind
of quantum constructions of, you know, CH, SH, whatever it is, these sort of quantum correlation
constructions. The question is, how do those work in our models? And can we find a sort of
a physical way in which, in some quantum many-body system or something, we can actually measure a
maximum entanglement speed? We haven't figured that out yet.
And so, where would you put the goal? I mean, for instance, back in the 80s,
the goal of a string theorist like me and many of my colleagues back then, we envisioned that
we have this approach to physics that really only has one parameter in it, the string tension,
the string length, and we envisioned one day being able to calculate from first principles
things like the mass ratios of the elementary particles, the coupling strengths of how these
particles influence each other and how the various forces of nature act on these particles.
As the years went by, we began to modify our view of what was likely achievable because even
though the fundamental theory didn't have any knobs in it to tune, when we began to look at
things like the theory had extra dimensions and they needed to be compactified to a smaller scale,
we began to see knobs and things that we could vary entering in the theory through the
precise shape and size of the extra dimensions and various adornments which those extradimensional
spaces supported. Where are you? Do you envision that this Earl-like computational view to how
reality functions will, in principle, predict the mass ratios of the electron to the muon one day?
Where's the ambition and where do you think you are in that process?
I think the answer is yes, it will predict it. But it will predict it for observers like us.
And by the way, even in traditional quantum field theory, the mass of the electron
depends on the observer. In other words, the mass of an electron in the renormalization group,
for example. You mean in terms of the energy scale at which you measure it? Is that what you mean?
Exactly. You measure the mass of the electron by kicking the electron a certain amount and
that gives you the mass and the amount you kick it, it gives you a different mass. And there's
quantum field theory once being able to calculate that running mass, so to speak. We already know
that there is observer dependence to these things. But we probably have a good enough character.
Probably we have a good enough characterization of us as observers that I think my expectation
is yes, these things will be computable for observers like us. Let me give you some predictions
about these meta predictions about models. For example, I think black holes and particles
are going to turn out to be incredibly closely related and may even be pretty much the same
thing. That is that they're both defects in the structure of spacetime.
They've come from very different places in general relativity and in the ways we've
thought about particles. But that's one possibility. I think that this question of,
for example, in quantum field theory and the standard model of particle physics and things,
we have this local gauge invariance idea, this idea of what leads to fundamental forces and so on.
Local gauge invariance, it looks fairly clear how that will emerge in our models.
The question is, compact league groups naturally? Yes. So just like the limits of this
hypergraph is, okay, so when we think about this hypergraph, we think about all the different
nodes in the hypergraph and we can say these nodes in the hypergraph are at a certain spatial
distance apart. We can attribute some spatial distance between them. But inside that hypergraph
is bundled up all the internal degrees of freedom as well as the external, as well as the physical
space. There is also internal degrees of freedom. So what we have to do more technically, we're
dealing with, can we distinguish the base space and the fibers in a fiber bundle? Can we?
That's what I was about to ask you. Yeah, okay. Right. So the issue is, and we've got toy models
of this where we can sort of distinguish the aspects of the hypergraph that are the base
space, the physical space, versus the aspects of the fibers, the internal degrees of freedom.
Presumably you actually really need sheet theory, I would imagine, if you're doing this.
Yes. Yes. And it very, I mean, one of the things that's fun with this is I had never
really understood category theory before that, you know, really working on this and we need the
most limiting case of kind of higher category theory. I mean, this really odd object is deeply
related to things that Grossendijk studied in the so-called infinity groupoid. And it's very,
it's very lovely that these things are, I mean, one of the things that to me is exciting about
the things we're doing is that, you know, it's one thing would be, oh, is string theory right?
Are we right? You know, these are two different kind of poles, but I don't think that's the way
it is at all. I think that most of the theories in mathematical physics that have been well developed
have something useful to say. And, you know, we may have a machine code that is a thing from which,
into which these can all be attached, but it isn't the case that it's like, oh, that was the wrong
track. It's like, and that same thing is happening with some of these sort of higher mathematical
concepts. But do you see any evidence of things like, you know, SU3 cross SU2 cross U1? I mean,
I mean, this is the question that that just like, okay, so let me explain. And in our big graph,
you can say, oh, there are these, there's kind of this spatial extent. Now you can ask, what about,
for example, rotational invariance? You're at a particular place in the graph, and you say,
if I were to rotate things, would I have something that looks the same? Well, that's a
graph theoretical question, because you can wrote, you can, you can say, you've got one graph that's
here, and then I've got another graph that's kind of at an angle. And I can ask, can I match up those
two graphs? Can I make a graph transformation where I'm re retangling the graph, but it's still the
same graph? Okay, it's an automorphism of the graph. And so the question then becomes sort of,
what just like we've said, oh, in the limit, this, this, this graph behaves like a manifold or
something, we can ask when we're looking at these rotation like things, is, is the limit of that
something like a lead group, something like a continuous group? Okay. And so the thing we don't
know is just like we don't can't derive the number three for the dimensions of space. It is, I think
conceivable. I'm not saying it will happen this way. I think it's conceivable that for a wide
class of models that though that everything will be a subgroup of e eight or something that the
that it will necessarily be the case that the thing we derive as being that internal lead group
degree of freedom, so to speak, has to have certain characteristics. I don't know that
that's the case. But I think the things we're seeing so far, make it not completely crazy that
that would be the case. Make it a make it a cross eight. And then we have definite resonance.
Yes. Yes. Right. Well, I mean, we just don't know this is this is one of these things where you're
kind of, you know, there is a there's it's, it's, it's a, you know, the thing that is both exciting
and kind of humbling is, you know, the model is right there. Now we just have to do the hard work
of figuring out what his consequences are. And if it turns out the consequences are crazy and don't
agree with what we observe physically, then we're out of luck. But I have to say, at this point,
I'm, that's, I don't think that's going to happen. There's too much. How many people are,
how many people are working? Is it, is it you and a, in a small team or? Well, I mean, it's
locally we have this thing we call Wolfram Institute, which is a small, small group of people.
But there's, there's a wider collection of people who worked on different, different aspects of
this. And I think that the, I mean, the, I don't know, it's, I haven't counted because it's not
really a, I mean, there's a, there's a small inner group, so to speak, which is a modest number of
people. But there's, you know, that, and there's a certain amount of bridge work that's been done
to whether it's to categorical quantum mechanics, or to other kinds of fields where people are like,
well, you know, we're really working on categorical quantum mechanics, but we're doing it in the
context of the connections to this model. So it's some, I mean, I think the kind of, you know,
the way physics tends, well, I don't know, physics, I, I've been out of physics as a,
I haven't been professionally doing physics in, in, in 40-something years, but it used to be the
case. I, I happened to be lucky enough to work on physics, you know, in the late 1970s, when it was
having kind of a golden age of the sort of arrival of quantum field theory, and then subsequently
cosmology, which I was quite involved in. And, you know, that was the kind of the, the, my,
my sort of feeling for the, at that time, there was this great tendency for everybody, you know,
some new thing would happen, and every physics, yes, right. And I think, you know, that would be
nice if that, if that, you know, more people, the thing about what we're doing is that,
you know, some of it is very paradigmatically similar to mathematical physics. Some of it
really plugs into mathematical physics, but quite a lot of it does not. Quite a lot of it is more
like distributed computing, you know, mathematical logic, just, you know, computer experimentation,
things like this. And it is somewhat paradigmatically different. And, and also I would say that,
that, you know, this is what I get for having spent 40 years building tools. The tools we have are
pretty, you know, streamlined and efficient. And there's a lot of things where it's pretty easy
for me, given those tools, to jump pretty far relative to what people are used to doing and
kind of the steps that they take in doing mathematical physics and so on. So that makes it,
you know, there's a lot of kind of alien stuff that gets made possible by that. And that I think
makes it, you know, in a sense, I've been sort of, you know, as time goes on, that, you know,
the tower that we're building gets a bit taller and it gets a bit more difficult to kind of,
you know, when people sort of get involved, we do the summer school and winter school
about this project. And, you know, that's sort of, it's getting challenging to fit kind of the
what we know so far into a few weeks of lectures. And that's, you know, I think that that that's
kind of, but, you know, to me, you know, the more people we can get involved, the better.
Right now, I mean, one of the frustrating things is there are a lot of experimental
physicists who are like, we've got a telescope, we've got a particle accelerator, you know,
we would like to look for something unusual and interesting, just tell us what to look for.
Right. And we're still in the situation where we're like, we don't really know yet.
Hey, we've been in that position in string theory for quite some time.
So you see, but this is, this is why we need to make the right bridge to string theory,
because we want to make use of everything you guys have figured out. And maybe you'll find what
we figured out useful. I think one of the things that's been exciting for me about this project
is that, for example, I said, there'll be, you know, people said, what are you working on?
I say fundamental theory of physics, people say, oh, that doesn't sound very practical.
And I'm like, yeah, you know, it might have applications in 200 years.
And the surprise to me is that I was wrong about that. There are actually applications now to
distributed computing, because the model that we have of the structure of space time is basically
a model that you can think of as events happening and so on. And that is, you can think of that
as being a big distributed computation. And so the ways that we have to think about space time
now becomes ways to think about, now become ways to think about distributed computing.
We're starting to think about, you know, programming in a certain reference frame,
things like this. So we're importing by using the fact that we have a common formalism,
we're able to start importing successes from physics into other areas.
So to my surprise, there actually seem to be some pretty near term applications of
not so much the physics side of this, but the bridge that's made to physics
from the kinds of things we're doing. Yeah. Well, I can make you a pledge right now for whatever
it's worth. You correctly calculate the electron to muon mass ratio, and I will drop everything
that I'm doing. That's going to be a challenging one. Give me something, you know, I've, you know,
the time when we can see what the, you know, it's, you know, getting 206 is, you know, I'm not
counting on that being soon. I have to say, some things about these models have just dropped
much more easily. Like the idea of what energy is, I thought that was going to be a long hard,
I thought this whole thing was going to be a, maybe we could talk about what happens in the
first 10 to the minus 100 seconds of the universe, but we'd never have things to say about kind of
things that are more obviously connected to sort of current reality. I think the other thing that's
been a very interesting surprise is this fact that the methods we're developing are practically
useful to people who are doing things like numerical relativity. That's, that's a thing.
That's right. Yeah, I didn't, I didn't know that, that, that is true. I mean, the numerical, yeah.
Yeah, that seems to be, I mean, I don't know, we've been, Jonathan Gorat, who's
one of the people working on this, who's been, has been traveling around talking to numerical
relativity groups who are starting to use software that he's produced that is based on our models.
So that, that's a, that's encouraging. I'm, I'm done. No, I think, I think that's some,
so yes, electron muon mass ratio, I'm not counting on that one anytime soon.
Right. You know, I might get you an E8. I think an E8 would already be impressive enough.
Well, you know, because of the classification of compact league groups, again, the small
number in some sense of truly distinct ones that are out there, I don't know if that would
am, grab me as fully as it may grab others. But I can't help but make one comment,
which is you noted that in your approach, the relate, there may be a relationship between
black holes and elementary particles. That would be interesting. I don't know if you're aware of
it, but a paper that I wrote with Andy Strominger and Dave Morrison some years ago, we found
something of exactly that sort we found in string theory, that if you have certain
shapes, manifolds to the extra dimensions, and you take a particular sub space within it,
like a sphere, and you collapse it down to a sufficiently small size, it can look like a
black hole for most of that motion. But when you actually collapse it right down to zero,
there's a smoothing of the space in which that black hole turns into an elementary particle.
So there's, yeah, so there's a direct link that we found through certain kind of deformations
of the extra dimensions. That was a direct link between black holes and elementary particles.
So again, whether that has an incarnation in anything that in your approaches,
it just certainly jumped out to me when you said that.
Yeah, yeah, that's very cool. I didn't know that. I mean, I think it's funny because I knew
the physics of 1980 or so pretty well. And then I've been kind of in, it's like a cryonic
freezing where I was only partly paying attention for a long time. But no, I mean,
that type of result, it's interesting. And that's exactly why one should try to make a
better bridge between our models in string theory, because one might be able to see
how that really fleshes out in our models. And then in string theory, see how that really,
you know, this extra dimensions thing is going to, I don't know, we'll see. But I think this idea
that you're kind of lifting out of this hypergraph, both the spatial direction and internal degrees
of freedom, I think is, you know, I don't know how related that is, but I think that's going to wind
up being, you know, I mean, it's that that has a certain, I don't know, there's a certain
colluciclineness or something to the whole, you know, to that whole kind of way of thinking about
things. But, but I would, that will be my, my guess for how that will, how that will end up
working out. And that in fact, you know, again, that that one will, you know, if, if, you know,
as I say, I think the thing that to me is really interesting is, it's not like, in my view, you
know, there's sort of a sense of where mathematical physics has gone. And I just don't think I think
that there's been, I mean, it's kind of analogous, I suppose, to what happened in the early days of
computation where people had different models of computation. And then Turing machines came along.
And that was kind of a way of, of anchoring a bunch of different kinds of ideas. And then you
could take these, these models that have been often much more difficult to understand. And you had
kind of this pretty mechanistic way of thinking about them. And you could build a whole lot of
stuff from it. So I'm kind of, that's my, that's my qualitative view about what, what I think can
happen. And it's, it's a, it's wonderfully exciting stuff. And I think as we all know,
if you're going to shoot for the stars, you've got to be willing to fail miserably. And so you
have to be bold. And so you're certainly being bold and to be fascinating to see how this develops.
So I'd love to check in at some point again, with an update on where things are. Look, I'd also
hope today to speak about, but we'll put it off hopefully for another conversation, if you're
willing to do so, the whole AI stuff and consciousness and free will and all those wonderful ideas.
But, you know, when you have an opening in your schedule in the future, it'd be great to connect
again. I'd be happy to talk about that. I've got the, this week's fun thought is quantum LL lamps,
but we'll leave that. There you go. Okay. So that's intriguing enough. All right. So thank you so
much for joining us. And we'll, we'll talk again at some point in the not too distant future.
Yep. Lovely to, lovely to chat. Great. Thank you. All right. Everybody that wraps up this
live session, which if I'm being completely honest and too much information and partly
wrapping up because I've got to use the facilities and sitting here any longer will be definitely
dangerous, but it's been a wild ride in this conversation with Stephen Wolfram, as we expected
it to be, trying to perhaps find the underlying computational structure to all the things that
we as physicists have for the last hundred years been enamored with statistical mechanics,
special relativity, general relativity, quantum mechanics, quantum field theory. And who knows?
I mean, the thought that there might be some deeper underlying structure that allows us to
understand where these laws come from and as well tied to the fact that we are the observers that
are aware of these laws. Well, it certainly is bold, big, exciting. Who knows if it will pan out,
but that's the nature of being at the cutting edge. So thanks so much for joining us for this live
conversation. Please subscribe to our YouTube channel or subscribe at worldsciencefestival.com
to be updated on the various programs that we are undertaking. About a week ago,
we released a wonderful conversation on AI. Some of you may have seen it. If you've not,
you should check it out with Yann LeCun, Sebastian Bubeck and Tristan Harris, where we
really describe the inner workings of some of the LLMs that Steve Wolfson just made reference to,
as well as discussed some of the potential dangers or as some of the programs suggested,
the over-inflated view of those dangers of AI going to the future. We'll be releasing shortly.
I believe our next release will be a program on cosmology that we had at our live events in
September. Please, as well, keep your eye on. We will shortly release a really wonderful conversation
on string theory, the state of string theory that we had at that event with David Groves,
Ed Whitton, Andy Strominger and myself, really trying to give a feel for where we are. Here we
are 2023. These ideas began in 1968. Where are we in the process of trying to realize the
potential of string theory? That program will be released in the not too distant future, as well.
I think that's about it on the updates. Again, subscribe to our YouTube channel.
Go to worldsciencefestival.com. Subscribe to our newsletter. We will be having a number of
these live conversations going forward. For now, that's it here from Columbia University.
My office here, this worldsciencefestival live event. I'm Brian Greene. Thanks for joining us.
