If you want to follow up on any of the specific details, all the peer reviewed stuff is here.
There are some more kind of diverse thoughts in this blog and you can always find me at michael.levin at tufts.edu.
So I'd like to convey the following main points today.
First of all, I'm going to talk about the fact that our bodies operate in a multi-scale competency architecture, a kind of problem solving intelligence at every level of organization.
And I'm going to argue that definitive regenerative medicine is going to really require us to understand the collective intelligence of groups of cells and communicating goals to them in this one of the spaces that they live in, which is anatomical morpho space.
I'm going to specifically talk about a set of mechanisms which are endogenous bio electrical networks, and they're becoming a highly tractable interface for top down control of behavior of this collective intelligence.
The tools are now coming online to read and write pattern memories specifically into this protocognitive medium.
I'm going to show you some applications and birth defects regenerative pair and cancer, but also because we're going to focus on some bioengineering here talk about how we go beyond the standard traditional forms, and to really be able to heal restore and make new kinds of living structures.
We have to understand the agential material that we're working with now across the spectrum of different types of materials people have been working for thousands of years with passive materials and now we're getting into active matter and computational material and so on.
The interesting thing about changing the type of material is that different techniques and technologies become appropriate different strategies so when you're dealing with a passive material.
The good news is that everything stays where you put it you basically construct whatever you want to construct piece by piece bottom up.
But the bad news is that all of its functionality is on you, you as the engineer have to make the pieces do everything that you want this machine to do.
Now as we move rightward on the spectrum we enter what we're going to talk about here called agential materials and these are materials with an agenda.
And so you can think about building a tower out of Legos.
And so the property there is that as you as you construct a tower out of these Legos, it's quite easy to do, except that if it falls over that's it, that's the end.
You might think about constructing a tower out of dogs and what's different there is that they're not going to stay where you put them if you use the technologies and approaches amenable to appropriate for a kind of passive material right they're not not going to stay there.
But they but they do offer an interesting interface which is learning. And if you train them to stay like this then you gain something different which is that if you knock the tower over its self healing they will get right back up.
And so the idea there is that you need to use the appropriate kind of approach to the level of agency of your medium.
And so this ends up being a discussion that a lot of people have about machines versus organisms and so our is is your body a machine is it more than the machine and so on.
And what I want to transmit is this idea of context dependent observer dependent fluidity and how we think about these things.
So, if you if you have an orthopedic surgeon, you definitely want that orthopedic surgeon to think of your body as a machine because they're going to use the appropriate tools you know chisels and hammers and things like that right.
But then, but then they send the patient home to heal. And when that patient heals there's all kinds of stuff going on to get from here to here that actually isn't captured by this paradigm at all.
And if there's any kind of psychological component to this to whatever to whatever happened to that patient, you definitely don't want a psychotherapist that thinks of the patient as this kind of machine.
So there are multiple levels and multiple different approaches, and some of the most interesting work is done by people like Fabrizio Benedetti, who says he works on placebo effects and we'll get to this by the end of by the end of the talk.
Words and drugs have the same mechanism of action, and this is incredibly deep it really gets to the bottom of what the what the living organism actually is as a multi scale system that spans a high level cognitive content all the way down to the movement of molecules across cells.
What you can think about is this idea that all these different kinds of this the spectrum of all different kinds of systems can be placed on what I call an axis of persuadability.
This is a way to think about all of these different systems from the perspective of the engineer to ask, what are the kinds of tools what are the approaches that I can use for all of these kinds of systems.
So back here, when you have simple machines, well hardware modification is the only game in town you're not going to convince it of anything you're not going to reward or punish it you have to be rewiring the hardware.
And then you get into some cybernetic approaches with things that have little tiny goals so homeostats and thermostats and things like that. And then there are some interesting systems, which, which allow learning different kinds of training.
And then of course we have a human level and whatever is beyond that as far as metacognition and things like that. And so one question that we have to ask is where do groups of cells fit into this kind of spectrum.
In other words, if we are bio engineers and we're interested in understanding our material, do we have to assume as many people assume that that it lives somewhere down here and so hardware rewiring is really the way to go.
Or might we find that there's actually some tools from these other disciplines that are amenable to this. And this is really critical because a lot of people treat this as a philosophical problem.
As in, well those are just cells they don't have memories or they can't have goals or people say stuff like that but, but I want to emphasize that this is an empirical question this is not you can't decide these things by armchair commitments to philosophical views you have to do experiments.
And that means taking some some tools and concepts from from other disciplines that are appropriate up here, and asking the question what what what kind of a new purchase on control and prediction and construction and invention and novel, novel capabilities
does that give us with our cellular material. Okay, so, so the thing is that developmental biology is really critical for all of these things because the teachers is something very profound that that that physics becomes mind slowly and gradually.
All of us at one point were an unfertilized oversight a simple, a simple cell, a little bag of chemicals, which people who could could look at and say okay well this is clearly amenable to the laws of it to the, to the kind of tools of chemistry and physics, but there's
no, there's no mind there just just chemistry, but eventually we become something like this or even something like this. And what's, what's critical about developmental biology is that it offers no sharp dividing line where you say, Ah, that's what there it is that's when we went from from chemistry to
mind, this is a slow gradual process. So, the self assembly of the body and the simple self assembly and the scale up of cognition is actually actually happened together.
And, and, and this is what we need to understand, if we're going to understand what what cognitive processes are going on here, and what might be there earlier, both evolutionarily and developmentally what might be there earlier antecedents that we can take advantage of for engineering.
So this is the kind of stuff we're made of this is this is what our, what our cells are like this well this happens to be a lacrimaria, it's a free living organism, but, but you get the idea that there's no brain, there's no nervous system there are no stem cells this is one cell.
And this creature is handling all of its physiological metabolic behavioral needs all in one cell it's highly competent in the little tiny goals that this thing has about its other state of affairs around this little little radius.
And when we engineer with these kind of materials and you can see there's a lot more detail here, what what you what you are able to do is is take advantage of an incredible toolkit that evolution has been preparing for over a billion years of all of these kinds of
competencies that otherwise you as the engineer would have to bake in yourself when you're dealing with cells, they already do sensing amplification signal discrimination they do learning they do decision making and so on.
They solve new problems, all of this is there for you in the material.
It's not just at the level of individual cells even below the cell level, something as simple as a gene regulatory network or a pathway a set of molecules that interact with each other can do several different kinds of learning including a
situation sensitization, associate of conditioning so so Pavlovian you know kinds of learning. All of that is present long before you get to a cell, and certainly long before you get to a neuron or a brain or anything like that.
So, so what I'm going to do next is try to show you some of the competencies of the medium just to you know give you a few a few facts that you may not have may not have seen in your biology so far.
So you can start to get a feel for this amazing material that that we're working in. So the first, the first thing I'll show you is this tadpole so so there are no eyes and so so here the nostrils the mouth, the brain the spinal cord, and the gut back here so this is a tadpole.
And what you'll see is that we prevented the primary eyes from forming, but we made an eye appear on its back, we'll talk about that in a little bit, and it turns out that these animals if you test them we made this machine to automate the behavioral testing of
small small model systems with light cues, what you find out is that these animals can see quite well.
And if you if you look where the optic nerve is well this I does make a single optic nerve it goes out it doesn't go to the brain.
It synapses on the spinal cord here, and these animals can see. And so you don't need additional generations of evolution you don't need selection.
In one generation, by radically changing the sensory motor architecture.
It's fine the brain can recognize the information coming in here on this weird itchy patch of tissue on its back as visual data they can learn in visual cues and so on.
The plasticity is amazing. And that gets even even even more incredible when you think about some other model systems these are planarium so these are flatworms.
One of the cool things about flatworms is that they regenerate their body so they regenerate from any fragments that you cut to the record is something like 275 pieces.
They are also immortal and really interesting organism but, but what you can do is you can train them, and if you train them and then cut off their heads which contains the brain.
The tail will sit there, doing nothing until they regrow a new head, and when they regrow a new head and behavior resumes you find out that they remember the original information.
So that leads to ask leads us to ask a couple of interesting questions. Where is the information during during this this regenerative process when I've got as a tail.
And the next question is how is that information imprinted onto the new brain as it develops. So you might think about applications in in human medicine where in in a few years patients with 678 decades of memories personality and so on, have to have
proportions of their brain replaced with the progeny of naive stem cells so some kind of degenerative brain therapeutics.
What's going to happen to those to that patient what what's going to happen to their cognition their memories and so on. But but but here you see the the interface between the memories of the body right so so the morphogenetic memory that enables you to regenerate the same pattern, and
the behavioral memory that of events in three dimensional space, and how those two things come together. To me, one of the most interesting cases is this.
This is a caterpillar. These guys are you can think of them as a kind of soft body robot they have no hard elements so the controller here is this this brain suited for driving that type of embodiment.
In the two dimensional world that they they crawl around and they and they eat leaves, but they have to become this this is a hard body flying kind of thing which lives in the three dimensional world.
And it has a very different brain and during metamorphosis. The brain is basically dissolved it is most of the cells are killed off, but the memories remain. So if you train the caterpillar by by giving it leaves on a particular color.
disc, the butterfly will remember that that that fact now the most amazing thing here is that butterflies don't eat the same things that caterpillars do. So caterpillars eat leaves the butterfly doesn't care about leaves it likes nectar.
And so that means that during this process not only do you have to store information, despite the drastic refactoring of the medium, which is the brain and the central nervous system.
But you also have to remap and generalize from finding leaves to finding a global category called food, and whatever that food is to you now that is what you're going to remember.
So, so it's really interesting to see how how specific memories are generalized and then imprinted onto a new physical architecture in a way that preserves their salience right now now that information you learned in this life, you have a different life in the
but and you don't have the details of the information but you have the generalized lessons that you've learned from there.
And this is, I mean, we don't have even the beginnings of an understanding of how all that actually works. But it has implications for human augmentation new embodiments through through, you know, kind of cyborg architectures and things like that.
So, the reason that that we have these amazing capacities in the living world is that all living beings are made of a kind of a nested multi scale competency architecture where it's not just structurally that you're made of organs which are made of tissues and cells and so on.
But at every level of organization, these structures are solving problems, each of them have little agendas in different spaces different scales of problems, and they're all very good at solving these problems and that this is this this architecture is responsible for for a lot of the magic that we can take advantage of as bio engineers.
Now, when I talk about problem solving, we have to realize that we as humans are pretty good when we're not great but we're pretty good at recognizing intelligent behavior in three dimensional space performed by medium sized agents moving at medium speeds right our, our cognitive system is sort of primed for that so we understand
dogs and apes and birds and maybe an octopus or a whale.
But there are all these other spaces in which living things strive and and navigate and suffer and have successes and failures. There is, there are transcriptional spaces of all possible gene expressions, physiological state spaces, and what we'll talk about most of all today which is anatomical morpha space.
So, these things these things are hard for us as humans to recognize intelligence operating in these different spaces, but just imagine if we had evolved with a primary sense of your blood chemistry if you could, you could directly feel let's say 20 different parameters the way you do with taste and smell and so on.
If you could directly feel your internal blood chemistry, I think we would have no trouble realizing that our liver and our kidneys were intelligent agents navigating the spaces and solving problems during the day and so on.
So let's talk about anatomical morpha space how do collections of cells navigate that anatomical space and I'm going to make the argument that quite quite literally groups of cells are a collective intelligence that navigates anatomical space to understand why this is.
Let's consider this this scenario. So we all start life like this a group of embryonic blastoderms and eventually blastomers rather, and eventually have this cross section through a human torso.
So now look at all the incredible complexity that's here right so so all normal humans have this this amazing order of everything is the right size and shape next to the right thing.
Where does this pattern come from. So, people often tend to say DNA but of course we can read the genomes now we know that none of this is directly in the DNA.
What the DNA actually specifies as proteins the micro level hardware that every cell gets to have, but all of this is the result of the physiological software that that is performed by cells.
So we really need to understand how do cell groups know what to make, when to stop in regenerative medicine we'd like to know how to repair how to convince them if a piece is missing how do we convince these cells to build it again.
And for today we'll talk more about how far can we push this as engineers we'd like to know, actually what's possible what if you wanted these cells to build something completely different.
And so we understand now that this is this is a problem of information that the structure of the body is not directly in the genome, any more than the structure of the nest is laid out in the genome of the termites or the structure of the web is specified in the genome of the
this is all physiological physiological software that we need to understand. So, so in order to embark on this journey and figure out what what what this all means.
I think it's, it's important to think about the end game. So what what what are we trying to do here what's the what's the end of this field when when do we think we've succeeded and we can all go home.
So I think that you can think about this is as a as a something we call the anatomical compiler. So someday, you will be able to sit down and draw at the level of the anatomy, not molecular pathways but at the level of the anatomy, you'll be able to draw the animal plant,
you can draw it or organ that you want whatever whatever it is, and what the system will do is compile that anatomical description into a set of stimuli that have to be given to those cells to build exactly that in this case this nice three headed flatware.
Why do we need it well besides the foundational issues of evolution and computation and so on.
It's an incredibly incredibly practical problem because if we had something like this if we had a way to convince cells to build whatever we wanted them to build birth defects traumatic injury cancer aging general disease.
All of this all of these problems would go away by robotics would would would take off you know this is this is central be our failure to communicate goals to two groups of cells is responsible for a huge part of the unmet need of biomedicine.
The important is that this thing is not a 3D printer it's not about putting individual cells where they go. It's a communications device. It's about translating our goals to that of the collective so that they can deploy their morphogenetic skills.
Now you might think what why don't we have this molecular biology and genetics have been going gangbusters for decades while we already have this. I just want to show you a simple example.
There's a baby axolotl baby axolotl stuff little four legs. Here's a frog tadpole they do not have four legs at the at this stage in my group we make something called a frog a lot.
So frog a lot is a bunch of embryonic axolotl cells a bunch of embryonic frog cells, they make a lovely chimeric embryo. Now I tell you that we have the genome of the axolotl been sequenced we have the gene, the genome of the fraud that's been sequenced.
So those genomes ask a simple question does with the frog a lot will have legs or not.
And so, and so we don't even have the beginnings yet of a of a science to be able to figure that out from this kind of genomic data. And so, so here's where we are.
We're very good at manipulating manipulating molecules and cells.
There are really exciting approaches nowadays, genome editing crispers stem cell biology pathway rewiring protein engineering all of these kinds of things are down at the level of the hardware but what we really don't understand at all and what we would like to control this anatomy
large scale collections of cells make decisions about what to build. And so I'm going to make the argument that biology today and biomedicine in particular is where computer science was in the 50s and 60s.
All this is how you did programming back then right you were you were down at the level of the hardware and you have to interact with the hardware, but the reason that nowadays on your laptop when you need to go from PowerPoint to Microsoft Excel you don't get out your
computer science and start rewiring is because computer scientists perfected this remarkable hierarchy of of tools to deal with software to reprogram certain kinds of media.
And I think this is what we're just beginning to realize in biology, and we need to understand the intelligence and the reprogrammability of our medium.
Now I've used the word intelligence several times what do I mean by it well here's here's the definition I like I like William James definition, the ability to reach the same goal by different means.
This is a very nice cybernetic definition because it doesn't talk about what kind of brain you have it doesn't specify what sort of problem space you're operating in it's it's much more deep than that.
It talks about different levels of competency to reach specific goals, when the system is stymied or deviated from that goal. Okay, so so now let's ask so for the next few minutes, let's talk about what kind of intelligence do cells to deploy what what problems do they saw.
When I say that groups of cells are collective intelligence what do I mean, here's, here's one example.
So this is a cross section through the kidney tubule of a of a newt, and normally there's eight to 10 cells that work together to produce that.
Now one thing you can do with these animals is prevent cell division at early stages which means every cell ends up with multiple copies of its genome you get polyploid newts to you know four and six and eight and things like that.
And when that happens the cells get bigger, but the newt stays the same size and so if you were to look at the at the cross section what you see is that that a smaller number of bigger cells are now involved.
So, so let's let's recap, you can still make a normal newt if you've got the wrong amount of DNA.
If your cell size is incorrect, they will adjust, and then the most amazing part of all which is that if you make absolutely gigantic cells, I think these are five n or six n newts.
One cell will bend around itself, and, and still give you the same kind of structure. The reason that's remarkable is that this is cell to cell communications or this is normal tubular genesis.
This is some sort of cytoskeletal bending it's a different molecular mechanism. So think of what you have here to two key points one is that this is downward causation, in the sense that in the service of an anatomical
different molecular mechanisms are being called up. So your, your medium is good at finding the tools that it has to get at the job done when things change so there's that definition of intelligence.
The other thing is just think about the problem that that newt have coming into the world fundamentally, you don't know how many copies of your genome you're going to have.
You don't know the size of your cells you don't know how many cells you're going to have you don't know any of that you can't afford to take your evolutionary priors to seriously or over train on them as as machine learning folks like to say.
You have to solve this problem from scratch and I think that because of the prevalence of mutation and you can't not not only can you not count on your environment to be exactly the same as it was.
You can even count on your parts to be the same as they were your own components are not going to be the same because of mutation evolutionary change, and of course environment throws a wrench into everything too.
So, so what evolution actually makes is problem solving machines you can't afford to to do the same thing every single time. Now, anatomical goals in in more for space means.
Yes, this reliably a single human egg reliably gives rise to a an anatomically normal human, but so do half embryos and quarter embryos and things like that you when you cut an early embryo into pieces.
You don't get half bodies you get perfectly normal mono zygotic twins triplets quadruplets and so on. That's because they can get to the same ensemble of states this this goal state and anatomical space corresponding to the normal human target morphology.
You can get there from different starting positions and avoiding some some local local maximum.
So, so that that type of navigation of space is really shocking. We by the way we don't have any machines that do this we don't, we're not good at making engineering that works like this you know we don't have anything that you can kind of cut into pieces and it's
still figures out what what to do rebuilds and by the way remaps old memories if you decide to change the structure the way that butterflies do that kind of process is not just for embryo some animals keep it throughout their lifetime so here's your axolotl.
These guys regenerate their eyes their jaws their tails including spinal cord their limbs, their ovaries.
And so if you if you amputate whether here or here or anywhere, it will immediately start to grow and morph and then eventually get eventually rebuild and then it stops to two amazing things.
One is that it grows exactly what's needed from wherever you cut so so it only does what's what's missing. And when does it stop well it stops when the correct salamander arm has been completed.
And that's remarkable because that means it has to know where it's going it has to know what the what the end goal of their journey through anatomical space.
And the reason it's a goal is not just because it's complex and it's sort of an outcome of a bunch of chemistry happening in parallel. It, which what you're seeing here is a high level of effort and measured in metabolic costs and so on high level of effort to get back to the correct
when it has been deviated. Okay, from that state now. Now I'll point out that this is not just about worms and salamanders so human livers regenerate human children regenerate their fingertips and deer, large adult mammal regenerate huge amounts of bone,
and that's an interesting question why why we're generally not that that good at it. But so so just to remind us what what we're talking about this this kind of
goal directed navigation and anatomical space looks something like this these these tadpoles have to become frogs so they have to so here's the eyes the mouth, they have to rearrange all these organs to go from tadpole to frog.
And the null hypothesis has always been that well it's a hardwired process so each one of these organs just travels the right direction and the right at the right amount and then you get from a normal tadpole to a normal frog.
So we decided to test that like how much intelligence does this really have. And so we created what's called Picasso tadpoles. So these are scrambled the eyes on the side of the head the mouth is off to the top of the head.
Everything's just just scrambled. And what you find is that these animals make quite normal frogs, because all of these components will undergo novel motions, and they won't stop until they get to the right place in fact sometimes they go too far and actually have to double back, but
eventually everything settles on the correct frog face. So the genetics actually does not give you hardware that just just moves things in a in a prescribed fashion. It actually gives you an error minimization scheme it gives you a system that can try to minimize errors from a specific set point.
So that means that to the standard of view of developmental biology which is which is what you see in your textbooks that you have some gene regulatory networks and then some some some proteins that interact via via physics, and then there's this magical process of emergence
right so so eventually if you crank on these rules and parallel eventually something complex will come out.
And that's true all of this is true and there's plenty of ways to get emerge in complexity but that's not the whole story in fact I think that's not even the most interesting part of the story.
What's what's more important are these feedback loops, which will try to regain that target morphology when you try to deviate from it and so this means of course injury but also mutations and to radigence and and various other ways to get away from this this kind of set point.
And so, so thinking about this suggests a couple of things. First of all, of course biologists know all about feedback loops and homeostasis and things like that but but typically we think about scalars like pH temperature hunger level those kind of things
single numbers here the set point is going to have to be something complex like a, like a, like a anatomical representation of the thing you're trying to build, how could we possibly store and a goal state like this in tissue how could tissue remember and anatomical or geometric pattern.
So this this really weird way of thinking about things, which by the way molecular biologists don't love because you're not supposed to talk about goals and things like that you're supposed to talk about chemistry and chemical pathways.
But but but this, you know, we should know that that of course since the 40s we've had a mature science of machines with goals it's not scary or magical anymore so we can we can think about these things now.
And this way of thinking about it makes some some strong predictions it predicts that you actually should be able to find decode and then rewrite whatever mechanism is keeping this this set point right because all homeostasis homeostatic systems have to store some kind of set point.
And it also predicts that means that if you if you if you are successful in rewriting that set point, you shouldn't have to make changes down here which is very difficult, you know, if you want to make, if you want to make system level changes, what genes do you change
usually we have no idea because reversing this is extremely hard it's a very hard inverse problem, but you should be able to just change the set point, and then they'll build the cells will do what they do best which is built to it.
So how could how could a collection of cells possibly remember and I use that word on purpose. How could a collection of cells remember what the correct state is going to be.
Well, we know from neuroscience that actually certain collections of cells are very good at remembering goal states and trying to implement them intelligently and that would be brains.
The way the way that system works is you have these electrical networks which use ion channels to set voltage gradients they have electrical synapses that spread information through that through the network, and at that hardware supports all of the amazing
software of cognition so.
So here's a zebra fish brain that this this group image, and it's the commitment of neuroscience through neural decoding the process of the project the research program of neural decoding that if we just knew how to decode this physiology.
We should be able to extract the memories the preferences the behavioral repertoire of this animal. So it turns out so so that's that's that's that means that in neuroscience we have the beginnings of a, of a science that links electrophysiology to mental cognitive content to
various kinds of intelligent problem solving activities, but it turns out that this is not unique to brains every cell in your body has ion channels.
Most cells have electrical connections to their neighbors like this. And so that means that what if we could what if we could basically steal a bunch of techniques and approaches from neuroscience and apply them to other cells that also form electrical
that we leads to questions like early embryos and so this is this is voltage imaging that we develop much like here but instead of the brain you're looking at the early frog embryo.
What what do what do cells think about long before there are brains or muscles or or movement in the 3d world, what is what is this electrical network thinking about. And so this is this is what we study.
And we develop some tools so the first tool of course is voltage imaging just so you can characterize the information flow through the system.
We do a lot of computational modeling and so and we do this by voltage sensitive fluorescent dyes, typically or sometimes genetically encoded voltage reporters.
We do a lot of computational modeling to try to understand these and predict these dynamics. Let me show you two patterns that that are particularly interesting one is that we call this the electric face so this is a time lapse
video of a frog embryo putting its face together the brightness corresponds to voltage to resting potential. And this is one frame out of that video and what you see is that basically the future structure of the face is already laid out in the electrical properties of that
So here's where the eye is going to be here's where the mouth is going to be here the placards the animals left eye comes comes in slightly later.
So, so this this pattern is a necessary part of normal development, because if we change this pattern, the gene expression that is required to pattern the face and the ultimate anatomy, those are all altered.
So this is this is this this this the the bioelectric code here is is literally showing you where all the different regional the regions of the face are going to be.
Now, so that's a normal pattern this is a pathological pattern that we see when we inject human oncogenes into tadpoles, eventually they'll make a tumor and that tumor, and then it has a bunch of metastases here, but you can already see these cells long before this is visible
and you see these and you know where it's going to happen by looking at where the cells are disconnecting from their neighbors and acquiring a an abnormal voltage potential and at that point they just think of themselves as amoebas and the rest of the body is just external
environment and and they go where they want me but they want to get metastasis.
Now, this is the so these are techniques for monitoring this these bio electrical states, but now we've also developed techniques to write information back into them.
We do not use electrodes we do not use electromagnetic radiation there are no fields there are no waves there are no magnets.
All of this is done by manipulating the external interface the bioelectric interface that cells normally used to hack each other.
And that means ion channels on their surface to set voltage state and gap junctions these electrical electrical synapses to convey that voltage state to the neighbors in the network.
So we can use all the stuff that neuroscience issues so we can use a various ion channel and gap junction modifying drugs we can mutate them genetically we can do optogenetics and use light and so on.
So what happens when you do this what what what what what what what what does this electrical information in the body what is it used for let's let's let's modify it and see what happens.
That's that's the that's what we started to do when we first developed some of these tools to to use these molecular reagents to control the bio electrical state of these networks.
I'm just going to show you a couple of a couple of examples that I like.
This is this is one where what we can do is we can we can use RNA and coding certain potassium channels to express it in early cells and to induce the kind of voltage pattern that you saw in the eye spot of that electric phase.
When you do that you find out that what you've done is told these cells to make an eye but you can do that anywhere. That is the information the cells used to decide what they should be.
And if you tell a bunch of gut cells that they should be an eye. Well that's what they make. And so, so we can make we can make these eyes anywhere in the animal, they have all the right lens right now optic nerve they have all that stuff.
And so, so from this we learn a couple things first of all that the bio electric pattern is instructive. Okay, it's not just a matter of well we screwed up some voltage and the animals is sick and doesn't make the right tissues.
It's actually instructive you can make an entire new organ by telling it what to do. Then we find out that that information is quite modular so we didn't give it a lot of a lot of details.
In fact, we didn't say how to make an eye we have no idea how to make an eye. What we've told it was a very simple signal which is a basically a high level sub routine call that says make an eye here.
This is handled by the material this is back to this concept of the competency of your material the material already knows how to make an eye, but what you need to figure out is how to convince it that that's the path that it should be following.
We also find that if you prompt and this will become important in a few minutes, if you prompt it with the right signals, you can, you can actually get it to do things that normally it won't do so in your text in your developmental biology textbook it will say that the cells
anterior ectoderm are actually incompetent to form I, and that's because it was probed with the so called master hygiene called pack six and in fact if you do that yes you don't get eyes passes.
But if you use the right prompt which is this bio electrical signal that no they of course they're competent you can you can get this anywhere in the body.
This reminds us to be humble about what are the competencies of the tissue if you if you don't know what your material does that may be a limitation of the material or it may be a limitation of us and our understanding so assigning intelligence to materials is basically us taking an IQ test ourselves in
terms of what do we understand about how this how this works. And the other cool thing about it is that if you only so this is a lens sitting out in the flank somewhere, if you only get a few cells the blue ones are the ones we injected.
They will actually recruit their neighbors so all of this other stuff here was never modified by us they actually recruit their neighbors to help them finish the task.
They didn't teach them to do that they already do that, like many other collective intelligences like ants and termites who, you know, if a couple of ants find something interesting and they can't carry it to the nest they'll recruit their, their, their, their buddies to help them out the cells do the same thing
here.
This is another kind of application where we looked at limb regeneration so frogs unlike salamanders do not regenerate their limbs at certain stages.
So here it is we amputate 45 days later there's nothing, but we were able to come up with a cocktail that after a, after a very brief stimulus, then triggers the whole so so here's MSX one pro regenerative kind of marker by 45 days you've
already got some toes you've got a toenail and eventually a pretty respectable looking leg that is touch sensitive and motile. The latest work on this 24 hour stimulation leads to a year and a half of leg growth.
This is not about micro management this is not about controlling gene expression or where the cells go. This is about convincing the cells right at the beginning that they, that they need to go down to the, down the regeneration path, not the scarring path.
And then after that the system takes care of it. So we are, of course, now trying to move this into mammals and so I have to do disclosure here because David Kaplan and I have this company called more fasciutical zinc, where we are trying to push that technology using wearable
which David's lab builds to to mice and hopefully eventually to the clinic.
And so, so the goal here is to develop a computational pipeline that goes all the way from the beginning of understanding well which channels are even expressed in my cells, down to understanding the bio electrical tissue dynamics, large scale kinds of anatomical
decision making eventually a computational and algorithmic description of how different regions decide their shape and size, which makes it much easier to then make changes and we want to like a full stack simulator where we can understand this.
And, and, and we're only at the very early stages of this but one thing that we can already do is make repairs in quite complex organs so this is a normal tadpole brain.
Here's a completely disorganized brain induced by a dominant notch mutation so you can see the forebrain is basically gone the midbrain hindbrainer bubble. They have no behavior they're just as a very, very, very drastic defects, but we had a computational model that told us that actually we could open certain
channels to reinforce the endogenous bio electrical pre pattern that tells cells how to make a normal brain. And if you do this, despite the notch mutation being there and not just a very important neuro genesis gene, but despite that, you can, and it happens to be this
if you activate these channels or misexpress some of these channels, you get back a normal brain. So, not not only normal structurally and molecularly but actually their behavior is normal their IQ comes back to normal indistinguishable from controls.
So in some cases and I'm not saying this is always going to be the case but in some cases, you can fix certain hardware defects, I mean this notch movement is a hardware defect, you can you can fix some hardware problems in software if you have the computational
platform that can they can show you how to do that. So what we are working on is this notion that that at some point there's going to be a workflow like this where you start with a with a incorrect by electrical state, say a tumor, you already have a database of
eomic data so that doesn't exist yet we're working hard to start to generate some of that data that tells you what the what the correct state is for that tissue or organ. And then the simulator would be able to say well these are the ion channels you need to open or close to convert the incorrect
state to the correct state, and then of course you go and you look for drugs and something like 20% of all drugs are ion channel drugs and so this is a huge platform of electroseuticals out there that could be potentially repurposed for these kind of bioelectric
interventions, if we if we had a system for for choosing them and so you can you can start to start to play with that there.
And so, so all of this so far has been about how do we get back to normal so injury, birth defects cancer how do we how do we get back to normal but I want as as engineers I want to start thinking beyond that.
And one interesting fact is that development is very deceiving. So, when you, it's deceiving because it is so reliable because it because it works so well, most of the time and when you look at an acorn, and you know that all of the time, the acorns
develop into trees. And this is you get you get the feeling that that what the what they oak genome has learned to do is to make these things nice flat green, same same kind of patterns, all the time.
But in fact, turns out humans are not the only bioengineers. And there's, there's this little guy these these wasps that lay embryos, they lay eggs on these leaves.
And what they're able to do is to hack the surrounding cells to build something like this. This is a goal, these goals have this amazing kind of complex structure there are lots of different lots of different kinds of goals.
And so what you find out is that first of all, the, this idea that what the genome only knows how to do is this is wrong. Actually, it knows how to do something very different instead of flat green.
It makes these round red, spiky things that we would that leads us to the realization that were it not for this wasp we would have no idea what these cells are capable of right we would never I mean nobody would ever guess that these same cells with that same exact genome.
There's no there's no genomic modification here with the same genome that it knows how to do this. The ability of that hardware to go there is we wouldn't know that what and that leads to the question of what else is possible right so so so if we
understood the bio prompting a little better what else can we make these cells do. And, and this idea that that evolution uses this kind of hacking universally it's all over the place.
This is, this is, you know, it's not it's not micromanaging the, the genome, it is, it is in fact, exploiting the competencies of the, it's exploiting the competencies of the material.
One of the things that the material is quite good at is scaling up its goals. So, so again let's let's remember that individual cells have little tiny goals I mean the thing the states that they're working towards our physiological metabolic things things on the scale of a single cell
space. And what what evolution and development allowed them to do is to join together a large goals in anatomical space, but that process has a failure mode that failure mode is cancer and so you can see here when individual cells disconnect from this from this
electrical network, they basically treat the rest of the body as external environment and they roll back to their ancient unicellular kinds of behaviors. They're not more selfish cancer cells are not more selfish than regular cells, their cells are smaller.
So you can see this you can see this kind of inflation and scaling of the boundary between self and world. And so that leads to an interesting strategy that we can use, which is when we when an anti cancer approach which is let's could we
actually reconnect we force the reconnection of cells to the rest of the the body and so here's this experiment we induce a nasty human oncogene care as mutation or something like that.
Typically they'll make a tumor and in fact this is the same animal here. The exact say the the cell the the cells are very strongly expressing the oncogene, but there's no tumor and that's because we also expressed a particular ion channel that forces these cells despite what the oncogene
trying to tell them it forces these cells to remain electrically connected to their neighbors and hooked into the to the pattern memory that we should be building nice skin the muscle, you know, the kidney and so on, as opposed to going off and being amoebas.
And so and so this interplay between the collective goals and the individual goals allows us to start asking questions about how do we reset those goals and where do they come from in the first place.
And you might think that where they come from in the first place has to be evolution I mean evolution over over the eons has set these goals.
So, in the last little bit of the talk where I want to discuss is some synthetic systems where there that are beginning to show us that the things are not so simple.
So, I want to introduce you to this thing, which are called xenobots, and what we started doing was to take some early ectodermal cells off of off of a frog embryo liberate them and put them in a petri dish now they could do a number of things they could die.
They could spread out and sort of walk away from each other they could form a nice two dimensional monolayer. What they do instead is they sort of coalesce together into this into this little little kind of organoid looking thing, and then they start to move
around and so they start to swim around because they have little cilia they have little hairs on their surface that is normally used in by by frogs and tapels to move mucus down there, down their bodies, but but in this configuration they can use it to swim
they row against the water and they swim, and so they can go in circles and they can patrol back and forth like this and they can have sort of collective behaviors.
And that's because Xenopus lavas is the name of the frog and we think they're a bio robotics platform so Xenobots, here's here's a Xenobot doing a maze.
So, so watch, watch what happens so it swims down here at this point it takes the corner without having to bump into the opposite wall, and then at this point for some due to some internal dynamics we don't understand it decides to turn around and go back where it came from.
So they have they have autonomous we're not pacing it we're not controlling it it has autonomous swimming behavior. In fact, lots of really interesting behaviors.
They have this is this is we're visualizing calcium signaling, so we can use all the tools that people use to analyze electrical activity in brains, information theory and so on, but there are no neurons here these are just basically epithelial cells.
But but but they have lots of interesting computations going on that can be read out through this calcium.
They are, they self repair so if you cut them in half, they generate.
Look at all the force that it had to generate through that through that hinge to to fold to fold this thing up like that right so they go back to their Xenobot form is if you give them a bunch of loose skin cells here, what they will do is they will they will
work with both independently and in groups, they will work together to collapse them into these little little little piles and they sort of polish little piles.
And because they're working with an agent material to just like we were when we made the Xenobots, these little piles become the next generation of bots and guess what they do they mature and they go on and they do exactly the same thing and so you have, you have
a dramatic replication right there, they're making copies of themselves from stuff they find in the environment this is Von Neumann's dream, a robot that finds materials and makes copies of itself.
So that leads to an interesting engineering question which is.
So what did what did the hardware learn during evolution me here's the Zenopus genome, typically it goes through a very stereotypical set of steps so here you know here's embryogenesis and then eventually get tadpoles with this behavior.
And these cells when they can also do this they can make Xenobots with its own weird developmental kind of progression they have different behaviors. And so, so, so this is really important.
There's never been any Xenobots there's never been any selection to be a good Zenobot where does this come from where do these behaviors and capabilities come from and so.
We once again remember that it is not just about selection it is, it is about the fact that evolution makes some very reprogrammable very competent problem solving hardware that in novel configurations can do different things I mean, we didn't do any we
didn't give the cells any new genes, no weird nano materials, all we did was liberate them from the rest of the body. And so what you see is that their normal behavior here is the result of them being hacked by these other cells to.
serve certain purpose and have a boring two dimensional life on the outside of the of the animal being a barrier to pathogen and so on, but but liberated from all that they have a completely different type of type of existence and so.
And so, and so, being able to look at your material through its point of view and ask who's who's hacking whom with what and how much is a really critical part of your toolkit going forward I think.
So, next generation bioengineering and biomedicine is going to be using tools of AI and tools from other disciplines neuroscience beyond neurons to really sort of play along this whole.
So, this this this whole axis of, of complexity and and cognition all the way up from from from kind of cognitive kinds of things and you know conscious ones for example, like in Benedetti study where where people are told they're given a particular a
active compound and then they they are their brain chemistry actually shows the effects of that compound even though all they got was placebo. So, so this idea that with what we're going to be doing is really taking advantage of the information processing the memories the the
different levels of the medium, and one one other idea that that that is reveling here relevant here is the notion of having a kind of impedance match between the technique that you're using the intervention and the target that you're reprogramming.
Okay, so so up till now we mostly you know we use we use drugs we use the various materials, and those are those are pretty low agency interventions, but could we could we design higher agency interventions to really match the agency the material that we're trying to deal with.
Could we make I mean we people think about smart implants and things like that.
But I just want to show you what I think of as as a as a really promising platform in the future. And this is towards personalized the gentile interventions.
So, here it is this this little thing is swimming around and if I were to show this to you and ask you what this is, you might think that this is some sort of a primitive animal we got from the bottom of a pond somewhere.
In sequence the genome you find something interesting 100% homo sapiens.
Okay, these are these are human cells, and this is an anthropot. So the way it's it's like the xenobot but it comes from human patients. This is this is what it looks like the basically they come from tracheal human tracheal epithelium donated by adult patients
we have a particular path for them protocol in which they also become ciliated on the outside just like our xenobots, and then they undergo all kinds of interesting behaviors.
So here's, here's one. What it's doing is it's, it's traversing this this scratch that we made this stuff out here is IPS derived human neural cells so this this lawn of neurons, we put a scratch through it so this is like a wound assay where you basically you basically
see what happens if you if you damage a bunch of these nerves. And so you saw that that anthropot navigate. If, if they if a bunch of them settle into this gap. So here we call this a super bot or a bridge bot.
And this is, this is something that we recently found that if you if you if you leave them there for about four days, what they're actually start to do is to knit together the sides of the gap they start to repair this wound in the neural tissue
that's like, once you once you've lifted up the bot and so this is, this is actually a PhD student in my group Gizem Komushka, who did all this, all this anthropot work.
And, and so just just imagine right in the future, your own body cells, no trans genes, no, no, no gene therapy are can be deployed to help repairs, who would have known that your tracheal cells that sit there quietly for decades are actually able to form a little
biobot that moves around on its own actually actually heals neural wounds. And what other kinds of capabilities do they have we don't know this is the first thing we try right so so so they they probably have all kinds of other
competencies and then of course there's issues of who can we train them. Now, can we can we make them smarter and in various ways and so on. So I and they don't require any kind of immune suppression because they're made of your own cells and they share with you.
The priors about what health and disease is, which, which, you know, not low agency interventions like drugs and implants are not going to have that.
So this is this is what I think of as the as the landscape for biomedicine going forward. This is all the familiar bottom up kind of tools that we have today.
But complementing them is this whole developing area of top down interventions, including behavior shaping which we didn't even talk about as far as training cells and tissues and then using a gentile implants and things like that.
And the various morphosuticals including electrosuticals, which are being used to rewire the not not the hardware, but actually to change their behavioral landscape. So the idea is that you're not micromanaging their their molecular state what you're
getting their decision making their memories, their set points, their beliefs of literally the models they make of their micro environment based on the past experience, the responses, you know, are they going to fight you on the things that you want them to do and so on.
So, I think, I think what's going to happen and you can you can see the details all here but I think, I think the diverse intelligence community which are the people who work on understanding problem solving and intelligence in really unconventional substrates have a lot to
say to biomedical engineers and regenerative medicine workers I think these two fields need to come together in an important way.
And I think the medicine of the future is really going to be much more like a kind of somatic psychiatry less like chemistry and bio electricity is at least one there may be others but it's at least one interface that really enables us to do to to exploit the mind of the body.
So if you want to go deeper.
A lot of the kind of more more general more philosophical stuff is in these papers.
I want to thank all the people who did the work so the grad students and the postdocs who did all the things I showed you today.
Lots of collaborators are funders of course, three disclosures so here are three companies that have supported some of the work that I've shown you today.
Jeremy gay is the amazing graphic artists who makes our all our illustrations, and most of all the model systems because they have the hardest job of all and to teach us about all these amazing things.
So thank you so much, and I will take question.
