You want to hear my big idea for American politics?
Go on.
There'll never be reparations.
OK, I've got some great news.
There's still 14 million slaves in the world.
I tell you why it's great news.
It gives America a rise.
So I can't joke about anyone with a disability
because they're below me.
Oh, that's a great way to see the world.
And you're above them, are you?
So you wouldn't joke about them because you're better than them,
are you?
Michael Gove recently came out and was going, did he?
Well, that's an exclusive, isn't it?
I think we all know.
Pay up.
Yes.
You're watching this for free.
Get the locals to.
It's worth getting it.
When the prime minister of the country that you live in
breaks off from the G20 summit to do a press conference
about your personal tax affairs, that's going to be a problem.
When is Jimmy going to apologize for his take on the vaccine?
So do it.
No wonder they're not going to take the vaccine.
They can't even take a fucking joke.
Anyone in the Illuminati gets it first.
That's the viral bit, right?
Well, first things first, why do you want this job?
It's quite a few of that, isn't it, guys?
Yeah, it does.
It feels like I'm applying for a job in an investment bank.
Exactly.
Well, you are the sharpest dress guest that we probably ever had.
You know, I come correct.
Look, how you do anything is how you do everything.
Stick a tie on, make an effort.
It's a bit of a pop-up.
He's talking to you, man.
At least I've got a jacket.
Anyway, listen, Jimmy, welcome.
Thank you.
It's great to have you on.
We've been in touch for a while,
but one of the things that we wanted to talk to you about,
we want to talk to you about comedy and mindset
and all sorts of stuff.
Sure.
But the stuff that we often talk about, as you know,
because you watch the show, is culture war
and politics and all of this stuff.
And it sort of feels like it's not something
you've been commenting on much,
but you are starting to take an interest in this stuff.
I mean, I was taking an interest.
I have, lots of my degree was politics and sociology
and kind of, you know, studying Foucault and Marcusa
and Adorno and Leotard and all those kind of guys.
Right kind of, you know, in the 90s,
when that stuff was really taken off,
it seems to have escaped the lab,
yeah, somewhat, the kind of cultural Marxist thing.
And I don't know, it's a very strange world now
where sort of Marxism and the left have left,
they've left economics behind.
And it strikes me that the most important factor
is money in the modern world,
in terms of, you know, the equality of opportunity.
I mean, the idea that there'll be equality of outcome
just seems like a nonsense to me.
It's just never gonna happen
because we're not, you know,
the quality of effort doesn't exist
and we're all given different gifts.
You know, I think we, so much of it is nature.
You know, and so much of nurture is nature.
So much of it is just, it's our factory settings.
This is how we come out.
I mean, what you wanna do is give people agency.
That seems to be the great sort of freeing factor.
So I don't know about, you know,
politics I never really comment on,
but it strikes me that the great,
the saddest thing in my life
was when universities started charging.
That for me was just the end in terms of going,
that was the ability to move from class to class.
Yeah, you know, I don't read as this at all.
So you sort of have to say it,
but I'm sort of first generation immigrant,
Irish parents moved over in the early 70s.
So economic migrants and we did very well.
And I think that's,
I think there's something about migrants
that we don't talk about enough.
They're incredible high agency people.
We're all from elsewhere, a generation ago,
and you go, what's great about London?
Why is it the greatest city in the world?
Well, migration.
It's this amazing sort of melting pot of energy
and people with kind of hopes and dreams and aspirations.
It's fantastic.
We should be encouraging more of it.
It's interesting that you say that
because the way that you present
and the way that you appear are two very different things.
Well, I think you have to be aware in the world
about its character and reputation, isn't it?
Yeah.
So you have your character,
what you know about yourself,
and then you have your reputation.
You have to be aware how you're perceived in the world, right?
You can't just sort of just assume,
well, everyone will know.
I'm aware how I sound and I sound like Silver Spoon.
I sound like I probably went to public school.
I went to the local grammar school.
So I'm a big advocate for the grammar school system
because it was fantastic for me.
You know, the idea of going,
well, everyone's got sort of different abilities.
You know, some people are very academic
and some people aren't.
And in our society, it's painted like that's better and worse.
Well, it isn't.
I much prefer the sort of the German system
where a lot of people are just very good
at doing practical things and they do very well.
Because I think that's the thing that we kind of,
we do in this country in that we look at somebody
and we go, oh, you must belong to this class.
Therefore, you have this opinion.
Therefore, you've had this background.
When the reality is, it's actually more complex than that.
Well, I think that, but there's a lot of, you know,
non-player characters.
Is that what they call them?
Yes, NPCs.
NPCs. So you go, there's a lot of NPCs out there.
Single data point human beings.
So what's your view on whatever it is,
whatever the issue, what's your view on the environment?
And you go, oh, I know what you think about everything
from that one data point.
And I'm not interested.
I like to be surprised.
I like to have, and it's also that thing of like,
you go, well, politics, I'm very wary of people
that are into a political party.
Because it strikes me, it's like the set menu.
Like if you know nothing about Chinese food,
nothing to matter with the set menu.
But if you've been a couple of times,
you know what you like, you know what you don't like,
and you have different opinions on different things.
You know, Chris Rock has got this amazing routine
about left wing, right wing.
You know, are you Republican or are you Democrat?
What's the issue?
Because if it's about theft, I'm a Republican.
And if it's about prostitution, I'm a Democrat.
You know, you move left and right
depending on what the issue is.
Yeah, well, that's something interesting that I,
as you might know, I call myself politically non-binary
and people always ask me about this
because my thing is like, you've got to think for yourself
about different issues.
And you might end up being right on this and left on that.
And that's kind of normal.
Well, isn't that an awful thing with politicians now
where we talk about hypocrisy?
And we talk, well, you said this five years ago,
yeah, the facts changed.
The facts keep on changing.
People will get Obama ran on an anti-gay marriage ticket,
right?
And I think we all agree he's a pretty good guy.
Yeah.
But that was, he was of his time
and things have changed and more, for the better.
And there is kind of progress.
I agree, it was a bigger match.
Isn't that like a weird thing with you go,
it's all seen as left and right.
And I don't see it like that.
I see it like it's authoritarian
or sort of libertarian.
There's more liberty and freedom
or there's more authority.
And it doesn't matter whether it's left or right.
It strikes me in the last 100 years,
we've only really learned one lesson.
We've learned that fascism is wrong.
It's a great lesson.
It's a valuable lesson.
But it's only half the story
because communism's also wrong and toxic and awful.
And the people in, I know you from Venezuela,
the people in South America still know it.
And the people in Eastern Europe still know it.
But we seem to,
I mean, there's people walking around
in chairman mail t-shirts,
like venerating these pricks.
It's insane.
And you go, and it is that authoritarian thing.
It sort of comes around in a circle.
It's about that kind of authority from above.
And do you think part of this is, Jimmy,
that we've, in the West particularly,
we've just got so comfortable
that a lot of these crazy ideas now just,
they're quite tempting
because we've sort of got nothing better to think about.
I think, I mean, I think gratitude
is the mother of all virtues.
And I think the more gratitude you have,
the better your life is.
But from a political standpoint,
I think the thing about gratitude
is we can't even see the freedoms that we've had.
We don't even conceive of,
it's kind of the Chesterton's fence,
the idea that we don't know what the US Navy is for
because we've sort of so taken it
for granted the last 70 years.
And really, it's only when,
I mean, if you look at kind of the sweep
of what's going on in the world today,
I'm sure your listeners are, you know,
viewers are very aware,
but the idea that really since the fall of the Berlin Wall,
America has become more isolationist
with every single president, right?
So they're pulling back
and they're spending less on their Navy.
And I'm sure lots of people would go, well, good, good.
What do we need?
America is the policeman of the world.
Well, we do need that
because that's what globalization is.
And it isn't for America to make money.
They did it for ideological reasons.
They did it to bring down communism.
And it worked.
They guaranteed free trade.
They're net exporters of fuel and food.
They don't need us.
We need them.
And they protected everything for the longest time.
And now we see that kind of recede slightly
and things start to get very fractious.
I mean, I think getting America
more involved and engaged in the world
would be a fantastic thing.
It would be good for everyone, totally.
I think the danger that we're currently facing
is what you've alluded to,
where people think that this is life,
this is how it's always going to be,
and this is how it always was.
And the bad times, yeah, they were the bad times,
but now this is always how it is.
It's the end of history.
When the reality is, this is just a moment.
Well, that was the era, is it Fukuyama?
Yeah.
That was the era I was at university for,
where it was really, liberal democracy
was kind of being exported around the world.
And the Berlin Wall had just come down
and it was a victory.
And there was an extraordinary sort of time.
It was very sort of very peaceful.
Hopeful time as well.
But then America kind of receded.
They pulled back and actually,
there's kind of this chaos going on as a result of that.
I'd like to get them more engaged in the world.
Do you want to hear my big idea for American politics?
Go on.
All right, it's a big idea, right?
So there'll never be reparations, right?
There should be.
The slavery was terrible and reparations is a good idea,
but it's too complicated to unpick that.
It's going to be, okay, I've got some great news.
There's still 40 million slaves in the world.
I tell you why it's great news.
It gives America a rise.
No, it gives America a rise.
But people, that's making the trailer.
People don't do well without purpose.
And nations don't do well without purpose.
And America doesn't really have a purpose at the moment.
I think that would be a great foreign policy for America.
We're going to stop slavery.
We're going to stop slavery around the world.
Okay, you've got six weeks.
If you've got slaves, you've got to free them.
Anywhere in the world.
And otherwise, we're cleaning house.
They've got the resource to do it.
They've got the reason to do it.
If they want to correct that,
they've got a blot on their history, right?
And, you know, Britain did it.
Britain did it after they, you know,
with the first to abolish slavery,
and then we spent about, you know, 100 years, 150 years
patrolling the seas with our Navy.
Well, that's no longer our role in the world.
We've got a different role now.
You know, what's our purpose?
We'll come onto that.
But the idea of like America ending slavery globally,
I could get behind that.
I think that's like not a terrible idea.
And what's the British purpose, Jimmy?
Well, I think Britain could serve as an example.
That's really the best we could hope for now.
We're not running the show anymore,
but we've left an incredible sort of gift to the world
in our language and in our culture.
And I think we could, I mean, broadly speaking,
I think we should have bitten America's arm off
when they offered us a trade deal post Brexit.
Japan went for that deal.
We turned our noses up.
We went over there and we had a look at it and we went,
oh, no, that's not right for us.
We should have bitten that their arm off.
They're going to have the most incredible 20 years.
The next 20 years for America,
they can afford to have a terrible political system
because the gifts that they have geographically
and demographically, they are just in the sweet spot,
the absolute sweet spot.
So they've got Canada above Mexico below.
They're going to double their manufacturing base
over the next 20 years, right?
That's clearly going to happen.
They're going to take all the stuff
that was made in China.
They can say, look, we can't trust these supply lines.
We have to make it all at home.
It's going to be a boom time for the States.
I think we should, you know, pin ourselves to that.
You're not worried about the States
because we get loads of people coming on who's saying,
you know, this is the end time for the United States,
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, et cetera, et cetera.
But you're not worried at all.
What, what, what?
Who's worried about America?
Why would you worry about America?
It's never been objectively better.
I'll give you, it's never been subjectively worse.
Right, people think it's like, you go over there.
I try, I travel around a lot in America.
I do a lot of tours.
And I'm lucky enough that I don't just do the big cities.
I also get to do kind of the bee cities.
Incredible places, wonderful places to live.
The land of milk and honey.
But again, there's maybe a lack of gratitude
because they can't see how fabulous this is.
Yeah.
People will cross oceans to get to America
because the gift they gave the world
was their, you know, classic liberalism, right?
The idea that they're, that the document, the idea that,
and that's why they kind of run the world still,
is the Declaration of Independence.
It's a fantastic document.
Really, when you think about kind of classic liberalism
and what's that about, what do we all sort of agree on?
We're not gods.
We have no God-given right to rule over people.
When you start with that, and you very quickly get
to the rights of man, and the idea that, you know,
we can rule, but it has to be by consensus.
And it has to be just.
And when people need rights, and they need the right
to free speech, and they need the right to protest,
is very important, and the right to petition.
All of these things come from that sort of initial premise.
And that document is just, it's genius.
And yeah, America's got its problems,
but they're all fixable.
Well, this is the thing that I think people are concerned
about in terms of America.
So levels of political polarization.
It's not the first time America's been politically polarized
if you recall history.
I do remember there being a civil war.
Yes, right.
I kind of think that thing about there's a certain sort
of certain people that are just so shocked
by the state of the world.
You go, have you never read any history?
Like spatially and temporally, they're ignorant of the world.
So everything, it must be such a shock.
Like, you know, there's a war.
And they go, oh my God, this is awful.
Have you read about the second world war?
It was awful.
I think I picked up the fact from this show, actually,
the idea that we did a Hiroshima every six weeks in New York.
Yeah, that was something I talked about.
Throughout the last two years of the war.
And no one really talks about that.
And the idea that that wasn't an easy thing to do.
That wasn't, it wasn't simple,
but it was a terrible war.
It was a just war, but it was awful.
Of course, then.
And the more you know about history,
the more you think, well, actually,
these are the best times.
I don't want to sound like Steven Pinker.
I know Steven Pinker gets given a hard time for this,
but the world's pretty great at the moment.
No, but let me give you some more things
that people talk about in terms of America.
Because I agree, like Francis and I travel
to the US regularly now.
We absolutely love it.
I think it's the most incredible place.
I think the gun laws, right?
Okay, so that's the thing that comes up over here
and we can't understand
because it's not part of our psyche.
Okay, so it's, you know,
we've got other stuff that we worry about,
hunting bans or whatever, we've got our things.
Every nation's got a thing.
I think the secret to the gun thing might be gun clubs.
So collective responsibility.
You say you can have a gun,
but you have to be a member of a club.
You have to find a thousand other people
to be in a gun club and you all support each other.
And then there's a level of collective responsibility.
So if one of those guns is used in a crime,
you don't go to jail, but there's a fine for everyone.
Because you let one of your guys get out of hand
and you didn't check on their mental health.
And so you go, you come together and you form,
the thing I worry about is a lone guy
on his own, an individual with a gun.
I don't worry about groups.
Groups of people, there's something great about that.
You know, that's our superpower as human beings.
You know, you put one guy in the jungle,
you fed the animals, you put a hundred guys down,
you've got a new apex predator.
I'm not worried about groups.
So you go, we'll put those groups together.
The genius of this, of course, is if you don't agree,
and you don't want this to happen in America,
you're gonna get together with your mates that own guns
and protest against it.
Well, you've already formed a club.
I'm already happy.
Fantastic.
I think that's the thing though,
the collective, the group, the tribe,
is that's what's kind of missing a little bit.
The community, which is what a lot of people talk about.
The worship of the individual above all else.
It's like the dose is the problem.
Yes, we're individuals and we have individual rights,
but there's also, there's something above that,
which is kind of the group and the tribe.
And people are searching, you know,
there's a God shake hole in all of us.
And we're searching for things.
And for some people, it's politics.
You know, sometimes I listen to this show
and people are sort of talking about politics
like it's gonna offer nirvana.
You go, no, no, we should avoid catastrophe with politics.
And then search for your own personal piece elsewhere.
Are you a believer, Jimmy?
We'll be back with our guests in a minute, but first.
Last year, I was introduced to Monetary Metals,
a game-changing platform that offers a unique approach
to saving and earning income.
And I have to say, I've been so impressed
that I'm really enjoying using my Monetary Metals account.
If you listened closely to our interview
with world-renowned economist Jim Rickards last year,
you'll have heard him say this.
Gold will be where countries go
and it should be where investors go,
follow the money, as they say.
And central banks have been net buyers
for the last 13 years.
So they're about the best informed players you can imagine.
So I'd have some gold.
So we know about the benefits of owning gold.
What you may not know is that now there's a way
to earn a yield on your gold, paid in more gold.
Why keep saving and fiat currency,
which loses value every year due to inflation,
when you can save and earn in gold and silver?
What's more, imagine not only being able
to protect your savings against inflation,
but also earning passive income from it.
With Monetary Metals, you can do just that.
Right now, you can earn between two to 5% annually on gold,
paid in gold, when you open an account with them.
If you're an accredited investor,
you're eligible to earn even higher returns.
We're talking about actually earning interest on gold,
paid in more gold.
So if you're looking to protect and grow your wealth,
look no further than Monetary Metals.
Visit monetary-metals.com slash trigonometry
or scan the QR code below.
And now, back to the interview.
Are you a believer, Jimmy?
No, I'm not.
Although, I think there's two types of idiots.
There's people that believe literally in fairy stories,
and then there's people that think
there's no purpose in religion.
And they're both idiots.
Pete Holmes, you know the American comic book?
Yeah, I know, they're a really good guy.
He had a great line, he's special.
And it's a quote from ACDC's Rode about religion.
Okay, he says, God is the name we give the blanket.
We throw over the mystery to give it shape.
Wow.
I love that.
Because it encompasses everyone, right?
We all know there's a mystery.
We all know we don't know.
And we throw something over that mystery and give it shape.
And for some of it, for me, it would be,
it's science and technology and progress
and the idea that we are incredible.
Human beings are incredible.
Not us three, but you get the idea.
And I lost my religion when I was in my mid twenties.
I kind of miss it.
I miss it.
There's a certain melancholy that, you know,
when you pass, you know, a big church kind of thing.
Well, yeah, it's a nice, you know,
I think church works not because God's pleased
by the ritual, but because the people came together.
Yeah.
And I feel that sometimes at comedy shows.
I feel sometimes like,
why are people obsessed by going to comedy shows
or going to Glastonbury and feeling part of this big thing?
And they all want to be part of a group.
I saw a couple of bands recently play live.
I saw the Peshmo in Paris last week.
And it was genuinely religious.
It was like this incredible experience
of like being part of a group
and all sort of singing together.
It was joyful, beautiful.
We've kind of lost a little bit of that.
And that's why, you know,
when I don't watch as much football as I used to,
but when people go, oh, I don't understand
why people are football fans, it's so stupid.
And you look at the group together,
that's one of the few times that a community
can come together, they can sing, they can be a group
and they can mobilize.
And look, some people's lives aren't great
and they follow a team and the team wins
and that's a win for them.
Do you think that's not important?
You're a fool, you're an idiot.
Some people need that.
And that's a beautiful thing.
It's a beautiful thing to work.
I think the issue is really nations need
a purpose beyond sports.
I think we maybe put too much on it
and it becomes like, it can become a little bit toxic,
but it's great.
Do you think sometimes a mistake that we make
when talking about things like politics
and left versus right, if people make the mistake
that equality of opportunity is the same
as equality of outcome?
Well, that seems to be, it seems like a very obvious thing
to sort of say, well, equality of outcome
isn't really doable.
As soon as you get to that,
you're three moves away from Stalin.
Because how are you gonna do that?
You're gonna have to enforce it.
And but the level of, is the problem poverty
or is the problem inequality?
Let's be honest about it, right?
What's the problem?
What do you perceive the problem as?
Because I perceive the problem as poverty, not inequality.
Because when you get to inequality,
it's about memetic desires, right?
It's the René Girard thing about the idea
that your happiness is your standard of living minus envy.
There's nothing I can do about that.
Comparison is the thief of joy.
Someone else's life,
someone else's on Instagram or a yacht
with 15 models doing a ton of cocaine.
Oh, okay, great, that's their thing, lovely.
I got my thing.
You could spend your life looking elsewhere
and trying to, you know,
and you want people to get to a level, though.
You want people to have a fair chance in life.
For me, education.
Education should be free.
It should be difficult to get into university.
It should be free.
I think we could start with STEM as a nation,
just go, well, STEM is free.
It's hard to get into.
These are the standards.
If you get there, we pay for you
and we pay for your life for three years to study.
Great.
And anyone with a STEM degree, by the way,
anywhere in the world that comes with a British passport,
come.
Jimmy, how would that be a downside?
No, it's interesting that you say that
because you're someone, first-generation immigrant,
you could say, white working class.
You've got to the very top of your profession.
A profession?
Not the very top.
No, but if you-
I can see the top from where I'm standing.
We'll talk about this
because that's one of the things about you is-
No one's at the top.
No one's ever at the top.
The grass is always-
But in terms of the UK-
You've done all right, mate.
You've done all right.
Jesus, I've come a long way on one tank of gas.
Gratitunberg would be proud of me.
Very environmentally friendly.
I've seen you late as special, mate.
I don't think she'd like some of those jobs.
Having said that, you have got,
you've come, as you said, very far on one tank of gas.
What do you attribute your success to?
Because there's a lot of people who make the criticism
that the UK comedy industry is very class-based.
We live in a very class-based society.
Yet you've done incredibly well.
So what do you attribute your success to?
Well, I suppose the perception of my class
is very different to my class.
So that's-
There's something going on there as well.
Like, I did turn up
suited and booted
when I came on the comedy scene.
And I think that thing about the people's-
It's a visual medium and the idea that you turn up
in a suit and tie and be like,
he looks like a TV host.
You should do a game show.
Yeah.
Great, OK.
I'll do that.
That was always a side hustle.
I would attribute my-
Any success I've had in life to a stoicism.
So do less better.
I do jokes.
The world ordered a stand-up comedian.
And I honoured that.
So I didn't get as distracted.
I got a little bit distracted,
but I didn't get as distracted by other things.
But, you know, there's kind of that thing of
you get offered your first bit of TV
and I know a lot of people have got offered their first bit of TV
and then they didn't talk for two years.
Who doesn't talk for two years?
It's your job.
Your job is being a stand-up comedian.
You should be working five nights a week minimum
and possibly more.
I mean, I now do two shows a night.
It's a joy.
One at 7, one at 9.30.
Have a drink and dinner before.
Have a drink.
They like it.
Have a drink and dinner after.
It's great.
It's like that thing of like,
there's no substitute for reps.
You need time in the gym.
You need to be a comic.
You need to be writing new stuff every single time.
You'd be trying new stuff at every single show.
That's why new comics, sometimes you see a new comic
and they're working on 20
and they're doing the same 26 months later.
Okay.
I don't know what you want to do for,
what do you think you're, the jokes,
the set isn't anything.
They're the bullets.
You're the gun.
And you've got to keep on feeding that joke-eating monster.
You've got to keep on writing.
And that's the joyful thing you get.
It's because you rise, you don't rise to your goals.
You fall to your systems.
And if you have good systems and you go,
right, this is what I'm going to focus on.
This is my thing.
This is my little gift.
This is what I offer the world.
It's easy.
And the idea that we're telling people now
to have a portfolio approach to life
and to have lots of different things going on
and different side hustles, generalists suck.
Do you really think 25% of effort being a stand-up comedian
is going to compete with 100% of my effort?
Good luck.
I think maybe you're being slightly arrogant.
Jimmy, where did you get this attitude?
Because I'm guessing you weren't born with it.
Did you learn this?
What, the...
Well, look, you probably don't realize it,
but your attitude is very, very rare.
Most, especially in this country.
In America, much more common.
Go for it, do this, do that.
In the UK, a lot of people are kind of encouraged
to be mediocre or don't reach too far,
don't work too hard.
You wouldn't want to fail, all of this kind of stuff.
Were you always like this?
I think comedy's given me a lot.
I really do.
It's something when you're in the right stream,
what feels like play, it looks like work to everyone else
and it feels like play to you.
And no one can compete with you
because you're just, whatever, it's 12 hours a day.
Who cares?
Two shows a night, who cares?
I love it.
I just want more of it.
I don't think it's that unusual an attitude.
I think comedy, though, the great gift of comedy is failure.
You make friends with failure.
And really, it's the myth is we only ever...
People see the results, right?
People are jealous of what you've got.
They're not jealous of how you got it.
That's right.
So that thing of like going,
we've got lies, big lies in our society.
We've got lies about genius.
The guys are genius.
It's just a genius.
Of course, Michael Jordan is a genius.
Or Bill Gates, oh my God, he works so hard.
He works so hard, works really hard.
Total bullshit.
Both of them, it's always a mix of the two.
It's all, when Michael Jordan,
if he hadn't turned up to training,
is literally no one, right?
And Bill Gates, same, same.
Like, the genius is...
I mean, there's different types of genius, obviously.
There's sheer innate genius.
There's, you know, there's Bach and von Neumann.
But there's also hyper-accelerated rationality.
And you're saying that it's comedy,
but you've got dyslexia, which...
Yeah.
And you made it to Cambridge, which is...
Yeah, I'm a dummy.
What they used to call a fucking idiot, yeah.
They're very dyslexic, so I can't write that well.
I didn't learn to read till I was about 11.
I've got, like, very, very bad penmanship.
I'd be very embarrassed.
Like, even now, if someone sees my notes or handwriting,
I'm embarrassed by it.
It's very childlike, and it's difficult for me.
I don't really think in what I sort of do a letter at a time.
But that's, I suppose, that thing of, like,
getting into Cambridge was a big deal for me
because I didn't want to be a dummy.
I sort of...
I'm very aware you are a story you tell yourself.
And so I changed schools when I was 16.
And I would really recommend this if you have kids
or if you're listening to this when you're young
and you have a narrative that you don't like.
Oh, I'm the guy that messes around
and I'm a loose cannon and I'm badly behaved.
Just put yourself in a new environment and reinvent yourself.
It's why people love traveling.
Because when you travel on your own, you get to,
you kind of arrive and you can kind of go,
well, I can tell any story you want.
And it's not bullshit.
You're just kind of, you're just changing it slightly
and going, well, I could be this now.
And I remember changing schools and, you know,
it's often the way my, a guy called Mr. Clay
and a guy called Mr. Thile.
First name, not Peter.
Very good guy.
Sort of saw us on the first day at this new school
and I sort of went, oh, I'd quite like to go to Cambridge.
And he went, yeah, okay.
You seem bright enough.
Very good at writing, but we'll get around that.
And then that was about pattern recognition,
which is really one of the gifts of stand-up comedy.
What are stand-ups good at?
What are jokes?
It's pattern recognition.
It's a lot of its pattern recognition.
So it's that thing of like going,
you don't copy someone's essay,
but you read a couple of A-grade essays
and you figure out, okay, well, that's how they look.
I could do that.
You figure out how jokes work
and then different types of jokes.
And you figure out how to reverse engineer.
I think comedians, I think our minds are quite,
quite similar to detectives
in that most people are thinking about what's next.
And we're thinking about, well, this is what's going on.
What just happened?
It's quite an interesting way of thinking.
But that way of thinking can sometimes lead you
to being distracted and unfocused
because you're going, well, this is going on,
but what's over there?
And that makes for a good joke
with that kind of tangential thinking,
but also as well, it can lead to a kind of unfocussiness
when it comes to...
I don't know, maybe I got lucky as well in the timing.
You know, I came to comedy in my mid-20s
and it felt like Indiana Jones getting his hat back.
It felt like I had one shot at this for a life less ordinary.
And I was very all in very quickly.
So I went from working for a big oil company to going,
well, a Yo Ho Ho, a pirate's life for me.
I'm off doing this thing.
And the people that I met,
I found it incredibly inspiring,
the world of stand-up comedy,
because it's a great community
out for ourselves, but in it together.
You know, we're all kind of, you know, lone wolves,
but we all sort of come together
and it's a great community.
So one of the things that everyone I've spoken to
who knew you in your early days in stand-up says,
is that you were just a level above everybody
in terms of professionalism.
You'd turn up and you'd say,
here's my business card, what's your phone number?
This might be the faintest praise there's ever been.
The most professional comedians,
I've been the tallest dwarf.
Well, right.
It's the best looking guy in the Burns unit, right?
He's like, yeah, okay.
But that thing of like going,
taking it very seriously from the jump and being,
I mean, my first Edinburgh show was called
Bare Faced Ambition, because I knew I'd entered this world.
This is amazing.
And really, I walked into a graveyard.
There was nothing going on in comedy 25 years ago.
It was not a career.
And now I think it's a career.
Really?
So even 25 years ago, it wasn't a career?
There was not much going on.
There was no one really touring when I started touring.
I remember just kind of booking the rooms
and it was like, it was very old school comics
would be maybe playing that room
or someone had played it a few years before,
but then one, I mean, now you get any theater in the UK
and we're blessed with this incredible number of theaters
around the country.
Four nights a week, there's a comedy show.
It's amazing.
It's amazing how many people are out there touring now.
It's become, the industry has grown hugely
during the time I've been in it.
And I've kind of ridden that wave.
I think it's been like a, comedy's very new.
If you think about it really, you could sort of trace it back.
I mean, you can trace it back to ancient times, obviously.
There's always been tricks to guards and all of that.
But really, George Carlin and Richard Pryor,
Billy Connelly over here,
the idea of these guys in the early seventies
being on stage for an hour or more talking
and people paying to see them
and there being a couple of amps, that's it.
That's really quite new.
And really, when you think about what that means
for guys like me and it feels like
you get to be the beakers.
You get, you know, George Carlin and Billy Connelly,
they're kind of John the Baptist
and you kind of have created this thing
and then there's more and more people getting into it.
I think comedy should be taught in our schools.
I'm a huge advocate for this
because you think about like learning music.
Music's non-verbal communication
and there's a huge value in teaching kids music.
But how much practical application is there
for grade three piano in life?
I'd argue not much.
But comedy, what does it teach you?
Well, I suppose it teaches you how to write down
and order your thoughts
and it teaches you how to sort of discover your own voice
and it teaches you how to communicate
and it teaches you some public speaking.
They're all pretty useful things in pretty much any life.
I mean, the great tragedy is most people live and die
and they never get to hear their own voice.
And really just doing a short stand-up course,
it teaches you kind of, you become who you are.
And there's something great
about finding your voice in comedy
because you kind of don't know,
I mean, I used to, I love storytelling comedians.
I mean, I love all different types of comedy
but storytellers I adore and I'm not one.
I'm trying to work on that.
I've got a fastball and I'm trying to work on my knuckleball
and especially in the new special,
I'm trying to do some different things.
But it's really interesting that you go,
you come out kind of fully formed.
You go, oh, I'm a one-liner guy.
I wouldn't have necessarily predicted that
when I got into comedy
that one-liners would be my love language.
Because when you started,
you used to do musical comedy, didn't you?
I did a couple of things with guitars and songs early on.
Just kind of trying some different stuff
and telling some stories and doing other stuff.
It was interesting.
But then I pretty quickly,
I suppose it's that thing
of the feedback loop of comedy is so valuable.
It's such an easy job, really, compared to music.
People, musicians go away for 18 months
and they make a record and they release it
and I wonder will people like it?
Well, it was me.
I wrote some jokes yesterday.
I was on stage in Cardiff last night.
I read them off a piece of paper.
Laugh, laugh, no laugh, no laugh, laugh, laugh.
Great.
They tell me.
The audiences are genius.
It's a wonderful thing.
It is a wonderful thing.
And we're looking at comedy.
So I started comedy in 2009.
And 2009 was kind of the apex of pretty much
the Frankie Boyle era of stand-up comedy
where he was on Malt the Week.
And the more offensive you could be, the better.
If you didn't tell a rape joke on stage,
you were kind of this sort of left-wing cuck figure
that everyone would kind of look down on you,
particularly in the open mic.
And now we went through a period
where it felt like it was very restrictive.
Do you think we're still in that period now?
Or are you going to disagree with my analysis,
which is more than welcome to say?
I think I would disagree with your analysis.
I think I've been working throughout that whole period.
And I've been doing my thing.
And I would say no complaints, few complaints.
But if you think about, I don't know who the,
I don't know, I'm doing all right.
And Ricky's doing all right.
And we do our thing.
And Hannah Gatsby's doing OK.
And Nishkumar's doing OK.
It's a broad church comedy, right?
There's a lot politically.
And in terms of your artistic kind of bent,
there's this huge variety in stand-up comedy.
It'd be like saying, if you were in a metal band,
oh yeah, I was in a metal band,
and then some people were playing some chamber music,
and off.
But you live together, you live in the same world.
It's fine.
The venues can accommodate both.
And I think that's kind of the magnificent thing
about comedy.
I like the Edinburgh Festival.
It's an incredible kind of melting pot.
And the thing about a sense of humour is it chooses you,
it betrays you, your sense of humour.
So people come and see the show.
And my favourite thing at comedy shows
is that kind of cognitive dissonance,
where people go, we shouldn't be laughing at that,
but we are laughing at that.
And in a world where, I don't think there's any problem
with censorship from above,
but there is a little bit of self-censoring going on.
In our, not in comedy, but in our world, right?
So then there's people that don't self-censor.
There's people that just say whatever they think is funny.
And people come and see me on stage,
and there's a catharsis in that.
Because you come and you see it, and you go,
oh, and then you have a very free and easy conversation
after the show.
Because you feel loose.
Because you, oh yeah, this guy doesn't give a fuck,
can't he?
He's using all kinds of language.
He's saying all kinds of things.
You forget as a comedian,
a lot of people don't swear in their everyday life.
Never mind, talk about some of these terrible things.
And I feel sorry for the people that get offended.
I genuinely do because when tough times happen in life,
people are gonna die in your life.
People are gonna get sick.
All four things are gonna happen.
You're gonna lose your job.
You're gonna lose money.
It's gonna, tough shit's gonna happen.
At least if you have a dark sense of humor,
you can laugh on those roughest of days.
There's a little bit of humanity in it.
And the people that are easily offended,
fuck me, they've just got to white knuckle it.
Poor loves.
I agree with you.
Can I push back on your idea about not,
I think all comedians self sense
if I'm being honest with you, Jimmy.
So I would watch your latest special.
I loved it.
Really, it was great.
Correct.
It was a correct answer.
You have a beautiful way of pushing back
on somebody who might say,
how brilliant that special was, mate.
Exactly, exactly.
I am the modern day Paxman.
Similar notes.
Anyway, but you did a joke
where you were talking about Christianity
and it was very funny all the way through.
And then you went, well, and people go to me,
oh, and I'm going to paraphrase it
and it's going to be terrible.
But why don't you make a joke about Islam?
And you go, because I'm not fucking mental.
But then I go on to make a joke about Islam.
Yeah.
Immediately.
But.
It's a, yeah.
I did make a joke about Islam directly after that.
Yeah, yes.
But in the way that, how can I put the,
in not in how.
I'm loving Jimmy's face around this.
Yeah.
In a way that I kind of,
I felt how when you,
when we tackle jokes about Islam,
I feel that we tiptoe around it more than.
Not this guy?
No, I've got loads of stuff about Islam.
And actually a lot of, I mean, I just played Istanbul.
Yeah.
I just played a Muslim country, did those,
did the bit about, you know,
the bit and the special that I think you're looting to
is the thing where I go, you know,
I'm a bit short for time, I can't do,
I've done jokes about Christianity,
but I can't do jokes about Islam.
And you get the crowd kind of go,
hmm, can't you wanna go,
I go, well, fun fact, I'm not a fucking idiot.
So if you're sat there thinking, well, that's not fair.
You joke about Christianity all day long,
but you won't make the same sort of joke about Muslims.
Well, then maybe as a Christian,
you should think about blowing something up.
Yeah, it's fun.
I don't think anyone gets particularly offended by that
because it's the, I mean, we all know Muslim people,
they're fine.
Yeah.
Exactly the same as everyone else.
Yeah.
There's no sacred cows in my show.
There's nothing that I'm like pulling punches or going,
well, I won't, I don't wanna stray too close to that.
It's about what's the funniest thing I can possibly say.
Let me try a different post back on a different thing,
which I think I disagree with you on,
because I think it's absolutely true
that for people who've already made it,
you, Ricky, Dave Chappelle, Joe Rogan, Bill Burr, whoever,
the ability to go on stage and make whatever joke you want
is totally there.
And even if people come after you
as they did about the gypsy joke or whatever,
like, you're gonna be fine.
No one's gonna be pulling your shows, et cetera.
But there have been, including a dead and professional,
people whose shows have been canceled.
Yeah.
No, I think-
Jerry Sadowitz.
Jerry Sadowitz is a very good example of this.
Brilliant comedian, incredibly offensive,
but brilliant comedian.
And, you know, there will be other examples
of people like that as well.
Well, I do think I'm in a privileged position.
I'm kind of grandfathered in.
Yes.
And it's that thing of, you know,
whenever I get dragged, it's like people always go,
yeah, and also you've got to right size it.
Like, you know, I told a joke
and some people didn't like it.
Yeah.
It's not the biggest deal in the world.
I think it's probably tougher in the clubs.
That's what I mean.
Where people are like, you know,
sort of saying, well, you can't say that
and you can say that.
And it's, you know, I feel like,
but saying something is too terrible to joke about
is like saying a disease is too awful to cure.
Or we can't use medicine on that.
It's gross.
But you go, well, the joking about it is it helps.
It's a cathartic thing.
What about this idea that particularly
in more kind of progressive leaning comedy circles,
that you're punching down,
where you're using your privilege to make fun of people
who don't have as much power as you.
And therefore this is wrong, offensive, evil, et cetera.
Okay.
Yeah.
I don't know what they want.
I don't really get it.
I don't get the idea that a joke is a punch.
You know, I don't kind of agree with the premise.
So never mind getting into the weeds of it,
but you go, what, sorry,
there's people you can joke about.
So I can't joke about anyone with a disability
because they're below me.
Sorry.
I'm punching down at them because they're below me.
Oh, right.
Okay.
Interesting.
That group is below me.
Oh, that's a great way to see the world.
And you're above them, are you?
So you wouldn't joke about them
because you're better than them, are you?
Okay.
I mean, I think you've only got to step back
from that one second ago.
The arrogance of that is unbelievable.
The idea of being an equal opportunities offender.
I go, well, we can all take a joke.
That seems a much more reasonable point of view to me.
And the idea of saying that, you know,
whoever it is in your audience,
it's all that they wouldn't be able to take it.
They are a sacred cow.
We can't make jokes about that one thing.
Well, you're on a very slippery slope
because who's making the rules?
Who's deciding what is and what isn't acceptable?
I'd like the audience to decide.
If they laugh and, you know,
there could be a sharp intake of breath,
but as long as the laughter is the first thing, great.
We'll get you back to Jimmy in a minute.
Let us tell you about a set of products
that can improve performance, energy levels,
and the way you look and feel.
The busier my life gets,
the more valuable a good night's sleep is.
Recently, I started using Cozy Earth's luxury bedding,
and I've seen a marked improvement in my sleep.
It's amazing.
Here's why I love Cozy Earth bedding.
Everything they make is made with premium viscars
from Bamboo, which is, importantly,
naturally temperature-regulating and breathable.
Best of all, Cozy Earth bedding comes
with a 100-night sleep trial,
which means you have up to 100 nights to try it out.
Sleep on them, wash them,
and if you're not completely in love,
just return them within 100 days for a full refund.
Cozy Earth doesn't just do luxury bedding.
With our code, you save up to 35% on loungewear,
pajamas, bedding, bath towels, and more.
Go to CozyEarth.com and enter our promo code,
Trigonometry, and check out for up to 35% off.
That's CozyEarth.com, promo code, Trigonometry.
And now, back to the show.
One of the people you mentioned, Jimmy, is George Carlin.
He was an absolute hero of mine for a whole host of reasons,
and one of them was...
The cocaine abuse.
The level of cocaine abuse.
I mean, obviously.
But apart from that, he was someone who really
was incredibly fearless, completely unafraid,
really, really principled in calling out bullshit,
irrespective of which side of the political spectrum
was promoting the bullshit.
And he made a lot of fun about Christianity at the time.
A lot of jokes like Bill Hicks, who was another hero of mine,
because those were the restrictive forces of the day.
Well, the basket of things that you can't talk about changes
through time, and comedians are sort of the canary in the mind.
We kind of...
So what's really the role of edgy comedy?
I always think the only defense of edgy comedy
is to be fucking hilarious, telling edgy jokes, right?
So, tic.
The other thing, what does it do?
What is it for?
There's an overt and window in politics, right?
We talk about what is and what is an acceptable policy,
and that moves through time.
There's also an overt and window in society.
Well, what's acceptable to talk about,
and what isn't acceptable to talk about in society?
And I think comedy plays a big part in that.
So both on the edgy stuff, the super edgy,
what we can talk about are these political things,
because the comedians start the conversation.
So when Dave Chappelle talks about stuff,
and it becomes a huge issue,
well, that's culturally very relevant.
But also, when someone at Edinburgh
might start talking about mental health,
and then the paper do a big article about this young guy
talking about his mental health struggles,
and you go, oh, that's very interesting,
and it opens that overt and window of conversation.
That's a very, very healthy good thing for society,
in my view, and that's really...
And I think comedy's got that ability
to kind of, it sugars the pill.
You could talk about these incredibly difficult things.
I mean, there's a whole bit at the end of the news special,
The Natural Bon Killer,
where I have the talk with a young man,
and basically school him on consent and sex,
and what you should do and what you should ask for,
and what's okay and what's not okay.
And it's fucking hilarious and super rude, like crazy rude.
But I'm not wrong about anything, is it?
And it feels like it's a really valuable thing,
because they might just listen to me,
whereas, you know, I don't know how else they're...
Well, no one else is doing that messaging.
People are far too keen on going, oh, well, that's obvious.
We don't need to talk about that. Yeah, we fucking do.
Do you see yourself almost as kind of a release valve?
So people who maybe in their own personal lives,
they can't talk about certain things,
or they feel constrained at work,
yet they come to watch you, the lights go down,
it's a darkened room,
you make jokes about all these different topics,
and that's a cathartic experience.
Yeah, I think there's a real truth to that.
I think it's very...
I mean, it's interesting, actually,
when you talk about Christianity,
doing that stuff in America felt much edgier
than doing it here.
And actually, as you travel round,
you sort of notice, oh, wow,
that was much edgier in South Africa
than it was in the UK, because, you know,
religion is much bigger.
Yeah, well, actually, religious in America,
and that's what I was gonna ask you,
because my sense is that the conversation we started earlier,
which was about God and belief,
and the lack of purpose and a lack of meaning
that increasingly in our society's people experience,
is like Jordan Peterson is on tour now,
and I'm gonna be joining him,
because he wants to have a conversation
about his latest book is called We Who Struggle with God.
And my sense is this is gonna become a big talking,
not a talking point, it's the wrong phrase,
but this is a big thing
that people are gonna be talking about,
and comedians stop making fun of Christianity, really,
in the way that they did during the Carlisle and Hicks era.
Have you seen the new special?
Yes, I'm not saying...
What do you mean?
Yeah, there's genuine blasphemy in there, please.
Well, I'm excited, look, I'm excited for you, mate.
I'm excited to see how your show does in Alabama.
But my point is something else,
which is I think, I don't know if you agree with me on this,
but I sense that there is a God conversation coming,
as you mentioned, the God-shaped hole in everybody.
And it just feels like this is the moment
when we're gonna have a different take on it going forward.
Do you see what I'm talking about,
or does this make no sense to you?
No, I think so, I think there's...
Listen, there's always gonna be,
there's a movement and then there's a counter-movement,
and the New Atheist movement sort of came along,
and then there's kind of a counter-movement against it going,
well, don't throw it all away.
But I don't think that's about saying,
well, necessarily subscribe to this religion,
but we're sort of going,
well, what's gonna be the thing
that brings people together and...
That's right.
I think politics isn't the right thing to replace religion.
It's because really, if you think about it,
it's about what is God, right?
What's God a proxy for?
The future, right?
It's like live well now.
It's very self-help religion,
because all self-help is prioritized later.
Every self-help book, that's the core, prioritized later.
And God is, well, do this now for a better life later.
And the issue is they're promising heaven.
So when you're promising heaven,
well, by any means necessary,
because it's heaven we're talking about here,
it's perfection.
And I think there's something about Marxism,
which is very similar,
because Marxism promises, albeit in a very secular way,
they promise perfection.
So they go, it's perfection.
So, communism, by any means necessary,
it's worth it because we're getting to this Valhalla.
And I think that's very dangerous
to put your sort of belief in that.
So I mean, I'm still an atheist.
I don't believe, but I can see such purpose and worth
in being part of a community.
And what community are you part of?
You know, you can't care about everything.
Well, this is what I was gonna ask.
So if it's not politics, which it is,
I think we can all agree,
what is it that modern society has to offer people
to replace?
Well, in a sense, it's been the environmental movement
for young people.
But that's, it's absolutely valid, right?
So it's the idea of going,
well, something bigger than me,
and I wanna give myself purpose in life and a mission,
and I'm saving the planet.
What could be more beautiful?
So it's a lovely thing.
I think I absolutely agree on the problem,
and I do not agree on the solution.
I think the, I cannot imagine a world in 50 years time.
And by the way, there will be a 50 years time.
The sky's not falling in.
If you think the world is ending in the next 20 years,
you're in a fucking cult, right?
But someone gluing themselves to the pavement
isn't gonna make the difference.
If you wanna change it,
go and get the STEM degree and do the work
on something that will make a difference.
You wanna hear my environmental plan?
I got an environmental plan, you know I have.
Yeah.
Here's what we do.
All of the COP23 aims, all of the stuff,
all of the, we're gonna bring down CO2,
all of the, we're gonna decrease the amount of fuel
that we use at the expense of poor people,
line through it.
We're not doing any of that.
Nuclear submarines.
They've been running for 70 years, right?
No one got sick.
They're safe.
We put a nuclear sub reactor in every town in Great Britain.
Every single town gets a nuclear sub.
So there's no NIMBY.
There's no, not in my backyard.
It's in everyone's fucking backyard.
Nothing you can do about it.
There's one in every town, right?
And if it blows up, if a terrorist gets to it,
it's a problem, not a huge problem.
Not a big deal.
Fukushima, no one died.
Let's, let's we forget no one died.
Okay, so you put that in every town and you go,
well we're not gonna,
we're gonna burn fossil fuels until we get this all sorted.
It's gonna take 15, 20 years.
15 years time, fuel bills go to zero.
So you, you paid for it all.
Fuel bills go to zero.
And then electricity becomes free in Great Britain.
And we say to all the big companies in the world,
do you wanna come and set up a company in Great Britain?
It's quite expensive to employ people.
Oh, energy's free.
Your business involve energy.
Yeah.
And then when we're not using it, we're just,
at night time, we just mined for bitcoins.
Sounds great, but although I don't think you'll be able
to mine for bitcoins 20 years from now
because the cap will be reached.
But what else would you do if you were king of the world,
Jimmy?
That's a good idea.
You seem like a man with a plan.
That's not a bad idea.
I'm all for nuclear.
I'm not sure about one in every town,
but we can argue about that.
Well, I think that thing about,
I mean, obviously we need fossil fuels as well.
Because the people that go,
we've got to get rid of oil and gas.
You go, no, fertilizer.
Don't forget, don't forget food.
Remember food, the stuff you eat three times a day.
You need fertilizer.
Where do you think that comes from?
Good luck getting that out of a fucking wind turbine.
I don't care how high it is.
It's not going to work.
So is that thing like, you need a little bit of that.
There's no solutions only trade-offs.
But I think what Britain could do
is set an example to the rest of the world.
Us doing that doesn't make any difference, by the way,
to overall CO2 in the world.
We're not big enough.
It doesn't make a difference.
But the example we could set,
where then in 20 years time,
what we need is statesmen, not politicians.
Because everything's about incentives, right?
And we incentivize politicians in the wrong way.
They're all about the next election
and what happens later this year.
And no one is thinking,
well, what's going to happen in 15 years time?
We're definitely going to need more power.
And the idea that the environmental movement
at the moment says, well, we need to cut back.
Well, I don't buy into that.
It's not going to happen.
Well, also, you go, well, try convincing genuinely poor people
in Africa and India and China that they need to cut back
because we used it all.
So if you were king of the world,
in charge of everything, what would you do?
All right.
What other ideas have you got?
Well, it's often that thing of like,
I love that William Gibson quote,
the future is here, but it's not evenly distributed.
Yeah.
It's kind of a wonderful idea of like,
well, actually, there's great stuff around the world
and we should just take best practice from all over.
So I'm not a huge fan of the,
this will come as a shock to you.
I'm not a huge fan of Hungary's president.
But they have an idea in Hungary
that I think might be the most progressive idea
I've heard in European politics in 20 years,
which is if you're a woman and you have a baby in Hungary,
you get 25% off your income tax for life.
You have two babies, you get 50% off.
You have three babies, 75%, four babies,
ding, ding, ding, no income tax ever again, right?
Now that to me, someone should be running on that
in Westminster in this election
because you automatically get 50% of the vote, right?
Because it's incredibly progressive.
It handles the gender pay gap, right?
And there is a disparity in incomes between women.
And basically, when you take yourself out of the workforce
to have a baby and it's harder for women
than it is for men to have a baby, it just is.
So you go, well, hang on.
If we can give women back that money down the line
for having a baby and we can close the gender pay gap
and we can encourage mums to go back to work,
which is a great example to give you kids,
a great thing to do if you wanna do that, wonderful,
and we'll incentivize you.
It strikes me as, why are we not doing that?
And someone's gonna go, well, we haven't costed it.
It's gonna, I don't care what the costing is
because demographics is destiny.
And if we encourage more people to have kids
and we make it easier for people, then a better world,
a better world, more of us, great.
More of us is a good thing.
You know, that's the other thing I don't like
about the incredibly left-wing environmental people
that seem to think we're a scourge on the planet.
Fuck all the way off.
Too many people, all right, who should we get?
Why don't we start with you?
It's genocidal, it's crazy.
But the idea of like going,
I think we should be encouraging people to have kids
and make it easier.
Because really, when you think about,
where's the best places to live in the world?
It's places that industrialized relatively slowly.
It's ex-colonial, it's like Australia,
like Sydney, Melbourne, Toronto, Vancouver,
like best place in the world.
Places that, because kids went from being an asset
when we were on the farms, right, there was a free labor.
Great, have as many kids as you can
to being a liability in the cities.
And really great suburban areas is what we need more of.
So it's that thing of like,
people are always planning new towns.
No, you need new suburbia is what you need.
Because you need places where people can afford to live
with a house and a garden and a standard of living.
You don't need more flats for single people.
That's not what we need.
We need more suburban spread areas where people can live
and have a community and, you know, a nice place.
Yeah, and that's one of the things
that I've found so frustrating about this government
is Michael Gove recently came out and was going...
Did he?
Yeah.
Well, that's an exclusive, isn't it?
I think we all knew, but that's...
Sorry, sorry, you do not have to use the sentence.
No, no, no.
Oh, well, that's just a mix-up.
Please continue.
There's going to be all the Americans
giggling Michael Gove and go, I understand that joke.
But he recently came out and he was saying,
well, you know, unless...
You can't say it again.
Don't do it.
I'm going to triple down.
He recently said...
Yeah, he recently said that unless young people
can get access to property and the housing ladder,
they're going to reject democracy.
Thanks for quoting my arch-age, Michael.
And then you go, well, that's great, mate.
What a great point.
Should we talk to the housing minister about it?
Oh, hang on a second.
You are the housing minister.
Yeah, it strikes me we need a bit more housing.
Yeah. I mean, we definitely do.
People need places to live.
It's...
Yeah, and that doesn't strike me as a complex idea.
I'm trying to think of other things I would do,
like other things that are great around the world.
Like, I like Portugal.
I like the Portuguese drug laws.
I like what they've done in Lisbon.
Like, Lisbon was like one of the roughest towns in Europe.
Yeah. And it's now an absolute joy to wander around.
And really, they've taken away petty crime
because 90% of petty crime is drug-related.
And they legalized all drugs.
And it's fantastic.
Now, I would say there's a proviso on my drug policy,
which not everyone will love.
All drugs are legal, right?
Weed is legal, coarse weed is legal.
The legal age for weed, though, is 45.
You've got to...
Because it's a performance inhibiting drug.
That's what weed is.
It's performance inhibiting.
Like, men in their 40s that are working too hard
and you just need to fucking chill out, mate.
There's more to life than this.
Enough already.
Marijuana.
Young people just starting out, I think, prohibition.
You think...?
Well, I did a personal prohibition when I started comedy.
I didn't drink for 12 years.
Really? Yeah.
Smart on the comedy side,
because you're constantly surrounded by drunk people.
You're surrounded by it. There's a lot of it.
And I saw people.
There's people that I started with that were so funny.
So funny.
And they had a brilliant time.
Oh, my God, they had fun.
And you don't know their names.
Yeah.
And I think that's really sad.
And they just didn't... They didn't manage to...
It wasn't the appropriate time.
You know, there's a season for these things.
And I think, actually, for young people,
it's about where you've got time and you've got focus.
Where are you going to apply that and that's your life.
So it's, you know, there's a crisis for young men.
I mean, Jesus knows life isn't easy for young women
in this society.
But for young men, there's a very clear issue,
which is that George Orwell wasn't right.
Audis Huxley was right.
Our power will not be taken by some force from above.
It will be given away for cheap dopamine.
So guys are playing video games 100 hours a week, right?
The video games are a proxy for career.
Very clearly, right?
You look at the levels and the big boss at the end.
I mean, it's so clearly a proxy for career, right?
And porn is a proxy for sex.
You know, there's no risk involved in either of those.
And what you want is young men to take more risks.
You want them to, you know, so the message shouldn't be
play less video games and look at less porn.
It should be go out there and have an adventure.
It should be, you know, the message needs to be
more enticing than don't look at porn online.
It should be get your dick wet.
More of a message and more exciting.
Solve the population problem as well, Jimmy, two and one.
Yeah, it's not a bad, you know.
Jimmy, it strikes me that you are a combination of both
creativity and pragmatism.
And those two normally don't go together.
You tend to either get the pragmatic or the creative,
particularly-
This again, I mean, it comes back to gratitude.
It just comes back to luck.
I got very lucky.
I think like, we only see luck in certain fields.
Like we can see, like Barbie Oppenheimer, good example, right?
So we can all see, oh, Margot Robbie.
Oh my God, she's so beautiful.
She was just born like that.
But no one looks at Oppenheimer and goes,
ah, he was born with an IQ of 170 and a work ethic,
which is also heritable.
So you don't see the luck in everything.
There's one side that we're very dismissive of, the luck.
And then the other side we don't look at.
And it seems very unfair.
Like life is kind of unfair.
We come out with our gifts, with our factory settings.
And the trick of life is to know what you are,
to accept what you are early on and lean into that.
And how do you get there?
How do you accept what you are?
Because there's a lot of people who spend their entire life
fighting against what they are.
There's a lot of people with curly hair and straightness.
Yeah, OK.
There's a lot of people going on sunbeds.
OK.
You're the color you're meant to be.
You're meant to look like that.
You're great as you are.
Thanks, James.
You're leaning into it.
But you know that thing of like just going, acceptance is,
it's great because then you've got the starting point
and then you can kind of build on that.
And I think in my life, I would say to any young comic,
I'd say to pretty much anyone, avoid competition
through authenticity.
No one can beat you at being you.
Don't be the best, be the only.
No one does what I do.
I mean, people do a similar job like a stand-up comedian.
OK, you can categorize it like that
and go, well, there's lots of stand-up comedians
and some are doing better than you
and some are doing worse than you.
But no one does what I do.
I deliver a very specific product.
You know, I make something people want.
I make them happy.
And Jimmy, when Francis said you were at the top,
and this is something we talked privately about once as well,
you were like, well, I'm not at the very top.
And you just have an ambitiousness that is, A, quite unusual
and be very infectious about your goals for your career,
for things that you want to achieve,
that you are quite relentless about.
A lot of people in your position might say,
well, look, I've made a lot of money.
I'm super successful.
Like, I can just have, I can just chill.
I can just, you know, you've got a family.
You've got, you know, the opportunity to lie on the beach
51 weeks a year or 52 weeks a year if you want.
But you're just cringing, as I say all of this,
because you're super driven to be the very best.
Listen, I want to be everything I can be.
Yeah. But that's not the very best.
I want to buy, what's the best thing I could do, right?
I think I've found the thing that I'm best at.
Am I the best in the world? No.
But I can, I've got a shot, right?
I've got a shot of being,
be everything that you can be within that.
And really, I think the thing about having, you know,
kids and family is,
those kids are not going to listen to what I say.
They're going to watch and imitate.
And if they see someone with a work ethic,
well, that's, you know, they might,
they might pick up on that and copy it.
That wouldn't be such a bad thing.
And I think also the work ethic thing is,
the downside of success is it fosters envy and jealousy.
And really, I think letting people know how hard you work
gets rid of 90% of that.
Because people know, let people in our industry
know how much I work.
They know how much I do.
And it's, so it's difficult to be resentful.
You know, and I think resentment's a,
it's the opposite of gratitude.
It's a poisonous thing.
I really love the Frederick Nietzsche quote on resentment.
If you think someone's ruined your life, you're right.
It's you.
Yeah.
Oh, it's a mic drop of a line.
And I completely agree with this.
Actually, I'm working on a book about gratitude.
But the thing is, I have to say,
that is a lot easier to feel and think about
when you're already successful.
Our partners, GiveSendGo, are hosting thousands of crowdfunding
campaigns in the US, UK and around the world
right now.
There's a campaign on there right now
where you can invest in a UK startup
that aims to revive the traditional high street.
Imagine a world where we're less reliant
on the huge supermarket chains.
What if there was an easy way to spend our money
with local independent grocers, butchers, bakers, et cetera?
Instead of lining the pockets of faceless corporate
behemoths built on cheap labor,
monopolizing the market,
and that have destroyed small businesses.
GiveSendGo uses AI tech to pick up your shopping
from hundreds of independent stores
in a single transaction,
when it's all delivered to you at the same time.
GiveSendGo have proved time and again
that they uphold freedom of speech,
unlike the bigger crowdfunding sites.
That's why we're proud to partner with them.
They, like us, believe that with openness and honesty,
we'll create more understanding
and ultimately more harmony in the world.
Starting a campaign on GiveSendGo is easy and intuitive.
Go to GiveSendGo.com today.
That's GiveSendGo.com to start raising money
for whatever's important to you.
And now, back to the interview.
That is a lot easier to feel and think about
when you're already successful.
When you were working your way up,
and I don't know what your career
would have been like early on,
but everyone has setbacks, everyone has, you know,
you drive for four hours to some shit gig.
You just crushed it from day one.
What?
Oh, bless him.
No, but my success started way before you think it started.
It's character versus reputation, right?
Reputation is what the world thinks about you.
When did the world think I got successful?
Well, I don't know.
Maybe they don't think I'm successful now.
Whatever.
I'm selling big venues and I got Netflix specials
and great, all of that stuff, okay?
Well, the locus of controls outside of me.
So that's not interesting to me.
My character is what I know about myself.
Well, when I started getting paid to do stand-up
at the comedy store in London,
which is the place I used to pay to get into
to watch funny people say funny shit,
and then I'm getting paid in cash to do 20 minutes,
twice a night.
What?
Sorry?
And I can live my life on there's enough money to live on.
That's it.
That's success.
Now, the amounts of money have increased
and the size of rooms have increased
and all of the other stuff that comes with it.
That's all gravy.
But from that first time,
you get paid to be a stand-up comic.
That's success.
And people have career dysmorphia.
People are working as stand-up comedians,
telling jokes for money,
going to the Edinburgh Festival every year
and thinking, oh, I'm not successful enough.
What are you talking about?
You've got the best job in the world
and you're doing it and you're getting paid to do it.
What?
How could you complain?
I guess what they would say, Jimmy,
is that they want to be able to perform to more people.
They want more people to see what they do.
They believe in what they do in their art
and they feel frustrated
that they're only performing to this size of audience.
Well, I don't think they'll be able to get this then,
but having stuff isn't fun.
Getting stuff is fun.
It's not the pursuit of happiness.
It's the happiness of the pursuit.
They're happiest years.
I'm gonna have a great time touring at the moment.
But those early years in Edinburgh, my God,
those trenches that when you're out there doing it
with your friends, you've got your little gang
and the best times.
The best times in the world.
It's unbelievable.
Because you're just starting out,
you're kind of finding your feet
and you're kind of machete through the jungle,
trying to find your way.
Amazing fun, right?
It's the self-help thing.
It's not the destination or the journey.
It's who you become on the journey.
That's the thing.
And saying, well, this level of material wealth
is success in comedy.
Well, don't work in a city.
If you think this is a money game,
you're in the wrong competition.
Your ladder is leaning against the wrong wall.
This isn't.
This is about being funny.
The teal of sub-comedy is laughter.
You want to bring as much laughter as you can to people.
You want people to have an incredible experience
with you every night.
Everyone's got to serve someone, right?
Who do you serve?
You know, I think there's different things.
My work life, it's the audience.
You're in service of the audience.
They're life, right?
They've come here.
They've paid money, right?
They've bought a ticket.
Really, when you think about comedy shows,
my shows are not expensive,
but they're not cheap either, right?
If you work in a regular job, right?
And after you chat to people in the audience,
you see what they do.
And you think about, my God, right?
He's come with a wife and two kids to my show.
That's costing him 150 quid with parking and dinner
and drinks.
That's expensive, right?
You've got to deliver for that guy.
Yeah, it's great to be in service of someone.
And then in life, I would say in my lesson,
I talked to Chris Williamson about this a lot
and George Matt, you know those guys?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Anyway, friends with Chris, yeah.
We chatted about this idea of like 24 hours ahead, right?
How to live your life?
How to live your life successfully?
Well, what would you tomorrow be grateful
that you today did?
That's a great way to live your life.
Just to be in service of you tomorrow,
to be in service of your potential
rather than you right now.
Because bad habits pay off immediately in the moment.
And good habits pay off later.
The only difference, right?
And you go, well, if I eat right and I go to the gym
and I write a couple of jokes today
and spend time with family,
I'll be glad I did that tomorrow.
And repeat.
You know, that's the algorithm for life.
Whatever works, repeat.
You mentioned self-help a lot.
And I did read that you studied various things
like NLP and whatever when you were younger.
This is why I was asking you about A,
how you deal with difficulties.
Because look, of course, you're absolutely right.
Once you start getting paid to do comedy,
do the thing that you love.
But nonetheless, everyone has challenges in life.
Things happen, there are difficulties that occur.
What are some of the most useful strategies
that you've discovered,
in addition to the one you were just talking about,
for being effective and being happy
and being successful in life?
It's agency, put yourself in charge.
But if you put yourself in charge, it's much easier, right?
It's harder in the short term, but ultimately, it's easier, right?
What's the difference between ambition and entitlement?
OK, so where you are now and where you want to be,
if you want to do something about it, that's ambition.
Great.
Where you are now, where you want to be,
if you think it's someone else's problem, that's entitlement.
And entitlement can come in different ways.
You know, it's like, it's not necessarily a trust fund kid going,
I want daddy to do this for me.
But we've all got friends that have got,
you know, they're blaming their career on their management,
or somehow they didn't get the right meeting,
or the tape didn't arrive on time,
but yeah, something.
But they're not putting the locus of control within themselves.
If it's within you, I remember like,
hearing a story about David Tal, the great David Tal,
backstage in a place in a couple of comics,
whinging about their management,
or whatever, their representation, or their lawyer,
or something, and where their career was at.
And David Tal just won't be funnier.
There you go. Really simple.
Like, what's the first principles of comedy? Be funnier.
Any comic that's having a problem with their career?
Write 20 incredible one-liners.
You really stand out.
And we've mentioned David Tal, and I love David Tal.
I think he's very dark, very funny.
He might be, I mean, he's certainly one of the most
influential comics that people don't necessarily know.
Because, I mean, it's worth people looking at,
I think you can probably get it on Spotify,
Shanks for the Memories, is a sort of perfect hour
of stand-up comedy.
And he did a special called Bumping Mights with Jeff Ross,
where they're just kind of rinsing each other on stage.
It's really worth checking out.
Like, if you're a comedian, because his voice,
I mean, you might hear it and go,
oh, that sounds like quite a lot of comics.
Yeah, he started that.
He's like, he's New York, he goes up very late
at the comedy cellar, and he just destroys.
And who are the comics that you love
that you really enjoy watching?
I mean, my favorite of all time is Chris Rock.
I think Chris Rock is a generational talent.
He has an incredible ability to generate material
that is meaningful and philosophical and hilarious.
I've had the pleasure of working with him
and knowing him a little bit.
He's just exceptional.
I love him, I love Chappelle, I love people
that do sort of a similar thing to me.
So, you know, Gervais does a similar thing,
Jess on Nick does a similar thing.
We're kind of in that, you know,
there's almost like, I love Jim Jeffries,
we're gigging, we're doing some marinas in Canada
later in the year together.
We're doing like a double header, it'll be really fun.
But that thing of like, I like my voice.
And then I love Roshin Conaty.
I think it's got one of the most original,
infectious comedy voices.
She's incredible, I wish she would do more standup.
I love, you know, Catherine Ryan.
I love Beth Stelling.
I think it's got an incredible special on Netflix.
Extraordinary talent.
I mean, it's that thing, I could witter on all day.
Neil Brennan's special, I think,
blocks and three mics are some of the finest
and he's new one.
It's brilliant, I've seen it.
Crazy good.
Yeah, we had Neil on the show
when we were in America last night.
It's just wonderful.
And then there's the older statesman.
There's, you know, you're Ron White's.
And, you know, there's older guys
that are, you know, David Tal,
that have been doing it a long time
and they're just perfect.
And they're still doing it.
That's the great, they're generating new material
and out there on the road.
You know, no one's putting their feet up.
But I was going to say,
the interesting thing with Chris Rock is,
is that Chris Rock is actually very controversial,
but he's not controversial in a way
because of the topics he tackles,
but rather than the way he tackles them.
That he's, he doesn't,
when people think of what Chris Rock is going to say,
a lot of the time they can't predict it.
And when he actually talks about a subject,
you actually find yourself thinking,
I've never actually thought of it like that.
I think he's very classically dialectical
because he'll set up a thing,
he'll say his premise will be,
and he'll get that whole audience will boo the premise.
Yeah.
Often, like three or four of his routines,
the premise, the audience boo.
And then 10 minutes later, they're this fucking guy.
It's, I mean, he's incredible.
But it's that thing where you go to be in that industry,
to be able to be on the same bill as someone like that.
It's, I mean, pressure is a privilege.
I really believe it.
Like that thing, we did gigs in Amsterdam last year.
So it was like, who was it?
It was Chappelle, Chris Rock and me in an arena
in Amsterdam.
I mean, it was, maybe just took the roof off.
It was just amazing.
Just amazing.
To be in that room, to be in that company,
it's like you're breathing kind of rarefied air.
And every day is a school day.
You know, it's that great thing with comedy where you go,
and sometimes it's the greats.
And sometimes you're with kind of relatively new people
and you know, at a festival, whatever,
you're watching someone and get something out of that too.
You know, it's like, the great thing about comedy is
anyone can come up with something fantastic.
Anyway, people have got great jokes.
Yeah.
I love that what you said there,
the pressure is a privilege.
And it's so true because when you feel pressure,
that's the moment where you're in those defining periods
of your life where you know that you can't go.
You can't have an easy life and a great character.
Show me a trust-fun kid.
I'll show you someone miserable.
You need a bit of pressure.
You need tough times.
You need to, and the problem with life is it's self-assignment.
You've got to give yourself that challenge.
That's a tough thing.
That's kind of tough love, isn't it?
You know, you need to go and find that adventure
for yourself and the adventure can't be easy.
It's not an adventure.
It's the teacups and we all want the roller coaster.
It's such a good point.
And I think it's one of the reasons
that Jordan Peterson became as big as he did
because he was telling people,
go out and slay the dragon effectively,
which is basically what you're saying.
And I'm curious with your attitude about agency,
which I completely agree with,
it's interesting that we do seem to live in an age
where a lot of people are being counseled
to go in the opposite direction
and see themselves as a victim of circumstance,
victim of the political system,
victim of this, victim of that.
What do you make of that?
Well, I mean, I would defer to Chris Rock on this,
who made a exceptional point,
the night he was slapped by Will Smith.
He said there's two, the biggest addiction,
the biggest addiction in America is not fentanyl.
It's attention.
And there's three ways to get attention.
You can be excellent at something,
you can be notorious, or you can be a victim.
And those incentives,
it's tough to be excellent.
And it's easier to be a victim.
And that thing of going that mentality,
I just, you know, it's not that people aren't victims,
some people are victims,
but is it gonna define the rest of your life?
Is it, you know, that thing that JK Rowling said,
there's a brilliant thing about childhood.
Some people have very, very tough charters, right?
Incredibly tough.
What's the statute of limitations on that?
Because I think if a 16 year old said to me,
oh my God, I've come up through the system,
it's been really tough.
You've got nothing but empathy, right?
Yeah.
But for a 40 year old says that,
you go, ah, the thing is though,
and at what point, where do you draw the line?
Well, the answer is somewhere.
Somewhere along there, you draw the line.
You go, well, you need to take a stand.
So it's that thing of, I don't know how we do this.
I mean, it's a very big problem,
but you go, how do you, you know, give a man a fish?
Teach him how to fish.
How do you give people agency?
Because the sympathy and compassion is,
it's no good because no one cares enough about your life.
No one cares enough to live it for you.
That's right.
And interesting, you mentioned childhood.
What was your childhood like?
I had a wonderful mother,
an incredibly funny, larger than life character.
If ever you have a comedian on the show,
I'll give you the cheat sheet.
Here's the question you should ask.
Would you, your parents were sick?
Pretty much every comic I know had a sick parent,
either physically or mentally.
My mother was suffered with depression.
And so being able to change the mood
and to make her happy and make her laugh
was something that, so I became the thermostat,
mood-wise, in the house.
I was able to do that, to make people laugh,
to make things okay.
And that then becomes a pathology.
That's kind of how you get into it, I guess.
She's very funny, but also, yeah, very...
And then, you know, your childhood,
it's normalised, whatever was normal for you,
you think is the same for everyone.
Jimmy, it's been an absolute pleasure.
I can't believe you look.
It's great.
I'm such a fan of the show.
I think it's really important what you guys are doing.
I think it's that thing of you go,
what's lacking in the world is conversation.
And feeling like you're in a conversation.
And actually, I spend a lot of my life on my own.
I like my own company.
And I like listening.
And I like that thing of going,
and it just sort of, you go off in different directions.
You go off in different tangents.
And you have very interesting conversations.
I love the breadth of guests that you have on the show.
I love the fact that, you know, it's very open.
It's a very safe space for people to chat.
I think it's really adding value.
And in a world where, increasingly,
the traditional media outlets aren't trusted,
what we need is longer form.
Because actually, over a two-hour interview,
there's nowhere to hide.
You know, it's all very well-doing publicity on, you know,
I mean, I'll be on The One Show next week, I'm sure.
And it's great.
It's fun.
But it's three minutes ago.
And, hey, I've got a new special.
You should watch it. It's great.
It's like it's an authentic conversation.
It's like, it's a chance for me to kind of show who,
oh, well, look, that could be funny.
Watch the special. Great.
But also, this is who I am, if you're interested.
And it's lovely to be able to share that.
And it is because in a world,
if you think about the media landscape 10, 20 years ago,
you didn't really have that much of a say
about how you were presented.
There could be times where you were misrepresented.
And you're like, well, that wasn't what I said,
or that's not what I think.
But it's tough. The story's out there.
Whereas now, you actually have the opportunity
to present who you are.
Yeah. Yeah. No, it's the gatekeepers are kind of gone.
Yeah. It's great.
I think it's really valuable what you're doing,
more power to you.
It's so exciting, man.
And we really appreciate you having on the show.
And I will say you've been very supportive of us,
you know, behind the scenes.
Yeah.
So it's a great privilege to have you on.
We're going to move to locals
where we're going to ask some questions from our audience.
But before we do it, and actually before...
Pay up.
You're watching this for free.
Get the locals that it's worth getting it.
Also, you're supporting New Media.
Yeah. This boy's got to eat.
Well said, Jimmy. Yeah, thank you.
And our last question, always the same.
What's the one thing we're not talking about
that we really should be?
Natural Born Killer, my new special on Netflix,
currently streaming.
We just talked about it for two hours, man.
But they're not talking about it enough.
Yeah.
Actually, we didn't either.
We didn't even mention it. So fair point.
It's a great special.
Don't watch your special. It is great.
Yeah, it is. Thanks for having us on.
All right. Head on over to locals.
Pay up.
Yes.
You're watching this for free.
Get the locals that it's worth getting it.
When the Prime Minister of the country that you live in
breaks off from the G20 summit to do a press conference
about your personal tax affairs,
that's going to be a problem.
When is Jimmy going to apologise
for his take on the vaccine?
No wonder they're not going to take the vaccine.
They can't even take a fucking joke.
Anyone in the Illuminati gets it first.
That's the virus, man, right?
