Good afternoon everybody, I'm Andrew Ross Sorkin and it is a privilege to have with
me Peter Thiel this afternoon, one of the great legendary investors in Silicon Valley.
He has been involved in just about everything that you touch and feel, including being the
co-founder of PayPal, the co-founder of Palantir, he made his first outside investment, made
the first outside investment, I'd say in Facebook, his firm Founders Fund is a big
backer of Stripe and SpaceX, his firm backed numerous other startups through the Founders
Fund into your capital.
He also started the Thiel Fellowship to your program, that's an alternative to a college
degree which I want to get to at one point and more importantly than all of it, he has
touched some of the people and found the people who you read about in the headlines every
day from Mark Zuckerberg to Elon Musk to Sam Altman and so many others and it is great
to have you here.
Thanks for having me.
We're also going to talk a little politics as well, along with maybe some of the issues
and culture conversations that are happening in Silicon Valley, but here's where I want
to start the conversation because I want to start the conversation talking about people
because I think there's something actually extraordinary when you think about your track
record over the years of involving yourself in investing not just in companies but ultimately
in people.
You wrote a book which is coming on a 10-year anniversary and by the way I re-read it and
it stands up in a very big way, it is called Zero to One and you wrote the following about
founders, the idea of founders.
You wrote that the lesson for business is that we need founders.
If anything, we should be more tolerant of founders who seem strange or extreme.
We need unusual individuals to lead companies beyond mere incrementalism and I mention that
because I also just mentioned a number of individuals which we read about all the time
and some of those people would be described as unusual perhaps or even strange.
And I'm curious about how you think over the years you have found these individuals, what
it is that has made these individuals as successful as they have become.
Yeah, it's obviously, if there was some simple magic formula, this is what a founder looks
like and you invest in this category of people who's a founder, it probably gets faked.
It's like, I don't know, it's a 20-year-old with a t-shirt and jeans or something like
this or you end up with all kinds of really fake ideas but yeah, I think a lot of the
great companies that have been built over the last two decades were, they were founded
by people where it was somehow deeply connected to their identity, their life project.
They had some kind of idiosyncratic, somewhat different vision of what they were doing.
They did something new and then they built something extraordinarily big over the years
and of course they have these sort of extreme personalities, often have a lot of blind spots
and there are all these ways in which it's a feature and there are ways in which it can
be a little bit buggy but it's sort of a package deal and I net out to it being massively
advantageous versus let's say a professional CEO being brought in.
The prehistory of this I would say would be in the 1990s, the Silicon Valley formula was
you had various people found the company and then you'd replace them as quickly as possible
with professional CEOs, professional management and there are variations of this that happened
with Netscape and Yahoo and even Google, all these companies and the Gen X people founded
them, the baby boomers came along and sort of took over the companies and stole them
from the Gen X founders in the 90s.
In the 2000s when the millennials founded the companies they were given more of an opportunity
and it made a big difference.
The Facebook story I always tell is it was 2006, two years in, Zuckerberg was like 22
years old and we got a $1 billion offer to sell the company to Yahoo and we had a board
meeting, there were three of us and we thought we should at least talk about it.
It was a lot of money, Zuckerberg would make $250 million and sort of an eight hour long
discussion and he didn't know what he'd do with the money and he'd just start another
social networking company and kind of like the one he had and he didn't know what else
he would do and so he really didn't want to sell and if you had a professional CEO
it would have just been, man I can't believe they're offering us a billion dollars and
I'm going to try not to be too eager and we better take the money and run and that one
thing right makes a big difference.
Let me ask you a different question and all of these individuals had a huge impact on
society and have an enormous individual power and I think one of the things that you've
argued in this book and that you've argued over the years is that we need to give them
that power, we need to offer them a latitude that in many ways we don't offer others.
Well I think one of the frames I always have is that there are many ways in which the United
States, the developed countries have been relatively stagnant for the last 50 years.
Progress has slowed.
We had progress in computers, internet, software and many other domains, things have kind of
stalled out and it sort of manifests in low economic growth in the sense that the younger
generation is going to have a tough time doing as well as their parents and there is
sort of this way that there has been this broad stagnation for 40, 50 years and we need
to find ways to do new things.
I don't think, you know, startup, tech startup companies are the only ways to do them, that
is a vehicle for doing it and if you don't allow these companies to have a certain latitude
and flexibility to try to do new things, we shut it down right away, you know, the stagnation
will be worse than ever.
Okay, but here's a separate almost philosophical question, I'm going to read back something
you said to the New Yorker, there was a piece about Sam Altman, this is right around actually
when open AI began, 2016 and I think it actually might even be representative of how you might
think about Mark Zuckerberg or Elon Musk or some of these other kinds of major players.
This is what you said, you said, Sam's program for the world is anchored by ideas, not people
and that's what makes it powerful because it doesn't immediately get derailed by questions
of popularity and I thought that that was actually very indicative of most of the people
that you have invested in, it's really been about ideas and in some ways you could even
argue is disconnected from people.
I think it is really about a whole wide, people are able to think about a wide spectrum
of things, they're able to think about good founders have theories of how to hire people,
how to manage them, how to build teams, they have theories about where the culture, the
societies were going, they have technical things about the product, the design, they
have ideas about how they should market their company, so they're sort of polymaths are
able to think about a lot of these things, but yeah, I'm biased towards a lot of the
ones where it's more intellectual and maybe, but I think that quote has held up pretty
well with Sam Altman, maybe he needed to pay a little bit more attention to the board
and things like that and there was probably a people dimension that he had ignored a little
bit too much in November 2016.
Since we're on the Sam Altman of it all and since Sam was here yesterday, I'm so curious,
you were a mentor of his, what do you think of open AI and what do you think of AI more
broadly right now?
I mean, are we in a bubble?
Is this the future?
What is this?
Wow, it's a broad question.
I think I'm always hesitant to talk about it because I feel there's so many things I would
have said about AI where I would have been very wrong two, three years ago, so maybe
I'll start by just saying a little bit about the history of what people thought was going
to happen and then the surprising thing that open AI achieved and that did happen and if
you had this debate in the 2010s, there was sort of one, maybe frame in terms of two paradigms,
two books, there was the Boston Book Superintelligence 2014, which is that AI was going to build
this god-like superhuman intelligence and it was heading towards this god-like oracle
and that was what AI was going to be and then there was the Kaifu Li, a rebuttal 2018 AI
superpowers, which was sort of the CCP rebuttal to Silicon Valley, that no, AI is not about
god-like intelligence, that's a science fiction fantasy Silicon Valley has, AI is going to
be about machine learning, data collection, it's not conscious, it's not any of these
weird things, it's surveillance tech and China is going to beat the U.S. in the race for
AI because we have no qualms about sort of this totalitarian, not the word he used, collection
of data in our society and that was sort of the way the AI debate got framed and then
the thing I always said was, man, it's just such a weird word, it means all these different
things, it's annoyingly undefined, but then the sort of surprising and strangely unexpected
thing that happened is that in some sense, what open AI with chat GPT 3.5 for AI was
achieved in late 22, early 23 was you passed the Turing test, which was not super-intelligence,
it's not god-like, it's not low-tech surveillance, but that had been the holy grail of AI for
60 or 70 years and it's a fuzzy line, the Turing test is you have a computer that can convince
you that it's a human being and it's a somewhat fuzzy line because sometimes, but it pretty
clearly hadn't been passed before, it pretty clearly is passed now and that's a really
extraordinary achievement, it's extremely, it raises all sorts of interesting big picture
questions, what does it mean to be a human being in 2024? The sort of placeholder answer
I would have been tempted to give a couple of years ago would be something like the
Noam Chomsky idea that something very important about language, this is what sets humans apart
from all the other animals, we talk to each other and we have these rich semantic syntax
things and so if a computer can replicate that, what does that mean for all of us in
this room? It's an extraordinary development and it was also somehow, even though it had
been the holy grail, somehow in the last decade before, it was not expected at all and so
there's something very significant about it and very underrated and then of course you
get all these questions about, is it going to, is it an econ one question, is it a compliment,
is it going to make people more productive or is it a substitute, good, where it's going
to replace? So what do you think of all of this and how bullish as an investor are you
on this? What do you think our society, when you hear Sam Altman talk about this, you say
he's right, that's what it's going to be, do you think it's going to be something else?
You lived through 1999, there's some people who say this is a hype cycle, other people
say this is the future. Well, I'm very anchored on the 99 history and I somehow always like
to say that 99 was both. The peak of the bubble was also in a sense the peak of clarity, people
who realized the new economy was going to replace the old economy, the internet was
going to be the most important thing in the 21st century and people were right about that
and then the specific investments were incredibly hard to make and even the no-brainer market
leader, so if you said 1999, the no-brainer investment would have been Amazon stock,
it's a leading e-commerce company and they're going to scale and they'll get bigger and
it peaked in December 1999 at $113 a share, it was $5.5 in October 2001, 22 months later,
you then had to wait until the end of 2009 to get back to the 99 highs and then if you'd
waited until today, you would have made 25 times your money from 99, you'd have first
lost, you'd have gone down 95% and then made 500X, so even the no-brainer investment from
99 was wickedly tricky to pull off in retrospect and I sort of think that AI, the LLM form
of AI. These are the large language models. The open AI's of the world. Again, passing
the Turing test, I think it's roughly on the scale of the internet and so it's an incredibly
important thing, it's going to be very important socially, politically, philosophically about
all these questions about meaning and then the financial investment question I find unbelievably
hard and confusing and yeah, it's probably quite tricky. If you had to sort of concretize
one thing that's very strange about the, if you sort of just follow the money, at this
point, 80 to 85% of the money in AI is being made by one company, it's NVIDIA and so it's
all on this sort of very weird hardware layer which Silicon Valley doesn't even know very
much about anymore. We don't really do hardware, we don't do silicon chips in Silicon Valley
anymore. I get pitched on these companies once every three or four years and it's always
I have no clue how to do this. It sounds like a pretty good idea but man, I have no clue
and we never invest. Then there's sort of this theory that the hardware piece makes
the money initially, then gets more commodified over time and it'll shift to software and
the, I don't know, the multi-trillion dollar question, is that going to be true again this
time or will NVIDIA sort of have this incredible monopoly at the moment?
I suspect NVIDIA will, I think it will maintain its position for a while. I think the game
theory on it is something like all the big tech companies are going to start to try to
design their own AI chips so they don't have to do the 10x markup to NVIDIA and then how
hard is it for them to do it, how long will it take? If they all do it, then the chips
become a commodity and nobody makes money in chips. Then do you go into hardware and
you should do it if nobody else is doing it, if everybody does it, you shouldn't do it,
and then maybe, I'm not sure how that nets out, but probably people stay stuck for a
while and NVIDIA goes from strength to strength for a while.
I have a related but maybe personal question for you. You happen to have this very interesting
relationship with Sam Altman and then also a very interesting relationship with Elon
Musk. You both worked at PayPal. You famously were part of a coup effectively to push Elon
Musk out of the company. You're now friends with him all over again and have a stake in
SpaceX. You can maybe walk us through that friendship.
We had some rough moments in 2000, 2001, but it's been beautiful.
We're always going to go with this, actually, is one of the things that's been fascinating
and fascinating to the valley and I think to the country has been the commentary we've
heard from Elon Musk who helped build open AI with Sam and the break actually between
the two of them as creating this not-for-profit and what's happened to it. In fact, Elon
Musk originally sued Sam earlier this year and then dropped the suit recently.
But how do you think about this idea of a company that was started as a not-for-profit
and all of the safety concerns and things that you hear from Elon on one side and Sam
on the other?
Man, whichever person I talk to last, I find the most convincing probably. I talked to
Elon about it and he made this argument. It's just completely illegal for a non-profit
to become a for-profit company because otherwise everyone would set up companies as non-profits
and take advantage of the tax laws and then you turn them into a for-profit and this is
the most obvious arb and they just can't be allowed to do this. It's obviously just
totally illegal with what Sam's trying to do at open AI. And then like half an hour
after the conversation was over, at the moment it's like, oh, that's a really strong argument.
And then half an hour later, it's like, but the whole history of open AI is that the biggest
handicap they had was a non-profit and it led to all these crazy conflicting things culminating
in this non-profit board that thought it was better to shut down the company or the whole
venture, whatever you want to call it, rather than keep going. And nobody is ever going
to take the lesson from open AI to start a non-profit and turn it into a for-profit later,
given what a total disaster that was. But whoever I listen to last, I find the most compelling.
Let me ask you a different question. You've left Silicon Valley. You have now moved to
Los Angeles. That's your home. We left San Francisco specifically. It just felt it was
time to get out. So tell us why it was time to get out, because I think a lot of the issues
that actually we read about around open AI and some of the culture issues add a lot of
these companies are the reason you decided you didn't want to live there anymore. It's
hard to... It's a bunch of things that came together, but there was a sense that it was
sort of the ground zero of the most unhinged place in the country. You had this catastrophic
homeless problem, which maybe is not the most important problem, but it was never getting
better. It was by 2018 when we moved to LA, it felt like it had become extraordinarily
self-hating, where everybody who was not in tech hated the tech industry. This is very
odd. It would be like the people in Houston hating oil or people in Detroit hating cars,
people in New York hating finance. It had this unhinged, self-hating character in the
city itself. There were all these things that seemed extraordinarily unhealthy. If you asked
me in 2021, I would have said, man, they are finally... Yes, they're sitting on the biggest...
They created all this wealth, and yet they are going to succeed in committing suicide.
Three years later, I think the jury is a little bit more out, because maybe the AI revolution
is big enough that it will save even the most, I don't know, the most ridiculously mismanaged
city in the country.
It seemed to me...
Tell me if I'm wrong. I thought that part of the issue that you had with San Francisco
was the politics of it. Not just the politics of it, but how politics had seeped into the
culture of so many of the companies. I think that you thought that it had moved into the
city in a very progressive way.
Yeah, that's always a very clear dimension of it. That's the tip of the iceberg. That's
the part that's above the surface that people always focus on. Then the part that's below
the surface is just the deep corruption, the mismanagement of the schools, the buses, all
the public services, the way things don't work, the way the zoning is the most absurd
in the country. There was a house I was looking to buy where you couldn't build access into
the garage, and Gavin Newsom, who is the Lieutenant Governor of California at the time, said he
would help me get a garage access permit. Again, it's not clear that's what the Lieutenant
Governor of the fifth largest economy in the world should be doing, but he said he knew
how to do this in San Francisco and it was circa 2013. You needed to get it, you needed
to get the neighbors to sign off, which was maybe doable. Then you needed to go to the
Board of Supervisors because you had to build a staircase, and it was a public walkway,
and the whole public had to comment. Nobody knew what happened then. Then even harder,
a tree had grown where the driveway was supposed to be, and you needed a tree removal permit.
This was the sort of thing that you would never get. You can describe all this as crazy
left-wing ideology, but I think it's more like really, really deep corruption. This
is in a way the San Francisco problem, it's the California problem. The analogy I have,
if you want to think about the economy of California, in some ways it's analogous to
Saudi Arabia. You have a very mismanaged state government, there's a lot of insane ideology
that goes with it, but you have these incredible gushers called the big tech companies, and
then there's a way the super insane governance is linked to the gold rush of the place. There's
some point where it'll be too crazy even for California, but California can get away
with a lot of stuff, you wouldn't get away with elsewhere. San Francisco, my judgment,
had gone a little bit too far. Maybe the AI thing is they found one more giant gusher.
You don't have any Saudi money in your fund, I hope.
Virtually none. Just in case. Here's a different question though, because it gets to the politics
of this, which is it seems like a shift inside Silicon Valley, and a shift in terms of even
the way the companies are managed in a political dimension. You were very outspoken, obviously,
you supported President Trump in the last go round. I want to get to that part too,
but I want you to speak first to the shift in the valley, at least what seems like a
shift perception wise from being a very progressive place to maybe less so. Maybe not, maybe it's
just the large summers that I spoke this afternoon, and he said there's 10 people he thinks
are very loud on Twitter, and that's why the world thinks that between David Sachs
and a bunch of other people, and Elon Musk, that's not representative, but I think you
may have a different view.
Well, I don't think you'll get a majority of tech people to support Trump over Biden
or anything like that. I think you'll get way more than you had four or eight years
ago, so I don't know if you're measuring a relative shift or an absolute number. Those
are probably two different measures on that, but I would say that if we ask a very different
question about, let's say, extreme wokeness, or I don't even know what you're supposed
to call it, there is probably a broad consensus among the good tech families in Silicon Valley,
founders, startup CEOs, people across a pretty broad range that it's gone way too far. I
talked to a lot of these people, a lot of them are, I'd say, more centrist Democrats,
but it is just, we need to have a secret plan to fight this, and what they tell me behind
closed doors is way, way tougher than what they dare say in public, and so it is like,
we need to have a plan to hire fewer people from San Francisco, because that's where the
employees are the crazy. So if you want to have a less woke workforce, we need to, we're
going to have targets about how we steadily move our company out of San Francisco specifically,
and yeah, these are the sort of conversations that I've...
And do you agree with this? And by the way, let me just read, you probably know Alex,
Alex Wang, Scale AI CEO, who said that he's put together what he calls a merit-based
hiring program. He said he's getting rid of DEI, says hiring on merit will be a permanent
policy at scale. It's a big deal whenever we invite someone to join our mission, and
those decisions have never been swayed by orthodoxy or virtue signaling or whatever
the current thing is. I think of our guiding principle as MEI, Merit Excellence and Intelligence.
Bill Ackman went on to say that he thinks DEI is actually inherently a racist and illegal
movement.
Yeah, I, again, my feel for, there aren't that many people who are willing to say what
Alex says, but I think there are an awful lot of people who are pretty close to thinking
this, that there were ways they leaned into the DEI thing. It was like an anti-Trump thing.
It was like a, everything was sort of polarized around Trump for the last four years of his
campaign, so you have to demonstrate that you're anti-Trump by being even more pro-DEI.
That's, of course, not necessarily a logical thing, but yes, people somehow ended up in
this place that was very different. There always are questions what drove the DEI movement,
the wokeness in these companies, and it probably is over-determined. There's a bottom-up,
woke millennial people who were brainwashed into DEI in their colleges. That's sort of
the bottom-up theory. There's sort of a, I don't know, there's sort of a cynical corporate
version where this is, you know, the leadership of the company either believed it or used
it as sort of a, as a way to manage and control their companies in certain ways. You know,
the part that I always feel is a little bit underestimated is there was probably also
a top-down level from a government regulatory point of view where, you know, if you don't
do DEI, there is some point where you do get in trouble. You know, I don't know.
This is part of the ESG movement now. I mean, look, we talked about ESG here for a long time.
There was an ESG movement, and then there were probably all these governmental versions.
And so, I don't know, this would be probably, if my candidate for the company in Silicon
Valley is still probably the most woke, would be something like Google. And it's less woke
than it was two, three years ago, but in some ways, you know, they have a total monopoly
in search, and so there's sort of some way in which, you know, if wokeness is a luxury
good, like, you can afford it more if you're a monopoly than if you're not. And then the
problem for Google as a pretty big monopoly is that it's always going to be, you know,
subject to a lot more regulatory pressure from the government. And so if you have something
like the Gemini, the Gemini AI engine, you know, and it's sort of this comical, absurdist
thing where it generates these black women Nazis, you know, and you're supposed to find
famous Nazis, and then the diversity criterion gets applied across the board, and so it just
generates fake black women who are Nazis, which is, you know, a little bit too progressive,
I think. But then if you think of it in terms of this larger political context, Google will
never get in trouble for that. The FDC will never sue them for misinformation or anything
like that. That stuff does not get fact-checked. You don't really get in trouble, and the
FDC will never get in trouble. And you probably even get some protection where, okay, you
know, you are, you're going along with the woke directives from the ESG people or the
government. Maybe you overdid it a little bit, but we trust you to be good at other
things. So there may be a very different calculus if you're sort of a large quasi-regulated
monopoly. Let me ask you about large quasi-regulated monopolies and also concentration, but I
want to read you, this is something you actually wrote in your book 10 years ago about Google,
and it being a monopoly. You said, since it doesn't have to worry about competing with
anyone, it has wider latitude to care about its workers, its products, and its impact on
the wider world. Google's motto, don't be evil, is in part a brand employee, but it's also
a characteristic of a kind of business that's successful enough to take ethics seriously
without jeopardizing its own existence. In business, money is either an important thing
or it's everything. Monopolists can't afford to think about things other than making money.
Non-monopolists can't. In a perfect competition, a business is so focused on today's margin that
it can't possibly plan for a long-term future. Only one thing can allow a business to
transcend the daily brute struggle for survival, monopoly profits. Were you writing in favor
then of the monopoly idea or against?
My book was giving you advice for what to do, and from the inside, you always want to do
something like what Google did. If you're starting a company, competition is for losers.
Capitalism and competition, people always say they're synonyms, I think they're antonyms,
because if you have perfect competition you compete away all the capital. If you want to
have Darwinian competition, beard, red and tooth and claw, you should open a restaurant.
It's like an awful, awful business. You will never make any money. It's perfectly competitive
and completely non-capitalist. From the inside, you want to always go for something like
monopoly. In other parts of my book, I also qualify it that there are dynamic monopolies
that invent something new, that create something new for the world, and we reward them with
patents or things like that that they get. Then at some point, there's always a risk that
these monopolies go bad, that they become like a troll collecting a toll at a bridge,
that they're not dynamic, and that they become that fat and lazy.
Are we there yet? Lena Kahn, if she was sitting here, would say we got there a long time ago.
I think, man, all these ways I would, if I had to defend Google, and I would still say
that it's still better run, even in its silly woke way, even in a slightly troll-like toll
collecting way, than whatever a completely destructive path Lena Kahn would have for the
company. We're still getting more good from Google as it is.
Do you feel the way about all the big tech companies? You have lots of investments in smaller
companies that need to access the app store on Apple's phone. Do you say to yourself that
it should be opened up? Do you say they created the store, therefore they should control the
store? How do you think about that kind of stuff?
There are a lot of complicated questions on all these things. They're much bigger. We're
in a very different place from where you were 10 years ago on these things. I still worry
that in many cases the remedy is worse than the disease. A lot of these businesses are,
if you have a natural monopoly, the remedy is not to break it up. It's like a utility company
and then the remedy is to regulate it or tax it or do various things like that. If you
could convince me that we are a static as a utility company, then maybe the remedy is to do
something like that. To the extent that the real monopoly problems in our society are much
more these old economy, racket-like companies. I spent three months during COVID in Maui and
there's a single hospital in Maui. The Hawaiian Island, there's this line, if you have a pain,
get on a plane because it's a local racket, it's completely mismanaged. That's probably
the really dysfunctional monopolies in our society are these pretty big ones that control
these local markets that are 100% troll collecting. I think even with all my misgivings about
something like Google, it's a vastly morally superior place to your local hospital.
How do you feel about it in the context of AI, which is to say that if you believe AI is this
transformative product and that there's only going to be three or four players who are going to
control all of these models, whether it be Google or Microsoft with open AI or maybe an
Amazon along the way. I don't know where you think Apple is going to land in this conversation.
Is that a good thing or a bad thing? Also, I would argue, even as an investor who looks at
startups, how do you even look at startups down the line that could effectively get competed away
because I'm going to build my app with AI and I'm just going to copy what you've made?
Well, I think it's in a very different place from the consumer internet type businesses.
There's been a history, they've been around for decades. If I had to make the anti-Google
experiment, it would be, they won at Search in 2002 and there's been no serious competition
for 21, 22 years. They beat Microsoft and Yahoo in 2002 and then it's somehow very hard to disrupt
that. Then I think the AI piece is extremely fluid, it's extremely hard to know, it's very hard
to know where the value is. As I said, it's like the obvious monopoly right now is Nvidia
but it doesn't seem that durable. If you thought Nvidia is as durable as Google, the stock's really cheap.
You should just buy it like crazy. The market pricing is telling you they have a temporary
monopoly but it's not very robust and then on the level of the software companies, I worry that
OpenAI has a lead, all sorts of other people are going to be able to catch up pretty quickly
and if you have three or four doing the same thing, that's a lot more than one.
Very, very different set of economics.
I want to pivot the conversation again because another investment that you've made
and been very public about is Bitcoin. You have remained a very big bull.
You have come out publicly and you said that enemy number one to Bitcoin is the sociopathic
grandpa from Omaha that you described as Warren Buffett.
Can you tell me what you were thinking when you said that?
It got a lot of laughs so somehow people, it probably had some kind of a nerve but it was in a 2022
Bitcoin convention talk I gave and there were three separate enemies.
There was Jamie Dimon, Larry Fink who is no longer an enemy by the way.
He sort of shifted but maybe I can say that Larry Fink things too.
Then there was Warren Buffett and the rough context was, my sort of political sociological analysis
was the cryptocurrencies were, it was a revolutionary youth movement but for them to really take over,
you needed, it couldn't just be a student uprising like 1968.
You needed to get the rest of the society on board and as long as the old people were going to sit on their hands
that was the big blocker for cryptocurrencies to go to the next level.
Are you still convinced?
I think it's gotten partially unlocked with the Bitcoin ETF but then probably the part where I'm less convinced of
is this question of the sort of ideological founding vision of Bitcoin or these cryptocurrencies
as sort of a cipherpunk crypto-anarchist libertarian anti-centralized government thing.
Isn't that what got you interested in the first place?
That's what I thought was terrific about it and then the question is does it really work that way
or has that thread somehow gotten lost?
And so when people in the FBI tell me that they'd much rather have criminals use Bitcoin than $100 bills
it suggests that maybe it's not quite working the way it was supposed to.
Have you sold any of your Bitcoin?
I still hold some.
There are all these ways. I didn't buy as much as I should have and I'm not sure it's going to go up that dramatically from here.
From here?
Yeah, I think we got the ETF edition and I don't know who else buys it quickly from here.
It's an interesting investment advice.
That actually surprised me because I thought you were still all in.
I still have a small position.
It probably still can go up some but it's going to be a volatile bumpy ride and I had a dual reason.
One was the sort of ideological decentralized future of computing world that I really do believe and really believe would be better
and it seemed like the perfect vehicle for that for such a long time and I am just much less convinced of that.
Interesting.
So maybe Larry Fink with the BlackRock ETF surrendered to the forces, the anti-ESG forces
or maybe it's more like Bitcoin's been co-opted by them and I worry it was more the latter.
Okay, different question. SpaceX, that's another big investment for you.
After ousting Elon Musk you became friends with him again.
What does that look like to you in the future?
Is that going to be the biggest investment you've ever made when this is all said and done?
Man, I'm always sort of hesitant to sort of pitch these companies too much.
But I think there were sort of a lot of different things that came together.
When Elon was building both Tesla and SpaceX in the 2000s, people thought he was just really, really crazy
and I think even a lot of those of us who worked with him at PayPal, there was this PayPal book that David Sacks and I thought of writing
and the Elon chapter was, I think, entitled something like the man who knew nothing about risk or something like this
and there were all these crazy Elon stories I could tell and then if one of the two companies had succeeded
you would say, well maybe he still got really lucky but when two out of two companies that people thought were completely
hair-brained in the 2000s, when they both succeed, you have to somehow reassess it and somehow the rest of us
somehow are too risk-averse or there's something about risk he knows that we don't or something like this
and so yes, I think there's...
You didn't invest in Tesla?
We did not invest in Tesla. We should have invested in that one. It was public at a much earlier date
and then there's always sort of a self-imposed limitation that we tend not to invest in public companies
there's 20% of the venture fund you could but that was sort of the...
I think they started Tesla in 2002, it went public in 2010
I remember test driving the Model S in October 2012 and it was just, wow this is just a terrific car
and I think the correct thing would have been to wait till they came out with it and then nobody liked it
it was such a hated stock shorted by everybody and you could have just waited 10 years
and just bought the shares in the public market and you would have made 10 times your money in 18 months
and 100 times in the next 6, 7, 8 years
and then there was something also about SpaceX that looked like it was a very crazy, hair-brained idea
and yet it was very straightforward, it was the rocket launch business
the government will pay or the customers pay for the vehicles before you build them
so it's actually cash flow positive, there's some money they needed for expansion
but it was basically a cash flow positive business, it was a weird investment in 2008
they didn't need any of the money but there was some NASA or government rule where they needed outside investors
and so they were forced to take investors and then we were on good enough terms that we did it
if you had been a Tesla shareholder we've all been reading about it
would have you paid him the big compensation package?
I would have, well I think the nuanced answer is I would have voted in favor of the compensation package
because you would know that if it failed the share price would have gone down a lot the next day
because people would wonder whether Elon would quit and that would be bad for the company
so whether you believe in the package or not the rational thing would be that you should vote for it
and then if you think it's a bad idea maybe you sell your shares after you get a pop or something like this
so that's the obvious game theory on why Elon was going to win that vote no matter what
and it was really crazy that we listened to people in the media and I'm sure yourself
but we're all saying it was a hair-brained thing and the shareholders were all going to vote against it
and if you just did the basic analysis it was obvious that Elon was going to win the vote
regardless of what the shareholders actually were
What did you think of him investing in X?
By the way X is what he wanted PayPal to be, did you give him money for that?
We didn't do anything on the Twitter one, we didn't do anything on the current XAI company
I guess there's a lot of different things that have X in the name with Elon
I think it was an incredibly, I do think we need a broader surface area for debate in our society
and so I think obviously there are all these very complicated trade-offs between
how much speech do you suppress, how much good speech are we suppressing, how much bad speech are we allowing
how do you get those trade-offs right, very, very hard to do
My judgment is we should have just a lot more surface area for debate discussion
and I think what Elon did with Twitter was I think extremely important
and I support it as an ideological project
I worry about it as a financial thing, I don't know if that works
We've looked over the years, we've looked over and over again at starting some kind of media company
and there's always sort of this thought, can't you do something else in the sort of right of center media space
and does it have to all be as lame as Fox News, isn't there an opening to do something else
and then the question you always have to ask is it the Murdoch family that keeps it lame
Why do you think it's lame?
I think it's lame because they're controlled by the advertisers
and there's a very narrow limit on what they can do
and then the Elon question with Twitter was are you really allowed to do this and keep the advertisers
and so that's where...
Would you make it harder?
It's super important what Elon did as a non-profit but it's going to be tough as a best...
What about Truth Social?
They have a few other problems they have to solve first
Now it's something you'd invest in
You get your head around the $6 billion valuation
If I wanted to secretly funnel money to the Trump campaign and get around the campaign limitations
so the stock price goes up and you can sell some stock and fund this campaign
that might be a reason to invest
Do you think people are doing that?
They probably don't think of it in quite that literal term but maybe that's what's going on
Have you talked to people in your realm who have said hey?
Nobody's said that but I suspect a lot of the investors are going to vote for Trump
They're thinking about it at least on some subconscious, not articulated level
I want to talk a little more about Trump in just one more second
but I want to ask you one last related social media question
which is the search in general was here in Aspen
and I think you've probably seen in the last couple of weeks that he came out
and genuinely believes that social media and the Facebooks of the world really
have done a real disservice to young people in the country
and I just wonder what you think of that as somebody who invested early in Facebook
I can't say that he's 100% wrong
The place where I always push back on is that I feel it's too easy to turn tech
or the social media companies into the scapegoat for all of our problems
There's some kind of an interesting critique one can make of the tech companies
and if you ask how many of the executives in those companies
how much screen time do they let their kids use
and there's probably sort of an interesting critique one could make
What do you do?
Not very much and I think that's very...
What's not very much?
An hour and a half a week
Something like that
How old are your kids?
Three and a half, five years
Three and a half and five years old
If I were to make the anti-tech argument it's that there are probably a lot of people in tech
who do something quite similar for their own families
and there's some questions that that might lead you to ask
And then on the other hand
I don't think this is the main cause for all the different types of social dysfunction we have
and it's maybe it's a 15%, 20% cause
There's sort of a lot of other things that have gone super haywire in our society
and by putting all the blame onto this, onto tech or onto one company
you are really ignoring a lot of other stuff
We could do a whole panel on this but one related question
because we haven't mentioned it, TikTok
Do you think of TikTok as a national security threat?
Yeah, it's a very...
There's something very strange going on
Obviously the TikTok algorithms for the US are very different from the ByteDance algorithms in China
Would you shut it down in this country?
I probably would lean towards a tougher response
I think just to shift from the normative to the...
I don't think we're going to do anything
I met the TikTok CEO last summer
and I was the Singaporean guy, the TikTok CEO
and I told him he didn't need to worry about it being shut down in the US
and maybe I'm wrong but I think...
Because you know something?
Because we are incompetent and slow and bureaucratic
and we will never get our act together in dealing with the problems of China
until the day they invade Taiwan
and then it will be shut down within 24 hours
and since I think there's a 50-50 chance that China will invade Taiwan in the next five years
my advice to the TikTok CEO was you should take all your people and computers
and get them out of China because once Taiwan gets invaded it'll be too late
so that's my advice but you don't need to worry about us doing anything before then
and then his somewhat...
I'm not sure good or worrisome answer was that they had studied World War I and World War II very carefully
and there were a bunch of companies that were able to trade with all sides in those wars
By the way, that implies that he also thinks that China is going to invade Taiwan
He did not...
You know, again I didn't frame it deterministically
I said 50% chance, five years
We are over time but we're going to keep going just for a little bit
because I promise you we're going to talk a little bit about politics
and I want to talk about your own politics, your own personal politics
You were very vocal and outspoken about supporting who is now the former president the last time
You have been less outspoken this time
We're all going to watch the debate tonight
So before we can get into the lessons and everything that you've learned
and all of your prior experience
are you planning to support the president this time?
You know, I'm...
I'm the former president I should say
You know, you hold a gun to my head
I'll vote for Trump, I'll still...
I'd rather have him vote than Biden
I'm not going to give any money to his super PAC
I'm going to be less involved in all these ways
And man, look, it is...
And then I don't know, I think Trump will win
I think he will win quite solidly
I don't think it's going to even be close
And then my pessimistic look ahead function is
after he wins there will be a lot of buyer's remorse
because the elections are A-B tests
You know, if you asked me to make a pro-Trump argument
I wouldn't, but I can probably come up with anti-Biden arguments
and Biden is not going to make a pro-Biden argument
he's going to make anti-Trump arguments
and it's these two different hate factories
that we have targeted at each other
and that's the way the politics work
and my judgment is Trump will easily win that
but yeah, the election is a relative choice
the post-election is absolute
and then it'll be like, you know, if Biden wins
like, how did we get this senile old man
and if Trump wins, it'll be...
Can I just ask you this?
It's still like this clown show, whatever people will say
I'm not going to ask you to make the pro-Trump argument
That's sort of...
But let me ask you about what I imagine is your anti-Biden argument
I look at the last four years and say to myself
if you were in Silicon Valley and you owned stock
and these tech companies over the last four years
you unfortunately did nothing but go up
and I know...
And I just... I wonder if you can make the argument
because we can talk about Lina Khan
and we can talk about regulations and potential taxes
and all sorts of things
but it's hard for me to look at the last four years and say
especially if I was sitting
I would imagine in your seat and say
this was a terrible travesty
but maybe I don't understand
Well, I mean, I don't know
this may not be believable to you
but I...
I don't think it's...
the only thing I care about
is whether the country is good for the tech billionaires
and I think there are
a lot of people who have not experienced
the last three or four years this way
I think one of the things Carvel said in the earlier
presentation just before
this one that I thought was quite good
was there's been a shocking loss of support
by the Democrats in the 18 to 35 year voters
and it's because you can't get on the housing ladder
you can...
you know, the college debt's overwhelming
you can never get started
and so there's sort of a sense that...
You think he'll be able to fix that?
I don't...
I think it's...
it's just an up-down referendum
on the incumbent at this point
and, you know,
my guess is that the sense is
Biden's definitely not going to fix it
and his time will run out and that's...
and then...
this is where I'm not overly excited
I don't think Trump will
particularly fix it but look
the place where people, you know
at this...
in the audience here I think are just maximally
divergent
yes, the stock market has been great for people here
you're in this wonderful
bubble in Aspen where it's like
I know Clinton is still president
and it's 1995
and everything
is just getting better every day
in every way and it's like some new age
chant if you just say that to yourselves
it's true
and then
the...
the part of the Trump
statement that I think was
the most offensive
thing he said
it was very offensive not just
to Democrats and to Republicans
and especially to Silicon Valley
was make America great again
because that was a pessimistic slogan
it was the most pessimistic slogan
a major presidential candidate
ever had because
what it says implicitly is this is no longer
a great country
and that's what you are never supposed to say
especially if you're a Republican
that's why the Bush people probably hate him
more than anybody in this audience
you know
and then
Silicon Valley was, you know
it's somewhat offensive to people in New York City
but the bankers on Wall Street don't really think
they're making the country a great place
so it's not personally offensive
it was personally offensive to Silicon Valley
and yet
I always think
there is this problem of stagnation
there is this problem we're stuck
there's a sense that
we're not progressing in all these ways
as a society as much as we have
I don't think Trump has all the answers
but I think
what I said in 2016 is
the first step
towards solving problems is to at least talk about them
what about the polarization part
the polarization part the uncertainty part
the questions about democracy
and the rule of law and the future
of a country and I think there's a lot of people
who worry about those things
sure those are all
those are all still
those are things you probably wouldn't worry about
if Biden was the president right
I feel the country is still very polarized
it's been getting more polarized
for decades
it was polarized against
Bork in the 80s
that was sort of a new crescendo in polarization
there was way Fox News was polarized
against the Clintons
and I don't know
it's always what's cause and effect
is the polarization causing the stagnation
or does the stagnation lead to the polarization
I don't think the polarization just happens
in a country where everything is gross
it's a tonal question
you come across a very sensible reasonable person
I think
there are people who hear
I'm sure disagree with you about
lots of different issues but
my question about tone
about the president and the tone of the president
by the way I should say
and I'm not speaking out of school
you also I would say by the way
you've been a Republican
for a long time now
public about that
you're also proudly gay
openly so
and I wonder if you can tie
you know
President Trump when he talks
about some of the issues around LGBT issues
in this country and other people
there are people in those communities
who say they don't feel safe about it
yeah
we can go through all these different
different versions of that
I think
there was never any thought of reversing gay marriage
or any of those things
by Trump
at least
and look
I think the
yeah there are all these ways
they're not the way
I would articulate these things
but
these sort of polite tone
there was
people had attempted to say
something's gone very wrong in our country
the house is on fire, it's burning to the ground
we are a society
in decline, stagnation
maybe
AI will save us
but this is the way people talk about AI
if it doesn't lead to this cornucopian growth
we're just completely going to be
buried by budget deficits
and debt
for decades to come
and I think
AI is a big thing
is it big enough to solve our budget deficit problem
I don't believe it is
we have a lot of these
problems and
at this point
extra politeness
is not quite
the thing
it was an inarticulate shriek for help
and look my sort of fantasy
in 2016 in supporting Trump
this was where I was completely delusional
this would be the way you start to have a conversation
and
and that's why
another reason why I'm
off-ramping I'd much rather have
the sort of conversation we had here
and if I lean in all the way to support Trump
it'll be all about that
and we can't talk about all these other things
which is the way we are going to substantively solve the problems
I want to thank you for this conversation
and for addressing all these issues
it really was a phenomenal discussion
awesome thank you so so much
thank you very much
you
