Good afternoon everyone. If you could take your seats. I'm Elliot Gerson and it is my
great privilege to introduce the next session. It is really, in a sense, central to the theme
of many of the things that you've been hearing about this week, the world on fire, populism,
the rise of authoritarianism, and basically the whole mess in the world that we've been
talking about through one prism or another over the last few days and we will continue
to. And we are going to have someone address the root causes of that in a way that no one
else could and he is someone who certainly needs no introduction and I don't want to
take time away from him and after his remarks you'll all have an opportunity to ask questions.
But I will, given the fact that it is the 20th anniversary of the Ideas Festival, say something
about our guest who you know all about his distinctions. You read him, you follow him,
you watch him. He also has a long history with the Institute. He co-founded and the
chairs weave the social fabric project. But more significantly, although it's pretty
wonderful, in the annals of the Ideas Festival I can now say to you officially, because I
went back to our archives and confirmed this, that no one has spoken at the Ideas Festival
more than David Brooks. And appropriately. David, I think one reason when we created
this, we had no idea if it would survive more than 2005. One reason it was so successful
was David Brooks. And then a couple years after that he came and he has been here every
year, every year since. There is no one spoken as often. A couple of other things that make
him an exception here, an entirely deserved exception. One is that early in this process
of the Ideas Festival, Guinea and I decided that we would have a rule to make sure we
keep things fresh and people would come back for new things every year. We had a rule that
no one would speak more than three consecutive years. But of course we had to have the David
Brooks exception and we do. And the other thing that this is an example of an exception
of is that we decided at the very beginning that the format we would use in almost all
instances is conversation and dialogue. Either an interview or a moderated panel. And that
we were not going to have lectures as one often has at other kinds of conferences and
events. But then again, given the wisdom, insight and popularity of this man, we had
to make a second David Brooks exception, which was to allow him to have these kinds of formats
with regularity. So without any further ado, it's my great pleasure and privilege to bring
up David Brooks.
I should correct, Elliot. I haven't actually spoken more than anybody else. It just seems
that way. I read my first book for book on tape and the sound engineer told me a story
when you read your book for audio, you realize how boring your book is and how often you
repeat yourselves. But the sound engineer told me the story that there was a novelist who
was reading a 700 page novel. And he's in the middle of it and the sound engineer looks
in and the novelist is weeping. And so the engineer says, there's something I can do.
And the novelist says, don't I ever shut up? And so that's me at Aspen. Now every other
talk I've given here has been about how to live a better life, how to improve your life.
This one is not because of the global situation. I thought I should rise to the occasion and
try to diagnose the whole global situation. But I felt guilty about that that if I don't
give you some practical life tips, your lives will fall apart over the next year before
I can give my next talk. So in the first few minutes, I'm going to give you some actual
life hacks, which I got from the internet or the Bible, one of the two. And so here
are a few life hacks. These are practical life hacks. Then I'll get to politics. When
you have 90% of a large project finish, finishing up the final details will take another 90%.
Denying or deflecting a compliment is rude. Accept it with thanks. Getting cheated occasionally
is a small price to pay for trusting the best in everyone. Because when you trust the best
in others, they will treat you the best. Purchase a tourist guidebook to your hometown.
You'll learn a lot playing tourist once a year. The thing that made you weird as a kid
will make you outstanding as an adult. It's not an apology if it comes with an excuse.
Just because it's not your fault doesn't mean it's not your responsibility. If you think
you saw a mouse, you did. And if you saw one, there are others. If you can't make up your
mind between two options, flip a coin. But don't go by how the coin comes up. Go by your
emotional reaction to how the coin went up. Take photos of your parents every day. That's
how you'll want to remember them. If you meet a jerk once a month, you've met a jerk. If
you meet a jerk every day, you're the jerk. Don't ever look at a recent photo of your
first great love. And this one is from Warren Buffet. You can always tell someone to go
to hell tomorrow, which is good. When you're mad at them, you can tell them to go to hell
tomorrow, way today. So that's my life-altering advice for you cramped into about 90 seconds.
Now we turn to politics. Now, I got my political start when I was five. My parents were somewhat
left-wing. We lived in New York, and they took me to a place where hippies would go called
a be-in. And a be-in was where hippies would go to show how little they cared about money
and material things. And one of the ways they showed this was they set a garbage can on
fire, threw their wallets into it, just to show we don't care about money. I'm five
years old. I see a $5 bill on fire in the garbage can. I break from the crowd, reach
into the fire, grab the money, and run away. And that was sort of my first step over to
the right. And so I veered right, and then I veered left. But the main thing I am, like
all of us probably in this room, is I believe in liberal democracy. And I was a foreign
correspondent in the 1990s at the High Water Mark of liberal democracy. I was in the Soviet
Union, if you remember, in the final days of the Soviet Union, Boris Yeltsin was the
democratically elected president of Russia, and this old Soviet apparatus staged a coup.
And they had tanks rolling through the town, and Yeltsin, if you recall, stood on a tank
in front of the Russian White House, the parliament building, and said, I dare you,
shoot me. And all the democratic activists surrounded him to offer sort of a buffer.
And I was there, and I found a woman who was handing out sandwiches to the democratic protesters.
And her name was Valentina Kossieva, and she was 93. And so I asked her to tell her
me her life story, and she told me that she'd grown up in the Palace of the Tsar before
the revolution. Just after the revolution, she'd been lined up for a firing squad because
she was on the wrong side of the Russian Revolution. Her mother saved her life. She got married.
Her husband was disappeared in the 1930s, purged and sent to the Siberia and never to return.
Her two boys were killed in the Battle of Stalingrad by the Nazis. One of her sons was
rifle-butted to death. And then she married again. Her second husband also was sent away
to the Gulag, and she never saw him again. And then in the 1950s, under Khrushchev, she
was part of the Kalmyk people, which is a Muslim people, and they were sent off to exile.
And so my brilliant interviewing techniques when she's telling me this story is, and then
what happened? And then what happened? And basically every bad thing that happened in
Soviet history happened to her. And they were so moving to be talking to her at age 93,
asking out sandwiches at what we thought would be the rise of Democratic Russia. And
it didn't turn out that way, obviously. And I covered in those days the end of apartheid.
I covered the Oslo peace process. A participant is in the room. And I covered the reunification
of Germany. I covered nothing but good news for five years. History has since taken a
dark turn. And the interesting thing about the dark turn it has taken, especially this
year, is that it's happening all around the world. I was raised with the idea that we
Americans are outliers. We're more individualistic, we're more mobile, we're just outliers compared
to most other countries in the world. That is not true anymore. The Ipsos organization,
which is a British firm, asked people in 28 countries about certain attitudes. And we
are absolutely typical of the world now. Our pessimism is typical. 59 percent of Americans
say they believe our country is in decline. That's compared to 58 percent of people around
the world. 60 percent of Americans agree with a statement that the system is broken, compared
to 61 percent worldwide. Our hostility to elites is absolutely typical. 69 percent of
Americans think that the political and economic elite don't care about hardworking people
compared to 67 percent worldwide. 63 percent of Americans agree that experts in this country
don't know what they're talking about compared to 62 percent worldwide. We're just typical.
Even our authoritarianism is typical. 66 percent of Americans say the country needs a strong
leader to take it back from the rich and the powerful compared to 63 percent worldwide.
40 percent of Americans, we need a strong leader who will break the rules compared to
41 percent worldwide. So there are two things to take from this. The first is that we're
typical. We're no longer extraordinary. We're a typical country with typical beliefs. And
the second is that all around the world in all these 28 countries measured there's an
incredible hostility to the system and infertile landscape for right wing populism. And if
you look around elections of the world, it's a big election year, you see right wing populists
thriving in place after place. So Geert Wilders, the right wing populist in the Netherlands,
party rose to power in the European elections. The German AFD, very far right group, surged
in France. The Marine Le Pen party surged, causing the whole French political system
to go into meltdown. You look at Indonesia, you look around Latin America. Right wing
populists are surging all around the country. And of course, here at home, Donald Trump,
the economist says it's about two thirds likely that Donald Trump will be a reelected president.
That's typical of what's happening all around the world. And so to me, it's a mistake. We're
going to watch the debate tonight, but it's a mistake to see the U.S. election in isolation
from these global trends. And if Trump ends up winning, it'll be because there's just this
global tide in country after country after country. And so what's going on? Why has this
happened? Why is it happening all around the world all at once? Now, there are certain
obvious things we could say. People are reacting against globalization. There have been policy
failures, the financial crisis, Afghanistan, Iraq. But these policy failures are not all
around the world, and yet right wing populism is all around the world. Something deeper
is going on. And I think it's some sort of global spiritual relational and moral crisis.
And it shows up in the deepest essences of our societies. So the first thing is, and
I'll just take U.S. statistics, we've just gotten a lot sadder as a society, rising
suicide rates, rising mental health problems. The number of people who say they have no
close personal friends is up by four folds since 2000. The number of teenagers who say
they are persistently hopeless and despondent is 45%. The number of people not in a romantic
relationship is up by a third since 2000. The number of people who rate themselves in
the lowest happiness category is up by 50% since 2000. So we've just become a lot sadder
as a society. And when you get sadder, you get meaner. I give you all these stats statistics.
I can give you a bunch of mean statistics, gun violence, hate crimes. The one that gets
to me, it used to be two thirds of Americans give to charity, now fewer than half of Americans
give to charity. We've just become sadder and meaner. And that's deep in the fabric
of society. We've also gotten a lot more pessimistic. And some of that is the media's fault. We've
determined that we can get your eyeballs if we create headlines that generate fear and
anger. And so the number of headlines that generate fear and anger is up by about 200%
over the last 15 years. But it's not only the media. Some researchers took a look at
sort of global conversation in print starting in 1850 up till today. And they measured how
many of the books, magazine articles, newspaper articles, whatever, how many of them were positive
and how many were negative. And from 1850 to about 2008, most of this stuff was positive.
There were dips during the Great Depression, which you'd expect. And there were increases
in the 1990s when we had prosperity. But basically, we're a pretty happy country. And then starting
in the financial crisis, but ever since, the negativity of American culture has just collapsed.
So we have a more negative public culture than we did in the Great Depression, than
during World War II, than during World War I, than any of the crises of the past 150
years. We just are an incredibly pessimistic country. And if you've been asked high school
students, the share of high school students who say it's hard to have hope for my life
has been surging. And so this negativity has a political valence. On the right, it manifests
as catastrophism. And so I interview a lot of Trump people. And the general theme you
hear over and over and over again is this country is on the verge of total destruction.
It's just a catastrophizing mentality. On the left, it shows up in the form of mental
health problems and depression. And so 34% of conservatives say they report feeling in
poor mental health at least half the time, 34% of conservatives. But 57% of progressive
young people say they report feeling negative mental health. Just higher rates of mental
health problems, higher rates of neuroticism. And it's very gendered. 41% of liberal males
say they have poor mental health compared to 60% of liberal females. It's not clear
to me why this is happening, but you see the mental health crisis feeding into our politics.
And so my underlying point is that the global crisis of populism and the rise of authoritarianism
is not just about policy and politics. We're undergoing a global spiritual recession. And
a lot of people are trying to use politics as a form of social therapy. Remember Ryan
Streeter is a researcher formerly at the American Enterprise Institute. He discovered
that people who call themselves lonely are seven times more likely than others to be
active in politics. So there's a lot of lonely people dominating our political activism.
In a healthy society, we have what you call the politics of redistribution. We have big
arguments, but there are arguments about how high taxes should be or where spending
should go. And that's in a healthy society. We don't have that kind of politics anymore.
We have the politics of recognition. People are going into politics in order to feel good
about themselves and in order to make the other side feel shamed. They're going out
for a sense of purpose and meaning. And so people are using politics to fill a hole in
their own soul, to be affirmed and to get retribution on the people they dislike. Politics
is a seductive form of social therapy because it seems to solve your spiritual and psychological
problems. It gives you the illusion that there's a war of good and evil and you're on the side
of good. It gives you a moral landscape so you have some meaning in your life. It gives
people a sense of belonging. If you're lonely, suddenly you're part of team red or team blue.
It gives people a sense of righteousness. That you don't have to sit with a widow or
feed the poor, but if you get indignant in front of the TV set, you feel you're doing
something right for the cause. And it gives people a sense of purpose, a sense that somehow
they're contributing to something larger than themselves. The problem is if you're asking
politics to fill a hole in your soul, to solve your psychological, relational and moral problems,
you're asking more of politics than it can give you. Because you don't really have community.
You're not working with others. You're just hating the same people. You don't really have
moral action. You're just indignant in front of the TV set. There's not really a morally
comprehensible landscape. It's not like one side has the monopoly on virtue and the other
side is monopoly on vice. And so when you try to use politics to fill the hole in your
soul, you're seeking to get out of the sense of anxiety, alienation, depression, but you're
simply winding up in a state of moral war. And it makes everybody mean and brutal and
makes all the problems worse. So I've tried to describe a kind of unpleasant America and
an unpleasant world, a negative mood. What's the cause? What are the deep roots of the
negative mood that I think is leading to populism and leading to authoritarianism? Well, I'll
start with some child psychology. There was a guy named John Bolsby many, many years ago who said
one of my favorite sayings about life in general. And the saying is, all of life is a series of
daring explorations from a secure base. All of life is a series of daring explorations from a
secure base. And he's a child psychologist, so he meant you need a strong family, a strong home,
and then you can be daring having a daring life. So do we have that in the world today? Do people
have a secure base? Do they have the opportunity to do daring explorations? And I think both those
things are in decline. So what is a secure base? A secure base in Bolsby's terms was family. And
family is not something you choose. Family is something that we're bred into. It's deep in our
soul. People are not transformed by institutions to which they are lightly attached. We're attached
to this specific family, this specific sacred piece of land, this specific country, this specific
philosophy or faith. These are things that we don't choose often, but they are deeply woven into
the fabric of our identity of who we are. And they give us a secure psychological base. When we
get married, it's not a contract. We're not doing it because it's in our self-interest. We're doing
it because we're willing to make a lifelong commitment, hopefully, to another human being.
Rabbi Jonathan Sacks, who was the head rabbi in Britain until he died recently, explained the
difference between a contract and a covenant. He wrote, a contract is about interests. A covenant
is about identity. It is about you and me coming together to form an us. That is why contracts
benefit. A contract will benefit a person, but a covenant will transform a person. And specifically,
it is these attachments often, for most of us, to these deep things that are woven into our soul.
First, the family. Second, the sacred place, loyalty to America, loyalty to your town, loyalty to
your country. And third, is a sense of a moral order. Now, people who are religious have a sense
that there is a coherent moral order that is not dependent on our choices. And you don't have to
be religious to believe that. That there is a sense that the world is morally coherent and you
can build your life around a sense that there is such a thing as right and wrong. Civil rights
movement. Based on the idea that, as Lincoln said, if slavery is not wrong, then nothing is wrong.
If segregation is not wrong, nothing is wrong. There is a coherent moral order woven into the
fabric of human life. George Marsden is a historian who wrote, what gave such widely compelling force
to King's leadership and oratory was his bedrock conviction that moral law was built into the
universe. And so it's very hard to feel existentially safe if everything's up for grabs. If right
and wrong are up for grabs. If your family are up for grabs. If your country is up for grabs. It's
hard to feel secure. Now, liberalism, democratic liberalism, which I revere, is based on individual
choice. It's based on the idea that we respect human dignity and we respect our choices. But
liberal societies only prosper when they are based on things that precede choice. There's only a firm
foundation for us to make our choices when there is these covenantal obligations to each other
through family, through nation, through God, or through some idea that there's a thing that's
called right and wrong. And when individual choice gets so extreme that it's eats away at the
covenants of our life, then it begins to erode the foundation of liberal society. And in my view,
over the last few years, liberalism has gotten, we've had an extreme form of liberalism. And this
is measurable. There's this thing called the World Value Survey. And the World Value Survey,
they go all around the world, and they ask people about their values, about how individualistic,
how much you believe in autonomy, or how much you believe in community. And especially in Europe
and the English-speaking world. Over the last 20 years, our values have shifted away from the
world. This is my view of a slide. I'm going to hold up a chart, which most of you will not be
able to see. That's my slide. This is my technology. But basically, the slide shows values all
around the world. The African world is over here, Latin America is over here, the Confucian world
is over here, and way out sticking at the end is the US and Western Europe. Our values have shifted
away from the rest of the world. We're much more individualistic, much more autonomous, and we've
entered this form of extreme liberalism, where everything is a matter of choice. I remember I
was teaching at Yale, only teaching at schools I couldn't have gotten into. And we were going around
the classroom, and the kids were, the students were talking about what they wanted to do after
college. And we got to one of my best students, a woman named Zara from Ghana. And she said,
well, you have to understand, it's not my choice. It's the village sent me here. And she just comes
from much more communal culture than those of us in the West. And but we have gotten so
individualistic, I think we've begun to undermine the fundamental foundations. Our families are in
trouble. Patriotism is in trouble. Our sense of social trust with one another is in trouble. But,
and that points to, I think, the most disorienting thing that's subtly disorienting to a lot of us,
what I call the privatization of morality. It's not only the privatization of morality is the
idea that each of us has to come up with our own moral values. And this is an extreme form of
liberalism. It's an extreme form of individualism. And if your name is Aristotle or Nietzsche, maybe
you can come up with your own moral philosophy. Most of us learn our morals in morally cohesive
communities. In our neighborhoods and our families, we have that sense of right and wrong formed
within us by the people who love us and the people who embrace us. And we have some sort of
existential security because of that. But when you privatize morality, then everyone set a drift.
And it's not only a drift like physically, deeply at the core of our souls were set a drift. And
Walter Littman, a great columnist in the middle of the 20th century, saw this coming. In 1955, he
wrote a book called The Essays in Public Philosophy. And he wrote, if what is good, what is right,
what is true is only what the individual chooses to invent than we are outside the traditions of
civility. And so what I'm really describing here is a sense of constant flux. A constant flux not
only in a lot of things in our life, which is good, but in the deepest foundations of our lives.
And this situation was foreseen also by two writers who I have never quoted from in a talk,
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. I'm not a Marxist, but in the Communist Manifesto,
they wrote that bourgeois capitalist life will lead to the constant revolutionizing of production,
uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation. They wrote
all fixed, fast-frozen relationships with their trained of ancient and venerable prejudices and
opinions are swept away. New-formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is
solid melts into air. All that is holy is profaned. And man is at last compelled to face the sober
senses, the real conditions of his life and his relations with his kind. All that is solid melts
into air. All that is holy is profaned. It's that sense of deep inner disturb that I think you
haunt a lot of us. And the authoritarians know exactly what to do with this. Whether it's
Xi Jinping, Vladimir Putin, Iran, Hamas, Viktor Orban, Marine Le Pen, MAGA, what unites them? They
say, I'm going to restore order. I'm going to restore order to the street. I'm going to restore
order to the borders. I'm also going to restore order to your soul. They stand up for family. They
stand up for what, to me, are reactionary values on LGBTQ issues. They stand up for everything.
And they make it all about order. And so a lot of people flock to the authoritarians and the
populism because they're not only saying, screw those elites. They're saying, I'm restoring order
to your deepest anxieties. And it's just tremendously powerfully appealing to people all
around the world. So that's the first part, the lack of a secure base. And the authoritarians
promise, of course, they're not really delivering a secure base. They're just delivering authoritarian
narcissism. But it has this spiritual resonance with people. So the second part of that, John
Bolz, we quote, that all of life is a series of daring explorations from a secure base is a part
about the daring explorations, the chance and the opportunity to make sure your future is going to
be better than your past. We all need that sense that our life has some movements and purpose and
progress. And for a lot of us, it does. But for a lot of people in American society, it doesn't.
And the key divide in American society right now, and the key divide in our politics is over
education levels. And this is only true in America. It's true in all the countries I've been
talking about, what they call the diploma divide. So why would there be this gap which did not
used to exist? It used to be the political divisions are about money. Rich voted Republican,
poor people voted for the Democrats. Now it's highly educated people vote for the Democrats,
less educated people vote for the Republicans. And this basic pattern occurs again and again and
again all around the world. Why is that? The short answer to me and the reason a lot of people feel
they don't have a chance of possibility in daring explorations is that the game is rigged. That rich
people just have vastly better educational opportunities than poor people. Our sorting
society has created a caste system. Three year olds who come from a home with parents making over
$100,000 a year are twice as likely to attend preschool as poor parents, poor kids. By eighth grade,
children from affluent families are performing four grade levels higher than children from
poorer families. Students who grow up in a home making over $200,000 a year have a one in five
chance of scoring a 1,400 on their SATs, one in five. For poorer kids, the chances are one in 50.
At every step of the way, kids from highly educated parents and highly affluent parents
have this huge advantage. There's a guy named Daniel Markovitz who calculates that if you would add
up all the things that affluent parents give to their kids, whether it's private school tuition,
oboe practice, soccer practice, travel teams, even trips to museums, trips to Europe, it amounts
to a $10 million investment in each kid, and they just soar ahead. Kids whose families can't make
that contribution, they fall way behind. Markovitz made, to me, the shocking claim, which he's a
very careful scholar, is that the educational gap between rich kids and poor kids is now wider than
the educational gap between whites and blacks in the era of Jim Crow. That's just a yawning gap,
and it has produced a caste society. We don't live in a single society anymore. We live in a society
divided by educational levels. In 2003, there was a woman named Annette LaRoe, a great sociologist,
who studied how children are raised, and she said people from working class backgrounds practice
what she called natural growth parenting. Life is hard, let the kids enjoy their childhood.
Children from college-educated families practice what she called concerted cultivation,
which is how I raise my kids and how a lot of you probably raised your kids. The calendar becomes
the central thing on the door, and you're shepherding your kids, sports practices to
oboe practices to whatever, and you're really investing in your kids so you can thrive in
the meritocracy. But it has created a vast difference, so college-educated people live
very different lives than high school-educated people. The average high school grad in this
country lives eight years shorter than the average college grad. 40% of high school grads are obese
compared to 20% of college grads. High school grads are much less likely to marry and twice as
likely to get divorced than college grads. 60% of births to women with a high school degree
happen out of wedlock. That's a rate 20 times higher than college grads. The opioid death rate
for those with a high school degree was 10,000, was 10 deaths per 100,000. 10 deaths per 100,000.
For a college degree it was only two deaths per 100,000. And so these are just vast chasms
in how we live, how we prosper, or don't prosper. And so a lot of people look at that gap and they
say the system is rigged. And populists attack the educated class. Or as Donald Trump once put it,
I love the poorly educated. And so populists say those elites, they rig the game,
they close it off opportunities, you are screwed and I will fix the problem.
And so on both these deep levels, the need for a secure spiritual foundation for your life
and a sense of hope, populists claim to have an answer. And so I'll spend three minutes on
what we should do to repair the situation. The first is people are in the center and people are on
the left have to have some version of faith, family, and flag. We have too often allowed populist
authoritarians to grab, for example, patriotism. I took a walk today with a guy named Richard
Reeves who's speaking here today and he's from Britain. And he noticed that the far right was
seizing the British flag and seizing a lot of the symbols of British patriotism. So there's a
paper in the UK called The Guardian, which many of you know, it's a progressive paper. And on page
two, they had a big full page picture of the Red Cross, which is what there's a certain symbol of
England. And that the whole page two was that. And on the page one editorial said, we're not letting
the far right take this from us. Please cut out this piece of paper and hang it in your window of
your living room, because we're going to re-seize patriotism. We're not going to let the right have
that. So that's the first thing. And similarly, progressives and centrists have to have a way
to talk about the sacredness of family and the sacredness of patriotism. Second, and this is
Fred Riley who is executive director of Weave, the social fabric project, which we work on together,
it's the need to give people secure base, give them interpersonal trust. 71% of young people,
Gen Z, ask them, if you agree with this statement, most people are selfish and out to get you. 71%
of Gen Z, yes. How do you not live with fear if you think most people are selfish and out to get you?
And that's low social trust. And so what we do at Weave is we take people who are building trust
to the local level, and we try to support them. Trust is built locally by people who show up for
you, by people who are there with you, by people who know you. I wrote a book that came out in
October called How to Know a Person, and it was based on the idea that trust exists. Existential
security exists when the people around you see, hear, respect, and know you. When the reporting
of that book, I was down in Waco, Texas, and I was at a diner, and I'm having breakfast with a,
I think a 95-year-old lady named LaRue Dorsey, and she presents herself to me as this stern
disciplinarian, like she'd been a teacher, and she said, I loved my students enough to discipline
them. And I was a little intimidated by this drill sergeant later. But into the diner walks a mutual
friend of ours named Jimmy Dorell. And Jimmy Dorell sees us, he comes up to the diner, he grabs
Mrs. Dorsey by the shoulders, and shakes her way harder than you should ever shake a 95-year-old.
But he says to her, Mrs. Dorsey, you're the best, you're the best, I love you, I love you.
And that stern disciplinarian lady that I've been talking to, in an instant,
turns into a bright, eye-shining, nine-year-old girl. With the power of his gaze, he brought out a
different version of her. And that's when, when you have people around you who are able to see you
in that way, then it's, you feel seen, heard, you feel safe. We evolved to be surrounded by people
who were looking out for us. And part of the reason Jimmy Dorell was able to do that is that he's,
he's a warmer personality than I am. But part of it is he's a pastor. He pastures to the homeless
in Waco. He has a church called Church Under the Bridge. The homeless people didn't feel comfortable
going to his church, so he brought the church to them. He has it under a highway overpass where
they sleep. And so he's a pastor. So he thinks every person he sees is made in the image of God.
Every person he sees has a soul of infinite value and dignity. Every person he sees is so important,
Jesus was willing to die for that person. Now you could be Christian or Jewish or atheist or Muslim
or Buddhist, I don't care. But we have to learn to see each other with that level of reverence and
respect, or else we will feel unseen, disrespected, unheard, existentially unsafe. So that's ways to
try to create a secure base in the community as we've done, interpersonally as I hope to do in my
book, and on the national level as people come up with new ways to secure the family, secure the flag,
and secure faith. Then on the other side of the equation, we somehow have to create more opportunity
for a wider array of people. We have to fix the meritocracy. In the 1930s, a guy named James Conan,
who was president of Harvard, created our modern meritocracy. It is not a natural growth, it's an
ideological project. And his ideological project was the central human trait is intelligence.
And we're going to sort people starting at age five by how smart they are. And I'm fine with
intelligence. It's a good trait to have. It's not the most important trait in human ability. To me,
the most important trait in human ability is hunger. It's the drive to keep working, to keep
learning, to keep moving, and to keep getting better at something. The second trait is the ability to
work in teams. There's a funny thing that there's zero correlation between how you do in school and
how you do in life. Grades predict nothing. And that's because school is all about self. It's about
how am I doing individually. Life is generally about how am I doing as a team. How am I doing with
others? So there's a basic non sequitur between schools and life. The third trait I think is
character. Ask people, there was somebody who did a study, why do people get fired? In only 11%
of cases are people fired because they're not smart enough to do the job or they lack the technical
knowledge. The main reason people get fired, 89% of cases, is because they're assholes. Or they're
unteachable. They're uncoachable. They don't do well with their teammates. And so somehow we have
to build a meritocracy around a broader definition of merit that won't be able to be gained by the
rich. A definition of merit that includes drive, resilience, good character, empathy, social
ability. And if we widen out that, how we define merit, I think we'll have a fairer society.
And we won't have these bottlenecks for people. So these are tough times.
I, sometime last November, I was at a hotel bar on my travels. And if you'd seen me there,
you would have said, sad guy drinking alone. But I call it reporting. And so I was at the bar
and I'm on Twitter, of course, and I'm scrolling through all these images,
mostly from the Middle East. And they're just brutal images. And you think about the famous
dates of our century are just brutal dates. September 11th, January 6th, October 7th. It's
tempting in these times to turn into what the authoritarians want us to be, which is war of
all against all. Us versus them, it's just war. And yet as I'm scrolling through my phone,
looking at all these images, I come across a video and it's an interview with James Baldwin.
And he gave the interview, sometime it looked from the black and white images, it looked like
the early 60s. Now Baldwin was a guy who was horribly mistreated by his society because of
the color of his skin and because of the sexual orientation. And that guy had a right to feel
bitter and hatred. He had the right to sink into the enmity that drives so much of our politics.
But in this interview, he says, you know, there's not as much humanity as you would like in the
world. But there's enough. There's more than you would think. And then he says, you've got to remember
as you walk down the street, every single person you meet, that could be you. You could be that person.
You could be that saint. You could be that monster. And you've got to decide who you're going to be.
And so he could have calloused over, as I said, but instead he had this mentality, I could be that
person. I may like them. I may not like them. That could be me. And the phrase that leapt to
mine as I was listening to this little 60-minute or 60-second clip was defiant humanism, that even
in brutal times, when a lot of our political opponents are brutal and monstrous and frankly
authoritarian, that perversely and paradoxically the way to rebut them is to be more human,
is to touch the things that really we do need to solve our souls and to emphasize the deepest
parts of our nature. Thank you very much.
Now I have less some time for a question and answer. If anybody has comments or questions,
all that I ask is you make them long and be andering with no question at the end.
Do we have any mic runners? We have a mic runner.
Can you talk about your thoughts, how social media for young people especially
contributes to depression and loneliness?
So the mental health crisis has many causes as you expect. Some of it as I said I think is
philosophical and cultural in nature which is what I tried to describe but and I was a little
skeptical that social media was really leading to this incredible ramp up in depression and suicide
and my argument and I'm friends with a guy named Jonathan Hyde who's written about this was that
social media is everywhere but depression and suicide are not going up in Denmark, they're not
going up in Ghana and but Jonathan has persuaded me with a fair boatload of data that in fact
they are going up everywhere. Wherever there's social media there's a rise in suicide and a rise
in depression. Now we happen to get it worse because you combine social media with a highly
individualistic culture where people feel solitude it's going to have the effect is going to be a
lot worse so I am become convinced that social media truly is horrible not that I get off it but
um and that one of the Jonathan's proposals which I think is gaining great traction it's rare you
see a somebody in my business say we should do this and then suddenly all across the country
people are doing it and Jonathan's one proposal is no phones in schools and school district after
school district is now adopting this and it's like a lot of technologies at first we don't know that's
dangers but once we learn the dangers we know we adapt and so I think that's happening with social
media we're adapting I think that'll happen with AI eventually too but maybe way there in the back
information could you restate the source of the uh motivating quote at the beginning
about base and exploration who was that a guy named John Bolesby who was the father of the
thing called attachment theory he I think he was like 1940s 1950s John Bolesby uh all of life
is a syringe of daring explorations from a secure base I see a couple little Katie
thank you I just love you David Brooks thank you for this incredible presentation
you're so thoughtful and smart and compassionate but I wanted to ask you for some real world advice
you know and this isn't going to be a long story I promise but I did a breast cancer walk recently
and a woman came up to me and said I really love you even though we're very different politically
I'm pretty sure and then I tried to kind of talk to her and I said oh well why are you
feeling the way you're feeling and I said do you believe are you do you have do you believe the
election was rigged and she said yes I do and I said but there's 60 plus lawsuits you know I did
the whole thing like why it wasn't and she said no I really think it was I've seen evidence
and can you tell us how to talk to people you know and how to lean into our humanity
when people believe things that just aren't true yeah it's really hard right I mean I was nice to
her but I just was frustrated yeah hey this is paradox that you're asking me this question
because one of my earlier years here a woman came up to me after I gave a talk and it was
a more one of my more personal talks and she talked about her son getting killed in a car crash
and I had no idea what to say and but I'm happened to be behind Katie Couric at the
security line at the Espen airport on the way out so I asked you what do you say and you gave me
good advice mostly just hugs but I would say so I'm at a baseball game and it's the night
inning in Washington and a guy turns around to me and says hey are you David Brooks and I think
nice he'll like my he'll say oh I like your column you know I like your show whatever
and I said yeah and he said you're a fucking asshole
and he like he's and my son was there and he said to my son you should be ashamed of your
father he's awful and this was a Trump guy and my wife is there and she's trying to calm him down
she's get off me woman and then he says I'm shaking I'm in the presence of evil and that was
like oh and I would like to think that at that moment my son and I rose above conflict and reached
out with compassion and empathy and understanding sadly that did not happen we were as nasty as he
was so I'm not and my wife was genuinely angry with me with the right to be but what I've learned
there's a highly recommended a book called Crucial Conversations by a guy named Joseph
Granny and a bunch of other people it's how to have these hard conversations and they point out
something which I've learned when somebody comes up with that kind of critique from a Trump's board
or whatever or from the further left my first job is to stand in their standpoint it's to ask them
three or four or five times how did you come to believe what you believe and I never ask people
anymore what do you believe I ask how did you come to believe that because that way you're getting
them in narrative mode and they talk about an experience they talk about a somebody who shaped
their values and then so I asked them three or four or five times and I may not persuade them I may
not agree but at least I'm showing them the respect of curiosity and in this book Crucial Conversations
the authors say in any conversation respect is like air when it's present nobody notices
when it's absent it's all anybody can think about and so a lot of the people who hold these views
feel profoundly disrespected and if you can show them respect I'm not sure you will persuade them
I'm not sure anything haven't I've been written a million anti-trump columns in the last seven years
for all the good it's done to the world but at least you'll show them that respect and I think
that will solve some of the sense of hurt the sense that you looked at you people look down on me
and the the other thing those people in Crucial Conversations say is that every conversation
that exists at two levels what we're nominally talking about and the real conversation which
is the flow of emotions flowing between us with every comment we make to each other we're making
each other feel more respected or less respected more safe or less safe and so by standing in their
standpoint hopefully you're making them feel more safe and less condescended to
and I don't know if that'll change the world but it's the only thing I could think of
maybe in the in the back I see a couple hands we've got two minutes and 45 seconds
thank you for your talk Fidel Vargas president CEO of the hispanic scholarship fund and I
apologize I came in a little late but one of the other things I seem to notice and I would love
to hear your perspective homogenous societies versus diverse societies France the United States
versus say Japan how is that playing out because it's a whole lot easier to
say the other and who's causing our problems how does that play into everything yeah I mean
we evolved to live with 150 people like ourselves we evolved for homogeneity we now get to live and
it's a privilege and honor to live in much more diverse societies and it's to me it's a wonderfully
great thing but it's just tougher it's tougher for me to relate to somebody whose lifestyle
whose historical narrative is vastly different than my own and that that one of the reasons I
wrote that book I had to know a person is because we have to up our social skills to fit the society
we're living in and these traits go super deep I there was an election in Connecticut a guy named
Ned Lamont ran against a guy named Joe Lieberman and researchers found after that election that every
town that was settled by the Portuguese in the 17th century voted for Lieberman and every town
settled by the English voted for Lamont these are 350 year old categories and they're still
shaping belief I have a party conversation you can tell how fun I am at parties where I asked the
following question and I asked that at dinner party recently how do your ancestors show up in your
life it's like we all know we're formed by our heritage but how and so there was a Dutch family
there and they talked about their Dutch heritage there was a black family there they talked about
the African-American experience I talked about 5,000 years of Jewish history which I'm sure was
a scintillating two and a half hours for them but you know we're so deeply formed by our ancient
heritages and you just have to be very socially skilled to see people in that level of profound
difference but once you do it it's fun and I'll close with this bit of research a concrete way to
change your life so I'm buddies with a guy named Nick Epley he's a social psychologist at University
Chicago and he was because he's a social psychologist he knows that every the thing that makes us
happiest is talking to each other we pretty relational social animals and so he's on his
commuter train on the way up to campus from his home and he's looking around the car and everybody
is on their phones not a single person is talking to each other so he's a social psychologist for
the next couple months he pays people on the train to talk to a stranger and he asks them
afterwards when they get off the train how'd you like it and they all say that was the most
enjoyable ride I've had in months we underestimate how we how much we want to talk to each other
we underestimate how much we're going to go deep we want to go deep and so I did a presentation
with them at Chicago a couple months ago now and we're doing our conversation on stage and he says
stop I'm gonna make everybody in this room find a stranger and for the next 10 minutes tell them
about the last time you cried and you hear this groan go up from the crowd and he says how many
of you want to do this and a few hands go up how many of you don't want to do it 80% of the hands
went up and he said go and they did it and 10 minutes pass and we can't get them to set up so
we can get back to our conversation and then finally when they do come up he says how many
of you enjoyed that and 80% of the hands went up and that's just a small practical thing so now
when I'm on the plane I often talk to the stranger I wait till there's only an hour left in the
flight in case I'll be boring but still but it's just a concrete practical way to instill a little
social relationship a little social trust and to weaken the kind of existential loneliness
that I think is the cause of a lot of our problems so thank you very much
you
