The Stoa is a digital campfire where we cohere in dialogue about what matters most at the
knife's edge of what's happening now.
We are, wow, this is a double header today and we started at 12 noon Eastern time with
a great session on the ecology of, an ecology of communication with Nora Bateson and Diane
Musho Hamilton and today, and I'm going to ask them to write their correct name.
I don't know why that happened, but our guest today this afternoon is Zach Stein and Daniel
Smockdenberger, for some reason the default is my name, but I did not do that, so I'm
going to hand it over to Greg, double G, and let him take it from here in terms of setting
the stage.
Amen.
Well, it's a real honor to be here, I'm super psyched, I get to touch with my good friend
Zach Stein and get to have a hear from Daniel Smockdenberger, one of my real leading forces
and leading edges in society as far as I'm concerned right now that I follow.
So I'm super excited for us to talk about the we, the I, the it, think about what it
is that we are doing as a collective, reflect on our epistemics and our values and the direction
of our education.
And so I'd like to welcome Daniel.
Thank you so much for joining us.
I'm just enjoying the comment thread, it's actually really great right now.
Cool, cool.
Good way to start.
Good to see everybody here, thanks for having me, rain that didn't hurt you today, it's
good to see you.
Cool, cool.
And Zach, welcome to you also.
Yeah, thank you.
I'm, I'm excited, this is a hell of a jam we've got set up here.
Absolutely man.
So what I'd like to do is play a clip from Daniel's recent conversation with Brett Weinstein,
a long conversation, a three hour conversation, but there was a portion that just jumped out
at me, because it reflected on the very theme of our session.
And it's within two minutes, but as Daniel does, there's a lot packed in that two minutes.
So I want to play that.
And then, and this is similar to what we did earlier Daniel, you frame the song, but first
we're going to start with comments by Zach, double G, Greg and Regas and myself, and then
have you come in.
So you're going to hear us sing on your song, and then you come in, how does that feel?
I like it being facilitated by a jazz guy.
Cool.
All right.
So let me screen share and let everybody see what I'm talking about.
Okay.
And the only answer out of the oppression or chaos is the comprehensive education of
everyone in the capacity to understand at least three things.
They have to increase their first person, second person and third person epistemics.
Their third person epistemics is the easiest philosophy of science, formal logic, their
ability to actually make sense of base reality through appropriate methodology and find appropriate
confidence margin.
Second person is my ability to make sense of your perspective.
Can I steal man where you're coming from?
Can I inhabit your position well?
And if I'm not oriented to do that, then I'm not going to find the synthesis of a dialectic.
I'm going to be arguing for one side of partiality, harming something that will actually harm
the thing I care about in the long run.
And then first person, can I notice my own biases and my own susceptibilities and my
own group identity issues and whatever well enough that those aren't the things that run
me?
When I look at kind of the ancient Greek Enlightenment, the first person was the stoic tradition.
The second person was the Socratic tradition.
The third person was the Aristotelian tradition.
There's a mirror of all those in modernity.
We need a new cultural enlightenment now that where everyone values good sense making about
themselves, about others, about base reality and good quality dialogue with other people
that are also sense making to emerge to a collective consciousness and collective intelligence
that is more than our individual intelligence.
And so that we have some basis of something that isn't chaos, but that also isn't oppression
because it's emergent more than imposed.
So it's like it's cultural enlightenment or bust as far as I'm concerned.
All right.
So I don't.
Okay.
It's cultural enlightenment or bust.
So I would like Zach to riff on that and then double G Greg Enriquez and then I'll say a
little something something and then we'll go from there.
Totally.
I mean, this is the core of the, you know, almost the year long work Daniel and I have
been doing with the Consiliance Project and in many ways the root of our collaboration
and the root of a lot of the work that I do as an educational philosopher, I didn't put
it in terms of cultural enlightenment.
I put it in terms of that we're an educational crisis.
And so, yeah, it's a deep diagnostic point and reason for hope, I think for the future.
And so, yeah, there's a lot of things to say specifically, I will say that a cultural
enlightenment doesn't mean the modern enlightenment, right?
So it's important not to mistake it for what Greg calls men's, which is the modern enlightenment
natural science, which would be one third of what Daniel spoke to, right, that we need
actually a different kind of more comprehensive cultural enlightenment, which, you know, there's
historical precedent, the when Daniel speaks to the education of everyone, right?
This is one of the great dignities of modernity.
And I attributed to John E. Most Communious, who I've spoken about on the stove before
and spoken with Greg about.
And it is that notion of the basis of new social reality beginning with culture, specifically
with the life of the ideas that live between us.
So yeah, and the first person, second person, third person framing, of course, is resonant
with my meta-psychological model with development, and so on and transcendence and the notion
that there's a kind of a, for lack of a better shorthand and up leveling necessary across
each of those three modalities, which needs to be facilitated by kind of like techno-social
education centric reform at a very broad scale.
And so that's a big project.
But it begins with realizing that this is the project to do, that it's fundamentally educational
work that needs to be done first in the interest of something like an enlightenment.
And if you look around, these are the times in which enlightenment arise, liminality,
times of chaos, when convention both breaks down and is reified and locked in, right?
So this is the age of Comenius, was that the Thirty Years' War, and that route between
the Renaissance and what we call the Enlightenment.
So he has a deep, it speaks to me, if I'm thinking of a song, this is a deep, deep set
of chord changes, which are, yeah, deep enough to bring multiple types of collaborative elements
on top of.
And this isn't a narrow thing that's hard to improvise with.
This is actually a large statement that can galvanize a bunch of different endeavors.
So yeah, so I'm glad you guys started with that.
I'll leave it there because there's much, much else to say.
So I think Greg would go next, double G.
Yeah, there is a lot to say.
It's a beautiful clip.
I think if we, if I now at the days think about the educational process, I tend to think
about it as skill development and soulman and transcendence, which is another tripartite
that I know that Zach has educated me on in ways of thinking about our own development.
When I place it in my own context, you know, I'm embedded in American psychology.
And I talk often about the problem of psychology and really it's a problem of American psychology.
And I believe that the problem of American psychology actually can be traced back to
the Enlightenment and its fundamental confusion about the first person, second person and
third person, the process by which we generated a third person matter in motion epistemics
and how that scientific message and epistemology got dominant.
And then how we didn't know how to sync it up to a first and second person way of being
in the world is absolutely essential.
And I think in relationship to this Enlightenment, if we are going to be so bold, is to fundamentally
create an opportunity to educate around all three perspectives, to appreciate which each
of those epistemic frames is about, and to begin to generate sense making systems that
allow us to cohere an idea just as you know, I think that failure to do that is deeply,
deeply dangerous.
Thank you.
Thank you both Zach and Greg double G. So I'll put it in terms of an idea that I have
been developing of late cultural intelligence.
So in the course that I actually taught through the Aligned Center this past fall into winter,
there were three parts.
The first part was cultural literacy.
So what is culture?
What does it mean?
What does culture do, right?
I also decoupled culture from race.
So the course was actually called cultural intelligence, transcending race, embracing
cosmos.
And I did that move specifically because mixing up race and culture has gotten us into all
kinds of trouble since at least late 1600s.
So cultural literacy has to do with understanding certain developmental models, both for a
person and for societies and civilizations and groups.
I'll just leave it there.
But I know almost everyone on this call knows what I'm alluding to.
There's different names and different models.
Then we need some case studies.
And in the course, I used Western culture, American culture, and black American culture
as the case studies of culture in action.
And then in the last part, I made it into the personal, the more I part of the I we
it and to deal with certain issues with cognition and emotions.
And then with shadow and cultural somatics and need for us to deal with the reality of
trauma and integrating that so that we can move forward and develop in various ways.
And then our spiritual vision, you know, your your insolments that I think is a key part
of that, where we embrace a more cosmic vision that may sound woo woo, but I mean it in more
of a philosophical sense, like rooted cosmopolitanism, we can have a rooted identity or rooted identities.
But we also at the same time can be citizens of the world and citizens of the cosmos.
That's where we come from.
We're star stuff.
So I think cultural intelligence, what I'm calling cultural intelligence, is a part
of this cultural enlightenment that I totally agree is necessary.
So that's my comment.
And now we hand it over to the man himself who made the statement, Daniel.
I don't think I said anything particularly original in that statement, but maybe it was
a good starting place describing the need for a philosophy that is first, second, and
third person.
I think many people have done.
I heard it from Ken first college.
The couple thoughts that come to mind first is that the thing that I'm saying is necessary
is actually not all that lofty.
Like an integrated metaphysics that actually gets beyond the or properly addresses the subject
object distinction and the limit of the distinctions between first, second, and third person formalizes
all that.
Like that would be nice, but that's not needed.
Right?
How about second person epistemology?
I'm talking about some very basic shit, which is can I try to get where someone else is
coming from and do a decent job of actually trying to inhabit what it's like to be them
and how they're seeing things?
Can I try to steal man and rather than straw man it like this is a very basic capacity,
but almost completely nonexistent in the public sphere currently.
When I talk about the first person, very, very deep nuance, phenomenological insights
are not that needed.
It's like, can I pay attention to where I have motivated reasoning?
And I really want the answer to be one thing as opposed to something else and I want to
be right.
And, you know, like I'm not that earnest.
Can I just pay attention to and value my own earnestness enough?
And then with third person, again, it's like before I share something on Facebook about
the virus, do I know what a virus is?
As opposed to a bacteria or an exosome, like just do I have the basic shit about what I'm
talking about?
And if not, just study more a little bit.
So I would like an integrated metaphysics, I would like to move in that direction, but
I would like more people that can hold uncertainty about the hard questions while being able
to advance the basic stuff well.
I think sometimes the desire to be able to formalize the metaphysics actually comes from
a certain uncomfort with uncertainty and wanting to be able to have some perfected or totalizing
knowledge.
And I'd rather people who are like, I don't know lots of fundamental things about the
nature of consciousness and its interaction with matter and if it's purely computational
or not or whatever, but I can try to get your perspective and then I can try to synthesize
the partial values and the perspectives to see how to move forward.
When the famous saying by Von Klausowitz that war is politics by other means, the key is
actually the opposite side of that statement, that politics is how you sublimate warfare
for people who actually want different things and value different things and have different
sense making of reality.
And warfare is so nasty and people who haven't lived through it have such a bad intuition
about how nasty it is that coming to compromise is actually a really important thing.
So I want to be able to understand, I can't just demonize the other people, try to get
a short win and keep driving cultural arms races and actually get anywhere good.
I've got to try to understand where they're coming from well enough that we can find some
common ground because all the other answers suck.
And that for us to be able to remake home and society institutions that derive their
power from the consent of the governed, the governed in order to consent have to understand
the issues.
And so that means that there has to be a culture that values understanding these things enough
that we invest in it enough that that's possible and that's what I mean by a cultural enlightenment.
That's great.
That's great.
And I love how as abstract and detailed as you can get, I love the fact that you're like,
this is basically what it is.
And we can put various labels on it, but if we can get people to steal man, if we can
get people to, as John Viveki says, do self-correction, question their own shit, and look at what
you call base reality, that's where it is.
But like you said, in the public sphere, in the public square, this is so little there,
so there are, as Zach implied, there are various movements going on in groups of people that
are doing this.
So one of the things we tried to do for this series is actually start with conciliants.
We started with a session called From Matter to Life to Mind to Culture, where we had a
physicist, an evolutionary biologist, a psychologist, Greg Double G, and myself dealing with culture.
Usually those domains don't engage in conversation.
So that was our attempt to actually model that.
What I like to ask you and Zach, Daniel, is for the conciliants project that you've been
working on for a year, and that should be seeing the light of day pretty soon.
What can you tell us about what we should be looking out for and what we can expect?
Because it's a real big deal, and I want to honor you and Zach and others who are working
on this project for having the courage to take a heroic step to not only analyze, not
only what's wrong, but how civilization is going down the tubes, but taking the step
of trying to do something about it to make sure it doesn't happen.
So I want to thank you for that.
Yeah, I think one just theoretical thing I want to say, because I forgot to say it, and
I think it's a bit important.
I just got off speaking with a group of retired congressmen, and they were talking about not
just the breakdown in education in civics, but any kind of cultural value in civic engagement
or the moral development that's associated, and when you read the founding documents here
and any kind of thoughtful open society philosophy will say something similar is that there is
a moral education along with the epistemic education that's required because a democratic
system of governance means a process of collective choice making where we all participate in
making some choice as opposed to have some ruler make it for us, and the choice is informed
both by what we value and what we think is and the effect will be.
So the epistemic is what is what will the effect of the injunction be or the activity
will be, but there's also the values part.
And every system had some way of being able to bind the well being of the individual and
the well being of the collective at various scales tribes obviously had to have that.
And religion was a method of doing that and patriotism was a method of doing that that
my sense of being able to have honor was bound to duty right that there's a connection and
obviously, for a bunch of reasons some unfortunate some legitimate things like religion and patriotism
have kind of waned deeply, as have local community identities and, and the market idea, right
the kind of randian idea was just pure greed will creates the greatest good for everybody
because I only get ahead in the market, if I produce a good or service that other people
really want that benefits their life at a better value that the rational economic actor
consumes.
And of course, behavioral economics showed us that that was utter gibberish because we
can manufacture demand for nonsense and, and it's way easier to make money through extraction
than actual production and lots of other things.
And yet that meant the, the idea of binding the way the individual gets ahead with some
kind of collective value is broken.
And the kind of market ideology said the invisible hand will just magically create good and it
doesn't.
And so that kind of values base of culture, you can see that it's missing right like right
now, neither the left nor the right have a value on understanding each other they just
have a value on appealing to their own base and demonizing each other.
I was just one thing I wanted to add.
Well thank you for adding that I mean our second session was values as energetic transcendence.
So we are really trying to, you know, hit to play the core changes that are that are
really needed.
So thank you for that.
That addition.
Zach, would you like to, to come on in back.
Yeah, absolutely.
And to get your question, Greg, I mean, generally when one is writing a book was and it hasn't
been released at one doesn't speak too much about it, but I can say that sense I don't
want to jinx it, but at the same time, there are some things that can be said in general,
you know, which are that, you know, it's it's an educational project aimed at the foundations
of our shared social understanding.
And so the focus is in many ways, the media, the news, right and what what's happening
in the context of the way that the world in its complexity is staged for us by the media,
right, that the media gives us resources for sense making, and these resources are insufficient.
And so some of what we're doing is pointing that out, but only in the context of equipping
people with ways to both ask more of their resources in terms of like what they're getting
to actually put a different kind of demand on the media, but also to allow for the convergence
of a movement around this shared sense that we're in an informational crisis akin to like
an ecological crisis.
And there is an information ecology, of course, and there's an information ecology precisely.
So the idea would be that there's kind of a founding move that needs to be made here
in drawing attention to this, the crisis in the information ecosystem.
And there are a group of people who already identify as those who are seeking to save the
informational ecosystem to save reason and truth, goodness, beauty, things of that nature,
and discourse, communication, perspective taking, the simple civic virtues that Daniel was speaking
to, which are not a given, which do not necessarily emerge with each new generation,
they must be educated for.
And so yeah, so it is that it is part media literacy, part advanced situational assessment,
but larger part education and capacity building and model offering to make that first move.
To create a catalyst that can ramifications into something like a broader cultural enlightenment,
not a lofty new metaphysics, but in fact, just new forms of civic virtue that get us out of this
death spiral, basically, which is what we're in as a culture.
Absolutely. When you say new forms, will they be new?
Or will they be? Is it a question of like, what from what is in the past that we need to take forward?
What do we need to let go of?
And then what innovative forms can we come up with?
Because certain things that we have let go, we need to reclaim.
I mean, absolutely, we're in like a we're in like a post conventional, post institutional moment.
Where we are exactly being asked to vet those aspects of convention for what they're worth.
And so it's not that we're creating something whole cloth new, we're in fact rescuing the virtues of
modernity and pre-modernity.
And jettisoning those that need to be like because they didn't have computers, printing presses and other
things, but the virtue, in a sense, was basic.
And so again, convenience, right?
Bishop of the Bohemian brethren, deeply mystical, but ecumenical, uniting, trying to bring a sense
resilience during the war.
So yeah, so there's a there's a very deep educational catalyst that's trying to be created.
So I'm Paul.
Great, come on in at any time.
Yeah, actually, Daniel, I was wondering if you would just share some of what you see is really
hopeful about the concealing.
Where do you see there's a lot of catastrophic risk?
Where are you seeing some of the most hopeful opportunities?
I think it's been getting kind of surfaced here that there are things already happening that are
signs of a nascent movement to a cultural enlightenment that just doesn't recognize itself yet.
And so if you look at Tristan Harris and Center for Humane Technology and all the groups that are
looking at the way that there are unhealthy aspects of how the information ecosystem works,
social media, etc., and working to address that, that's already a movement to identify how sense
making is broken, how the fourth industrial revolution is not being rightly directed for
open society or even a networked society.
But it just thinks that it's focused on the social media problem.
And then there are other groups that are focused on perverse incentive in journalism and trying to
fix some of the perverse incentive in journalism to not have to have click baby titles and really
short salacious things.
And there are other groups that are focused on how to get better education and civics to high school.
But they don't all realize that they're part of the same project, right?
That those are all focused on where there are things that are actively damaging public sense
making and or where there's a need for further development of it.
So one of the things we're seeking to do is to identify all the groups that are doing good work
that is ultimately around that and to be able to curate and up-regulate the signal to those and
reframe them as not just education or journalism or social media or identifying
Twitter botnets or whatever, but as parts of this cultural enlightenment where
you move away from the kind of SDG focus of here's all the stuff the world should do, right?
World should coordinate to do these things.
And you realize, well, we should have done nuclear disarmament and we have not ever done that.
And we should have done the SDGs back when they were called the Millennium Development Goals.
We couldn't do them. Like, why do we suck at doing big global things that are critical?
And as we move into increasing catastrophic risk, that's more problematic.
Upstream from the question of what should the world do is how do we coordinate better at all?
The really critical things at scale.
And upstream from how do we coordinate better is how do we make sense of reality and communicate
effectively prerequisites? So what we're looking at is what are the missing prerequisites that
make coordination possible that make all of the goals worth having possible?
That's great. That's really great.
One of the things that I'd like to bring to our discussion is
what was mentioned before regarding civic values.
I am very strongly influenced by the work of Ralph Ellison and Albert Murray,
both of whom were very high modernists. And I think proto integralists and you can even say
proto metamodernists. And both of them had a strong allegiance to the principles of American
democracy based on what Ellison called our sacred documents, Constitution,
Declaration of Independence, Bill of Rights. Now, for some who hear that,
who perhaps are from the postmodern progressive perspective, there may be a cynicism that arises
because you can talk all that you want to, but we know that that stuff isn't true,
hasn't been true, particularly for certain groups of people and I happen to look like
the group of people that they're referring to.
But Ellison and Murray not only acknowledged that reality, they also had the consciousness
and the awareness that having that beacon of light, that beacon of possibility that's
represented in those documents and the values and virtues of those documents
is an energetic force in and of itself to move you towards it. So even if it's inch by inch
and then there's regression and then that's the reality, you still have something to agree upon
that we're moving towards. And if you can agree upon that, then we have somewhat of a common ground
and you also have a need for a higher ground based on new developmental and post-conventional
reality. We have that too, but we need to think common and higher ground. And they were really
aware of that. So we're going to have to re-embrace some of those whole liberal values and I don't
mean liberal, I mean classic liberal, you know what I'm saying? So I just wanted to bring that
because I think that is really important to voice. Zach, Daniel?
Totally. Yeah, I mean there's so many directions to go with that. The first thing I'll say is that
I'll go theoretical because it's easier for me anyway. There's this issue in developmental
psychology which can be kind of like transferred on to the scheme of historical development,
which is like transitional and enduring structures in development, that there are these
themes which emerge over multiple developmental levels over multiple years of your life, which
continue to be perennial themes which you actually deepen. So like fairness, on the playground,
fairness is about how many M&Ms does each kid get, like literally count the M&Ms or Johnny will
freak out and he does because it's not fair if he gets fewer, unless there's stipulations because
he's smaller or whatever, but there's a greed upon fairness. This thing emerges all the way through
adolescence and then if you study philosophy and you read John Rawls, you get a principal
conception of fairness. So this issue of as history unfolds, there is going to be in retrospect a lot
of hypocrisy because earlier renditions of a perennial theme were understandably limited
in their first or second or third or fifth or hundredth articulation because this thing will
not stop being unpacked, that the things we think constitute justice now and medicine now
and science now, 50 years from now, they'll look back on and be like, whoa, dark age, yikes.
And yet they will still be pursuing something like science, justice, human flourishing,
hopefully, if we succeed. And so there's this question of how do we retrospectively
render to our ancestors trust in the judgment that they had, that they were actually doing
the best with what was given to them? And then how do we see when in fact that wasn't the case
and there was evil and there was mistakes, right? And so and that's a polarity, but there's all
of these, it's great in between about the complexity of rendering moral judgment to the past and also
the relationship between generations. And so it's a deep issue that we are now grappling with,
part of becoming, I think, hopefully a more mature species is that attempt at the full
remembrance of who you are, similar to what happens when you mature as a person, right?
That like at a certain point, you got to start dealing with your shit. And if you don't, you
will limit your future possibilities by a lot, your future relationships, your development of
future capacities. So there's a reckoning that happens with maturation and with capacity development
and a bunch of other things. And so I'm kind of superimposing that as a historical lens,
but it's useful broad brush strokes to think like, yes, you know, we this is apocalyptic in the sense
of everything being revealed that this is a time when we're trying to grapple with the full extent
of history, right? It was a choice, waking up from the nightmare of history.
And so yeah, so I don't think it's trivial, but I to say that one believes in the founding vision
of the United States. And I but I think it's important thing that we're gonna have to figure
out what we, meaning people who live within the geometric, you know, the United States system,
what we think about that kind of phrase, because that kind of phrase is actually tearing us apart.
Yes, I'll leave it there. But it's a deep, again, you hit a deep chord there,
and one that's going to like resonate across the whole spectrum of response.
And someone in the chat put the our declaration by Danielle Allen, Harvard political philosopher,
who's one of my very favorite, she's incredible. And I want to thank that person for mentioning
that because I want to voice her. I'm also wondering, Zach, how does your meta psychology
fit within the educational project?
I mean, it's in so far as I'm having an impact on how the conceiving and executing of the project
is going, it's, it's completely woven in. I, I don't think it will ever be something we explicitly
teach. I mean, I don't, I don't know, but I doubt it. But it is certainly part of the way we're
thinking about it. Yeah, I mean, you know, for example, image, right? Visual literacy as an
aspect of media literacy is huge. And this is something I talk about with our editor-in-chief
a lot is the nature of the imagery and the way image captures personality, right? Words capture
development, mind skill, image captures personality. That's why the image of a man being kneeled on
so much more powerful than just the words of a man being kneeled on, right? And so the repetitive,
repeated, re-traumatizing playing of the image in the media landscape is like
a kind of like a psychological torture that we submit ourselves to because we're addicted to it.
And so there's a, there's a lot of things in the aspect of installment that actually
are being addressed, but not head on. We're not like, we're working on installment,
but we're actually working on personality, character, value, and some of that will be
not in the words, but how the words are presented, that the medium becomes the message,
the nature of the design and imagery and those kinds of choices, as opposed to it just being a
cognitive, linguistically mediated project. And then of course, because as Daniel was saying,
we're curating the space, we're trying to bring in the best of what we can find and build a movement.
A lot of my concern as a psychologist is, has nothing to do with what people are thinking
and everything to do with what people are feeling and the way they're processing their
emotions and relationships. And so I'm going to be trying to pay a lot of attention to those
groups that are looking at the psychological and emotional precursors to even being interested in
civil conversation, you know what I'm saying? So there's a lot to do in these arenas. So in
that sense, I think it's very much informing the project, but it's one of many models that are
being used to shape the project. Daniel, I was wondering if you could talk a little bit about
sort of how you're thinking about ethics and values and relationship to the project, and
is it fair to say, I noticed your conversation with Brett, when you got on this,
wove in and out with sort of foundational issues of values. So if we think about the
three points of view, and also then think about the foundational values that we can be guided around,
that to me always seems to be a super important place to find and create common ground. And I
see my friend Mike Moskolo here has built a frame around how to understand need and value. So
I just wondered if you could offer some reflection about value-based discourse.
I'll start by taking something that Zach was just saying, where he was discussing
how media is affecting people dramatically or emotionally, in addition to cognitively,
and just a decision that we had to make around that, and how it reflected a value that we hold,
and then I'll get into the deeper question. Early in the process, there's a branding team that came
on to help us, and they're like, what emotions do you want to evoke with the site? And I'm like,
no, I don't want to evoke emotions. This is the whole point is that that's actually the thing
we're trying to cure is figuring out how to use scientific, split-tested optimization of images
and whatever to evoke emotions for some kind of a purpose. I actually, if anything, I would want to
evoke an emotion using a technique, then show people how we did it. Just like do the magic trick
and show them and say, this is what is happening to you all the time. Here's someone on the left
doing it. Here's someone on the right doing it. Here's the market doing it. Here's a religious
leader doing it. Now fucking go look for this everywhere and have more immune system to this
kind of memetic manipulation. So cultural engineering, the goal of it usually is how do
we control the thinking, feeling, values, and ultimately behavior of a lot of people towards
some specific vested interest. Our goal is cultural engineering of a different type,
which is how do we make all of that first type of cultural engineering not work anymore? Our
goal is to obliterate the effectiveness of narrative, memetic, and info warfare. And
in order to do that, it's how to, and it's an asymmetric war currently. It's, you know,
trillion dollar companies against a person who doesn't even realize they're engaging. So it's
how do we equip people better to recognize when those things are happening? How can we equip them
to notice when Russell conjugation and Lakoff framing is happening or when statistical cherry
picking of data is happening, when conflation is happening, and also when the right kind of imagery
and evocative dynamics are being used? So there is a value embedded in that for us, which is
seeking to increase the, I mean, it corresponds to when Greg, you were saying liberalism earlier
with the core of it means that the idea of promoting liberty and the sovereignty of the
individual, how do we actually increase the sovereignty of the individual against
asymmetric forces seeking to co-opt it? Because to the degree that we can get better and better
causal mechanisms to affect other people's choice, we're actually debasing the reality
of their choice. And an ethical system, however we figure it out, is a system for making the
right kinds of choices, but it doesn't mean we take away other people's choices. So to the degree
that I compelled someone into an ethical choice is no longer ethical. So our goal is how do we
actually help nurture the growth of people who think and reflect deeply on these things
and want to talk with and listen to other people who are also thinking on them. And we don't have
to have an absolute ethical system. Like, you know, most ethical systems have reducto ad absurdum
applications that show where they become nonsense. If your goal is a negative utilitarian and you
want to minimize suffering, you should kill universe because they're suffering universe, right?
And there's each of those different, every form of utilitarianism has some weird edge cases like
that. So do values, ethics. And so again, there is a fundamentalism I'm not seeking. I'm seeking
people who can ground abstractions and felt sense and have a certain trust of their own reasoning
and a trust of other people's reasoning to come to what the best emergent thing they can move
forward with is. We were talking with Nora Bateson today, and I'm sure this is what Greg
would want to hook you up on, but you know, her narrative around warm data and the context of
the influence that you have inside of it in relation and attending to not the formulaic,
but the echoes of impact and the capacity to have grace and sort of participatory flow
in whatever that kind of system is that rather than prescribing some complicated ethical code,
you have to be very, very wary of those kinds of things. So I'm hearing you infuse that
aliveness and reflexivity in the best sense in terms of the kinds of
propagating values that would enable us. Nora's work with warm data is one of the things that I
hope we can signal boost because she's looking at complexity from the embodied standpoint, so not
kind of the mathematics that are studied at Santa Fe Institute, but the complexity of
how many different contexts and perspectives and nuance people can inhabit in the way they
approach anything. And I think it's more relevant to actual choice making.
Specifically, though, any ethical system that gets formalized and optimized, I believe, becomes a
paperclip maximizer. And I'm particularly concerned with, as people pursue enlightenment ideas and
they go more rational, you get instrumental rationality and utilitarian or consequentialism,
and you can do the worst evil things in the name of utilitarian ethics, because if I'm sure
that the trolley is going to kill 100 people if I don't do anything, then of course I'm justified
in making it for sure kill one person. But the real trolley problems that we're trying to make
decisions about have way more uncertainty. They involve complexity where we say, okay, well,
I'm sure that AGI is going to emerge in 20 years, and I'm sure that it's going to get rid of all
hydrocarbon life based on the von Neumann Morgenstern decision making principle and blah,
blah, blah. Therefore, I need to chip people's brains right now. And so we will make choices
that risk really terrible things or are willing to cause harm because of a worse harm that we're
actually over waiting our certainty on. And so bad epistemics combined with fear of the unknown
and a desire for excessive certainty, driving instrumental rationality is the name of a lot
of well intentioned evils. And so we have to be careful with that. Daniel, I want to push back on
one of the things you said before Greg Double G asked you what he did about Norbert's warm data
and the pushback is the idea that you can actually create images, a model, a process
that is not going to involve the emotions. I know you didn't say it doesn't involve the
emotions. The implication of what you said is that you don't want to manipulate people's
emotions. And that's very admirable. And that's ethical. But what we know about embodied cognition
and 4e cognition is that you don't have cognition without your emotions. So one way or the other,
you're going to have emotions involved. Therefore, you have to make some choices. What type of
fruitful emotions do you want this to evoke? And if the emotion has to do with
the kind of awareness, what I think is an application of what I'm calling cultural
intelligence, the ability to discern certain distinctions and how various forces are trying to
get you involved in their narrative schemes for their purposes and being able to look at that as
an object rather than being subject to it, there's going to be emotions involved. So I don't think
that's realistic. That's my pushback. I don't think that's realistic at all. So I can try to report
on the Amazon rainforest cutting in different motivated ways, where in one way I want to
make it seem like the world is going to come to an end tomorrow if one more piece of rainforest
gets cut and the Bolsonaro is doing it out of like baby blood drinking evil. And I can make
an evocative thing that will just make utter horror and outrage. But I can also do the thing
that Bolsonaro is doing, which is to show how much fucking jungle there is, and these few
indigenous people in there, and then all these poor farmers in Brazil who don't get to actually
make any money because all this stuff is protected for no reason that's keeping them from being able
to access that land. And I can invoke outrage at the exact opposite thing. So, and both of those
are very partial perspectives and evoking certain kinds of responses for political reasons.
I would like to help make the clearest overview of the thing that we can. It's not unbiased,
it's bias corrected by trying to take all the biases, right, by trying to take the various
perspectives, trying to inhabit them, trying to see what we can verify or see as true in them,
and then also what we can falsify or see as missing, unwarranted or, you know, whatever.
Basically a scientific process. I mean, that's an element is the scientific process.
Yeah, an earnest, because it's not science in that if I'm asking what someone's perspective is,
it's not measurable, it's recordable, it's an earnest endeavor into inquiry.
And what I want people to feel is whatever the healthy natural emotion comes from seeing reality
is, maybe they feel sad, maybe they feel some anger, then hopefully they come to some inspiration
or hope or responsibility, right? But I want them to feel the real thing that comes from
seeing reality clearly, naturally, as opposed to some manipulated emotion that I'm intending them
to feel. And then I'm manipulating what I show them to achieve that emotion. I'm not trying to
prevent them from emotion. It's just the emotion isn't the outcome I'm seeking so that I am,
what I'm seeking is their clarity. And then there is a healthy emotional response to clarity.
Beautiful. So you're trying to use third person, I like your term base reality.
To then evoke first person awareness of that base reality. And then that's going to impact
second person, we space into subjective interpersonal dynamics in a certain way that
hopefully now this is my this is my bias, I have a bias towards tipping a tipping point,
I have a bias towards a group of people and groups of people who will as happened in other
enlightenment, achieving a certain level of consciousness and culture together so that
their thought words and behavior were aligned in a certain way that it can move the entire
culture in society forward. That may not be realistic. But I think that with a critical mass,
it can happen. Is that something that you can gravitate to Daniel and Zach?
I'd like to say something about the previous point with what we've been calling the pedagogical
atmospherics of the site, that the long standing mistake of the kind of like sciences of learning
was to commit Descartes fallacy, which is to separate emotion from thinking and to believe
that it is emotion that gets in the way of thinking. But in fact, it's thinking doesn't
take place in the absence of emotion, it takes place in the presence of the right kind of emotion.
And so what good teachers do is create these types of emotional environments that are non-coercive.
So the experience of the website isn't one of an absence of emotion, it's the experience of not
having your emotions manipulated, which is not a non-emotional experience. It could be a novel
emotional experience. It could. So that's why people like therapists. So Greg probably gets this,
like therapists are also able to create a space, ideally, where you have a situation of not,
it's not that there's no emotion, it's that you're not being manipulated emotionally,
but you are being presented with reality and concepts and images and other things. And so I
think that the trick ends up being not to make it devoid of emotion as if you can't do anything
without emotion, but those, the right emotions to accompany that kind of thinking emerge,
is what Daniel said. And so, you know, if you're trying to teach a child about moral development
and you read them a story that you think should evoke a moral response and it doesn't,
like they're just not moved by the heroic gesture of ethics, you don't then force them to feel
something, you find a story that resonates them until they're actually moved by the story. And
so that question that the teacher knows how to not manipulate your emotion, but get those materials
in front of you in such a context that you experience the non-manipulated emergence of emotion.
And so this is again, this deep questions at the basis of what we're doing have to do with
non-coercive forms of teacherly authority. And that a subclass of that is non-coercive forms
of emotional relation. And so very touchy stuff in postmodern contexts, where for the most part,
there is no such thing as legitimate teacherly authority. And there is no such thing as
emotional relation that isn't basically with a downside power dynamic in some way. And so
the ability for the therapist to hold more space and give you room to express your emotions as seen
is actually a potentially manipulative power game, which it is power, but it is the power of
teacherly authority, which can be granted. And so this is a very one of the things that is being
nuanced in the pedagogical atmospherics is that we are toying with this deeper issue of how can
you have something emerge in our culture as it is, which becomes a potential focus for a legitimate
distribution and dissemination of teacherly authority. And that's one of the main things is
the reason teacherly authority fails is because it got localized. And we need to find a way to
distribute the teacherly authority. This is something I'm passionate about. And I'll just say
quickly. Yeah. So from my vantage point, I am working on a broad descriptive systematic metaphysics.
And part of that comes from exactly this point. And that is enlightenment did not produce a
coherent metaphysics basically. And part of the postmodern critique, which then seeps into the
authority, some of that is glorious in relationship to kinds of authorities that emerge. But some of
that undermine the concept of good teacherly authority in a particular type of way. And there
are ways I believe to restore that both in terms of the kinds of process and structures that we
engage in at a process level, and at an analytic level, that would bring some clarity. But anyway,
so one thing, one thing very quickly down your promise, and rain we're going to be
bringing people in shortly, I just want to say that this process reminds me very much of
Ellison and Murray's perspective on the blues. So the blues can be viewed as
third person based reality, the reality that as Murray says, life is a low down dirty shame.
But at the same time, you have to make a choice. Are you going to and this is going to be an
existentialist riff? Are you going to basically cut your wrist? Or are you going to go out and
swing? Are you going to engage? Are you going to have what Kenneth Burke called a frame of acceptance
of struggle of life of all the things we all you're going to have a frame of rejection where
you say, well, that's wrong. It's unjust. It shouldn't be that way, which I think is an immature
way of looking at it. So there's some aspects that's in the black American blues idiom wisdom
tradition that aligns very strongly. And I just wanted to voice that. Okay. I appreciate that.
Oh, go ahead, Daniel. Yes, I wanted to add something.
How we are addressing this teacherly authority topic, because
we don't have any authority that anyone doesn't grant. And we don't want like,
ultimately, we don't want anyone to trust us and defect on their own sense making us. We want people
to develop better sense making that they can trust on their own. So how how we're handling that is
say we do sense making on a particular piece. We're trying to make sense of what's going on
on the India China border or whatever it is. So we have the piece, but then we also have
how we came up with our sense making on it. So what data sets did we look at? What epistemics
did we apply? What are the other views? And what was our sense making on their views? So we actually
make our epistemics crystal clear. And then we allow people to criticize them. So we can say,
if we miss something, if we included some data that was false, or we miss some critical data,
tell us if we find out that you're right, we will publicly update it and credit you if you want that.
If not, we'll show the position. So we're not attached to a position we're attached to the
best earnest process we can, we're making it transparent. If you want to take this process,
fork it, modify it somewhere else, you can, it's public comments. And so the goal is to help people
develop. So it is developmental, right? It is to help people develop better capacity,
but where they get to have full transparency into that process. And then the other part I
want to say about emotions is insofar as there's an emotion I'd like to induce beyond just the
emotion that naturally arises from seeing what there is to see. I think there is a kind of
epistemic nihilism that is pretty ubiquitous, where people don't feel like they could make sense of
what's going on. And so it's hard to make sense of what they should do with their life or how to
vote or how to apply their time or anything. And if someone was to have any experience reading,
where they start to see the possibility that emerges of making better sense of things,
that they have a certain kind of epistemic hopefulness start to emerge. An inspiration,
not an inspiration in some answer out there, but an inspiration in their own capacity to
increase the basis of their agency, which is their capacity to make sense of the world.
If there's any emotion specifically that I would hope would come about, it would be that one.
That's great. Can I interject here? Because the teacher Lee authority bit is key. Like
one of the signs of legitimate healthy teacher Lee authority is that it is trying to make itself
obsolete. Like the good teacher is trying to give you exactly the skills you need to no longer need
the teacher. And the good therapist is trying to give you the skills you need to no longer need
the therapist. They're not trying to keep you addicted to them as the authority. That's not
teaching. That's something else. That's not actually teaching. That's just the authority.
And one of the ways to think about propaganda, you'll never actually know all you need to know
to replace the propagandists by design. So one of the problems with so called conspiracy theories.
In any case, the broader point there is that there are many indices that how do we tell the
difference between legitimate and illegitimate teacher Lee authority. And that is one of them
that it seeks to make itself obsolete. And so this is precisely what the concealings project
is seeking to do that. In fact, we're trying to show you under the hood exactly what we're doing.
So you can have that sense of being empowered to step into their own, your own sense making.
And rather than just having to keep to come to us. And so I think that's one of the dynamics
that you find in the media currently is that say you're addicted to the, to the trough,
like, or go keep going back to eat more of the like high fructose news stuff. And
that's just an egregious violation of the obligation that the media has, which is to you.
Yeah, go ahead. Sorry. So you would like to, in my own words, increase people's sovereignty,
not to become rugged individuals, but to become self determining in their own sense making
in terms of like what they actually think and feel, not based on the manipulations that are all
about them in the media sphere, including advertising and PR, but to really take a look at,
you know, what do I think? What do I believe? And why? And that's powerful. I also want to say
that, that goal of the teacher, you know, teaching the students so that the student
goes beyond the teacher, that goes back a long ways, doesn't it?
I got that from Dewey. I got that from Dewey because Dewey was like, all right, y'all,
you, because people were inspired by Dewey and they made all these crazy schools where they just
let the kids do whatever they wanted. Basically, the absence of teacherly authority in the wake of
a very strong critique of teacherly authority, which created chaos and kids who never learned to
read or, anyway, so he was like, okay, what constraints on freedom are legitimate? He was
like, those constraints on freedom are legitimate, which basically set you up for greater freedom
if you hadn't have the constraint put on you, right? So the idea is like, you don't want to allow
for freedoms that end up putting the person in a situation to have fewer freedoms, right?
So it's about that dynamic and the eventual, you know, graduation of the student into
the lifelong learning journey that the teacher puts them on, rather than being locked into
a set of ideas, which just holds them the rest of their life. And they're basically caged in these
ideas and those ideas come with an identity and then the ego becomes attached to the worldview.
And then you're in that place where for a long time psychology thought that brains didn't change
after the 20s and 25s and that people didn't change. And in part it was because there was a
calcification of the identity and cognitive architecture as a result of, I think, certain
forms of schooling. This would be Dewey's, and basically we're counting Dewey's argument here
about why we cease to continue to develop and grow. So yeah, what you learn from your teacher
should be that you can go on to have many teachers and to move up and out and up and through.
So yeah, there's a beauty to that way of thinking about constraint and authority, right? That in
fact this is the very stuff of intergenerational transmission and cultures that can exist in
perpetuity have figured this out. And we are in a crisis of teacherly authority and intergenerational
transmission. Rain, there are some questions I think. Yeah, maybe we'll go to questions.
I've got some good questions in the chat. I'm going to jump around a little bit
to kind of follow the thread we're on. So since we were talking about teacherly authority,
Rob Hart has a question which I'll repost in the chat here. Rob, do you want to ask your question
or if Zach spoke to it a bit? So if you'd like to modify it at all, please go for it.
Yeah, I think Zach did start to answer this and I would love to hear him kind of
deepen one of the ideas he said about freedom. But the question I originally said was,
what do you think is the best thing that a teacher can want for the student and the world
and use their teacherly authority to produce in the student's journey?
So I have really enjoyed your use of the tripartite model and I've kind of seen each
lane of this tripartite model of our psychological development as a way that we approach sovereignty
or a way that we augment sovereignty in our lives, the sovereignty of sort of the
way that Daniel uses it. And I'm curious if that relates to what you mean by freedom
and if the whole panel could sort of weigh in on what they believe to be the highest good
that a teacher can seek for the student using their teacherly authority.
I'll begin and I'll try to be brief because I think I've spoken a lot. So Margaret Mead
wrote a book called Culture and Commitment and in this book she suggested that there were
three kinds of cultures. There were cultures where it never really changed and you were
basically going to inherit what your parents had and their lifestyles and their ideas and things.
And in those situations it was very actually easy to know what as an elder one should teach
the youths. It was precisely what they needed to know to do what had been done for centuries.
And then there's the second form of culture where there is some change but not that much change
and enough change where you can actually teach kids to how to expect certain kinds of change.
And there there's a more collaborative relationship and this is what the era that Margaret Mead
believed she grew up in, which was like World Wars. But she came to realize that there's a
third form of culture where in fact things change begin to change so rapidly that it becomes
very very very difficult if not impossible for the elders to know what to teach the students.
They that the students will inherit a world that the elders literally do not understand
and they become aware of that fact. And so there's a room like this weird reversal and this is
actually the root of the youth rebellion and the intergenerational crisis is the fact that this
something like this has occurred and we don't know how to negotiate this as educators.
But what it means I think is that the educators responsibility is to allow the student to find
the problem that is theirs to work on. It's very vague. So you need to allow for enough freedom
such that and enough support such that the project that of the the project of their life
right the image of their life to get to the meta psychology aspect of it that you're working on
who will you be in the future and the elder says I cannot imagine and the youth says now I can
because you've given me the resources to imagine right beyond what you're capable of imagining.
So that's the responsibility it's not to determine for them or to pick out of some slot of jobs that
we're aware of now or something like that right it's actually to give the resources of judgment
and discernment resources of imagination because we're in that situation of not being able to
imagine what it will be like for them those who come after us who will not be like us who inherit
this world that we've created with the type of objects and its risks. So yeah I think that in
that sense that freedom is there but it's a letting go which many parents know but which we're having
to exercise at an intergenerational level which is very complex. So that's uh I'll leave it there.
I'll very quickly say I think we need to teach young people how to improvise because when you're
dealing with double binds and you're dealing with uncertainty you're gonna have to improvise but I
don't mean winging it. I'm talking like jazz improvisation where you've got to have the chops
you've got to have a lot of knowledge you've got to have you know a lot of grounding in base
reality in history and knowing know thyself and go back to that because at certain points you're
just going to have to in the moment make choices that one hope is is the wise spontaneous choice
in the improvisation that's part of a model that that my wife and I do the jazz leadership project.
We look at improvisation as wise spontaneity so I would just say that and for that you've
got to not only support but you've got to challenge them you've got to give them structure
but you've got to give them a certain amount of freedom within the structure to express and to
experiment and to make mistakes and then learn from those all of that so I really think it's a
balance of those of those elements. Okay let's jump to Tyler Wakefield you just asked a question
that got some plus ones it's on the topic of education still but a different angle when it
comes to the institute the institutional aspect of the academy if you'd like to ask your question
and open to Zach or Daniel to respond. Hi yeah if anyone wants to respond to this I was just
you know we've been talking about you know and maybe an educational enlightenment
but you know I'm wondering when a lot of these these processes that are developed whether it be
journalism or other sorts of propaganda come out of you know the university structure people
educated within it I was interested what you know what's to be made of the academy or
is is this movement that is going to exist outside of it is that the expectation because
the institution simply can't be repurposed to to do this type of interdisciplinary thinking
or is this is there an idea that this movement will eventually permeate into
the academy or is that necessary I just you know. What a great question that we need about two more
hours to I'm not touching that I'm not in the academy so I'm going to let let those that are
or have more proximity to it to answer that please. Well I'll just say I'd like to hear
Daniel's take on this also I'll say briefly if somebody who has two professor parents
in the audience even and grew up in the academy my hope is is that there is a zeitgeist of
awareness maybe spurred on by COVID that we are in a major cultural shift and that the
structures of modernity as both terrifying and glorious as they were I think there is
the hope of an increasing conscious awareness that maybe transformation could happen that's
being in some ways very optimistic because I also have a pessimistic side that sees an
enormous amount of inertia and static and stasis and indeed you know I find myself in these
circles now following Jordan Hall and Zach Stein and Daniel Schmockenberger as opposed to
my sort of standard academic friends precisely because of the mentalities and the structures
that are at place certainly my own work in the context of America what I call American psychology
what it became how it was established and what it might become is very much something I'm passionate
about and I believe that if the consciousness raises and the sensibilities that emerge and we
start to cultivate a wisdom commons about how to educate folks for the new next generation
there may well be a very very strong impact a wave of impact across the academy so that they begin
to restructure it's definitely needed and it is my deep hope that that potential might emerge
I'll go ahead and say something and then we let Zach end with it since this is
his topic in more depth I don't think we can consider the restructuring of any of the major
institutions in isolation because they are all inter affecting so obviously if the purpose
of schooling is to prepare people for a workforce then that's a very real constraint
how much of the tax money can actually be invested into the education if most of the
people are going to be laborers like what education is relevant to be a labor
well with technological automation creating a massive amount of job obsolescence in the
next while largely in the labor fields that's both a risk and an opportunity what could it
portend for different kinds of education so also things like
what is it what is education in the
information singularity post information singularity when you've got something like
a hundred thousand peer review journal articles in each field per year come out and there is no
such thing as an expert in any domain anymore and so to be an expert has to be increasingly
hyper specialized micro fields which also means increasingly poor understanding about any of the
kind of broad topics but the broad topics then end up having those who focus on to have the
problem of a lack of the depth where the devil in the details ends up mattering and so then we
start looking at how can the right kinds of computational infrastructure machine learning
etc not replaced by augment human capacity and what do we want to train people to do both when
we don't need the people for labor in the same way and we also don't need the people for all of
the compute but there are things that people are uniquely good at and it happens to be that the
things that they're uniquely good at and that we have intrinsic motivation around largely coincide
so factoring the change in the technological and economic base in association with the
educational base is the way I would say is the beginning of starting to think about this
and I mean we definitely don't have the answers we have a lot of design constraints and some of
the answers and this is why the goal of a cultural enlightenment of more people starting to think
deeply about all of the institutions that need restructured and how to do that has to happen but
it's like okay well how do you go against the direction of market incentive well the market
isn't going to incentivize anything that goes against the market incentive well the state could
but the state ends up getting captured by the market interest it's supposed to regulate if it's
not regulated by the people so ultimately if the if the market incentive is not flowing in the
direction that you want comprehensively where is the change going to come from it well it can't
come from the market alone it can't come from the state that isn't grounded in the people it
actually has to come from culture which means people valuing something other than what the
market currently values enough to reform institutions that can guide market type dynamics
and so the thing we're interested in doing right now is how do you actually even just
take the people that are already sympathetic to these ideas and gather them somewhere
which obviously this is one example of provide better education resource information processing
and the ability to work on these problems in in more um collaborative and effective fashion
and I think that is kind of what a cultural enlightenment that ends up leading to the
reformation of institutions usually looks like I'll say a couple things one is that
well it depends what you mean by academy because there's at least two things happening there's
higher education which is sometimes just an extension of high school as a necessary
upper stack on the public education system and then there's the academy where there's
something like supposedly ongoing knowledge production right and these two things are
often happening in the same so-called university which is this massive especially a state school
this massive research complex that is doing both higher education and academics right
academics being uh you know independent research in the humanities and science etc right so these
two things right both of those are in radical crisis right now COVID really complicated and
already debt-ridden higher education complex in the united states so we're actually no matter
what we do intellectually over here we're looking at a very different higher education coming
in the coming years higher education I said higher education this is about what we do with
those people who are exiting high school right the question of what's going to happen to high
level knowledge production is also extremely interesting and this is where we're getting to
daniel's point about computational um assistance to human judgment at the edge of expertise and a
whole bunch of other things that are coming at the academy pretty fast and fast and hard
and the radical de-incentivization of the humanities like this is that's another crisis
in higher education is the absence of from a market perspective and even political perspective
sometimes uh doing really solid work in the humanities like ethics and political science
and stuff of that nature so yeah so I am kind of avoiding answering the question in a concrete
way and saying like there's so much indeterminacy right now in exactly that region that it's not
clear I could see a mass homogenization where you get like 12 big brands of higher education
who've consolidated all the little players and you get kind of a centralized probably state
subsidized system but I could also see just a radical fragmentation wild west market driven
pseudo higher education with pockets of amazing stuff so I think the the answer is we'll see
we'll see um there's certainly not right now from where I sit uh anyone knocking on my door
from the academy telling me that there's a groups in the academy organizing around this
um I see them hunkering down trying to preserve the old system and business model um which is
I think going to fail so thank you let me get one more Daniel yeah um Chris D I just
reposted your question you're here feel free to unmute yourself yeah hey guys thank you so much
for this conversation my question has to and my attention is the concellions project challenges
legacy media legacy media gets a lot better at being ethical and delivering high quality
information so where do you see the best case scenario for the concellions project on its impact
on legacy media and how are you going to deal with backlash from let's say not only the traditional
institutions but also the memetic tribes as well thank you
thank you want to go first all right this document I want to write and put on the side I'm not sure
if we will but I I like the idea that is called something like predictable responses and it
identifies the predictable responses of the various memetic tribes and you know if you are
an acute non-tribe you think that uh this is part of the deep state cabal because somebody
in our advisory councils three steps connected to Epstein if you are part of the woke crew you
think that we are giving voice to racists rather than cancelling them by hosting dialectics with
people on the right um you know those kinds of things and then say if you had a response arise
that was anything like these and that was and that you're kind of adjacent to that group you're not
actually thinking you're just a memetic propagator right like there is a stimulus response process
happening and you and you should be concerned about that like you should want to know that
you're actually thinking see if you can come up with a response other than the one predictable
by your social sphere um so that's one answer on by the way by the way I could just I could just
feel that there were people triggered by what you just said and if not in this group yeah
on the video you know uh so but I mean hey you need to get a response but I but I wonder
and please don't lose your thought but I really wonder if
another way of going about that is not just the presumption that you should not be caught by a
particular narrative but the steel manning maybe this way the steel manning is so powerful if you
can voice uh with integrity the perspective and maybe lawyers do this naturally of others
you disagree with to me seems to me that's such an incredibly important step
yeah I mean it's it's pretty straightforward to argue that
the political opponents that you disagree with don't stop existing because you cancel them
or because you ignore them or because you call them idiots or terrorists or communists or
islamophobes or whatever it is to dismiss them they don't stop existing and they don't stop being
political actors and if you polarize them against you they're also smart in paying attention to what
works and if you win they reverse engineer the tool that won and use it next time so if you
want to keep driving cultural arms races keep doing that but just do the math on where that goes
with exponential tech if you want something other than a cultural arms race don't be so
myopic temporarily myopic that you think winning this time actually matters very much
and then say how can we actually the respect for these humans is actually obligate there is no
way forward on a shared planet without without getting rid of them and we can't get rid of them so
you know how do we how do we handle that so yes you can explain those things I think actually
making the point that I don't think most people want to think of themselves as being more predictable
than a GPT-3 algorithm and yet most of their tech speech is more predictable than a GPT-3
algorithm most people's text response wouldn't even pass a good turing test because they're so
following certain memetic tropes and to have people think about that is actually a valuable thing
now the mainstream media question
an analogy that I think is an interesting one is
it was supposed to be that the market worked by people having demand for things it would
actually increase the quality of their life creating an evolutionary niche for supply supply
would emerge and you'd have competition of who could provide the best product or serve as the
best price and then everything gets better but of course as soon as supply side is organized
and demand side is not organized and it can exert force and to be able to manufacture demand
manufactured demand broke the intelligence of the market right and so you can't say well let's use
demand to change supply because demand isn't coordinated so it's an asymmetric war and the
supply side wins so sometimes you have to use supply to change demand to change the rest of
supply and that's what I see the elunded with Tesla and electric cars before Tesla there just
was not a big demand for electric cars and so he was able to make a car that was interesting
enough that demand went up enough that now all the other car companies are making electric cars
faster than they would have been otherwise our goal is to show what good media could be like
what good news could be like in a way that makes demand for something that doesn't currently exist
that people know that actually creates an incentive for other news organizations to do
better news because there's a better educated populace actually demanding it where right now
they have an authentic market incentive that's been erased to the bottom because people actually
click on the more salacious click baby stuff and so we're hoping to be able to educate consumer
patterns of media enough that it actually changes the topology of the markets to make the supply
side have better incentives all right um rain had to sign off so i'll manage a few more questions
as long as we don't maybe do one um i think it was jason killinger um is jason yeah hey um
hi so i asked um the first uh the first second and third person development that
daniel you spoke of um that greg played at the beginning um also speaks i think to values and
i'm wondering if while we're waiting i mean obviously we have major leaps that we need to
take in media and in education and i'm wondering if there's kind of like a fast track
um base level that we need to get to that's on that speaks to those around values that if that's
like the kind of place we can immediately go i'm wondering if you have any thoughts on on on that
and kind of like movements or people that are that are getting us that are kind of like taking
care of that level right now that we can kind of put support behind
i don't know that i understand the question exactly but uh i think i understand a part of it
so what are the values that are involved in what we're talking about and what could be done or
is already being done on values development work oh i i i guess i mean like finding um
finding this coherence like on the basis of values like like a thing that keeps coming up for me is
like um i keep asking people like um do you love how far do you extend your circle of care
like the those kind of things that i think are are kind of like a ground floor towards like a you
know cultural enlightenment yeah i think um the process you're describing of dialogue that
looks at things that are shared rather than different first and build some kind of shared
life experience commonality value i think super valuable one thing that we're doing early on is
the second person sense making is largely about values it's it's it's what is so let's say for
instance i'm there's some issue where there's a polarization around whether or not this particular
proposition should go through and it seems to be uh around something that if it does will benefit the
economy but damage the environment and if it doesn't the environment will be preserved but
the economics won't get ahead or whatever so we can identify well what are the values independent
of the strategy fuck proposition a yes or no and the values are i actually want my kids to be able
to get a better job and then values over here are i want to have this last little bit of old
growth force protected when we identify what everybody's values are first almost everyone
can empathize with everyone's values if they aren't bound to a strategy where they're in a theory of
trade-offs where valuing your value requires going a particular direction in a proposition that messes
up the thing i'm more directly connected to so can we separate the values that we're seeking to
serve from a proposition of how to serve them then can we all hear everybody's values and then say
is there a proposition that would serve all of them better that's a key reformation of the
democratic process and it was actually the goal of the town hall and scale just messed it up
is before you get into voting on a proposition was it even a good proposition did you do sense
making to help bring that about and a big part of the sense making is not just what is but what
are all the things that people care about connected to this so one of the things when we're sharing
different narratives is not just what a different people think is true but what is it they care about
that is ultimately motivating them that can engender the empathy of each other i really think
that's a very very key shift and move you know is foundationally you do this all the time in
therapy what is the care what is the value and how do you hold multiplicity of different values
and then look for adaptive synergies across them in some of the solutions so but that value piece
and then empathizing with it steelmaning honing it relating to it is a crucial process i know
forest has been here and spoke before and he's done the best work i'm aware of on what that
democratic like system could be of getting all the values to inform we're we're not doing anything
that advance in terms of trying to actually formalize the governance system here we're trying to
actually just at the communication layer can we even understand the values where other people
are coming from are we seeking to do that and in the media pieces we're putting out
are we helping make explicit when we steelman the positions both the partial epistemic truth
but also the values that they're holding yeah great i think you say for us i think you talk
about forest land tree correct forest land tree correct and that that sense making is ultimately
an ethical and value laden process that and this is Habermas's point ultimately that there's this
thing rationality which you can do by yourself on a desert island which is just about manipulating
the world but then there's this thing called reasonableness which is about how reasonable you
are and how balanced and comprehensive and how much respect basically you show to those who
in who who you're in discourse with and so there's this key base and daniel said it like
you know respect for other humans is obligate like uh not because you'll go to hell or whatever
but because if we keep amplifying the cultural war we will create a situation of inevitable
self-induced extinction so yeah there's this base notion of reasonableness rather than rationality
for example and the reasonable includes the emotional right it's unreasonable to exclude
emotion although it could be rational for a little bit of time to exclude emotion but it's
completely unreasonable to make continual demands on the exclusion of emotion so there's a there's a
deep basis of values at the root of sense making and in my model of course you get the
installment and trans and development and transcendence but you begin with you know the
root of the value of self and other i like the word justification a lot but
so let's let's do one more yeah i think we have one more question uh evan mcmullen is is on deck
if you want to unmute and ask yourself evan all right thanks can you guys hear me yep yep cool
so this goes back a bit in the conversation to when you were discussing teacherly authority
and so my question has to do with um i'll just read it so my question says that it seems that one
of the thorniest issues related to this issue of teacherly authority is that the fact that most of
us were coerced into an educational system where the source of teacherly authority was ultimately
not epistemic but the threat of physical violence and coercion and so this seems to have created
a trauma surrounding the teacher student dynamic and many if not most people in our society
and so i wonder if you have any thoughts on how we might address that as individuals small groups
and as a society at large i can handle that daniel do you need to run if you look like you needed
to run like you were bowing out i can handle this if you need to go this will be the last question
unless you're interested what i'm gonna say but you can probably predict it uh the uh yeah you're
absolutely correct that in fact the crisis of teacherly authority we're in um is not contrived
and artificial and um kind of like made up it's a legitimate crisis of teacherly authority that
for a brief period of time the modern nation state was able to instantiate a form of teacherly
authority that was unprecedented just world historically um and this was what caminius was
cooking actually back in the 17th century and uh but that was just a window of time when it could
be sustained in an american particular by something like a civic religion where in fact your high
school teacher was a potentially inspiring uh in like put there by the state who was this
admirable thing that you were supposed to like those days are gone like the the screen won
and schools lost um and that was just the nail on the coffin of teacherly authority that had
already been degraded um for a long time in part because of the inability of the school systems to
demonstrate their problem-solving capacity which is to say no child left behind and a few other things
which made it clear to all the students that like this is not working like we can tell you
adults actually don't know precisely how to run this enormous urban school district in terms of
the way you're distributing money and other things so it became very transparent and the most
reflective intelligent middle school to early high schoolers usually either strategically
manipulated the system in order to advance themselves or just cynically checked out essentially um
and so that means we're in a situation of having to deal with the downstream consequences of a
multi-decade long uh crisis of teacherly authority in the schools and so that means people don't
wouldn't recognize good quality teacherly authority if they saw it and that's why people are
actually susceptible to pathological forms like cults and spiritual teachers that are
corrupt and things of that nature um so yeah so I I don't know how to kind of de-traumatize that
but I do think that um some of it has to do with those that pedagogical atmospherics on the site
that there needs to be explicit and clear just how much we're putting in your hands
and that we've got nothing under the table or under our sleeves or somebody behind the curtain
pulling the strings on us that in fact you are seeing it um and then it's all on the table and
you can enter like peers into a relationship and that's what every child would have liked to have
been able to do um and when they reach a certain age of self-reflection would be able to say hey
what do I who do I and how do I and they begin to ask their questions and they begin to pursue it
instead of being forced to sit in an uncomfortable desk for six hours a day being talked to by a
woman who's not smarter than your mom who is only there because her issues paid and you know what
I mean so there you are um so it's kind of a cynical note to end it on but right well and on
that note now I know you've got to go and we're getting near it Daniel uh do you want any offer
any sort of summary thoughts or reflective thoughts for us to chew on as we I think I talked plenty I
would just say thank you for having me here for hosting these dialogues and I hope uh I hope it
was something in here was useful for the people who were here absolutely thank you so much Daniel
for coming and uh and joining us in sharing and you also Zach and of course uh Greg Enriquez my
partner in this endeavor and we want to thank all of you who have been here sharing in the chat
asking questions explicitly the listening in just being a presence and a part of the field
and container that we created so we want to thank you all and I want to say that our final
session will be next Monday the 22nd featuring Jordan Hall uh Zach Stein again
and Jamie Weill and we'll be looking at uh once again the issue of of a commons and hopefully
we can get to a wisdom common so we hope that folks will share and we'll also come back amen thank
you Greg thank you guys thank you so much for everyone coming sharing that really appreciate it
all righty thanks everybody take care
