So there's a thing that I see people routinely fail to get and it's a little hard to express.
I'm just going to try.
There's no rule which says that we make it. There's no rule which says that humanity has
to survive this century or even this decade. There's no rule that says that everything's going
to be okay. And when I say this to people they generally accept it. Most of the people I talk
to anyway. They say, yeah of course. Of course there's no rule that says that we have to make it.
Of course humanity could fail. We could go extinct. It could happen.
It's like they know it, but they don't feel it. They don't take it seriously as an actual
possibility. They kind of think, okay we have these things that we have to do. We have these
challenges we have to overcome and so we'll do that. We'll rise to the occasion. We'll figure out
what we need to do and we'll do it. But okay, this is a related concept. There's no rule which
says that the challenges we're faced with are challenges that we are capable of meeting.
Think about something like an asteroid strike. If a big enough asteroid hits earth we're pretty
much done for, right? And I'm not saying that this is something we should day to day be concerned
about because we're dealing with geological periods of time, right? Regularly asteroids hit
earth. We're sort of due for one, but what does that really mean? Sometime in the next
million years or whatever it is. So we have more pressing concerns, but
when people are prepared to take seriously the possibility of an asteroid strike,
usually it's because they're thinking about it like, oh interesting. Okay, so we have good
telescopes. We would spot the thing. I wonder how long we would have. Would that be enough warning?
Would that be enough time for us to build whatever it is that we needed to build to go up there
and redirect it or blow it up or whatever? So they're willing to think about the possibility
from the perspective of tackling the challenge. But the thing is, as I said, the periods of time
that pass between asteroid strikes are so large that human-scale time periods don't really matter.
The chance of an asteroid strike 200 years from now is more or less the same as it is now.
And similarly, the chance of an asteroid strike 200 years ago is about the same as it is now.
And if you go back a few hundred years, the question becomes very different.
Could we see the asteroid coming? Maybe. Could we do anything about it?
No. I mean, pretty much just flatly no. We didn't have the technology. We didn't have
the understanding of the thing necessary to build something that could deal with that.
If an asteroid were headed for Earth a few hundred years ago, that would just be it.
Just game over. Humanity's done. Shame. You know, you didn't quite develop your technology fast
enough to have anything that could deal with asteroids before one happened to hit you. Oh, well.
There is no rule which says that the challenges the universe faces us with are challenges we can face.
And I hope that kind of gives some taste of what I'm talking about,
of like understanding the possibility that we could be currently faced with challenges
that we will not rise to. That we actually could fail.
But people just have a very hard time taking seriously the possibility that we could fail.
I think it comes from a few different places. One place obviously is religion, right? If we
were created deliberately by the creator of the universe, we are important in the universe.
And so we're not going to be wiped out by some asteroid or whatever. We're not going to be wiped
out in some boring way. Religions, they're often okay with the idea of an apocalypse,
of humanity or of the world ending. But they're not okay with an accidental apocalypse.
They have a very hard time taking that kind of thing seriously. In a religious apocalypse,
it's always part of the plan.
And so someone with a religious mindset, when faced with a scenario in which humanity is wiped
out in a way which is not part of the plan, they have a very hard time taking that seriously.
And I would posit that anyone raised in a society that's primarily religious probably has a lot
of this as well. A lot of this kind of feeling that maybe we face a lot of challenges.
Maybe we face very difficult challenges, but we'll deal with them. And if we don't,
then that's okay because it's all part of the plan. Even if they would not explicitly endorse
this idea, even if they claim to recognize the reality that there is no plan, I think those
lingering ideas don't just immediately disappear when you give up on the supernatural parts of
your religious beliefs and your upbringing. And it's not just capital R religion either, right?
Like anyone who believes that human beings have souls or that human beings are in some way
special, like fundamentally special, that the universe itself has like a separate category
for human beings. Because again, there's this sense in which the universe on some level cares
about us or even just recognizes us or acknowledges us as a thing. And if you believe that, again,
it's difficult to think about the situations in which we're wiped out in some boring way with no
dramatic final test, no heroic last stands, no judgments, no thrilling story to tell,
and nobody to tell it to. So religion is one place that I think this comes from. The other
place that it comes from, I think, is fiction, especially Hollywood and especially science
fiction. And I'm not saying that people can't tell the difference between fiction and reality.
I'm kind of saying that. I mean, on a conscious level, people can tell the difference between
fiction and reality. But I think on some level, it's like people understand that whatever this
fictional thing is, it didn't happen to us. It didn't happen here on earth. But it sort of
happened somewhere. It happened in the world of the story, and that still feels real.
It's kind of like, say you have two people, A and B. In person A says, you know, alcohol is
actually a really harmful drug. I think we should ban alcohol in the UK. In person B might reply,
well, they did try banning alcohol in the USA in the 1920s, and that didn't really work out
at all the way they hoped it would. In person A would reply, well, yeah, but that was a different
time. It was a different place. You know, modern Britain is very different from 1920s America,
and we could implement it differently and so on. In person B would say, yeah, I mean,
maybe there are important differences. But still, the fact that something similar was tried and
failed is evidence against the idea, right? That's useful information to take into consideration.
And that doesn't seem like an unreasonable position to take. But then people would do the
same thing where somebody expresses something about AI, and somebody else says, yeah, but think
about what happened in 2001, a space odyssey or iRobot or something. And you say to them, well,
that was fiction. That didn't happen, right? That's a fictional example. It's different from the real
world. It doesn't really make sense to use that. And they'll say, oh, I know, I know that it's
fictional. But still, there's some sense in which this is like evidence, right?
And no, it's not. I mean, it's, at best, it's one dude's best guess. And usually it's not even that,
because usually the person is not trying to be as accurate as possible. They're trying to be entertaining.
So clearly fiction affects the way people think about this.
It's interesting. It seems like it increases the probabilities people assign to bad things
happening with AI, but it also decreases the probabilities they assign to really, really
bad things happening with AI. In the sense that they have in some part of their mind a whole
bunch of examples in which bad things happened, but then we were able to overcome them, right?
And this is not just with AI. This is any existential risk. Even asteroids, for example,
coming back to them. Even though people often won't explicitly endorse this idea,
I think there's a part of people which says, oh, well, I've seen the world threatened hundreds of
times, right? And every time it works out. There's some, there's a brave hero or a plucky
band of misfits or something comes along. We figure out what we need to do and then we do it.
And I guess that's where we are, you know? And some of those people are even potentially
helpful because they offer to join your plucky band of misfits. But they're still not able to
take seriously the possibility that we might lose because they've never seen that happen,
right? I mean, they've never seen it happen in fiction or very rarely seen it happen in fiction.
And furthermore, they've never seen it happen in reality, obviously. That's kind of a difficult
one because I feel like you should be able to use reality as evidence. But I mean, of course,
we've never observed humanity being wiped out. Wouldn't be here talking about it if we had.
And so it's hard to get people to really feel the reality of the situation,
which is that we, the whole of humanity, we are up here on this tightrope.
We've had no practice, no dry run, no rehearsal. We get one shot and there is no parachute.
There's no safety net. There is no rule that says that we have to make it. We absolutely
can fail. And we will if we don't successfully tackle a series of hard problems. And there's no
rule that says that we're actually capable of tackling those problems. And there's no rule
that says that we have enough time to do so. So we'd better get to work.
