Hello everybody and welcome to Open to Debate. I'm Zania Wicked, your guest moderator for
today. Having spent a number of years in the policy domain, including the State Department
and the White House, I now make my living by trying to ask the right questions, either
as a moderator or coach, in order to bring clarity and direction to people and organisations.
And my job today is to do just that on the topic of will the future be abundant. In 2011,
the Pew Research Centre conducted a study that showed, for the first time, that more
Americans thought that their children were going to be worse off themselves than thought
otherwise. That trend has continued. Imprinted in our basic genetic makeup is the commitment
to ensure the propagation of the species, and not just its continuation, but in such a way
that we are healthier and happier. And it's in this context that I can't think of a more
important question to answer than whether the future will be abundant or not. What world
are we leaving for our children, for our species? This is not about whether we are optimists
or pessimists, nor is it about the political oscillations that consume the papers every
day. This is about understanding the underlying trend line. Is the future going to be abundant?
As a former policymaker, it's a vital question to answer, one that drives behaviours, our
own, that of our businesses, our societies and our governments. It is one that should
drive our international relations. So, to talk us through the dynamics, and to answer
the question of will the future be abundant, we have two Peters. Let's get into it and
meet our debaters. Arguing yes, the future will be abundant, Peter Diamandis, founder
and executive chairman of XPRIZE Foundation, and author of Abundance, The Future is Better
Than You Think, and The Future is Faster Than You Think. Welcome, Peter.
A pleasure to be here. Good to be here. And arguing no to the question, will the future
be abundant, is geopolitical strategist and author of The End of the World is Just the
Beginning, Peter Zahan. Welcome, Peter. Great to be here. Now, because we have two Peters
debating with us today, I'm going to be referring to each of you as Peter D and Peter Z, to
try and minimise some confusion. Before we get started, I just want to take a quick sense
of what motivates you both to make this argument. So, I'm going to ask you each to take the
30 seconds and tell us why you're here today. Peter D, what are the stakes for you in this
argument? An individual's mindset is probably the single most important tool they have to
solving problems and creating a better world. And our inherent mindset that we evolved over
100,000 years is one of fear and scarcity. But that doesn't put you in a very good position
to solve problems. Having an abundance mindset, optimistic mindset is probably the most important
thing for delivering a future for our children that is better than our past. And so, my mission
here is to give people a clear understanding of why the future is extraordinarily abundant
and why they're more empowered than ever before to create that future. Phenomenal. It's about
mindset. And Peter Z, the same question for you. Why did you show up? We've been living
through one of the most atypical periods in human history, and a lot of us have drawn
linear forecasts as to where that takes us. That's never been true and it's not true now. We're
entering a period of extreme change, and my goal is to get people to understand the size of the
icebergs ahead of us and where they are so we can navigate around them. The future isn't necessarily
dark, but that doesn't mean there's going to be anything we can predict. Okay, so this goes to
the core, both of you. So let's get to our opening statements. We want each of you to take a few
minutes to explain your position. Peter D, you're first and you're arguing yes to the question,
will the future be abundant? Tell us why.
Exponential technologies, and I define those as computation, sensors, networks, AI, robotics,
3D printing, AR, VR, blockchain, biotech, are technologies that are making those things that
used to be scarce more and more abundant. And so we're living in a world where technology is
transforming scarcity into abundance at an extraordinary rate. Everything that we used to
view as scarce, access to food, water, energy, healthcare, education, is blossoming. Now to
be clear, we are living during a time that is chaotic and unpredictable and sometimes downright
scary. I don't deny that at all. We humans like going to sleep and waking up in the morning,
knowing that the world is the same as it was the night before. And it's not. It's changing at an
accelerating rate. And we're not arguing that there are issues, there will be issues for sure.
But even as it's changing at this accelerating rate, what is happening is those things that used
to be scarce are becoming abundant. And so if we look at this, and I believe in what's called
data-driven optimism, there is a huge amount of data that drives towards this vision that abundance
is in fact the future. So first of all, global life expectancy has more than doubled over the last
70 years, from roughly 40 years old to now hitting 75. Global child mortality has precipitously
dropped from 43% in the 1800s down to under 4% today. Maternal mortality rates, women dying in
pregnancy, over the last 20 years alone has dropped 34%. Cancer deaths have reduced by a third over the
last 20 years. You may not believe this, but even democracy has blossomed over the last century. In
1900, about 1% of countries had universal voting rights. Today, it's 96%. Extreme poverty has plummeted
from 95% extreme poverty in the world down to under 10% today. Literacy rights have skyrocketed,
mobile phone uses, we have some 8 billion mobile phones. The poorest on the planet now have
most advanced technology for communications and access to knowledge. We have 5 billion internet
connected individuals. Access to electricity has exploded. We have swatter safety. We have more
access to food. And so the question is, why is this happening? Why are we seeing this incredible
abundance in access that people have? And it's not that we humans have gotten smarter, we don't
have better forms of government or better politicians. It is the technology. Technology is a
scarcity, is a resource liberating force. It transforms scarcity into abundance over and over
again, right? We used to go kill whales to get whale oil to light our nights. Then we ravaged
mountain sides. Then we drilled kilometers under the ground to get access to oil. And now we have
8,000 times more energy hitting the surface of the earth from the sun than we consume as a
species in a year. Energy will become squanderable abundance, right? And that tips water and that
tips health. And so all of these things are increasing abundance. I have zero question.
Now, and by the way, anybody who wants access to this data, if you go to diamandis.com backslash
data, I have 50 charts showing over the last decades and century this increasing access to
abundance. So it's not about creating a world of luxury for everybody, but it's about creating a
world of possibility for everybody. And you're muted, senior. Peter, absolutely perfect. Thank
you so much. And now let's hear from Peter Z. You're answering no to the question, will the
future be abundant? Tell us why. Peter D is absolutely correct. The world of the last 75,
80 years has gotten better and better and better and better. But it's important to understand
why we've been able to go down this technological path. We've had three things going on.
First of all, we had globalization. At the end of World War II, the Americans found themselves
facing off against Stalin on the plains of Europe. And it was a war we knew we could not win. We knew
we needed tens of millions of people to stand not behind us or with us, but in front of us to serve
as cannon fodder. And that meant bribing them. And our bribe was globalization. We used our
navy to open the seas so that anyone could go anywhere and interface with any partner and access
any commodity in any product and sell into any market. If in exchange, you would join us against
the Soviets and it worked and it generated the greatest prosperity and security the world has
ever seen. But the Cold War ended in 92. And ever since then, the United States in a series of ever
more nationalist political contests has elected the guy who wants to do away with it faster.
And the biggest difference between Trump and Biden when it comes to international economics
is that Biden was able to hire a grammar checker. The road hasn't changed. And this is a very strongly
bipartisan issue. And we're moving away from the generations of security and economic growth that
gave us the ability to go down to this technological path. Then there's demographics.
Pre-Stalin, we all lived on farms where kids were free labor. So you'd have as many of them as you
could put up with plus one because that's how you found out it was too many. But then Stalin
brought us globalization and industrialization and urbanization and all the new industrial
jobs were in town. So we moved in to take them. Well, in town, kids aren't free labor. They're
just a source of migraine. So you just fast forward 30 years to the 70s to the 90s. We entered
this weird period where we had huge numbers of young workers and huge amounts of consumption
because of it, but not a lot of kids that we had to spend money on. It was demographically
speaking a moment in time. You fast forward another 20 years to the 2000s and the 2010s,
and we now have lots of mature workers who are over 40 but not yet retired. People were at the
height of their income, but their expenses were under control. So we saw a huge tax base, huge
infrastructure spending, lots of production, lots of investment, which generated, among other things,
the tech boom that brought us the world we're in now. But this too is only a moment in time.
And in the 2020s, we're now aging out. Whether it's Spain or Italy or Germany or Japan or Korea
or Taiwan or China or Thailand, this is the end of the road because that bulge now hits mass
retirement. And we have to come up with something that works without investment or consumption or
production. And we're not going to get that first right on our first try. And then finally, there's
China. China is a country that exists because of globalization and demographic change. It's
utterly dependent upon globalization for access to raw materials and access to markets. But it's
also the fastest urbanizing country in history, which means it's the fastest aging population
in history. And they've already aged so quickly and so far that consumption led growth or cost
competitive production has already faded into memory. Their birth rate fell by more in the last
six years than it did among European Jews during the Holocaust. So even repopulation is now
statistically impossible. And China will cease to exist as a unified industrialized political
economy within 10 years. Major shifts in economic models take at least a couple of decades, and
they are messy. The shift from imperialism to globalization, for example, took the better
part of five decades and gave us two world wars and the Great Depression. So no, abundance is not
the word that I would use to describe the future. We've passed that already. We just heard opening
statements from ex-prize founder Peter Diamandis and geopolitical strategist Peter Zahan. And I
want to trans summarize those briefly. Peter D, you argued yes to the question of will the future
be abundant. Your principal points were that exponential technology changes are making scarce
things more abundant. Technology is moving scarcity into abundance at an incredible rate.
You acknowledge the fact that we're living in a frightening time and that the world is changing
at an accelerated rate. But you gave us some statistics that emphasize your optimism. You
talked about the doubling of global life expectancy over 40 years, the lowering by a huge factor of
child mortality and maternal mortality, the blossoming of democracy despite what it might feel like,
the tumbling of extreme poverty and more. And you asked the question, why is this happening?
And your answer was technology is a resource liberating force and that energy will be a
squanderable abundance. Arguing no to the question was Peter Z. And Peter Z, you acknowledge the
fact that the world has got better, but you thought it was important to understand why it had gotten
better over the last century or so. And you said there were three reasons for that. The first was
globalization. You described following the Second World War the fact that we had bribed the world
through globalization and generated incredible security through that globalization. The second
reason that you put for why things have gotten better are demographics. You described the pre-Stalin
period when people lived in farms and subsequently moved to the towns. And there were huge numbers of
resources in those people. You fasted forward through a couple of decades and a couple of decades
and moments in time where there was abundance of people as in the last 20 years. But you talked about
as we move into the 2020s, we're now aging out in your words. You've got a population bubble
that is hitting mass retirement. We need to come up with a solution and we're not going to do that
on our first try. And then the third reason you laid out was around China. The fastest urbanizing
country in history that is now aging. You described China as a country that will cease to exist
in it as a unified industrialized economy in the next decade. You talked about those three factors,
globalization, demographics, and China being on a positive trajectory and now hitting a negative
trajectory. And the major shifts in systems that we need to manage this
never go smoothly and we're going to get it wrong. So that is why the future is not going to be abundant.
So let me pick up and ask you both a few questions and pick up where you left off.
The first question, and this is for both of you, abundant for whom? How do imbalances and
inequities factor into your thinking? Does it matter where you sit? What nationality? What country?
What ethnic or socio-economic group? And maybe I'll start with you, Peter D.
It matters in the beginning, but it doesn't at the end. In the beginning, when the first mobile
phones cost a million dollars in New York, Manhattan for the Wall Street, traders and they
worked very poorly. That's the way it was. Towards the end, now there are $40 handsets and
they're available to billions of people and they work incredibly well. And not only do they work
incredibly well, on this handset which every child on the planet has access to comes the world's
information, two-way video conferencing for free libraries of books, entertainment, knowledge,
information that were neither available to the heads of nations 20 years ago are now available
to the poorest. There are eight billion handsets on the planet. So what we see is technology is a
democratizing and demonetizing force. And so, you know, things do begin when they work poorly.
They're available to the richest who take the risk and eventually they rapidly demonetize and
democratize and are accessible to everyone. We're seeing this on communications. We're seeing this
on energy. We're seeing this even in artificial intelligence, right? All the AI systems that
we're seeing coming out of Google and different parts of the world are available for free to
anyone with a handset. Again, amazing. And so, I believe that this is a force and it's a non-stoppable
force and it is what is causing increasing abundance. Whether or not it's used for negative
purposes or positive purposes is a different issue. The question we're asking here is it
will it be abundant? And yes, these things are abundant across the board.
Bundled across the board. A lot of people have described technologies like AI as things that
increase inequality. So I just want to quickly, quick follow up with you, Peter. What's your
argument to people who say that actually these technologies are increasing inequality rather
than decreasing? And then I'll come to you, Peter. Peter Z. Again, my comment is in the beginning
they're accessible to a smaller group, but we've seen over and over again these technologies become
demonetized and democratized. I talk about the six D's of exponential. When you digitize anything,
in the early days of its growth, it's deceptive. 30 doublings later, it's a billion fold bigger
and it's disruptive. And it's dematerializing, demonetizing, and democratizing. We've seen
this over and over again across every technology. AI is going to be ultimately the best educating
system, the best healthcare system will be available to the poorest child and the wealthiest child
delivered by AI platforms. Okay, thank you. Peter Z. The question abundant for whom?
Geographic factors and demographic factors are not the same everywhere. Some countries are aging
faster than others. Others have better borders and better economic geography. And as a rule, gross
oversimplification, the Western Hemisphere looks pretty good. They, in many cases, industrialized
on a slower rate or from a later start. So their birth rates haven't fallen nearly as much. And what
I outlined in my opener is less true for them with the United States being one of the youngest
demographies in the world as well as Mexico. So we have a transition period here that's going to be
a half a century as opposed to what they're going to have to do in Europe, which is going to be in
less than a decade. That buys us a lot of time to figure out the details. It also means that we
have the ability of expanding our supply chains to make up for those that fall. But when it comes to
technology at its core, the demographic structure is everything. Developing new technologies requires
a huge number of people in their 20s and their 30s who are social, who are integrated, who can work
as a team and can imagine the future and then figure out how to operationalize it and then figure
out how to mass manufacture it. The problem with this process is that every step up until mass
manufactured generates no income. And that means you have to have a huge amount of capital to push
this whole process forward. Now in the 2000s and the 2010s, we had exactly that world. We had the
millennials, which were many, and we had the boomers who were nearing retirement but had not yet
retired. So they had their life accumulation of savings, which pushed down capital costs for
everybody. That's one of the reasons why growth these last 25 years has been so robust. Lots of
young smart people, lots of money for them to do things with. Well, that's over. As of December
of last year, half of the world's baby boomers had already retired and they'd liquidated their
savings. And so we've seen capital costs triple. They're going to triple again in the next few
years. And the oldest baby boomer, sorry millennial, I'm sorry, the oldest millennial, sorry millennials,
turns 45 next year. They're no longer the young bucks and the next generation down is small and
to be perfectly blunt kind of antisocial. So the environment that has allowed us to push the
technological envelopes so far, so fast, so consistently, it's already behind us. And we're
already seeing those adjustments throughout the tech space with layoffs, with shutdowns,
with focusing more on manufacturing now, rather than idea generation, because we're realizing
we're losing China at the same time. So the risk here isn't that we're not going to push the envelope
forward. I'd say that's almost impossible. The risk here is we're going to lose too much of where
we have and we backslide a little bit. And we're going to find out the answer to that question
in just the next five years about whether or not we can retool fast enough. North America
basically needs to double the size of the industrial plant. And if we fail that,
then we lose a lot of what we already have. I can see that Peter Dee disagrees. So Peter
Dee, back to you. I vehemently disagree. Yeah, so this is so wrong in my opinion.
What's happening is we have more individuals, more empowered with technology than ever before.
We have created an interconnected globe where people have gigabit bandwidth anywhere on the
planet. They now have the ability to use AI to code at a speed like never before. The cost is
demonetizing of the ability to innovate and create, right? It used to be that it would cost you
$100 million to sequence a genome. It's now down to 200 bucks. Your ability to code used to
require a massive amount of education. Now you can code just by explaining through natural language
what you want. So the speed of innovation is exploding onto the scene. And the number of
individuals who've got access to this technology is greater than any time ever in human history.
And entrepreneurs that used to require 50 or 100 or 200 people to create a company
are now creating a company that's delivering a valuable asset or resource with two or three
people. So I think we're seeing a Cambrian explosion of innovation by no means a decrease,
and it's going to be accelerating. I'm going to move us on. What I took away from this little bit
was Peter Z. You're saying that the world is aging, and so the ratios are changing. And Peter D,
you're saying, yeah, but all of those people who weren't part of the system and weren't productive
are now part of all $8.1 billion, $8.2 billion are enabled productive. Okay, enabled. I like it,
caveat. Let me ask you another question. Again, maybe I'll start with Peter Z this time.
Tell me in 30 seconds what you think the future looks like in, say, 2050, and maybe take an American,
a standard American, what do you think life looks like? And then I'm going to come to you, Peter Z,
for your view as well. I think we're going to make it over the hump. I think we're going to succeed in
doubling the size of the industrial plant. And I think we're going to make it through to when the
millennials' kids enter the market and rebalance our demographics here. I don't think it's going
to take till 2050. I think 2040 will be plenty of time. And we will have a system where we are
largely immune to international shocks, and we have local workers serving local markets using
local resources. And getting there is going to be the fastest economic growth in the history of
Canada, Mexico, and the United States. It's not a good story. It's a great story. It's a story of
growth. But I wouldn't call it abundant. It will be driven by a breakdown of the old system.
Okay. So Peter Z, 2050 looks good. It's much more localized, but it's an ugly way to get there.
Peter D. So I'm going to agree with Peter Z and a lot of that. And I do think 2040,
it's hard to predict beyond 2040, honestly. We're going to be in the next 20 years,
we're going to be adding healthy decades on to the human lifespan. And that's one of areas that
I'm focused on, fingers crossed, and about to launch a massive XPRIZE in that area. But we're
going to add 20 healthy years. The study done out of Harvard London School of Business in Oxford
said that for every healthy year you add to the lifespan of humanity, it's worth $38 trillion
to the global economy. So we have more people living longer, healthier lives. It's positive on
both sides of the equation, more empowered than ever before. We're going to see AI have the most
disruptive and most reinventive impact. There are going to be two kinds of companies at the
end of this decade, those fully utilizing AI and those out of business. It's going to be that black
and white. And so we're going to see AI as the closest analogy for me is Jarvis from Ironman,
where it's your partner, it's your co-pilot, it's your inspiration, it's your collaborator.
Across everything, allowing you to fulfill your dreams, giving you access to not information
but knowledge. I'm going to come back to productivity towards the end of this time,
but I want to move on to climate. And Peter Dee, I want to turn to you first and say,
aren't we using up the Earth's resources? Will there ever be a tipping point at which we can't
multiply them or become sufficiently efficient or productive to deliver more with less? Is science
going to allow this? This idea that we are scarcity-bound, again, is built into our old brain
that evolved for hundreds of thousands of years. We're living, again, in a world where technology
liberates resources. So again, we used to kill whales to get whale oil. Now we're on the verge
of fusion, which will give us near infinite energy. We still have an oil economy and we will for the
next 20 or 30 years. There's no issue about that, but we're going to be increasing the amount of
resources available to us. We're about to launch a very large XPRIZE for large-scale desalination.
We fight over water. 97.5% of the water on the planet is salt, 2% is ice, and we fight over
a half a percent of the water on this planet. But there's an abundance-minded way of thinking about
it. There's plenty of water. We live on a water planet. It's just not a usable form. That's where
technology comes in to capture trillions of tons of water out of the atmosphere. We call it rain
or desalinate water out of the oceans. What other resources do we consider scarce? Because
I can show you the technologies that can make it abundant. I'll just say for climate real quick,
our ability to bring the earth back into balance is something fundamentally critical,
and I think I would rather be fighting that battle today with the tech we have versus 20 or 30 years
ago. Peter Z, do you want to come back on that? By the way, you don't need my permission to push
back on one another, but I have a feeling, Peter Z, there might be something you want to answer to
that one. Well, you know, me and Peter D were both such shrinking violets. Thank you for unleashing.
I noticed that, really. You're very well behaved, both of you. Go ahead, Peter Z.
Sure. Climate change is definitely a big issue. Anyone who thinks they can predict it on a zip
code by zip code basis, I think is a little crazy because our math just isn't that good yet.
My concern isn't, on this topic, isn't so much that we don't have the tools. It's that we don't
have the tools, yeah, to deal with it yet. I think a best example I can give you is what it takes to
put up a solar panel. Aluminum is the most energy intensive of the primary industries that we have,
if you look at steel and fertilizer and the rest. Taking raw silicon and turning it into a finished
silicon panel requires seven times the energy that it takes to make the same volume of aluminum.
We're probably going to lose most of our capacity to produce polysilicon at scale
when the Chinese break down. The issue here is ultimately out of timeframes. How long does it
take to build the industrial plant? How long does it take to apply the technology? The issue that
Peter D and I have always struggled with is whether or not we've already passed the point of no
return on these technologies and we no longer need the old system to push it forward, or whether we
do need time to move it forward. I think the best example I can give you there of where we haven't
crossed the Rubicon yet is AI. AI chips are all three nanometer or smaller. They all come from the
same city in Taiwan, but that makes it sound a lot simpler than it is. There are 9,000 companies
that are involved in the manufacturing system to allow those fabrication plants to work,
and over half of them only produce one product for one customer and they have no competition
anywhere else in the world. So if you peel out any small section of the global system that's
technologically oriented, like say Germany, which is any severe demographic collapse right now,
we lose the ability to make those chips at all, or certainly at scale. Now we can rebuild that
ecosystem, but it takes time. So everything that Peter D said about productivity, I agree. The question
is whether that's this decade, the next decade, or the decade after. Okay, I'm going to go back.
We've got so much to cover in so little time, so I'm going to ask for quite snappy responses if I
can get from you. I want to come back to you, Peter D. I love it. I'm coming back. I want to go back
to you, Peter D. There's a war in Ukraine. We've got a growing conflict in the Middle East.
Peter Z has already bought up China and his view that China is my language, not yours, Peter Z,
but effectively in decline and over the next decade. We have a vulnerable Taiwan. I haven't
even talked about Iran and Russia. Are we on the verge of a great powers war? And does that, how does
this conflict affect your assessment? There's no question that there's lots of reasons to be
scared, concerned, frightful, and so forth. What I draw confidence from is history as well as a
projected future. You know, if you ask anybody, you know, would you rather live in the year 1900
or the year 2023? If you truly understood what life was like in 1900, where you were working
80-hour work weeks, your 12-year-old kids were in the factories, you were dead by 40 from tuberculosis,
you'd have to answer, I'd rather live today. And so the world has gotten extraordinarily better
by almost every measure, not every measure, but by almost every measure over the last 123 years.
And over that 123 years, we've also seen World War I, World War II, the Spanish
Flu, the Vietnam War, 150 million people died needlessly in those conflicts, and yet the world
has gotten extraordinarily better. This is not a straight and linear path. It has got ups and
downs, ups and downs, but what I truly believe is, yes, we're going to have these problems,
and we're going to overcome them. And the number one way to allow people to become more peaceful
is to give them access to prosperity. And technology does that. If you have access to all
of, you know, if your kids have access to the food, water, energy, health, care, education,
they're not going to want to go kill themselves and put on a suicide vest.
You've just silenced me for one moment. Thank you for that image.
Peter Z, I'm going to come back to you for one final quick question before I get back
to this issue of time that we keep coming up with. And I want to talk to you about population,
because that's one of the big issues that you've put on the table. Thomas Malthus back in 1798
predicted the population growth would outstrip food production.
Since then, numerous other scientists and experts have said similarly,
including most notably Paul Ehrlich and his wife in the population bomb in the late 60s.
They've all been wrong. Why is this moment different?
Industrialization. Industrialization plus technology introduced us to this very
simple concept called synthetic fertilizer. And it was applied at scale. And we were able to
put it on geographies that without it could not grow food, things like the Brazilian Serato,
for example. And that effectively increased the amount of land that we could cultivate by a factor
of three. And that's what's kept us all alive. As long as there is no disruption to the synthetic
fertilizer supply chain, we're good. China is where the single largest source of phosphate
comes from Belarus and Russia. The single largest source of potash and nitrogen is a natural gas
derivative. And we're going to lose access to a lot of that from the Russian space in the Middle
East as well. So we're going to have to hack the genome of plants in order to grow more food with
less fertilizer. And it is a race against time, whether we can figure out a way to improve yields
on the genetic side faster than we lose the ability to produce it on the synthetic fertilizer side.
And I do not have enough confidence to tell you how we're going to come down on that race.
So time is a big issue here, not just because our clock is ticking. So I'm going to come back to
you both with one last question that's on time. We've talked a lot about time as a macro sense,
but I want to talk about time in a micro sense. Peter Dee, in your 2012 book, Abundance, you
quote Matt Ridley that, and I love this, save time is the best definition of prosperity.
You give a whole host of examples of how time has been saved. You've done that today as well.
But many would argue today that time is an increasingly rare commodity. Expectations of
what we achieve in any moment has multiplied many times over. So I'd love to get from both of you
what do you say to this argument about time and prosperity? And you both have about 25 seconds
to do it. So maybe Peter Z, start with you. So save time is the best definition of prosperity.
So for you, Peter Z, what do you say to the argument that actually time is shrinking, in fact?
Electrification. Electrification allowed us to push back the night that gave us the
woman's rights movement, because all of a sudden women could have time to do things that were not
related to the household. Holding those advantages is our single biggest challenge. If we lose China,
if we lose the capital that comes from a positive demographic structure, our ability to hold the
line on industrialization itself is at risk. And electrification requires globalization,
and we could see a significant regression in the next 15 years as we lose the ability to do that
at scale on a planet-wide basis. And an asteroid could strike us and we'd all be dead. But the
fact of the matter is, you know, every human on the planet has one thing in common, 24 hours in
a day, seven days in a week, and how you use that time that differentiates wealth and capabilities.
And, you know, Google saved us from going to the libraries. ChatGPT is now giving us increased,
you know, so yes, we are resetting our expected performance per unit time,
and it's exploding onto the world, right? And so our ability to solve problems, to create new
products, to create additional prosperity is increasing at an exponential rate because of
these technologies. And these technologies enable us to solve the problems, you know, whether it's
labor from robots or AI, you know, I would rather bet on today than any time in human history.
We're going to bring some other voices in, some members of the audience.
Up first, we have Alexa Mikhail of Fortune Magazine. Alexa, welcome. What's your question for the
debaters? Thank you so much for having me. Yeah, so, Peter D, I'll start with you. You know,
you mentioned that in advances in technology and research has really expanded, you know,
not just health, not just lifespan, but health span, and we're going to have these 20 extra years.
So I kind of want to talk about what those years are really going to look like and what it's going
to sort of mean to age, to age in this country, given that, you know, this is sort of uncharted
territory, especially that I think people would argue that, you know, people are also, you know,
aging into poverty. People are dealing with caregiving duties. And so what's that going to
look like? Yeah, it's a challenge, Alexa, because people are probably not saving enough money for
those extra years. You know, the reality is people retire because of one of three reasons,
either they're in pain, they're either low on energy or they're forced to retire. But what happens
at 65 or 70, if at the top of your game, we've got all the energy, all the capabilities, everything
you've ever had and more, I think it's going to be a boom for global GDP if we allow people to
continue working. I think we're going to enter a new period of life where you're starting your next
startup, you're getting your next university degree, you're exploring the world even more.
You know, we shut down people's earning capacity at 65. Why? What if they don't have to? I think
it's a huge economic window of opportunity that is coming. We obviously need to change the, oh, sorry.
I was going to say, Alexa, do you have a, go ahead, Peter, but I think Alexa also had a
separate question for you. But Peter, if you want to respond quickly, go ahead.
I was just going to say, we obviously have to change the political incentives right now and
that requires reform of a lot of programs that encourage people to stop even before 65. And
from a medical point of view, the technology to watch is biologics, because if we can figure out
a way to make people productive without the mental degradation, that obviously moves the metrics on
a lot of this. Alex, you had a question for Peter Z, too. Yeah, thank you. I mean, I think you touched
on it a little bit, but given, you know, that you talked about mass retirement and people also
involuntary retirement as well, and just thinking about, in your mind, kind of similar to what I
asked for your D, sort of, what do you hope to envision about this, as we're going to be living
longer? I think of all the technologies that are on the table that are about to be manifested,
you know, which is, I'm stepping into Peter D's world here a little bit. Keeping mental
acuity firm throughout your 60s and 70s is the single most important one, because if you can
do that, we get an extra group of people, roughly 70 million in the United States, who can be part
of whatever the future solution and struggles are, as opposed to being part of the problem.
And that is one of the very few technologies that I'm, like, watching very, very closely,
because it looks like it's right at the cusp, and we might be able to tip that
into usefulness within the next 24 months. And that's very good. Pushing hard. Pushing hard. Yeah.
Please, please, please continue. Thank you. I'm hearing some positivity here. Thanks so much,
Alexa. Next, I want to invite Diane Francis to our stage. Diane is from the National Post.
Diane, what question do you have for the debaters? Well, I think this is a marvelous
said debate. I really enjoyed it. Am I on mute? We can hear you. Go right ahead. Great. Great
debate. Here's my question. Human nature. Malevolent usage, lack of regulation, anti-regulation,
ignorance, and, and algorithms in the form of very dangerous religions and theologies.
What, you know, tech can't solve that, in fact, could be, and is being utilized to a bigger,
worse extent than before. I'd like you to comment on that as well. I'll jump in. And you're absolutely
right. There's no question that we're going to see malevolent use of AI. And it's my biggest
concern over the next one to five years. I think we're going to see the election be patient zero
in this situation. I think on the flip side, what's going on is what I would call loss of privacy
is going to be a countervailing force. It's hard to hide things more than ever before. So our,
you know, it's going to be a white hat, black hat race in terms of AI being used to help determine
malevolent AI's usage. And one question to ask everybody listening is, do you believe that
human nature is ultimately good or bad? I believe it is ultimately good. And I believe that an
entrepreneur, and this is my mission is to inspire and guide entrepreneurs to create a hopeful,
compelling, and abundant future for humanity. That's my massive transformative purpose. I say it
every morning. It drives all of my organizations and my companies. Entrepreneurs are individuals
who find problems and fix problems. And so, you know, the world's largest problems are the world's
biggest business opportunities. So when you see a problem, it's an entrepreneurial opportunity.
And I think we have more positive mind than entrepreneurs trying to find and slay and solve
problems than any time ever in human history. Peter Z, I think that question was also framed
at you, wasn't it, Diane? Absolutely. Sure. Let me give you the bad and then the good. First
the bad. We've got two major powers, the Russians and the Chinese, who are going to vanish from the
world over the course of the next generation or two. The question is whether it happens fast or
slow. And when countries feel they're in a corner and they have nothing to lose, the chances of
them doing something that they normally wouldn't consider, of course, rises very high. But let
me give you two examples of why I don't think that their decline is going to be catastrophic
for the rest of us. In the case of China, they don't command the top technology. They import
all the server time, they import all the chips that are necessary for them to access AI at scale.
And we're already in the early stages of the Biden administration and whoever follows Biden,
probably working to build a wall in that space. That limits the damage that can be done from a
strategic point of view. The Russians, back in 1987, when the KGB realized that the end was
nigh, and remember back in the late 80s, the KGB controlled the Politburo. They basically
had a meeting where they decided whether or not they wanted to spread nuclear weapons around
the world and salt the earth to destroy whatever the West might do next. And they decided the
answer was no. Even in the darkest hour for a lot of these countries, the desire to end the human
condition just doesn't exist. That doesn't mean they die quietly. That doesn't mean there aren't
problems. And we are still cleaning up the mess from the Soviet disintegration. But it does mean
there are limits. I am far more concerned about powerful individuals that maybe don't have restrictions
on their actions than I am about powerful countries that are getting desperate. And that's a different
sort of problem. Peter D, I think you've just come up with a great suggestion of another debate,
which is are people inherently good or bad? And if open to debate haven't done it yet,
we'll make sure they do. Great question, Diane. Do you have a follow-up?
No, I think that the organizational aptitude of human beings, unless it's taken over by tech,
and then I want to know who controls that fact, has been a constant historical disappointment.
Not just politically, but in terms of parenting, in terms of financial moving forward. This is a
huge issue. And putting the hands of powerful, increasingly powerful tech into people that
may not be good is something that I don't see talked enough about. There was a warning letter
about the AI chatbot. Nothing is moving. And any jurisdictions as to how to try and look at
what problems they've raised. So I just wondered, how optimistic are you, Peter? Because you're
my optimist. I am clear that these are really serious issues. I was just on stage in Saudi
and Riyadh at FII, heading their AI resolutions. And I think ultimately, artificial intelligence
has the ability to deliver extraordinary abundance for humanity. But talking about time frames,
as Peter Z said, this is the 10-year out time frame. There are going to be challenges and
issues in the near term. It's the one to five-year period that I'm concerned about navigating that
and allowing humanity to adjust to it. It is transformative change. And I think we humans
do not like change. We like waking up in the morning and knowing that the world was the same
as it was when we went to sleep, no matter what condition we're in. And we are in an accelerating
period of change. And it is creating more abundance, which is the topic here.
I think you can be a little bit more optimistic, Ms. Francis. We have a little bit more time than
I think most people think. If we have a problem with the chip production, which I think we're
going to, that buys us a few more years right there. And the fact that we're already having
these discussions, I mean, think about everything that is going on in the American Congress right
now. What a mess it is. They still found a time over the last several weeks to have an open session
about the ethics of artificial intelligence. So unlike previous technological revolutions,
where we come very late to the game, we're discussing this one as it unfolds. It doesn't
mean we're going to get it right on the first try, but we're at least not going into it blind.
So what I love about where this conversation is going is I almost hear like the two of you have
flipped a little bit your views. But let's bring on. Thank you so much, Diane, for your questions.
Let's bring on Andy Wang to the stage. Andy is the host of the podcast called Inspired Money.
Andy, welcome. Go ahead with your question. Thank you, Zanya. From an investor's perspective,
there are always growth opportunities. And at the same time, other areas that are contracting,
I'd like to hear from both Peter D. and Peter Z. Given your respective outlooks, what areas might
be beneficiaries of major trends over the next couple of decades? Are there companies, sectors,
or geographic regions where investors should look for opportunities?
Why don't I do Peter? Okay. So Andy, I'm investing my money, my venture fund money,
my time in two areas. Healthspan, healthcare, biotech. I think people would give an extraordinary
amount of their wealth to add 20 plus healthy years. And AI, I think those are the two largest
markets on the planet. And they're going to transform every single thing that we have and we do.
What's on the downside? Any company that is not an exponential organization that is born
more than 30 years ago are going to be outcompeted, outthought, and actually
massively disrupted what's coming down the pipe?
I think we need to focus on the scarcity in order to have the opportunity to turn it into
abundance. So number one, we need to diversify the semiconductor supply chain for the best chips.
Right now, we are incredibly fragile in that and anything breaks anywhere and the whole thing stops.
Building that will take years, but it's certainly within our technical capacity to do it and the
benefits I agree with Peter D are so outsized. It's totally worth our time. Second, if agriculture
goes the way I'm fearing, we need a drastic increase in production. The two ways to do that,
ironically, are both related to AI. One is automating farming to a degree so that each individual
plant gets individual attention. That requires AI and the tractor in order to put pesticides,
fertilizers, water, whatever it happens to be on a plant-by-plant basis. I call it digital
gardening. And the other aspect is hacking the genome of absolutely everything. We've been
moving in that direction for 30 years. 10 years ago, corn plants were 13 feet tall. Now they're
closer to five, but they generate three times as many kernels as the old system did. We need more
of that because if we can't provide broadcast agriculture for a place like Brazil, then places
like Illinois need at least double input to prevent a billion people from starving. This can
probably all be done in less than a decade, but chop chop. I agree 100% with you, Peter. It is,
we're seeing incredible, we're seeing a new species of rice that are able to have multiple
crops per planting. And for those who are concerned about GMO, listen, GMO has never killed anybody,
but I can guarantee you it's saved hundreds of millions of lives. I'm less interested in rice
soy, I think is the one that's going to be the real game changer because it's a protein plant
instead of a starch plant. We also have vertical farming and cultivated meats coming online. The
idea that we have to eat food the way it's always been produced, in the words grow an entire cow to
get access to meat, is going to be seen as insane in the future. Why not just grow the protein that
you need to make a good burger? That's a full topic for a whole other debate. I agree.
Thanks so much, Andy. Really grateful for your question. I've got a question for the two of you,
if I may, which is what's the one argument, and maybe we'll start with Peter Z. What's the one
argument from your colleague that you agree or disagree most with and why? Well, you know,
we actually don't disagree on what technology can do. We don't disagree really on what the
pace of technology can exchange or it can achieve. Our big disagreement is whether the system we're
in today is sustainable in the near-term future or not, or if we have to go through a bit of a
drop before we start back up. I would argue that demographics very clearly means that we're going
to have to take a breather here. I don't see a way around that. I don't see how manufacturing supply
chains that allow technology to apply to scale can continue this decade without a massive reorganization.
But on the rest of this, I'm with him. Excellent. Peter D. Yeah, I have to say,
I agree with much of what Peter Z has said here. The only thing I would say is it's a linear
extrapolation to believe that re-engineering the supply chain will take as long as it has,
because we've got capabilities coming from AI that are going to help us much more rapidly
re-engineer. We have even talked about quantum technologies coming down the pike that are going
to be impacting material science and biology in an extraordinary fashion. So I think if we were
going to try and re-replicate the old school system we've developed over the industrial
military complex of the last century, yeah, it will take many, many decades. But I think we have
shortcuts to be had based upon technology. Having said that, yes, there are supply chain issues.
We saw that during COVID, which can be put us in a precarious situation.
Let me give you an example to show you the promise in the peril. Textiles. Very unsexy
technology was the root of industrialization over a century ago. The model has always been the same
and up until the 90s in the United States, it was women in Appalachia with snowing machines.
Well, then we got NAFTA and the model moved to Mexico where the women with the sewing machines
were cheaper. And then we had the WTO where it moved to India and China where the women with
the sewing machines were cheaper. Then we had COVID and suddenly we didn't have clothes.
So some enterprising folks in North Carolina built some facilities that are two acres under
one roof that take raw cotton, clean it, turn it into thread and then yarn and then cloth and then
close. And the end product is cheaper than what you get out of Bangladesh per unit. And these places
have a staff of two. We had no idea we could do that until we were pushed and we found out we had
to. We're going to find things like that as we reindustrialize, but we're not going to know what
they are until they happen. But you're making the exact point I want to make. A company variant
3D that's here in Malibu is 3D printing clothing at an extraordinary rate in a lights out scenario.
And I think this is what entrepreneurs do. They demonetize and democratize. And I think anybody
listening to this, you know, there are massive opportunities to get ahead of the curve.
We've only got about two minutes left and I want to bring in what is a great question from one of
our audience, which is about the political system. And I want to give it to both of you.
Perhaps start with you, Peter Z, because you've given us the kind of almost apocalyptic view
in the short term. How has our political system contributed to accelerating abundance?
And is it a quip? Do you agree, first of all, and is it a quip to continue to do so? And then
I'll come back to you with the same question, Peter Z.
An understanding of where we are. We have a first past the post electoral system,
which means we have two very big tent parties with lots of factions. And the factions move
around over time as technology and demographics and geopolitics shift. And if you think in the
last 40 years, a lot's gone down, it would make sense for us to rearrange our system now.
This is the seventh time we have done this. We will get through it. Doesn't mean you're going
to like what it looks like on the other side. But at moments of transition like this, we get two
things. Personalities from the outside that just stir the pot, we've seen plenty of those,
and civil society takes over the governmental process because the government becomes
unable to do it itself. So that second piece, that's social media. That's the Elon Musk's
of the world. We might not like it every day, but you got to admit the situation's become a
lot more dynamic and there are a lot more decision makers out there when it comes to
economic and technological trends. It's loud. It's messy, but I'd argue it's taken us in the right
direction. Okay, Peter Dee. Zinnia, I count on entrepreneurship and capitalism to solve problems.
I never depend on the government. Period. End of statement. That was a beautiful brief answer.
Okay, we are outsourcing our governance is what I hear almost from both of you, actually.
Now's the time to bring it home with closing remarks. I'm going to go to you, Peter Dee, first.
You have the floor. Leave us with a reason to believe that yes is the answer to the question,
will the future be abundant? Okay, I built an AI model called Peterbot,
and I'm going to ask Peterbot to go ahead and respond to Peter Zion. Peterbot, would you?
Peter Zion's assertion that we are returning to a world resembling pre-World War Two
is overly pessimistic. The world today is vastly different with exponential technologies
driving progress. Let's focus on leveraging these capabilities to create a future that
surpasses any previous era. I understand Peter's concerns about a pricier and slower world,
but I see this as a temporary transition. I believe in the potential of technology to solve
global challenges. History shows that advancements have consistently improved our lives.
Let's dive into a few concrete examples. One, energy. We're witnessing a global shift towards
renewable energy sources like solar and wind, with costs plummeting and installations surging
worldwide. Two, transportation. Electric vehicles are gaining traction, with major automakers
investing heavily. Additionally, we're seeing advancements in autonomous vehicles, hyperloop
technology, and even flying taxis. Three, education. Online learning platforms are democratizing
education, allowing people worldwide to access high quality educational resources. Virtual reality
and augmented reality are transforming the learning experience. These examples illustrate
how innovation and technology are reshaping various sectors, creating opportunities for positive
change and a brighter future. You can access peterbot.ai. You can ask it questions about
its train of my books and my blogs. I believe in data-driven optimism, and the data has been
consistent up and to the right for the past century. Technology, which has made that transition,
is not slowing down. It's accelerating. Is there danger out there? Of course. Do I believe in
entrepreneurs and individuals to find and solve problems more than ever before? I think they're
the only ones who do. Is the world becoming more abundant? 100%. It is becoming abundant in terms
of access to all the fundamentals. Thank you, Peter. Thank you, Peter Bot. Now, Peter Z.,
you have the final word. You're a butthole, please. Tell us why you answer no to the question,
will the future be abundant? We don't have the redundancy yet. We don't have the resiliency yet.
And if things go with demographics in China and globalization the way I'm anticipating,
we don't have that in finance or industrial materials or manufacturing or above all agriculture.
And until we do, people are going to get left behind at scale. Hopefully, over the next 20 years,
we can work out the kinks of this transition and not lose a lot of what we've achieved in the last
century. But if you look back on the two millennia of history before 1900, that suggests that
unlocking that potential is a lot more difficult than it seems to us at the moment we're in now.
That was a very quick wrap up. Thank you so much, Peter. That's confidence.
No, that's, you know what? That's confidence. I like it. That concludes our debate. I'd really
like to both thank, I will say all three of you, Peter, Peter Barton, Peter, for showing up and
for approaching this debate with an open mind. We really appreciate you bringing the thoughtful
disagreement to the table and your being open to debate and equally agreeing on occasions.
So thank you for that. I'd also like to thank our guests, Alexa Mikhail, Diane Francis and Andy Wang
for contributing your probing questions. And particularly, I'd like to thank you, the audience,
for tuning in to this episode of Open to Debate. As a non-profit, our work to combat extreme
polarization through civil and respectful debate is generously funded by listeners like you,
the Rosencrantz Foundation's porters of open debate, open to debate. Open to debate is also
made possible by the by a generous grant from the Laura and Gary Lawdor Venture Philanthropy Fund.
Robert Rosencrantz is our chairman. Claire Conner is CEO. Leah Mathow is our chief content officer.
Alexis Pancrasi and Marlette Sandoval are our editorial producers and Gabriella Mayer is our
editorial and research manager. Andrew Lipson is head of production. Max Fulton is our production
coordinator and Damon Whitmer is our engineer. Gabrielle Yanicelli is our social media and
digital platforms coordinator. Raven Baker is events and operations manager and Rachel Kemp.
Kemp is our chief of staff. Our theme music is by Alex Klement. Klement, excuse me, and I am your
host, Xenia Wicket, and we look forward to seeing you next time. Thank you.
