of people started. Let's get going. Okay, sure. I want to start by acknowledging that
the ASCII set of excellence for the mathematical analysis of cellular systems sits on the land
of the Wurundjeri, Bunurong, Turbal, Yugara, Bedgal, Gadigal, Ganabal and Gambi people.
And we want to acknowledge their traditional ownership and the custodians of the land on
which we work and live. And I want to thank profoundly Marcus Koubert from Stanford to talk
to us today. Marcus wrote a paper in 2012 that I thought, and I know that he shows us something
with Francis Crick, Francis Crick called his autobiography, What Mad Pursuit. And I thought
the paper that Marcus published in 2012 was a mad pursuit. And in 2014, I had a Damascus moment
running through Hyde Park when I thought this was not insane, but insanely good. And we should
all try to do this. So I've read the paper re-read it. And I've read and re-read Marcus's
Scientific American article where he goes through trials and tribulations that gave rise to the
cell paper, which is just beautiful prose and a really nice tracing of this intellectual journey.
So Marcus has really been the sort of the person who fulfilled a dream that I think Francis Crick
and Sidney Brenner first voiced in 1967. And I feel hugely sort of privileged that we are able
to have him for this seminar, talk to us about his project on E. Coli modeling. And yes, Marcus,
I think with this without further ado, please entertain us. Thank you. And such a generous
introduction. It is true. I was thinking about Brenner in particular, much of the time when we
were doing that 2012 work. And I will tell you, Michael, like one of the all time highlights of
my career before we published that work, it was really important to me to talk to
Sidney Brenner about it. And so he grilled me for hours in La Jolla about this, about that
original 2012 paper. And then finally, he thought that we could move forward with it. And that was
something I'll never forget. So that's thanks for reminding me of that great moment.
Okay. What you're looking at here, I don't know if any of you are fans of the modern artist Andy
Goldsworthy, but he is a fantastic artist. And what he's famous for is kind of doing art in situ.
So he'll go for a hike, for example, you should you should Google him. In fact, if I would forgive
you for even Googling him during this talk, he'll do these incredible works of art in nature using
only what he can find. And, and they're very temporary, of course, there's a beautiful documentary
about it called Rivers and Tides, which I also highly recommend. It's really wonderful. Inspired
by that, I actually asked a friend of mine, who's an artist, that's Eric, who's in this picture,
I asked him to go into my lab and inspired by Andy Goldsworthy to take what he could find and
make us something that would that would be a way of thinking about wholesale modeling.
So what you're looking at is E. coli. And, but, but this is not photoshopped in any way. This is
just a photo of filter tip pipettes and conical vials and cryo vials and cryotubes, but at the
same time of computer cables and computer components. And so what this is supposed to be about is
bringing together experimental and computational components to build a model of E. coli. So that
is what this is about. That's what the art is about. That's also what the science is about.
That's what we're trying to do, bring together all of the data and all the things that are known
and use computational techniques and metaphors to be able to understand how E. coli works at a
system level. And as was noted, it was first articulated 50 years ago now by Francis Crick
and an uncredited, just an acknowledged Sydney Brenner calling for the complete solution of E.
coli. And there were a number of really interesting recommendations in this paper. It's truly
foundational. Almost none of them were followed, but it was visionary for its time. And I still
think a lot of those things we would benefit by doing an E. coli. So inspired by this and many
other things, we set out to do something like this. And what we're doing in particular is
trying to take all of the knowledge that has been generated about E. coli over many decades.
You're just seeing here, papers are rising over time. And we're trying to get all of those data.
Now, hundreds of labs, thousands of papers, millions of data points, the data are heterogeneous,
as you see here, just from the size of the data set in each paper. How do we bring that all together?
And the answer is we can encapsulate it in mathematics, right? So we can take the parameters,
you know, write these equations, let's say 4500 equations for every RNA in the cell,
that incorporates a set of parameters, we can do the same thing for the 1500 or so small molecules
that incorporates a whole another set of parameters, we can do that again for the proteins in the cell.
And now we've incorporated those link those parameters and can interact. Now, if we group
them by their functional categories and kind of apply our modeling special sauce, we have a way
of taking all of this knowledge as a whole and starting to look at what happens to overall
behaviors in the cell. That's that's the key goal of this project is to try to make enable
previously kind of impossible discoveries because we're looking at the system in its entire context.
And once we bring all those things together, we can start to run simulations that are
surprisingly lifelike. I've just been talking to my lab about this. Some of you will know the Turing
test where Alan Turing proposed that, you know, a robot basically if a human can talk to a robot
on the telephone and not recognize that they're talking to a robot, that starts to sound like
it's passing certain tests of intelligence. And as I show you as we stimulate these cells with
different environments and their gene expression shifts and sensors are triggered and they double
at different rates, we're starting to generate data and you'll see this towards the end of the talk
that is really starting to approach a remarkable situation in which I believe if a person came to
me now now rethinking Turing's test but in a in the context of a cell and molecular biologist,
if you were to come to me and ask me to see my data about E. coli, I think it's pretty likely
that I could come up with a data set that it would be extremely difficult for you to prove
was built not by artificial intelligence in this case, but also not by experiment by an
artificial life, by artificial simulation, right, that by a simulation that's simulating the life
cycle of E. coli at scale and with the full kind of a large amount of the actual biology
and chemistry that underpins it. So we reported in science just a couple, two, three years ago now,
I guess three years ago, the production of what we call the half cell model of E. coli. It accounts
for about half of the annotated genes and their functions. We are now busily working toward what
we call the E. coli whole cell modeling project which is we're hoping that in the next five years
we will have 90% of the annotated genes functionally represented in our model and be able to
perform a wide variety of interesting simulations on a wide variety of environments and be able
to make realistic simulations that can give us insight into how E. coli actually behaves.
And I'm just showing you a run through here. I could talk about any one of these stories.
I'm going to talk about two of them today, the testing key predictions here at the top,
and then the new functionality, the TR name metabolism. I'll talk about those two.
If anyone wants to talk about anything else, obviously more than happy to.
So first let's talk about complex phenotypes and we refer to this a little bit in our in our
science paper. So I'll use that as a springboard. And I want to of course thank all of the amazing
people who have worked on this. This is a I would say this project more than anything I've
ever been a part of requires an incredible amount of teamwork and discipline to be able to work
together as a team. And of course that's not necessarily an academic strength, right? So we've
really had to learn to be generous with each other and bring our strengths together and recognize
each other's gifts while also coming up with our individual contributions. It's been a real
challenge, but I've loved it and all the people working on this have been phenomenal.
Okay, so maybe just to get into this, I want to talk to you about a hierarchy of model predictions.
And it really goes back to my own history doing modeling, starting as a graduate student. You
know, when I started out in Bernard Paulson's lab, the greatest thing I could possibly imagine
was to be able to make a prediction with my model that was able to kind of recapitulate or
send back to me something that that I had withheld from the construction of the model. So previously
measured, you know, the data set existed, I just removed a little bit and I was able to then use
the model to kind of give me a very good guess of what I had taken out and what the values were.
So I call that validation here just for simplicity. We could talk about what these
different things mean, etc. But for now, just when I talk about it, that's what I'm thinking about.
When that first happened to me, I could not believe it. I was so excited. I thought it was the greatest
thing ever. And then, you know, that kept happening. And I started getting excited about doing my own
experiments, right? So I remember actually trying in San Diego to get somebody else to do an experiment
for me. And they said, why don't you do it yourself? And I thought, yeah, why don't I do it myself?
So I had to take, you know, an extra year just learning techniques, etc. But the thrill of
making a bona fide prediction with the model that I knew had not been tested before, and then doing
that experiment and finding something comparable and realistic was about as exciting as anything I
could imagine at the time. Great way to end my thesis. And I'll call that discovery, because
it's something now that we didn't know, right? And so in the case of wholesale modeling,
you know, I would say the wholesale model has now been compared to about as much data in a
by a lot of E. coli, right? As compared to about as much data as you could, you could reasonably
hope, right? We compared it to all kinds of different data sets. We'll continue doing it,
but it's remarkable to me how often the model gives us back a fairly good estimate of things that
were purposefully removing as benchmarks. Similarly, the model in much more limited,
but the model wholesale modeling has been used to predict kinetic parameters correctly that have
been tested later, predict protein degradation rates that have been tested later. And that's
been very exciting as well. So now I'm hungry for the top of the pyramid, which is to say,
I really want to be able to identify large scale complex phenomena that no one has seen before
and using the model as a guide. And so I tell my lab, this is of course, we don't set our sites
on prizes. We set our sites on just being useful to the world as much as we can. But I tell my
lab as a motivator, you know, there certainly are at least 10 more Nobel prizes hiding in E. coli,
right? So there are CRISPR was in E. coli, right? Like there are incredible insights just waiting
to be found if we have the ability to get after them. And so that's what I'm hoping that we identify
these like large scale interesting new insights into how E. coli works. And here I have to excuse
my dog who I think just recognized my daughter got home from school. Okay, so thinking about
these new paradigms, that's where I want to go right now. So even in that that first science
paper, there was a new paradigm that was identified. And it's kind of like all of them, you'll see as
we keep going here, it's kind of complicated. So I want you to take a look at this and just settle
into it a little bit. So if you're new to these this kind of modeling, so on the left, in red,
we have the expression of a gene. Okay, and it's six generations. So if you look at the protein
count, the upper left, you're looking at the protein count over time in a single simulated cell
over six generations. So each one of those red lines going up is a single generation. And what
happens is pretty much what you would expect for this R&B gene, the protein is being produced,
being produced, and then the cell divides. And so the protein count in the new daughter cell
is half. Okay, and then the protein is made and expressed and expressed over time. The cell divides
in half again, and it does this six times. If you look on the show, hopefully that one's somewhat
intuitive, right? And it's going in roughly an exponential growing in roughly exponentially.
And so we call this actually exponential expression of the protein. If you look down at the mRNA,
it's a little more surprising for people, although this is the kind of thing people have measured
in individual cells, the mRNA is much more oscillatory, like fluctuating, let's say, it's a much
lower count. And the reason for this is that the mRNA half-life is so short, it's just a few minutes,
right? Whereas the typical protein half-life in E. coli is many hours. And so you have something
that looks more stable on the top left, and something that looks much more random and stochastic
at the bottom left. None of this is maybe the key thing for you to know here, now that I've just
explained what I see when I look at this, is that none of it's really surprising, right? This is
actually what you're seeing on the left is exactly what I expected to see for all the genes. And it
is what I see for many of the genes. But I see for most of the genes, and this is was the probably
the single biggest surprise for our first round of simulations, what I see for most of the genes
looks more like what you see on the right. And let's look at the right bottom for a second. So here
over six generations pass, and only one RNA, mRNA is produced from this gene, right? It's produced
only once in six generations, a very low expression. But when this happens in a single cell, that still
means that a discrete event has happened. It's not that every cell is producing 0.0007 of an mRNA,
right? Like this cell is producing one of these mRNAs at this time in this moment.
And as a result, when it is expressed, now go up to the upper right, when it is expressed, there's
this burst, not a burst. Sometimes people in physics talk about a burst as being something that
involves regulation. So don't think about it that way. But there's there's just a sudden increase
in expression, of course, because you've gone from zero to one mRNA. So now translation can occur
and about 150 proteins are made from this single transcript before it decays. And then what happens
after that is every time now that the cell divides, each daughter gets half. So you're looking at these
little decreasing height stairs going down, right? Because the cell divides, and there's half of the
protein, and then it divides again because nothing new is being produced, and it divides again. And so
it goes down and stepwise in this really interesting fashion.
So when I saw that for just one gene, I was scratching my head over it, we call it now
subgenerational for exactly the reasons I just explained, one transcript, many generations.
But it turns out here, what I'm showing you is a plot of all the genes, okay, and they're ordered by
how often they're synthesized. And the red ones, it's kind of the same as here, the red ones are
exponential, and you can see that they're about a third of the genes are expressed exponentially.
So it's not that they're uncommon. But look at this, 60% of the genes are being expressed less
than once per generation at the mRNA level. Now, it's even true that there's a significant fraction
for which there's no protein sometimes. And it's even the case, if you want to get even crazier
and more mysterious, it's even the case that some of those proteins are essential, and yet
they are not always present in the cell. And the cell can survive that. I could talk about this all
day. Unfortunately, there's no time. It's really fascinating to think what the functions are of
these subgenerational genes. Maybe I'll take a second on that. Because when you look at what
these things are doing, like a very large fraction of, for example, the antibiotic resistance genes
are subgenerationally expressed. And for me, this was the biggest clue of what was going on,
which we kind of use a bet hedging metaphor. Or sometimes I just think about it as E. coli
suitcase. You know, you'll see other people talk about E. coli as this incredible computer,
this incredible metabolic engineer, I think of it for these purposes as a suitcase. It can only hold
a certain amount, right? So it can't hold all of the expression of all the genes it would need
to be ready for everything. And so I think the suitcase analogy is great, because if you're going
to, let's say that you're going on a vacation, but you don't know where, right? How do you do that?
How do you respond to that? Because you can't fit your skis and your ski boots in the same suitcase
as your surfboard. And similarly, what happens is E. coli can't fit resistance to every single
antibiotic, plus the ability to respond to carbon sources that it doesn't see that often,
plus the, you know, these other abilities that it needs, it can't fit them all in that one little
bacterial sized suitcase. And so as a result, what happens is instead of everyone in the colony
being ready for anything and everything, everybody in the colony, let's say is ready for one thing
or some small number of things. And that way, let's say that there's a whole colony. And one of them
just had that expression event. They are now resistant to some antibiotic. Okay. So the antibiotic
comes through, everybody dies, right? Then boom, divides, divides, the amount, the concentration
in each starts to reduce, right? Divides, divides, divides. Now, none of these cells have an appreciable
amount of the protein left, but there's been another expression event. And now this one has it.
Do you see? So the colony retains the ability to respond to everything while each individual
has a much more reduced ability to respond to changes in the environment.
That's how we interpret these data, the subgenerational data. It's a way of having
bed hedging and enabling cells at the colony level to be ready for anything.
So one of the fun things about what we do these days is we have this partnership with Ecosyke.
And so if you ever want to look at kind of exponential or subgenerational genes, every
gene in E. coli now, there's a modeling tab. If you look just right in the middle of this
slide, there's a modeling tab that you can click and it will tell you the count or concentration
per cell. So you can actually start to get an idea of and you can compare that to experimental data.
We're starting to make this automatic pipeline where Ecosyke changes are immediately read by
the model and incorporated and model predictions are automatically returned back to Ecosyke itself
so that people can benefit from the simulations and not just have to know the code and all that stuff.
Subgenerational sounds like someone else from the family is coming home. In fact,
I think I'm going to take one second to close these doors. Let me write.
So as I was saying, it's a fun prediction. And like I said, this is one of these cases where
it's kind of a paradigm shift. But is it actually correct? Right? Does it mean anything? And the
answer is, you know, we have to find out by testing. So if you look at this slide, what you're seeing
is three genes, these three columns, the three leftmost columns, LAGZ, GCFE, and BAES, those are
all genes that the model predicts should be subgenerationally expressed. And then on the
right there is HUB A, which is a gene that we would predict to be exponentially expressed. And so
you can see these first three rows, those are simulations showing, look at the second and
third one, right? They're showing the expression of an mRNA. And then they're showing the protein
that results in that characteristic like downward staircase that happens after as the protein is
diluted out. Now we actually made those constructs in chromosome fusions to Mvenous. And so you can
look here at the colony level, which is kind of fun. So you see these little islands of expression,
which is what you would expect to see in the case of a subgenerational gene expression. And HUB A,
of course, everything has the same intensity, the same expression. But it gets more exciting here
when you can look in the microfluidic domain. So here we've got cells at the bottom, you can see
all of the cells, they're expressing a constitutive plasmid here at the top is laxium venus. And so
this is a mother machine, which is to say they grow in these troughs. So you can see one cell for
a long period of time. And if you're looking, you should be able to see these little flashes like
that of subgenerational expression. So you can actually watch these things because unlike a colony
where things get crowded and it's hard to track things, here in the mother machine, you can watch,
you can quantify, you can segment the image pretty easily. And so that's really exciting.
I'm just seeing a Q&A. Do real observations update the model parameters?
Yes. So I would say real observations are used in most cases, but you'll see a couple of cases
where we have to go forward. So I'll talk to you about that in a minute. So the answer is yes and
no to that. Okay. So back to the mother machine. Hopefully you saw some of those flickers.
We can take them. Here's that in the middle. So on the left is our prediction, which I already
showed you. In the middle, you can see that mother machine. And on the, for each time point,
you have the constitutive reporter at the left and M venus at the right. And you should see that
little flicker in the M venus channel, which we can quantify over time. And to me, this is
why I do science, right? So here's the prediction on the left. There you see the characteristic
downward staircase experimentally in an individual cell at the right. And to me, that's the stuff
dreams are made of. And I'll just say, maybe to go back to that for a minute, we're now starting
to look at this in operons. We have a number of things we're thinking about. We've made several
constructs. I love to work with my own hands in the lab during the summer. So I've actually made
one of these constructs, which was exciting. So yeah, that's a story that's, that's on its way and
in progress. So that's a paradigm shift where we have some data. I wanted to show you that as
just something that came out of something you might have seen if you saw this science paper.
Now I'm going to show you something that was just published earlier this year. It's one of the most
exciting things I think that's come out of the lab, but it's all computational. In fact, I'm
desperate. We just hired two new experimentalists. And one of our goals is to try to figure out better
ways to try to test what's coming out kind of of this really interesting work. I have to thank
Hijo Choi here. She did almost everything herself and it has truly been amazing to watch. She is
incredible at kind of detangling very complex mechanisms. So I talked to you about Francis
Crick. Now I'm going to talk to you about another 40 year old paper. In this case, it's a 40 year
old controversy. So this paper was published and there are surprisingly few follow-ups,
really almost no follow-ups to this paper, even though it makes kind of an astounding assertion.
So they actually went in and measured individual amino acid tRNAs and how fast they turned over.
And the thing that was really important was they, they would took kind of all the rate,
they gathered all the rates that people had measured, and then they compared it to what they
thought E. coli would need to grow and divide. And they made this astounding assertion in their paper
at the very end, which I've highlighted here. Basically they say that their estimates of what
would be required in vivo is much, much higher than anything that had been measured in vitro.
So they basically are asserting here that the in vivo measurements, that the in vitro measurements
are not anywhere close to the in vivo measurements for whatever reason. 40 years ago. And nobody
really was able to challenge that because it's just very difficult to measure these activities
at all and not even to mention in vivo. But what's kind of incredible about a model like
the wholesale model, often we just talk about predictions, but what's really cool here is that
we can actually start to show, start to think about simulating the in vivo context, right?
We have a model of the in vivo context, so why not use it? Why not try to figure out what those
in vivo rates should be and then go back and compare them to these in vitro measurements.
So that's what we did. Hijo went in and updated our model in a number of ways. The most important
way here that I want you to see is that it's now code on specific. That turns out to be important
later. This is kind of how we do all of our work. We find places in the model that previously were
low detail and we make them high detail. And we go look at all the data that's needed.
So the new model is much better in a variety of ways. It gives you this idea of amino isolated
versus unamino isolated tRNAs. It can tell you the difference of code on usage has a number
of really interesting advantages over the original model. And so when we went to try the
Goldman-Jackabowski assertion, all we did was we took our original model that didn't include all of
the turnover rates related to tRNA synthetase and then we added all those rates and we wanted to
see if there was any difference in the simulated doubling time. And you can see there's a huge
difference. So on the left in black, you can see the actual experimental measurement,
44 minutes. Then you can see what the previous model was doing kind of around the high 40s.
And then you can see what happens when we add the in vitro measurements. It quickly goes,
you know, more than three-fold higher than me. So from my perspective, this is theory-based
evidence that the data or that their assertion is correct. And we can show furthermore that this
is related to the tRNAs specifically into there, those k-cats, because we can look at the terms
that guide the amino isolation rate. And if you just take the, you know, this is the full equation,
if you take those three terms and you just assume that they're at their highest rate,
basically the rate of amino isolation is going to be primarily set either by the enzyme concentration
or the k-cat. And so this is then where we can start looking at other data. If you look at the
proteome, which was not used to parameterize the model, if you look at the proteome, I've highlighted
all the tRNA synthetases in purple, you can see that the measured and the simulated
amount of the tRNA synthetases is remarkably, it's even more consistent than most of the proteome.
So that would suggest that we're getting the enzyme concentrations right by and large.
And more importantly, even this now is the orange is the distribution that has been obtained from
single cell imaging experiments. And so you can even get a distribution
of what's going on with these synthetases. And even that is similar to what's being simulated.
So this is very, very close. And so we are assuming that those enzyme concentrations are correct,
which means that it's the k-cats that are the problem. And I'll just show you here, this is
more on the validation and benchmarking side. But you can kind of see that we then, okay,
well, actually, let me take a step back. So based on this information and this information,
we decided to go and determine what we thought the in vivo k-cats should be. So this goes back to
the question in the Q&A. We decided to figure out what those should be. And in doing that,
it sounds like my dog is desperate to get back in. So once we made those predictions,
we could take the resulting model, once we had predicted these new k-cat values, and see how well
it was able to hit our typical validation benchmarks. And so in this case,
it's the doubling time. Our current model actually is a little bit better than the previous model
at hitting the doubling time benchmark. Although there's a significant amount of randomness,
I wouldn't put a lot of weight on that. Proteome looks about the same as the old model. The flux
zone data that we compare to the agreement is about the same as the old model. tRNA abundances,
we couldn't compare to before. Now we can. We use those in figuring out the model. So that's not
too surprising, but everything looks good. It looks like it's consistent with a lot of our
benchmarks. So that was a basis on which we can start to run some more interesting simulations.
You can actually look at the tRNA amino isolation in much more detail. There are several data sets,
and none of them are very well consistent. If you look here, those are all the different colors,
the reds and yellows and greens and blues. The model distributions are all in purple,
and you can see we probably agree more with the entirety of the data, which again was not used
as to build the model in any way. We're probably more consistent with all these data than any
data set is with any of the others. So kind of a remarkable little figure here, but not really
what the story is about. It's just to tell you, we have some confidence that this model is going
to give us interesting information about to get into Goldman and Jacobowski's work a little bit.
And so now what we've done here, and this is the springboard, the real springboard for what we're
about to do, we could go in and what you're looking at in gray is the range of all the
in vitro measurements. And you can see specifics about the triangle is exactly where
Jacobowski and Goldman thought that the lower limit had to occur. The blue is our estimates,
our in vivo estimates, and the values we used in building the model. So you can kind of look at
all these interesting things. And I think it's pretty fascinating to go into actually why these
different things are, you know, why there's a difference. What's the mechanism of the difference?
What is it that causes, you know, an in vitro? If there was, you know, we can kind of look at
this counterfactual. What if the value was the K cat that had been measured in vitro? What does that
actually do to the cell? I've highlighted two stories here. I'll refer you to the paper, which is
in nucleic acids research earlier this year for the first study, the histidine study. I'm just
going to focus on arginine because that's my favorite one. And I think about it all the time.
So if you look over here, first of all, just take a look at that green box around ARG RS,
the synth synthetase related to arginine amino isolation. And you can see that there's somewhat
over an order of magnitude between what Jacobowski and Goldman thought was the lower limit. And
there's even more if you look at the, the in vitro measurements. So there's a pretty significant
difference between what the model says and what, what had been measured previously. And so we can,
we can look, we can actually take, run two sets of simulations, one with our estimate and one with
the in vitro measurement. And that is in fact what we're going to do. So the gray box, the gray
and the leftmost is always going to be what we're calling like the wild type simulations,
which means with the optimized in vivo hypothesized parameter for the K cap,
the purple is all going to be with the in vitro measurement. Okay. And so what you're looking
at here is that in with the model with the optimized parameters, the gray one, it's just
running at that doubling time and it's pretty much staying there. Whereas if you change it to the
in vitro, in this case, immediately, the doubling time starts to go up and it continues going up.
So it's not really stable. And you can see that at some point it hits three hours. And that's when
we automatically halt our simulations. So these, these, these guys are failing. And they're failing
after about nine or 10 generations, but you can see the impact right away. And the beauty of a
wholesale model like this and something by the way that you would never see if you just did this all
with AI is that you can go deeply into the mechanism. And we call that deep curation,
just kind of by way of connection to deep learning, right? So you're, you're learning
through different layers, you're peeling back layers, right? You're looking at interactions
between interactions. And so here we're looking at the DNA, the major cell components, the DNA,
the RNA and the protein. When do those things gas out? And again, look first of all at the left,
normally it should just grow exponentially and then double, you know, divide in half and grow
again and divide in half. So what you see is that, you know, on the bottom, the total dry weight is
what we knew before, you're totally failing at about generation 12. That's that green line.
And if you look at the top or DNA and RNA, they're also RNA is failing at 12, DNA is failing at 11,
protein is failing at nine. So that's the earliest thing to fail. It shouldn't be surprising because
we know that these tRNAs are involved in translation. So of course, that's where we would expect to see
something happening, right? In translation. So now we're going to dig back a little further.
Okay, well, since it's translation, why don't we just go straight for the gusto and look at
amino isolation. And sure enough, you see that whereas the amino isolation of all the other
tRNAs is close to 100%, that arginine is down close to 0%. And that was fascinating to us because
with the adjustment we were making, we were expecting something at about 80%. So this was our
first clue, like we knew we had knocked things down, but we definitely had not knocked them down
that much. So what was going on with arginine? And so now we peel back another layer of the onion.
We can go and say, okay, well, if the amino isolation isn't working, why don't we look at the
amino isolation reaction and see what's going on with the substrates and products.
And so what you see, if we look at the member, again, the gray is that the optimized parameters,
the purple or the blue, bluish-purplish is the model, the in vitro, the in vitro ones.
And so you can see argrs, that has not changed much, arginine tRNAs is about at the same amount,
ATP is about at the same amount, but arginine itself is down a lot, like a whole lot.
That was also not expected, and I have these big arrows because we're on Zoom,
I just want you to be able to see what I'm talking about. So then we can actually say, okay, well,
why wasn't arginine there? We can look at this metabolic pathway, we can look at the fluxes
through all the steps in the pathway. And so the first step starts with glutamate and you start,
and so you've got a concentration of glutamate, doesn't look like anything's wrong there because
nothing happens really to tank it out until generation 19. You can look all the way down at
arginine and sure enough, that has a major perturbation at nine, ignore everything after 14,
those are just symptoms of a dying cell. But arginine is out at nine, you go upstream in the
pathway upstream, citrulline is still down at nine, and then you get to the n-acetyltransfer
reaction, catalyzed by arg-a. That flux, if you look kind of second from the left, that flux tanks
out at the ninth generation. And if you go to look at the expression of the synthase, arg-a itself,
pretty much the first step in the pathway, it is also reduced to essentially zero by nine,
by generation nine. Unexpected, you can see the gray there, none of that happens in what we're
calling the wild type version of the model. So this was kind of a big new piece of the puzzle.
If we then go to look at arg-a expression, now peeling another layer down, you can see that the
hexamer is gone at nine, sure enough, no complexation happens, no monomer is being made, no monomer is
degraded, because there's no monomer there, synthesis is not happening, so clearly arg-a
expression has been abrogated in a major way. Now we can do something, and this is where I'm
starting to talk to you about these Turing tests. Everything I'm telling you is just simulations
here. These are just simulations, but they're starting to really, I hope you see, take on a
life of their own. And so we decided to do another experiment that's quite complicated to do experimentally,
and it's even not that easy in a simulation, but you can do it, and the data looks remarkably similar
to what you would see in terms of just the look and feel. So now we're doing a ribosome profiling
experiment. We want to see where pausing in translation occurs on the arg-a transcript.
And so if we look on the left, that's what the optimized Kcat, the in vivo Kcat, you can see
there's essentially, especially for those arginine codons that I'm showing you, there's essentially
no pausing. And if you look in the middle there, there's a uniform distribution that's saying,
essentially, the pausing is happening equally everywhere. Whereas if you use that in vitro
measurement, boom, look at CGG, all of a sudden you have 90.4% of the time you have stalling at a
CGG codon, which is a rare arginine codon. And that turned out to be incredibly interesting,
because if you now look at the arg-a codon sequence, what you can see is that in fact, there are
premature terminations at the first CGG that occurs, 13.5% of the time there's a premature
termination at CGG. And then there's something even more exciting. There is a tandem codon repeat
of this rare codon, CGG, CGG, 77% of the time it stalls there. And there are CGGs after some
people have asked me, but at that point, almost everything has already fallen off.
So the presence of this dual rare codon was so interesting to me because here at Stanford,
one of my idols is Charlie Nofsky, who discovered attenuation in E. coli many decades ago.
And attenuation is a fancy way of regulating amino acid biosynthesis at the translation level.
And I don't have time to tell you exactly all the mechanism, fascinating as it is, it involves
these kind of alternative hairpins. But the big thing I want you to see, if you look down kind
of at the lower right in blue, you'll see UGG, UGG, you'll see the two again, a pair of, uh-oh,
one second, it's asking for hopefully that, can everybody see this?
Hopefully you can see it. Stop me if you can't see it. So again, two tandem codon,
is regulating whether or not tryptophan gets expressed, which is fascinating.
So immediately I started thinking about new modes of regulation via tandem codon repeats.
So we looked at the whole, and now I see I've got a hurry, but I'm getting close to the end here.
So we looked at the whole set of codons. We looked at all the proteins that in particular
had tandem rare arginine codons, and there are several, but not that many, but there are several.
And then we could actually look at all these different groups and we could say, okay, how
is the expression changed for different proteins depending on what codons are in their sequence?
And what we found was, now look at this blue arrow again, the proteins with CGG, CGG are
significantly and about 20-fold reduced in expression from wild type, or from proteins
that don't have any arginine codons, and none of the other groups are significantly different,
even though they might look a little bit different in the full change. They're not
calculated as having significance. So this means clearly that the expression of those proteins,
and I should just say none of this model, none of this was explicitly coded in the model. This
is all emergent. Everything you're seeing here is emergent. So then we can do this other experiment
suggested by our reviewer, who I would love to thank for that if they're out there.
What if we replace CGG with a more common codon? We can do that fairly easily in the model. So
that's a difficult experiment to do, but we can do it. And what we find is that sure enough,
when you replace CGG, you rescue the phenotype. So you rescue the phenotype,
and now you are able to produce arginine at normal levels, or closer to normal levels.
So what I've shown you here, hopefully, is that you can see that I'm kind of trying to trace this
incredibly complicated system where you're going from an amino-isolation rate and the fraction
of amino-isolated tRNAs. I'm showing you if you look at that third row down, like specific places
where pausing is occurring on a transcript, which is then translating to how much is produced
from that transcript, the number of hexamers, the number of the flux through a reaction,
the resulting concentration of arginine, and what that all means in terms of ribosome termination,
et cetera, et cetera, and all the way down then to protein mass and eventually cell growth.
What's really cool about this is that it establishes, I should say, an untested,
unverified positive feedback loop in which ribosomal pausing on tandem CGG codons appears
to have a regulatory impact on the concentration of arginine, and this is very fun in its own right,
and I would love to hear anybody's thoughts on this because it seems to introduce a positive
feedback loop. I'm just going to get the light here real quick.
It seems to introduce a positive feedback loop that works together with the multiple negative
feedback regulation that is already known in arginine, and for some of you out there,
you might know that this presence of what's called paradoxical feedback can have some
very interesting properties as far as what that means for control of the concentration
of this critically important amino acid. With that, I'll just end here the E. coli
wholesale modeling project. Again, we're trying to get 90% of the annotated genes in the next five
years. We were just funded by the Sloan Foundation to do this, and I'm absolutely thrilled about it.
We have several other studies that have come out, and one on growth rate control that came out last
year. This antibiotics one is now published in computational biology. The one on the left with
operon structure is now in the second phase of review, and I expect that it'll be accepted
in the next month at the latest. We're starting to really put out interesting stories, and I'll
just refer you only to the bottom right here where we're simulating whole colonies and their
responses to antibiotics. Again, thinking about Turing's test, I've worked with live cell imaging
for a long time, and when I saw this colony, I thought, wow, this looks real. I'm starting to
feel like we're getting to a point where this system feels like a real system, and I've been
thinking a lot about what artificial intelligence means and what artificial life means, what the
benefits and advantages of each are, but I think artificial life had a really interesting history
many decades ago. I'm wondering if it's time to reboot and reinvigorate that field as we're starting
to get to simulations that really do start feeling like artificial life, and what can they tell us
in comparison with, but also in contrast with what artificial intelligence-based methods, which
are also incredibly powerful and exciting, can do. I'm very excited about that. We have a whole plan
with all these things we want to do. I would love it. If anyone wants to join me,
I would love it. We're hoping that people will come take some of these rows on. I'd be happy to
share our plans with anybody, not just our code, which is all available, all our simulations,
but also literally our plans, because if anybody wants to do something, we've hosted people and
stuff like that, we'd love to help. With that, I want to thank the lab. They're amazing.
Iran up there, second from the right, is now just started as a new professor at the University of
Connecticut. He's doing great. Couldn't do it without him. Many thanks to them and also to our
funders who really have been amazing. It's one thing to have a mad pursuit, and it's another
thing to have somebody who's willing to pour some money into that craziness. I'm very thankful to
them for taking a chance on a long shot. With that, I'm happy to take any questions.
Thank you so much, Markus. I can't start my video, because I think you're the host now.
So if people, please put any questions in the Q&A. Thank you so much. It was just a talk where
I hosted it between smiling from ear to ear and just being open mouth at the results we can achieve.
So let me ask you a first question is, starting with your last part of the talk,
Jason Chin has done this amazing, astonishing work on reprogramming genetic codes.
In principle, your model should now be able to adapt his esoteric genetic codes and predict
life. Is that right? That is absolutely fascinating. I think he had floated it to us one time, and we
are thinking a lot about it. So everything so far with the E. Coli Wholesale Modeling Project has
essentially been, we think about it as basic science, right? So we're just trying to figure out
how the cell works. But I have a couple of students now who really want to think about
engineering and design. And so they are starting to add the software infrastructure for us to be
able to make larger, systemic kind of engineered changes. And so yes, I would love to be able to
do and show something like that. Yeah, I love that. That's a great comment. And thanks for the kind
words. Oh no, it's easy to praise that talk. Any other questions? Ben, look, Ben Hess, do you
want to read them out? You can see them yourself, I think. Sure. So Ben Hess is asking, given sub
cellular expression, how do you choose a starting state for a Wholesale simulation? Is there something
to be learned by starting the simulation from different states? Great question. So just like
you'd be familiar with in other simulations, we run it out for several divisions. So we have a
this whole initialization routine that brings in all of the experimental data and kind of
recalculates everything. That said, it is interesting to start the simulation from
different states. And more interesting from my point of view, we just recently added this feature
where now kind of mid simulation, you can change. So for those of you who are interested in like
causality theory or whatever, we're able to now do something with the model that you would never
be able to do experimentally. But that's so fascinating, which is to actually run a counterfactual,
where you have a simulation that you run for eight hours or whatever, but at four hours you
put it in a different trajectory and you can see exactly what happens with that same cell, the same
seeds, same number of every internal molecule, all the changes will happen from that instant. And so
yes, there's definitely something to be learned from doing that. I am fascinated with causality
theory right now. I know nothing about it. I feel like I would love to figure out ways.
Maybe just to add this, I told my lab this lately, I said, we're at an embarrassing
time right now because even though Hijo did all of that stuff and it was amazing,
maybe the dirty secret of that work is that it took her a long time. So we've gotten to a point
where it's just as difficult to figure out the story on our simulations as it might be to do it
experimentally. That shouldn't be the case. And actually, this is somewhere where I think Michael
potentially has a lot to add or anybody who does kind of data analysis, parameter estimation, these
kinds of analysis type stuff, which is not our primary expertise, because what we need now desperately
is a way to analyze our simulations much more rapidly so that we see that huge pathway that
took us months to figure out so that we see it much faster. That's the limiting step. And it's
still the limiting step for a lot of experiments. So long answer, Ben, but I love the question.
Okay, so Malcolm, have you used your models to understand how energy draining futile
cycles function in cells? The answer to that is interesting. And here I go straight to
Sydney Brenner. So when I showed Sydney Brenner that we had a model of Michael Plasma in 2012,
he immediately started thinking of ways to confound me by just asking me questions about the
simulations based on things he knew about E. Coli that weren't widely known. And the very first
thing he asked me was, how do you account for all the energy usage in the cell? And I said, well,
it turns out that we can account for production, but like very little of the utilization. And he,
this was I think the first time he took me seriously because he said, wow, that is exactly,
that's what I agree with. I think most of it is, you know, wasting, like through futile cycles or
other energy wasting. So it was the first time I started thinking about how hot when we're growing
cells in a batch culture, you know, we're typically increasing the heat to raise the temperature of
the culture. But, but I think in industrial applications, they're actually also cooling
down because they are generating heat in mass. Anyway, I don't know the answers to all those
things, but, but it is fascinating. So I thought I'd just pass that down. Then let's see. Mark
Wilkins, with your recent models, are you starting to consider interactions between cells? Yes. So
what you saw in the last slide was the first ever whole colony models where you have a colony of
a thousand cells, they are all in that case interacting through the small molecules that
they produce. But, but we haven't done much with intercell signaling, we haven't done much with
they, they push each other, but they don't really signal to each other by pushing or any or by
interacting. So that's a big thing I want to do. It's kind of in those remaining, you know, 30,
35% of the genes left that we have to include. And I'd love one day, you know, I don't know if
you're familiar with girl Sewell's work where he shows that bacteria can even propagate action
potentials in a biofilm. That just blows my mind. So I would love to be able to simulate
action potentials in a biofilm machine. But that's probably some years in the future.
Okay, Carlos Lopez from Altos Labs. Oh, interesting. So here we are within just a few mile radius.
Regarding the RNA observations from your models, many cells simply do not have mRNA for a given gene.
Does that mean we have to revisit how we are collecting single cell RNA seek data? Usually
we just throw away the zero reads. Yes, absolutely we do. In bacteria, it's complicated anyway,
right? Because you have all the typically in a single cell, this is in a different side of my
lab. But you know, we were the first to do to come up with a technique in mammalian cells,
where in the same cell, you could look at signaling molecule dynamics over time and also get the RNA
seek that goes with it. But even in a mammalian cell, you're getting 10 to 15% of the real RNA
because of the dropout. If you were to count all of the mRNAs of every gene in a cell, in a bacterial
cell at a given time, that would probably be somewhere around 3,000 to 4,000 total, total.
And so, so right, let's say you're getting 10% of that or 15% of that, that's just, you know,
it's not even 500 copies, it's going to give you a very skewed idea of what's going on, not to mention
the fact that every individual cell is going to look different. So that's, that's fascinating. I'll
tell you one other thing. I have a whole story about this, but in our operon paper that should be
coming out in just a few months in cell systems. One thing we discovered was through means, which I
won't tell you, we discovered that the RNA seek analysis tools also have a major limitation.
And the limitation is that they tend to throw out all genes less than 100 base pairs long.
And so the model, once the operons were included, the model was a better predictor
of especially short genes expression than the data with the current analysis tools. So,
so anyway, it just goes to show how when you include everything, like we throw away a lot,
and some of it is absolutely wrong to throw away. And in, and definitely the zero reads
is going to be wrong, especially in the single cell. And then the other thing that's going to be
wrong is just short genes, which, which we actually went back to the raw data sets to show that these
genes were being expressed at the levels that were roughly equal to what the model was predicting
based on the operon expression, but not equal to what the analysis was giving you, which was zero.
So, the subgenerational expression is a real eye opener for me. I had not, not seen that.
Does that, so in the boring question is, does that affect how you initialize the cell states?
Do you really matter? Does that matter? And the more interesting question is,
how in your bed hedging approach, how much variability would cells have? And would there
always be one cell in a population that would be able to persist or survive?
Yeah. It depends on the size of the colony, and it also depends on the gene. So every gene has a
different probability of being expressed in the model. In our model, it's very stochastic. So we,
we don't determine, even though I showed you ODEs, not everything is an ODEs. So in our case,
we decided that expression was best represented in a probabilistic or stochastic way. And so every
gene has a probability of being expressed. And that's what leads to its expression across,
let's say, a colony. Now, that said, there's a lot of regulation, some of which we know,
but haven't included another, of course, which we, we don't know, but at least we know that we don't
know. We have, we have an idea that there's stuff that people haven't discovered yet. So
my assumption is that, that once a cell colony is kind of perturbed into a new environment,
what happens is that there's feedback and regulation that then makes more cells able to
thrive in that environment. So there's going to be a little bit of feedback that's also not included.
But I think overall, what you see is just that these probabilities are giving you kind of this
stochastic expression, which can, which can kind of capture it. Maybe one other thing I'll tell
you that's pretty interesting is this explains, we had somebody visiting who came and gave a talk and
they weren't familiar with the simulation work, but they did a lot of work with antibiotics.
This was Minsu Kim at Emory University. And what he had shown in his work that's fascinating is,
is exactly what, what this model would predict. But what can be difficult to interpret if you
don't have it, which is that he grew a lot of cells. He grew a lot of colonies in different
wells of a plate. And then he would treat them with antibiotics and maybe one well of the plate
would still grow, right? And it's because they had expressed that subgenerational gene.
But he was assuming that maybe that cell had some resistance. So then he would grow out the cell
and plot, plate it again in 96 wells, and then he would do the same. And of course,
exactly what subgenerational would predict. Again, all the wells died except for one,
but a different one, of course, but they all came from those same cells that previously had survived.
So it's, so yeah, I think there's a lot now behind this idea that, that bed hedging is a real thing
and that, but most people I would say don't know the mechanism.
So one last question is to wrap up and also to give us ammunition when we talk to funders
and colleagues. Is now the state where for E. coli in silico biology is more closely
aligned to in vivo biology than in vitro biology is?
Right. This is an interesting question. I would say, maybe I'll say a couple of things about this,
because I think it's really great. I tell when, when I give talks, especially when I'm talking
to experimentalists, what I often say is, you know, building a model is like playing two truths
and a lie, that old game from being a teenager, right? Two truths and a lie, meaning that, you
know, a lot of what goes in there is correct, but some of it is not correct. And you don't know
a priori what's correct. You know, you're making assumptions. So you know that those aren't completely
correct. And I think experimentalists intuitively understand that a model has
some truths and some lie based in, based in it, right? But what's harder for them to wrap
their head around, but I think which is underscored by this tRNA study is that gathering data,
especially in vitro data, is also playing two truths and a lie. It's still, you're still relying
on unreliable narrators. And so I tell my students in class, you know, my favorite riddle is, I don't
know if you've seen this riddle with the two parrots, right? And they're, each parrot is in front
of a door and behind one door is treasure behind, beyond your wildest dreams. And behind the other
door is certain horrible death. And one of the parrots always tells the truth. And the other
parrot always lies. Okay. And somehow you have to figure out from those parrots, you're allowed
to ask one question, you have to figure out which door you should go through. Now, what I love about
this problem is that there is an answer, right? And the answer depends on the interaction between
the parrots. Like one always tells the truth and the other always lies. So you can ask either one
of the parrots, Hey parrot, like which door would the other parrot tell me to go through? And then
you take the opposite door. So what I tell my students is like, what happens if we do three
parrots or 10 parrots or N parrots, where M of them are telling the truth. And the rest are not
like, how can we, what's amazing to me about the two parrots is that even with unreliable narrator,
you can get a completely 100% reliable output. And is it possible through modeling
that brings together all these data? Is it possible to take all of these unreliable narrators
and somehow find the truth? And I think, you know, this is the kind of thing that the philosopher
should be thinking about, not me, but it is fascinating to contemplate. And so thank you
for the question. Oh, thank you for the answer, which was perfect. There was a frivolous demand
in the room to see your dog, but I think we over that. It's very cute. Hang on one second,
I'll be right back. I'll satisfy that. Okay, there he is. That's very well worth waiting for.
Thank you so much, Marcus. Thank you for this fantastic talk. It was just eye-opening, inspiring,
and I just really enjoyed it. For the audience, John Glass from Craig Wentz Institute will speak
next week. I'm also looking forward to that. But Marcus, thank you so much for your time
for introducing us, your E.Cola model, and to your dog.
Thank you. It was great, great to be able to speak to you all. Thanks for those great questions.
Let's connect soon, Michael. We'll do. Yes, I'll send an email. Take care. Perfect. Bye.
