It's weirdly difficult to pass a bouncy ball under a table.
The ball always wants to bounce out the same way it came in, which is odd.
This is something that my friend Hugh Hunt showed me ages ago,
and if you watch my channel a lot, you might be thinking,
hey, that's really similar to the golf ball paradox from a few videos ago.
If so, you're a lot smarter than I am, because I made the whole golf ball paradox video without
once thinking about balls bouncing under a table.
But then someone sent me this video.
Here, the ball bounces around inside a square container and comes back out the way it came in
without touching the back wall.
AT, who sent me the video, felt that it was linked to the golf ball paradox.
Only then did I think, well, hold on, if you can reduce the golf ball paradox down to a ball
bouncing around the inside of a four-sided shape, why not go further?
Why not reduce the problem to a ball bouncing between just two surfaces like Hugh showed me
all those years ago?
And this is great because, you know, I gave an explanation for the golf ball paradox,
but I wasn't that happy with it.
And I feel like now I have a great opportunity to explain what's going on in a really intuitive way.
So here's the plan.
If I can show that a ball bouncing back to you from under a table makes intuitive sense,
and if I can also show that that continues to make sense as we increase the number of
surfaces that the ball bounces off, well, then we just keep increasing the number of surfaces
until we have essentially a smooth surface.
We have the cylinder from the golf ball paradox.
In other words, we're taking the dynamics of a ball continuously rolling around the inside of a
container and we're discretizing it into lots of little collisions.
So let's first have a look at a ball bouncing under a table and see if we can make sense of that.
So we'll assume the ball isn't spinning at all when it first hits the ground,
but when it does hit the ground, the ground imparts some spin onto the ball,
which makes intuitive sense.
And actually, it's something you're familiar with from everyday life,
like the second bounce of a bouncy ball is often weird and unexpected.
That's just because of the spin that was imparted on the ball from the first bounce.
But to hammer the point home, imagine the interaction from the point of view of the ball
from the ball's reference frame, if you like.
If you have a stationary ball and a wall rushes up to it and swipes it,
the ball will obviously start spinning.
But look what happens now when the spinning ball hits the underside of the table.
Well, when the ball hits the underside of the table, it's got backspin.
And again, you know from experience what happens when a ball has backspin and it hits a surface.
It comes back in the direction of the spin.
And that makes intuitive sense if you think about it in slow motion.
Let's all pretend that I've keyed out my hand in this shot and you can only see the ball.
So you've got a ball approaching a surface with some spin.
The ball has angular momentum.
In other words, it wants to keep spinning.
Yes, I'm anthropomorphizing the ball, but that's okay.
It will want to keep spinning when it touches the surface.
But because of friction, it will have to roll during the collision.
As a result, the ball ends up traveling back the way it came.
In other words, the angular momentum of the ball is turned into a change in linear momentum.
And in fact, the swipe from the underside of the table
results in the ball spinning slowly in the other direction.
The final bounce is pretty boring and what you'd expect,
but it's the bounce that takes the ball back out again.
Now let's double the number of faces the ball has to bounce around.
We're now back to the square container, or as I like to call it, a very low polycylinder.
I'm filming it from the side instead of straight down.
And I've made one of the walls transparent.
I feel like this way it's easier to see what's going on with the spin of the ball.
So when the ball first hits the bottom plate, it gains some spin.
Hopefully it's intuitive to see that the axis of that spin will be in the horizontal plane
and perpendicular to the direction the ball is traveling.
Here I've marked that axis of spin with a couple of pins.
So what happens when the ball hits the second wall?
Well, hopefully you can see that the patch of ball
that touches the wall is moving downwards relative to the wall.
So due to friction, the ball will roll upwards.
In other words, as a result of the spin,
the ball will travel more steeply upwards than it would otherwise.
But we should also expect the spin of the ball to change
as a result of the interaction with that surface.
To figure out what the new spin will be, think about what would happen to the ball
if it didn't have any spin as it came into this second collision.
Well, again, hopefully it's intuitive to see that the spin it would have
after this collision would have an axis like this.
But because it did have spin coming into that collision,
we should expect the new spin to be somewhere between the two.
Somewhere between this axis and the axis it had on the way in.
So maybe it's spinning like this.
And actually that's what we see on the slow motion video.
So what will a ball with this spin traveling in this direction do
when it touches the top surface?
Well, let's imagine that the top surface is transparent as well.
So look, you can see that the patch of ball that touches the top surface
is traveling in this direction.
And again, because it's backspin, because of friction,
that will impart momentum onto the ball in the opposite direction.
And in this case, it's enough to switch from the ball traveling into the container
to the ball traveling out of the container.
And again, the spin of the ball will change.
It's somewhere between this spin and the spin that it had coming in.
And again, that's what we see in the slow motion footage.
You can carry on reasoning in this way until the ball leaves the container.
What if we double the number of faces again?
So it's an eight-sided container.
By the way, if anyone feels like actually building an octagonal container
to test this thing, then please do share the results
in the Science Fair Project channel on my Discord server.
Link to that in the description.
But I'll be using animation for now.
And you'll notice that with more faces, each collision with a face
has less of an effect on the trajectory of the ball.
That's for two reasons.
First, the ball is hitting the next face at a shallower angle.
It's less of a head-on collision.
And secondly, because the ball is already spinning from the first collision,
the movement of the surface of the ball underneath the surface of the container,
well, they almost match.
Almost, but not exactly.
Let's actually have a look at what happens between two successive bounces
when you've got this shallow angle between the faces.
Just like with the square container,
the spin of the ball modifies the final trajectory of the ball
as it leaves the second surface.
Just less so.
And just like with the square container,
the new spin axis of the ball will be somewhere between this axis and the axis coming in.
Those two axes are much closer to each other,
so the change of the spin axis is less as well.
So if you have smaller changes per bounce, but more bounces,
you end up with the same result.
The ball comes out after about one full turn.
I say about one full turn,
because you might remember from the golf ball paradox video
that the square root of seven divided by two
gives you the number of rotations around the container
for every full vertical oscillation within the container.
But of course, for the ball to get out of the container,
that's just half a vertical oscillation.
So the number of rotations before the ball comes out of the container,
we should expect to be the square root of seven divided by two.
Divided by two.
And that's a little less than one.
And crucially, there's always that inflection point
where the ball transitions from traveling into the container
to traveling out of the container.
We saw that with the square shaped container.
It's when the ball hits the top wall
that it transitions from going in to going out.
In the hexagonal container, we'd expect that inflection to happen
about halfway round.
But the same principle applies.
It's the point when the angular momentum of the ball
is pointing in the right direction
to cause the ball to switch directions.
If we double the number of faces to 16,
then it's starting to look a lot like a cylinder.
In other words, the golf ball paradox
is just what happens in the limit
as the number of faces of your container approaches infinity.
In the original video, I said that if you assume
the axis of rotation of the ball is fixed,
as if it were a gyroscope,
then we would expect the ball to oscillate up and down.
But that it would make one vertical oscillation
after just one single turn around the cylinder.
I said that the reason it takes more than one turn
is because the cylinder kind of drags
the axis of spin of the ball around
as opposed to the axis being fixed.
And I feel like that's easier to see
in the discretized version.
Like when the ball bounces off a surface with spin,
it forces the ball to change direction.
But the collision also changes the spin of the ball.
We see that very nicely in the slow-mo footage here.
And of course, as the number of faces of the container
tends towards infinity,
the number of collisions tends towards infinity,
and those discrete changes in the direction
of the spin of the ball
becomes a continuous change
in the direction of the spin of the ball
as it rolls around the inside of the cylinder.
A couple more really interesting things
that came up after I published the golf ball paradox video.
Patrick Default emailed me to say
he created a simulation of the golf ball paradox.
He'd also previously created simulations
of the ball on a turntable.
I'll leave a link to all of those in the description.
It really is nice to see that it works in simulation as well.
One final thought.
Discretizing the problem in this way
is really interesting for two reasons.
First, it's what Newton did
when he was first looking at orbits.
Well, maybe it was hook, actually.
But anyway, because orbital mechanics
have nonlinear equations,
it's hard to extrapolate where a planet will be in the future.
But if you imagine it instead
as gravity imparting discrete impulses
onto massive objects,
you can go step by step
to figure out where a planet will be in the future.
On that basis, Newton was able to prove
Kepler's equal area law.
And interestingly, software that simulates
the motion of charged particles
uses the same method.
There's something really interesting
about the business of spam.
Like, a lot of the spam we get is sent illegally.
But a lot of it is completely legal,
including some of the spam phone calls that we get.
But despite being legal,
they're actually potentially really dangerous
as well as annoying.
And that's because of the way the business works.
Basically, there are hundreds of these intermediary companies
called data brokers
that collect data about you
and then sell that data onto marketing agencies
that then call you, send you emails,
maybe even send you stuff in the post.
Because they know so much about you,
often you don't realize it's a marketing call
until a little way in,
which is quite frustrating.
But the real danger is that these intermediary data brokers
don't always have great database security.
There are loads of incidents of database breaches,
and these databases have your personal information on them.
So if you want to stop these annoying spam messages
and remove yourself from these potentially vulnerable databases,
then I humbly recommend the sponsor of this video, Incogni.
The way Incogni works is,
all these data brokers have a method of contacting them
to request that they remove your data
and stop selling it to people.
They all want to be contacted in different ways.
So it's a total pain in the bum to do it on your own.
But Incogni have done all the hard work in advance
so that you can just sign up to Incogni,
give them permission to act on your behalf,
and they'll just take care of it all in the background.
Incogni doesn't bombard you with notifications.
You can log on to their dashboard and see the progress.
Look, these are all the companies that now no longer have my data.
And since signing up,
I just don't get those weird phone calls anymore,
the ones where they know a bit too much about me.
If it sounds like the sort of thing that you'd like to get done,
then the promo on this one's really good.
The first 100 people to go to incogni.com forward slash science
and use promo code science to check out will get 60% off.
The link is also in the description,
so check out Incogni today.
I hope you enjoyed this video.
If you did, don't forget to hit subscribe
and the algorithm thinks you'll enjoy this video next.
