Let's turn aside, though, after Cycladic civilization and move into the second millennium BC,
and it's now beginning around 1900 BC on the island of Crete that we have evidence for
this extraordinary Bronze Age culture that we know as Minoan culture.
Here on Crete between 1900 and 1400 BC approximately, what we're faced with is a series of palaces
and so this is usually called palatial society. These palaces share similarities of design
and it's important to understand how this design is repeated time and again at the various Minoan
sites. We have Cnausos, the major one of these Minoan palaces, Maliar, Festos, Catozacro and
various others, Festos for example on the southern coast and in each of these places you will find
essentially the same design being repeated. You will find a central courtyard. Around the central
courtyard on one side you will normally find a series of administrative buildings with for example
throne rooms and interview rooms and sometimes a ritual bath as well and then on another side
of the ceremonial courtyard you'll normally find a series of private chambers, sumptuously decorated
in the case of Cnausos. We have examples of the beautiful frescoes which were used to decorate
these and then usually on one side of the courtyard behind the administrative buildings we also have
a third important feature of these Minoan palaces and these are the so-called magazines, magazines
used in the sense of storage rooms and if you're very lucky and you go into one of these you may
even still find pithoi in place. These pithoi are often six foot tall vases or storage vessels
that were made right there in place and the fact that we have room after room of these with dozens
of these tells us that what we have here is the palace acting as an economic center as well.
So these palaces are really the core to understanding Minoan culture. They are
administrative centers, they are religious centers and they are economic centers. Now
let's take these a little further, each of them. In the case of Cnausos, one archaeologist some
years ago wrote a wonderful remark when he said that he was not sure that the bottom which sat in
the throne of the throne room at Cnausos wasn't female. We may have here some matriarchal or
matrilinear society but it's very difficult to know for sure. Later Greek myth of course associated
the power of this culture of Crete with the legendary king Minos and that's why we refer to
it as Minoan culture but we should entertain the possibility that perhaps it was a matriarchal
society and that it was a woman who was the queen and the most powerful person at Cnausos.
We can also say about these palaces that they show similarities of design to palaces that
are found throughout the ancient Near East so that what we're finding here is an idea of social
organization, an idea of social order which has begun in those ancient cultures of the
Near East of Sumer and Babylon and Ugaris and so forth and which is now finding expression
in the Greek world. We can go a little bit further and here the interesting topic that
we should address is that of Minoan religion. The palaces were clearly the center of or at
least a part of an extremely complex religious system. We know for example that the Minoans
also worshiped on mountaintops. We have mountaintop sanctuaries that have been excavated and mountaintop
sanctuaries that are shown in Minoan art. We know of house sanctuaries where various goddess
figurines have been found, the bell shaped figurines that show the goddess in her long
dress with her little feet poking out. We have these house sanctuaries and we also have cave
sanctuaries where often literally hundreds of small figurines have been found,
dedications to the god worshiped there. The palaces are part of this system as well
and that we can be fairly sure of particularly when we look at the wonderful decoration of the
walls of the Minoan palaces. Here we will often see princes marching forward with
dedicatory offerings or priestesses accepting offerings on their behalf.
