This remains embedded in the ancient Near East in many of its gods and goddesses and it even goes down later into Greek and Roman myth and is remembered in stories for example of Venus and Adonis.
So it may be, it may be I emphasise that on Crete we had an earth mother and we had a virile male consort.
But I can't give you their names, I cannot give you a single line of any hymn sung in their honour at all.
All we can do is extrapolate from silent archaeological evidence and analogous evidence from other places.
Some of these I think are a fairly safe bet.
What we can say, and normally I wouldn't talk in terms of aesthetics because this is so subjective,
but what we can say is that we have very clear evidence that this Minoan culture was an extraordinarily sensitive culture,
a culture that was alive to the beauty of the natural world around it and was also alive to human beauty as well.
One of the most famous frescoes excavated at Knossos is one which Sir Arthur Evans excavators turned up soon after they'd started digging
and when they found this piece of plaster with the head of a woman shown in profile with a ruby red lipstick
and her hair pulled back into a gorgeous hairdo she was dubbed La Parisienne, the Parisian girl
because she looks like a beautiful girl of the Parisian demi-monde of the turn of the century.
We have very many other frescoes that similarly show elegant beautiful Minoan women and young handsome Minoan men.
This is obviously in some respects an idealized version of what their society is.
I presume there were some old and wrinkled Minoans somewhere but we don't see many of them in our evidence.
What instead we see is a culture which was alive to beauty and liked to decorate its walls with motifs such as dolphins
to show the beauty of the sea, the sea that the Minoans were themselves trading in
as they made their way around the eastern Mediterranean.
This brings us then to the other aspect of the palaces that I've touched upon
and that is that in addition to being administrative centers, political centers, centers of power
and in addition to being associated with this religious system of ideas they are also the center of the economy
and this is really a critical part of Minoan society.
Minoan culture is often referred to as a redistributive economy
and what we mean by that is that the palaces serve as a nodal point
and produce from the surrounding countryside staples such as grain, wool and oil
are brought in from the countryside and stored in these great pithoi in the magazines
and then in turn are redistributed out to people as they need them.
In addition to this control of the staple economy it also looks as if the palaces as you would expect
since they are the homes of the elite, of the kings and queens and princes and so forth
are also the center of an international trade and it's from here in these palaces
that we will find examples of perfume, of metal, metal being brought in in its raw state
and turned into beautifully worked metal objects, fabrics being imported from the outside world,
precious woods from the eastern Mediterranean, spices, these sorts of things.
These are not being traded by farmers up in the mountains, these are being brought in for princes.
They are stored here and then redistributed out.
So we can think of the palaces as being the center in every respect for all parts of Minoan life.
Now I've been referring both to national trade in staples if you will
and the goods produced around Canosos and around Malia
where farmers are probably under the control or closely connected to the palace
but also this international trade, goods coming in from overseas
and it's from these excavations in Crete that we find conclusive evidence
that the Cretans were in contact with many of the other great cultures of the eastern Mediterranean
during the Bronze Age.
In other words you will find scarabs, pieces of lapis lazuli, you will find seals and rings
made of gold or cut from amber that were made in other parts of the eastern Mediterranean
in Mesopotamia, in Syria, in Cyprus and in Egypt making their way to Crete.
And so in a way we should change our focus
and instead of thinking of Crete as the first Greek Bronze Age culture
let's think of it in these terms as being the farthest west of the whole range of Bronze Age cultures
which existed over the eastern Mediterranean in the second half of the second millennium BC.
