The word that is sometimes used to describe this is the Oikumene, the commonwealth, the shared world.
And if we think in those terms, really what we're getting in Crete is the farthest western expression
of a style of culture and civilization based on international trade and an export of ideas as well as objects
that links Mesopotamia, Syria, Egypt, the entire Levant or eastern Mediterranean and Crete.
We see, I think, some of the best evidence for this, not just on Crete itself, but on the island of Thera.
We'll be talking more about that in another lecture because Thera is going to become very important
for our explanations of what happened to the Cretans.
But on the island of Thera, what we fairly clearly have is a society that is closely linked to Crete.
Was it a Cretan colony or is it an indigenous society that is heavily influenced by Crete?
Well, it's hard to answer that exactly.
But what we can see on this island in the objects found here and particularly in the wall paintings found on Thera
is that this island was part of a Cretan network, a trade network and a cultural network.
Now, the reason I emphasise this is, I think, quite important.
Some of the more fantastic explanations of Cretan power and culture have pointed to the fact that in Crete
we do not find, generally speaking, walls around the palaces.
Now, think about this for a moment.
You live in a world where there are marauders and pirates and you choose not to build walls around your palace.
You're making quite a statement of your power.
And so in the past, people have sometimes said, oh, this is conclusive evidence that we have here a peace-loving culture,
a culture of feminine power that didn't feel the need to build walls around, to be militaristic and to protect its cities.
In fact, I would suggest the explanation is quite different.
It is that the defence of Crete was not on Crete and soil.
It was out there in the islands.
The defence of Crete came with its naval power.
And I would point out to you that, for example, that's exactly what the Greeks of hundreds of years later remembered about Minoan Crete,
that it had been remarkable for the strength of its naval power.
Thucydides says Minos was the first to build a great fleet.
And in that, I think what we're getting is some memory of the fact that the Cretans didn't need to defend their own soil throughout most of their history
because for most of the time, they could defend it with their fleets, sailing out around the eastern Mediterranean and the Aegean.
There's one other aspect of Crete that I want to discuss briefly.
And I think this is something that we might want to keep in mind during some of the future lectures.
One of my abiding interests is the question of how do we know what we claim to know about a particular culture?
And Minoan Crete is particularly instructive in that respect because this is one place where we can say quite definitively,
we owe everything almost to one man.
His name is Sir Arthur Evans.
Evans was a journalist who had travelled around the eastern Mediterranean
and while in Greece and on Crete, he was shown certain pieces of clay with glyphs writing on them that had not been translated.
And fascinated by these tablets, he tried to find where they'd been found and he then went
and in the good practice of the late 19th, early 20th century, he bought the land where they'd been found
and then shortly after, he set an excavation team to work.
The site from which these tablets came and which he partially purchased and then excavated is Knossos,
the type site that we've been considering in everything that we have to say about the palatial culture of Minoan Crete.
And we owe most of what we know about Minoan Crete and Knossos in particular to the work of this one man, Sir Arthur Evans,
a monumental intellect and a monumental influence on the archaeology of the Bronze Age.
Within days of beginning the excavations, his workmen were turning up hundreds of tablets in a script,
which unfortunately I have to say is still not substantially translated, linear A.
I want to make a few points about Schliemann and about the kind of archaeology that he was doing
because we need, I think, to keep these in mind.
Evans' discoveries are good examples of 19th century and early 20th century archaeology at work.
Like Schliemann at Troy and at Mycenae and like Leaad at Nineveh.
