Lecture 4 The Long Twilight
Hello and welcome back to our series of lectures on Ancient Creek Civilization.
In this the fourth lecture, we're going to look once again at the end of the Bronze Age.
You'll remember that in our last lecture, I was making the point that we probably know
more about the end of the Bronze Age than the Greeks did themselves.
And I was trying to emphasize the importance of this to the Greeks, in that it released
them, as it were, from the dead hand of the past, to use their memories and their myths
and their poems to create not a Bronze Age, but rather a Golden Age.
We'll talk a little bit more about the importance of epic poetry, in particular, in the creation
of this heroic memory of the past later on.
But before we proceed any further, we have to deal with some nuts and bolts.
Quite simply, what happened at the end of the Bronze Age?
How is it that there is such a dramatic difference between the cultures of the Bronze Age, in
Crete and on the mainland, and then the subsequent Iron Age cultures of Greece, leading into
the archaic and, eventually, the classical period?
There was, quite simply, a massive destruction.
There was a dramatic end to the Bronze Age.
But the reasons for this, the causes for this, and the exact nature of this catastrophe at
the end of the Bronze Age, remains one of the most vexed issues in Greek archaeology.
It's excited debate now for at least 100 years, and what I want to do for much of the lecture
today is to talk about some of the theories that have been offered for the end of Bronze
Age culture, the collapse of the Bronze Age in Greece.
Now by far the most dramatic explanation that has ever been offered, and one that remains
romantically powerful in people's imaginations, is the notion that the Bronze Age ended because
of volcanic destruction.
This in particular can be used to explain the collapse of Cretan power it is often supposed.
And we have to admit that the evidence here is powerful and it is, in some respects, quite
overwhelming, quite literally in the case of the island of Theera.
If you sail today into the island of Theera, you will find that your boat will not pull
up at a beach or at a jetty or at a port as in any other island of the Aegean or the Mediterranean.
Because in fact what you will be sailing into is the caldera, the cauldron of an exploded
volcano.
Theera lies about 200 miles northeast of Crete.
It was clearly wiped out in one single massive volcanic eruption, and it is sometimes being
suggested that this eruption not only wiped out Theera, but also wiped out Cretan culture
as well.
The story of the finding of Theera is in itself fascinating.
The story here really depends upon the construction of the Suez Canal.
Suez Canal required for its construction hydraulic cement, and hydraulic cement requires for
its manufacturing a certain type of volcanic stone.
One source of this is in southern Italy, another source was the island of Theera, and it was
in the process of literally skimming off foot after foot of this volcanic ash and stone
that engineers came down on top of a Bronze Age town that had been buried thousands of
years ago, an extraordinarily dramatic discovery.
And it was that overburden of material that had blown up from the volcano and rained down
burying the town of Theera that led people to suggest that this dramatic explosion had
wiped out not only this Cretan colony or this Cretan-influenced town in the Aegean, but that
its effects had been felt down on Crete itself.
So for example, a very fine excavator, a Greek excavator of earlier this century, pointed
to a site on the northern coast of Crete, at Tillisos, where he was able to show large
orthostat stones that had been sucked out of position and pulled back again in the
other direction.
So he said, by the effects of a huge tidal wave generated by the volcanic eruption, lacerating
the coast of Crete and then sucking people and goods and property back out to sea as
it left.
