It may have weakened the Cretans in some respects.
For example, if we regard Thera as being a Minoan outpost, a colony, or a trading emporium,
it may have been that a Minoan fleet was wiped out in this explosion,
but we really cannot give any detailed answer to this. We don't know exactly its impact.
Instead, the solution that I was trying to propose in the last lecture
was something that really extends over a longer period,
not a dramatic collapse of Minoan power at one moment,
but rather something more along the lines of a subtle shift of power,
that in 1600 the Minoans are powerful, but by 1400 their influence has been taken over by the Mycenaeans.
And that would mean that we would be dealing with something like conflict between the two cultures
out in the sphere of influence of the two cultures,
their trading area of the Aegean and the Eastern Mediterranean.
It's very interesting to note that at Thera, where we still have frescoes, wall paintings preserved,
we see examples of paintings that show large naval expeditions heading off from an island,
and we see in other registers of these same frescoes and wall paintings,
soldiers disembarking and charging onto land.
I think that it's in the islands that the war is going on between Minoan Crete and Mycenaean Greece.
It's there that the balance of power shifts, and it is as a result of that,
that Minoan Crete irreparably weakened, less able to control trade in the Eastern Mediterranean,
is eventually subject to invasion from the mainland.
And of course, the evidence supporting this then is to be found in Linear B,
the tablets that are found at Knossos in its last phase of existence,
and also found on the mainland at the Mycenaean sites.
So unfortunately, I can't give you a dramatic explanation for the end of Minoan Crete.
Instead, I'm giving you one that sees a shift from Minoan to Mycenaean power.
But Mycenaean power also vanished, and here it did vanish, excuse me, somewhat more abruptly,
shortly after 1200 BC.
And so the question that I would oppose is not what happened to the Minoans,
I think we can answer that, but rather what happened to the Mycenaeans,
the second of the great Bronze Age cultures?
Why did it collapse? What happened to their power, to their magnificent authority,
as we see in the Bastions at Mycenae?
Well, there are a couple of theories that have been advanced to explain the sudden collapse of Mycenaean power,
and now we should take a look at those.
In the early part of this century, still in many textbooks, and certainly throughout the 19th century,
the most common explanation was that the Mycenaean Greeks had been defeated
and militarily overwhelmed by the Dorians.
Who are the Dorians? Well, the Dorians are Greeks too.
They're Greeks, however, not from the Mycenaean realm of central and southern Greece,
but the Greeks of the far northern part of Greece, the area now called Epirus, and into Albania.
According to this theory, which was extremely popular with German historians in the last century,
but as I say, is still widely supported by many people,
the Dorians had come into Greece around 1900 with the other Greek speakers,
but while Mycenaean power had been growing in southern Greece,
they had remained apart, a separate people in the north.
And then, towards the end of the Bronze Age, around 12, 1100,
these Dorians came pouring out of the north,
and quite simply physically overwhelmed their Mycenaean cousins to the south.
Now, what are the merits of this theory? What's it got in support of it?
Well, one of the interesting things that it does have in support of it is the distribution of the Greek dialects.
Greeks speak different types of Greek in different parts of Greece,
just as there are different accents and intonations in different parts of America or in Britain.
And the families of the Greek dialects can be largely grouped into a western Greek and an eastern Greek,
and the distribution of these, particularly of western Greek from the northwest down into the Peloponnese,
and of eastern Greek from Attica, where Athens is located, and across the sea to the islands,
has been taken as evidence by some for population movement.
Greek speakers from the northwest pour in and take over the Peloponnese,
so their languages found both in the Peloponnese and in the north.
The east Greek speakers are pushed out, dispossessed,
and so you only find a pocket of their language in Athens,
and the rest of their language spoken further out in the islands.
That's an attractive theory.
Another bit of evidence that may support this idea of the Dorian invasions is a Greek myth.
Once again, I'll call upon the Greeks themselves, and that is the story of the return of the Heraclidae.
