Lecture 5, The Age of Heroes
Hello and welcome back to our series of lectures on Greek civilization.
In the last couple of lectures, we've been looking primarily at the Bronze Age.
We've looked at Mino and Crete.
We've looked at Mycenaean Greece.
And in addition to describing those cultures, we've also tried to have a look at some of
the explanations for the collapse of that Bronze Age world.
We've looked at various theories and I think that we can conclude by saying we're probably
never going to know exactly why the Bronze Age cultures of Greece collapsed as they
did, but they did.
That we can be sure of.
We can be sure of that because, archaeologically, if you go to most of the great Bronze Age
sites, you will find that their occupation history stops abruptly, sometime after 1200.
You'll find that if you continue around Greece looking at archaeological sites all over the
country and in Crete as well, you'll find a general pattern being repeated all over
the country.
And that is of a serious decline in the number of sites and in the size of sites as the centuries
progress on from the 12th century.
Let me give you an illustration.
If you were to go around Greece now and look at sites that we know were occupied in the
13th century, you would find about 320 of them.
If you were then to ask, how many sites do we have in the same area that are occupied
100 years later, the number has shrunk from 320 down to about 130, and if you go on then
another 100 years after that, the number shrinks even further to 40.
And not only do the numbers shrink, but if we can judge the size of the settlement by
the size of the burial population that we have in cemeteries around Greece, that also
is shrinking.
There are fewer people.
Now there are various ways of explaining these rather startling figures.
The one is that there's a change in the places where people live.
They're literally hightailing it for the hills.
And I want to give you a little illustration of that from my own experience from excavating
about 10 years ago in Crete.
In the eastern side of Crete, there is a site called Lavranda.
It is a middle Minoan site.
It dates from the middle towards the end of the 2nd millennium BC.
And then the occupation history of the site stops.
If you climb up the mountains, and I did this every day for many months, climb right to
the top of the mountain behind that is called Castro and excavate up there, you'll find
that there is a site which we know was occupied in the geometric period in the early Iron Age.
But we wanted to know what was the connection between the two.
And the hypothesis was that at the end of Minoan times in the Bronze Age, when life
became critical, when there were marauders, when there were pirates, when there was a
breakdown of social order, that one of the ways people dealt with this was by escaping
from their vulnerable area down in the plain and going up to the hills where they could
hide on the mountain tops.
And so we excavated there for a number of years and finally, during one of the seasons,
we came right down to the bottom layer and I note the bottom because below it was bedrock
and at the bottom layer in four separate squares up on the Castro, we found late Minoan pottery.
Exactly the level that you would expect if people had abandoned their middle Minoan site
and then gone up into the hills.
As you go round Crete, for example, you can visit sites such as Carfi, located in central
Crete, where you will see that people went up hundreds of metres to escape from the plain.
It's a wonderful site in terms of the vision that you get of the Mediterranean in front
of you, but you have to be a goat to get up there.
These people were hiding, getting away from a society that was collapsing and in crisis.
If you look at the mainland, we find that at many of these great Mycenaean fortresses
and you've seen the walls of Mycenaean looked at places like Tirrens and Glah and or Cominos.
What we find is that after about 1200, there is no central authority any longer.
Walls begin to collapse.
Places are either totally abandoned or in some cases we can attest to squatters.
That is to say, we can see small rubble walls being put up in the shadow of the great cyclopean
masonry that had existed there for hundreds of years before them.
So we've got a great change going on in terms of the quality of life.
We have a real downturn, if you like, at the end of the Bronze Age.
Now, those population figures that I gave you earlier, though, are interesting because
many demographers have looked at this and said, you know, if a population declined that drastically
over that shorter space of time, it actually could not sustain itself.
They would have all died out.
