Rather, he thinks that it can be a very fine indicator of precisely where virtue will reside.
You will remember, I think, from our discussion of virtue in its general form in book two,
that virtue, as Aristotle defined the moral virtues, was a habit of choosing the mean
between the extremes with respect to some action or with respect to some emotion.
And that general definition of virtue, on which he was so reliant, calling it a habit,
already had a place for virtue, because, as we noted, how do you tell when you have a habit?
You tell that you have a habit when something is done easily and regularly and with a certain
pleasure.
The very notion of having a habit of driving is not only the ability to do it, but the
ability to do it easily and regularly, and to enjoy doing it, to have a certain control
and mastery there.
Or if we have a good habit with respect to food and drink, it's that we're able to use
food and drink, but to use them in appropriate ways, truly to enjoy them, without, on the
other hand, so much using them or so much being dominated by the pleasure that we become
vastly overweight or that we lose control of our rationality by excessive drink.
That is, the pleasure gives us an indication of something that is there and designed for
our nutrition and gives us some of the joy of life, but on the other hand doesn't make
us slaves to the table or slaves to the pitcher.
There is rather a strong sense that the pleasure can give us an ability and an inclination
to do the particular activity and that when the pleasure becomes particularly associated,
not just with receiving the food or the drink or the other particular bodily stimulation,
but when the pleasure is associated with choosing rightly about this matter, that one can even
see it as one of the indicators that virtue is present.
So for example, when one thinks of situations of temperance, when a young person is learning
to drink, if one has never had any experience at home and one comes to college and never
had really any guidance in the matter from one's parents, very frequently there is a
going to excess.
That is, the fear, the mere manifestation of the pleasure and the tremendous excitement
and the fascination of it leads regularly to having students go to vast excess in the
matter.
Whereas, I find from my experience with students at the university, those who have been taught
to drink at home are able to enter into this in appropriate ways because they know the
ways in which it adds to human sociability and that it adds to a finer experience of
human company without on the other hand going out merely for the sake of getting drunk.
And so too with much other bodily pleasure, namely that finding the pleasure not just
in the thing, but finding the pleasure in using the thing rightly to enhance the entire
experience is very much a manifestation and a mark of the fact that some virtue is present
precisely because there is a certain habit.
In addition to this, one also sees in Aristotle's treatment of it that there is an importance
to being trained in finding pleasure about the right things, namely that our pattern
of the development of virtues in Aristotle's understanding, our pattern of development
requires habituation, requires that we do a thing again and again, but it is not just
a matter of doing it again and again by rote so that there is no choice, rather for Aristotle's
entire perspective and ethics, moral virtue is a matter of a habit of choosing the mean.
But in choosing the mean, this does amount to real deliberation, real consideration
of alternatives, real consideration of the likely consequences, real consideration of
the necessary means that must be taken to get to the end, and all of the elements that
are involved in that deliberation hopefully will become habitual so that we'll look at
them and look at them quickly and directly and attend to them rightly and give them the
right sort of value in our weighing and in our deliberation.
The role that pleasure has in this for Aristotle is that we must become, over the course of
our life, and especially our early life, habituated to take pleasure in the right things. Here
again, let me take an example from college life, but let me try something different
than food and drink. Let's try something like music, or sometimes noise, because some of
what at least seems to pass for music by certain people's standards seems to me to be pure
noise. But how is it that we come to gain an appreciation of what music is? Well, part
of it is exposure to different kinds of music, and so for the college students that I deal
with, sometimes it's a matter of exposure to classical music, but equally for those who
are already have a taste for that, it could very well be exposure to jazz, and if they've
never yet had the pleasure of learning what the real pleasures of the tremendous spontaneity
of a good jazz player, that can be an acquired taste.
