Without any of these things, he thinks we will be very frustrated as human beings.
Now, besides that general claim that comes as no surprise to us,
we heard it articulated in Book 1 and we've seen him develop it in detail
in the course of the books that intervene,
the other new element that is found within Book 10,
a new claim, is that this happiness will best consist in the contemplative life
and that the contemplative life is superior to the active life.
Now, this is not only a new claim, but it might be a somewhat surprising claim
from certain points of view.
It's certainly surprising, given what I just said about the political context
within which the Nicomachean ethics must be understood,
because Aristotle himself will be going on to do an entire book on political philosophy,
and he has a tremendous respect for the individuals
who were fundamental and foundational in their own various city-states
in providing for the organization of their communities politically and socially.
One of the great discoveries that scholars have made about Aristotle's texts in recent years
is they have now found one of the many, many constitutions that he collected,
the Constitution of Athens, but Aristotle went around
and besides collecting all the flower species and the animal species,
besides collecting plays, he also made a collection of the constitutions
of all the cities that he could find.
We have only one of those, namely the Constitution of Athens,
but it has that same approach that is so dominant in his outlook
that in order to understand the nature of anything,
what one best does is proceed empirically by making a collection
of as many instances of these things as one can
and then drawing out the common elements
and not just the least common denominator,
but drawing out the elements in this particular set of organizations or examples,
which will lead to real excellence.
Aristotle had a profound appreciation for the work of those who live and think
and act politically, and yet here in book 10,
he stresses the superiority of the contemplative life to the active life
as being at the very peak of the happiness that is possible to human life.
So without in any way denying that political claim,
I think it's a matter of appreciating the possibilities for happiness
in both the active and the contemplative life,
and then seeing Aristotle's reason for privileging the contemplative.
That is, I think he does see here explicitly in the 10th book of the Nicomachean Ethics
a strong role for the way in which the active life can be a genuine pattern
for human happiness. Why? Because it involves our human function,
namely our human rationality,
considered not just in its academic or theoretical use,
but rather our rationality considered in its practical and its political use.
The fact that we are able to devise systems
by which people will get those necessary material conditions such as wealth and health,
ways in which they will get the social stability,
have good reputations, have good friends,
have the possibilities of an economy,
and especially for Aristotle and his tradition,
have the opportunities for participation in the political process,
whether in Democratic or in some kind of Republican
or some kind of oligarchic or some kind of monarchical forms.
The various possibilities for political participation were extremely important to him.
And so he's deeply alert to the fact that we can be happy as a group
and we can be happy very much individually by living the active life
in which our rationality is put to these particular political and social uses.
But here in the 10th book,
he stresses the superiority of the contemplative life as an even better way of finding happiness.
There are two things, I think, that are going on in the text
in the course of making this argument.
One is something that is a response by Aristotle to his own intellectual forebears,
Plato and Aristotle.
And secondly, there is a sense of an appreciation of the privilege
that leisure, scholarly leisure, in his life allowed.
First, the appreciation to his intellectual forebears.
That is, he has a strong sense of the history of the philosophy that preceded him.
As you may know from other study, Aristotle's own immediate teacher was Plato
and Plato's teacher was Socrates.
And then the group of intellectuals who are prior to Socrates
are generally by scholars nowadays called the Presocratics.
Socrates being so important.
