Lecture 6, from Sicily to Syria, the growth of trade and colonization.
Hello, and welcome back to this, the sixth of our lectures on ancient Greek civilization.
In the last lecture in dealing with the period that came after the Bronze Age and looking
at that dreadful period of decline that we usually call the Dark Ages, I tried to make
the case that by about the 8th century the Greeks were reforming their culture and showing
a new direction in the development of their culture, and I pointed out that there are
going to be many different manifestations of this, some of which we're going to look
at in future lectures, such as the growth of the power of Delphi and Olympia, the origins
of the Olympic Games, for example, but the two areas that we have looked at so far are
the writing down of Epic and the development of city-states, Poles.
In the first of these we saw that although oral poetry had existed for hundreds of years,
there was a climactic moment towards the end of the 8th century when for the first time
the Greeks began to write these poems down, and I talked about the importance of these
monumental versions of the Iliad and the Odyssey, these poems going back to the Trojan
War, and their subsequent impact on the Greeks as they used these as the basis for a moral
code and the education of young men.
And we also looked at the rise of the Poles, at the growth of these larger communities
which are really very unlike the palaces of the Bronze Age and which are also very unlike
the Oikoi or households of the Dark Ages.
This is something new, it is made of a combination of households into village, into hamlet, into
town and so forth.
There is one other great aspect of change in the Greek world in the 8th century that I'd
like to concentrate on during this lecture, and that is trade and colonisation.
In other words, we're going to look both at the causes for these, why did the Greeks trade
and where were they founding their colonies and why, but then also I want to ask some
questions about the impact of these.
What is it that in the 8th century and onwards we see the Greeks getting from their colonialising
experience and from their contacts with other cultures through trade and colonisation.
Now a word of caution at the outset, when I use a term like colonisation, our tendency
normally is to think in terms of the kind of colonial experience of the 19th century.
Probably you all like me grew up with maps of the world that showed various regions of
the globe that were colour coded according to the Western European country which in the
19th century had state declaim to that particular territory.
The sun never set on the British Empire, there was always a red bit somewhere on that globe
that where you could see still a British colony.
But the colonial experience of the Greeks was very different.
This was not something initiated by large nation states or by the Greeks in general,
it was not designed to annex large areas of territory such as portions of Africa or of
Asia at all, it was certainly not designed to take a native population and to turn them
into the labour force for an expanding capitalistic economy.
The colonial experience of the ancient world is of a completely different style and nature.
The Greeks in fact have ever been exporting their people.
If you go to either Toronto or Chicago or Melbourne today, in any of those three cities
you'll be faced with the claim that that's the largest Greek speaking city outside of
Greece because like the Irish the Greeks export their people, leaving Greece constantly.
And this happened in antiquity as well as the Greeks left their homeland.
But particularly around 700 and on there was a fresh wave of colonisation which was quite
different from the waves that came before or after because it led to the founding of
a number of Greek colonies all over both the Aegean and more particularly the Black Sea
and the Western Mediterranean as well.
So we're going to end up with colonies of the Greeks as far apart as Massilia in southern
France, that's Marseille, Emporio in Spain, Cyrene, still of the same name in North Africa
and my favourite of all the colonial foundations of the Greeks are a colony whose very name
I think sums up the major reason the Greeks colonised it, it's called Olbia, it's in the
Ukraine and it's name simply means wealthy.
