As the Greeks founded their colonies, particularly in the western Mediterranean, I'm speaking
primarily here of Sicily and of southern Italy, they came into contact with another important
and powerful civilisation which had similarly been colonising at the same time. These were
the Phoenicians who came from Tyre and Sidon on what would today be the coast of Lebanon
and who had founded around 800 BC their own great western colony. They called it
Carthadasht which in Semitic means New City, we call it Carthage. I draw attention to the
presence of the Phoenicians here because what we're going to find is that in their colonial
experience the Greeks are going to brush up against the Phoenicians time it again and I think
sometimes because we're so used to thinking of Phoenicians in terms of the Punic Wars and the
conflict between the Phoenicians, the Carthaginians and Rome later on, we tend to assume that this
must have been a hostile experience, that Greeks and Phoenicians must have been almost ready to fight
each other wherever they met. In fact, I think the evidence suggests that the colonial experience
for the two of them was not quite that hostile at all because there were places where colonies grew
up that had begun as trading ports where both Phoenicians and Greeks were side by side. We have
such places for example at Pythakousai in the Bay of Naples where we have both Greeks and Phoenicians
and at Almena in northern Syria where we again have Phoenicians and Greeks. In these places
Greek and non-Greek settled side by side traded together and from there and from this experience
of trade the Greeks established a series of trade routes particularly leading up the Adriatic and
across to the toe of Italy to Sicily and around through the Straits of Assina where the Greeks
sailed looking for resources for precious metals and so forth. These are the trade routes that they
originate with and then colonisation follows. It's not an either or proposition, the two go hand in
hand quite well. Why? Quite simply because as a trader is sailing around the Mediterranean from
port to port he cannot help but see an island, an inlet, an alluvial plain where there is no
native population or where they look as if they could be easily beaten and on a trip back to Greece
all it takes is one report saying gee in Sicily you know I saw this place that really is ripe
and there you have the process of trade leading on into colonisation a very natural feature of
Greek history in the 8th century. This confluence of trade and colonisation I think can be seen most
clearly in Italy and in Sicily particularly at the Bay of Naples. Here you have trade routes coming
down from northern Europe into the Mediterranean, trade routes coming from the western Mediterranean
across these are intersecting and this is the same place where Greek traders will soon be followed
by Greek colonists as well. All right let's assume then that we can say satisfactorily that trade
and colonisation go hand in hand and they're bringing the Greeks out of Greece into the
wider Mediterranean world. What really interests me is not why they go out but rather what happens
to them as a result of this experience and here I think we're going to be able to say something
significant about the Greece of the 8th century and the 7th century. Trade and colonisation
brought the Greeks into close contact with a number of other older cultures but particularly
that of the Phoenicians and it is hard to underestimate the impact of this cultural
contact in the 8th and 7th centuries. I want to illustrate now some of the ways in which I think
in concrete terms the Greeks are affected by this contact with a non-Greek world.
The first and the most obvious is one that we've alluded to a couple of times already in lectures
and that is writing. Now you remember that the Greeks of the Bronze Age wrote in Linear B.
You remember that at the end of the Bronze Age the practice of writing disappeared,
there were no palaces, there were no records to be kept, writing was not needed.
Around 725 writing makes its way back into the Greek world once again but the Greeks are no
longer using the script of Linear B. They are using instead what we call the alphabet,
the Greek letters of the Greek alphabet that they used for the rest of their history.
Where did it come from? Well the answer is that the Greek alphabet is a borrowing from a
North West Semitic language, from a language spoken either by the Phoenicians or by their
Indian Abires.
