Secondly, the games that were held at Olympia
not only were held in this religious setting
but originally were primarily about individual athletes
and not their states, although that would change.
The Olympic games in fact arise from a feature of Greek culture
which will become more and more important from the 8th century onwards.
That is the agonistic spirit of the Greeks.
This term comes from the Greek expression the agon
which means the contest
and the notion that there is a contest at the core of life
is really a central Greek idea.
Athletes at the Olympic games, particularly in its early days
were competing to display their personal excellence, their arete
which is a Homeric term that refers to their manly vigor
and their qualities as warriors.
This is the same quality that Homer's warriors
try to display on the battlefield.
Furthermore, what the athlete at Olympia is trying to win
for himself, for his family and for his community
is what the Greeks would call klios athiton
which means undying glory.
This also is a phrase which is taken directly out of Homer.
So the games in about 776
originally then are a venue for competition,
not between states, but between aristocratic men and boys as well.
These are age competitions, so there are boys' versions of these games
who will compete running, jumping, boxing, wrestling,
chariot racing as well,
and who are doing so explicitly modelling themselves then
on a Homeric pattern.
Now this becomes clear not only when we consider the competition
at Olympia, but when we consider what also arises from it.
If you win at Olympia, the chances are that you will go to a poet
and you will commission that poet to write an ode,
a victory song on your behalf.
And these victory songs are not national anthems at all,
but rather they're songs, and we have many of these,
particularly from the Beocian poet Pinda,
which celebrate the individual and his success at the Olympics
and do so by tying the individual and his Olympic victory
to two other elements.
One will be the victories of his forefathers,
so such and such will be said to be the grandson
of a man who was victorious,
and the nephew of an uncle who was victorious in boxing
or wrestling, what have you.
These are heroic genealogies, if you will.
And the second element that we'll find here in the poems of Pinda
will be a reference to mythology,
where a myth involving the early history of either that family
or perhaps of some other family
will be used again as a way of connecting this contemporary man
to a long gone golden age.
What I'm suggesting here
is that we have an extremely interesting pattern of ideas
and behavior.
What it is, is this.
Homer, as we know, has encoded the morality of the Greeks
and taught them how to behave.
At Olympia what we will find is that that code is enacted.
It becomes the place in the real world of the 8th century
where people can display their Homeric sense
of what it is to be a Greek and to be a man.
The one encodes the other and acts.
Now, what becomes particularly interesting in the history of Olympia
is that this originates quite clearly
in the world of aristocratic competition,
men behaving like Agamemnon and Odysseus,
but as city-states grow more and more powerful,
they will have an investment in these victories as well
so that what originates as competition between individuals
will eventually come to be competition between individuals
representing their states.
And in that respect, the ancient Olympics become very much like
the modern Olympics, freighted with competition between states.
