Lecture 8, The Spartans
Hello and welcome to this, the eighth lecture in our series on ancient Greek civilization.
In the last couple of lectures, I've been trying to make the case that from the eighth century onwards,
the Greeks underwent a series of very profound changes
which would help to dictate the course of subsequent Greek civilization.
Among these changes, we looked at the growth of trade and colonization,
the writing down of Epic for the first time, the growth of city-states,
and also at the same time the growth of a pan-Hellenic idea
which finds particularly vivid expression both at Delphi and Olympia.
These rapid and dramatic developments also led to great tensions
within the emerging Greek city-states, the new Greek communities.
These conflicts were sometimes between regional groups,
they were sometimes between different aristocratic clans,
and some of our evidence suggests that at times these conflicts may have involved
entire classes, the wealthy versus the poor.
So endemic was this kind of civic violence, known usually as stasis,
that had afflicted virtually every Greek city-state.
And as a result, many states were forced to deal with this problem,
but because there were so few mechanisms politically
for resolving these problems of violence and conflict,
what happened in many parts of Greece was that unelected leaders,
whom we call tyrants, simply seized power.
Their control of the various Greek city-states was sometimes in fact beneficial,
because on many occasions they brought during their rule
10, 20 or 30 years of relative peace and harmony to the Greek city-states,
and we'll be looking in a later lecture, in particular,
at the career of Posistratus, who resolved many of the conflicts
of archaic Athens simply by virtue of his 40-year rule.
But today, instead of looking at Athens, which we're going to concentrate on
in many lectures in this class, it is really the core of Greek culture
for the classical period, I want to turn my focus aside
and look at one of the other Greek city-states, Sparta.
And the reason for this is that, eventually,
Sparta and Athens would come to represent two very different
and conflicting trajectories in Greek culture.
Sparta would follow a very different course,
not just from Athens, but from most of the other Greek states.
And the kind of society that it would create,
though it grew out of a response to stasis and conflict,
would look very different, would be organised very differently,
and would have institutions which were quite unique in the Greek world.
Sparta is going to look alien not only to us,
it looked alien to the Greeks as well.
It created, finally, a rigidly hierarchical society,
a society that was dominated by a warrior elite,
and therefore, in some respects, looks more like Homeric society
than any other Greek place.
And in particular, it is a remarkable social unit
because it is one of the few areas of Greece
that, physically and politically,
dominated, to the point of enslavement,
its neighbours, in this case, Messinia.
So, in this lecture, then, I want to concentrate on Sparta
and to look at how its history took the shape that it did
and what it was that was particular and peculiar
in the institutions of the Spartans.
Well, in the first place,
and this is a point that is not usually made in textbooks,
but I think an important one,
down to about the sixth century,
Sparta really has all the hallmarks of a typical Greek society.
It was, in fact, up until that time, quite an open society,
measured in terms of having flourishing arts
and being quite sophisticated in many genres.
We have wonderful poetry from the archaic period
that comes from Sparta,
particularly associated with Tirtais,
who tells poems of war,
and Elkman as well,
whose poems show for us Spartan choruses
of young women performing in competition
in honour of the gods,
choruses often answered by a single voice,
and these poems and the competitions that go with them
are really quite extraordinarily beautiful choral contests
and attest to a very lively poetic tradition in archaic Sparta.
