Those who lived in the community surrounding the town of Sparta were
simply known as the neighbors or in Greek the perioikoi. They were left a
degree of local autonomy but they were subject to service in the Spartan army
and always were under the control of Spartan officers of Spartiates I should
say. Spartiates who were unable to meet their obligations to their community and
I'll define what these obligations were in a moment were then dropped to a
lower status and lost their citizen rights and were known as the inferiors.
And below this elite group of the Spartiates there then was an entire
class of serfs made up of the people of Laconia who were not full Spartiates
and the people of course as we've seen of Messinia. Now the relationship between
these helots and their Spartiate masters is quite simply the Spartiate master
has a land allocation, a property, a ranch, a station, call it what you will
and it is worked for him by this slave population. Each Spartiate also has a
helot who accompanies him into war as a kind of Batman, a helper and on
some occasions the Spartan army will allow helots actual military service
which of course then will be rewarded by being released from servitude. This very
hierarchical society in which people had an absolutely fixed place hardly changed
for 300 years. It was all predicated on the enslavement of Messinia and the
closing of Spartan society. In order to maintain this rigid order all of the
institutions of Sparta and particularly those associated with childhood and with
the lives of men were predicated on this notion of creating an absolute
superiority of the Spartiate class. So for example children were raised not with
private families with their parents but rather were raised with other children
of the same age and this is a system that's not unparalleled in other
societies. The Masai have a kind of similar system which is also oriented
towards age cohorts and children proceed through their education living with
the children of the same age growing up in dormitories. Of course in the Spartan
system the entire intention of this is that every minute of the child's
existence should be predicated on honing his military skills. Athletic training
and military training designed to make these boys hardier, stronger, more
reliable as warriors. In addition to this while children were going through this
educational system known as the agogay they were also exposed to another
institution of Spartan society which is really quite extraordinary known as the
cryptea. It comes from a Greek word which means the hidden thing. The cryptea is a
kind of secret police that exists in Sparta and that secret police is really
made up of boys as they are undergoing their their training. It would be
comparable to us commissioning young men who are in ROTC to go off as a secret
police force and they are dispatched to live off the land and to learn endurance.
So sent away for weeks at a time with nothing but a single dagger and then
told to survive on their own. There is one other aspect of the cryptea which is
often remarked on in our ancient sources and that is if in the course of their
wanderings and they're living off the land these Spartan boys happen to come
across a helot they may kill him with impunity. This is I believe designed to
be a kind of terror technique that makes sure that helots will always be on
their land. They can be accounted for. If they are not penned up on the farm
where they're meant to be at night and you come across them somewhere on the
road then they shouldn't be there and so they're killed. This is a hideous
institution but I think it it's attested in the sources and I think it
exists. In order to further inculcate this idea that you as a Spartiate are
really only one of a class rather than an individual you continue to live with
your peers even when you become an adult. You dine with them every day in a
common mess hall which is known this whole system is known as the system of
Cicitia or common mess halls.
