Welcome back to our 10th lecture in this series on ancient Greek civilization.
In the last couple of lectures, we've been examining the archaic period in Greek history,
and we've been looking at the way in which this was a period of great tension, of great
turmoil and upheaval, even as it was also a period of great accomplishment of new wealth
and of new artistic styles and so forth.
We looked at Sparta in particular to see the way in which one community in Greece tried
to deal with the tension of the period, and we noted that in that case the Spartans really
took a very different tack from the rest of the communities of ancient Greece by closing
in on themselves and keeping the rest of the Greek world at bay.
We saw when we turned our attention to Athens that there the attempt to deal with the stasis,
the conflict which bedevils the affairs of the Greeks, was to appoint a single man, Solon
as archon in 594, in an attempt to push through a set of reforms that would save Athens from
lapsing into anarchy and then potentially tyranny.
This fear of tyranny is one of the features of the archaic period that we come up against
time and time and again, and before we talk more about the actual instance of tyranny
that we know best, that of Posistratus in Athens, we have to be clear that we understand exactly
what the term tyranny means.
Now when we use the term, it tends to conjure up images of cruel despots who are terrorizing
a frightened population, putting people to death, ruling by theat rather than by the
rule of law.
Yet in the world of ancient Greece and especially in the 6th century, tyranny really means
something very different.
It is a term borrowed by the Greeks from Lydia, Turanos, and originally a tyrant is quite
simply someone who has reached supreme power but was not elected to it.
And so in a way, it is a value-neutral term originally.
A tyrant is not a king, he was not born to that power, and he is not a president or an
archon or a prime minister, he was not elected to that power.
He is someone who has seized power.
And in the world of the 6th century, what this really means in practice is ambitious
men who take advantage of the disorder and the upheavals of the time to take power in
their home city.
Now whether they are good men or bad men, whether they are successful rulers, whether
they are tyrannical in our sense of the word or not, is not part of the original meaning
of tyrant.
It simply means that they have used the turmoil of the time and come to power and seized power
themselves.
Some of them in fact were great builders like Polycrates of Samos, you can still see if
you go to the island of Samos, the Eupolianus tunnel which he engineered running through
the mountain to help bring water down to his city.
Some of them ruled during periods of enormous prosperity for their city, for example Corinth
which became one of the great trading powers of the archaic period was ruled through much
of that period also by the family of the Cipcelidae, descendants of Cipcelus, who was remembered
for encouraging the prosperity of Corinth as a trading power at the time.
And by ending the dreadful factional disputes which had afflicted the Greek city states
in the sixth century, many of the tyrants actually brought a period of relative stability
and harmony to their city states.
And so their legacy is a complex one, they can't be regarded as they used to be as a
block to the development of democracy, often in fact they actually encouraged the later
development of democracy, we'll go into that later today.
The Athenians are our best known example of a Greek state ruled by a tyrant, they were
ruled by the tyrant Posistratus and by his sons for at least a half century, the second
half of the sixth century.
And this period in Athenian history far from being a time of fear, far from being a time
of arbitrary rule of secret police or autocracy of anything the sort, rather it was a period
during which the Athenians enjoyed peace at home and growing influence abroad and great
prosperity.
And so in this lecture I want to concentrate now on the family of Posistratus and the tyranny
experienced by the Athenians in the sixth century in an attempt to understand the importance
of this for the subsequent course of Athenian history and culture.
