You might remember that in our last lecture, I pointed out that in the period after Solon,
Athens actually saw not an improvement, but a worsening of the stasis, the civil conflict which had afflicted the state.
For two years, as I mentioned, we had a period of literal anarchy, no archon being elected,
and for another two years, an individual by the name of Damasias tried to seize power and establish himself as tyrant.
During the next generation, after this period of great turmoil in the late 590s and the 580s, down into the 570s,
in the next generation, three factions would emerge dominating Athenian politics.
They're labelled for us by Aristotle, who tells us that they were called the men of the shore, the men of the plain,
and the men from beyond the hills.
Quite clearly, these are regional markers, these factional names referred to the parts of the territory of Athens, Attica,
that these different groups came from.
Each of these factions, we don't know a great deal about them, but from what we know,
it seems as if each of these factions was ruled by an aristocratic leader.
So we have here a combination of that aristocratic factionalism that I've mentioned in the past
and regional distinctions in the Athenian state as well.
The leader of the last of these factions, the men from either the hill or beyond the hill, was known as Posistratus,
and he's going to be the important character we deal with today.
Posistratus actually had to make three attempts at establishing himself as tyrant of Athens,
and I want to rehearse the details of those attempts because not only are they interesting stories on their own,
but I think they serve to remind us of how weak the power of the Athenian state was at this stage in its history,
and that's worth keeping in mind.
So the three attempts at tyranny by Posistratus.
These begin in 561.
On this occasion, Posistratus appeared in the marketplace of Athens, the Agora.
He was dishevelled, his clothes had been torn apart, and he was bruised and scratched,
and he claimed that he had been attacked by his enemies in a factional fight, a typical example of stasis.
He therefore requested that he be allowed to raise a bodyguard, clubbearers,
and after he'd been given permission by the Athenians to do this,
he promptly marched up to the Acropolis and installed himself there and proclaimed himself tyrant.
Shortly after, he was driven out.
It has always struck me that this episode seems vaguely absurd,
that this sounds more like little boys in first grade playing king of the castle,
and the very fact that this could be the way in which the affairs of the Athenians are worked out in the sixth century
I think reminds us of just how weak the central authority of Athens is.
Athens is up for grabs between these competing factions.
In 558, three years later, Posistratus made his second attempt at establishing a tyranny,
and he did this by the much more legitimate means of establishing a marriage alliance between himself
and that of another leading family, the faction of another leading family.
Unfortunately, according to our sources, his young wife complained to her family
that he, Posistratus, was not interested in consummating the marriage properly.
Exactly what that means. We can't be sure.
It may be generously to interpret it that he already had sons from an earlier marriage
and that he didn't wish to complicate matters by fathering new children.
For whatever reason, exactly, they then separated shortly after,
and the alliance between Posistratus and the other faction broke down,
and Posistratus withdrew from Athens, facing opposition from the other factions.
Upon withdrawing from Athens then, around 558, he moved north to the northern Aegean,
to the region of Thrace, and he spent the best part of the next decade up there,
enriching himself as he opened new gold mines and silver mines,
and it was as a result of the wealth that he accumulated in the late 50s and the early 540s.
It was with this wealth that he then returned to Athens in 546,
and this, his third attempt at establishing the tyranny, was, in many ways, the most remarkable attempt of all.
Herodotus tells this story and says that the Athenians are normally regarded as the most intelligent of the Greeks,
but this story does really not redound to their credit at all.
The story is that on this third occasion, when Posistratus returned,
he landed in eastern Attica, Browron, where his family regional base was located.
