And there, he took a girl by the name of Fayy, who was six feet tall, that may be unremarkable
for us, but of course it is exceptional for the Greeks of the sixth century.
He dressed her up as the goddess Athena with a suit of armour, put her in a chariot and
then proceeded in ceremonial fashion to drive from Browron to the city of Athens, with the
Athenians lining the way, convinced that it was the goddess Athena herself who was
escorting Posistratus back to Athens.
That's the colourful story, the slightly more mundane historical detail that must be added
is that his opponents did oppose this return, they brought him to battle and at the Battle
of Polini in 546, Posistratus was able to defeat his enemies and finally, once and for all,
he would establish himself as the tyrant of Athens.
Notice though, where is there an Athenian army, where is there an Athenian state or
government force opposing him and defending the state against him?
It doesn't exist, because Athens at this stage is still really nothing more than a combination
of different factions fighting each other.
That's what it was at the beginning of Posistratus rule, around 546.
It was not that by the time of the end of the rule of the Posistratus towards the end
of the 6th century.
I want to talk then about the transformation that took place in Athens as a result of Posistratus
being in power and a good place to begin is by going to Herodotus, who 50 years after
the expulsion of the Posistratus family, investigated the tyranny.
He wanted to understand what impact it had and he came to the conclusion, the somewhat
remarkable conclusion, that Posistratus had in fact ruled very mildly, that he had essentially
obeyed all the laws that had been handed down from Solon and that in general, Posistratus
had done a great deal to benefit the Athenians.
Taking their cue from Herodotus, some modern historians would go even further and they
would say that looked at over the long haul, over the whole expanse of Athenian history
and Athenian democracy, Posistratus may have been finally more important for the establishment
of the democracy than even Solon.
Let's consider his record then to see whether these claims bear examination.
Well, first of all, we know that he maintains the existing body of law.
Now this means that every year still the Athenians met and elected new magistrates.
It is not as if government was suspended by Posistratus.
It's true of course that the majority of people being elected to these offices were probably
members of Posistratus family or other factions that were allied to him.
But the net effect was to continue this sense of the regularity of Athenian government and
in fact probably most other great families came to some sort of accommodation with Posistratus
so that what we end up here is with a more stable sharing of power between the great
families of Athens with Posistratus acting as a kind of moderator over the whole affair.
Furthermore, he appointed rural magistrates so that poor farmers could actually get legal
address out in the countryside.
Now this also is an important step if you think about it.
On the one hand of course it means they don't have to quit their farms and come into the
city centre.
So it encourages people not to be coming into Athens milling about and congregating which
some sources say he was afraid of because this might lead to unrest.
But more importantly I think it reinforces for every Athenian not just the people living
in downtown Athens but for the farmers living 30 miles out of Athens.
It reinforces for them the notion that there is a rule of law guaranteed by the Athenian
state which will protect them and give them a hearing.
Not that they have to travel into Athens for this but that it will even come to them.
So that I think is an important development.
Another much more straightforward and material benefit is that he embarked on an extremely
ambitious building program.
This included a temple to Athena up on the Acropolis and if you've been to the Acropolis
you'll of course have seen the Parthenon and the Erythion but between the two of them if
you look at the bedrock you will actually see the cut bedrock bearing the foundations
of that temple built by the persistrates.
The rest of the temple is now gone.
