This was to have very great importance in a number of different ways.
For example, the Homeric poems bear very strongly the mark
of a period of development in Athens.
And this looks to be not part of the earlier epic tradition of the Dark Ages,
but rather to date from the time when the Homeric poems were being performed
on a regular basis in Athens at the Panathenaic Festival.
And as a result of that, there are references to Athens
that are put into the poems themselves.
So we find Athens during the second half of the 6th century
assuming quite an extraordinary status in the Greek world
as an economic centre and as a cultural centre as well.
This can be attested in a number of different genres and areas of the arts.
For example, the sculpture of Athens in the archaic period
reaches quite an extraordinary new level of excellence.
And really begins to outstrip sculpture from other parts of Greece.
Similarly, in the area of vase painting,
and we have to consider vases not only in terms of their own beauty,
but also as markers of trade,
since they are often transporting goods to another place,
it is at this time that Attic black figure vases,
black figure vases from Attica or from Athens,
begin to supplant Corinthian pottery as luxury items
and were traded as far away as, for example, Italy.
In the Etruscan tombs, which were opened in the last 200 years,
one finds very commonly black figure Attic vases.
Now, with people in Atruria,
if the Etruscans are paying to have these in their tombs,
it means that they regard them as luxury items,
and that means that there is a demand for this Attic pottery.
It's becoming a high status item.
So we have this cultural transformation.
We have this being tied to an economic transformation
as high quality Athenian goods are turning up far abroad,
and this consistently goes with quite a new aggressive foreign policy
that can be tied to Athenian prosperity of the time as well.
So, for example, this is perhaps not so remarkable,
one finds that Posistratus, as the tyrant of Athens,
was interested in conducting friendly relations
with the tyrants of other Greek states.
And so we hear of the Athenians, for example,
dealing with Ligdemus of Naxos and Polycrates of Samos.
These are members of a sort of a mutual self-help society
for Greek tyrants in the 6th century.
In addition to dealing internationally with other tyrants
who, like him, were impressive builders and leaders,
Posistratus was responsible for the annexation of the island of Delos.
Now, this is quite a remarkable event.
Delos is one of the great Greek sanctuaries.
It is dedicated to the god Apollo,
who in myth was believed to have been born on that island.
His mother, Leto, had wandered around,
heavily pregnant, looking for a place where she could actually
give birth, and the island of Delos had allowed her to do it there.
And as a result, the entire island,
the entire island was a religious sanctuary.
No one could be born on the island.
No one could die on the island, lest it be polluted.
And as a religious sanctuary in the middle of the Aegean,
it became both a popular site of pilgrimage
and an important economic center as well, a neutral spot
where traders could come from different parts of the Greek world.
A very prestigious sanctuary almost to the caliber of Olympia or Delphi.
And under Posistratus, the Athenians took over control of the sanctuary.
Now, this, therefore, is a very potent statement of the power of Athens.
Athens is declaring itself as the dominant power in the Aegean,
if it can control the island of Delos.
If we consider all of these changes together,
the economic reforms, the foreign policy, the territorial annexation,
the new wealth, the increasing trade, the building program,
the reliance on the same body of law, the help for small farmers and so forth,
if we consider all of these things together,
what I think we get is more than just an increasing prosperity for Athens.
I think we get the creation of Athens.
By that I mean, before Posistratus, Athens had been nothing more than this
agglomeration of towns and villages and regional clans locked into fighting with each other.
