These clans had been like the Homeric heroes that we read about.
They had been like the Olympic competitors that we read about.
Locked into this same pattern of endless competition, of strife, of the argon, of the conflict.
Persistrators, yes, had arisen from exactly that same milieu as well. We can't deny that.
He also was an ambitious aristocrat who originated the same way as all these others.
But by the sheer length of his reign and by the sheer range of his legislation and his activity,
what he managed to bequeath to the Athenians at the end of his reign was a much more clearly articulated sense of the Athenian identity of the Athenian state.
From now on, in Greek affairs and in the affairs particularly of the Athenians,
there will be a strong sense of there being an Athenian state, a government, a rule of law and a regularity in all the affairs of the Athenians.
That, in fact, will be what makes possible the next major step which will be democracy and the institutions of democracy.
That would be a little while incoming, however.
Persistrators died in about 528, 527 BC and after his death, his sons continued to rule after him.
This is a very common feature of tyranny in the Greek world where the sons try to establish something of a dynastic rule following the successful rule of their ambitious and very successful father.
However, in the case of the sons of Persistratus, particularly Hippias and Hipparchos, they were not the equals of their father and their rule collapsed shortly after.
In 514, one of Persistratus' sons, Hipparchos, would be assassinated and four years later, and it is probably that very late period of the tyranny,
between 514 and 510, the years after the assassination of Hipparchos and the expulsion of Hippias,
it is probably in that time that we find the tyranny turning, as we would say, tyrannical.
That is to say that Hippias, after the death of his father and the murder of his brother, resorted to a much more autocratic style of rule until he eventually was driven out by the Athenians.
What would follow is what we will deal with in the next lecture.
But to set the groundwork for that, we have to recognize that with the death of Persistratus, the death of Hipparchos and then the expulsion of Hippias,
there would come yet another fresh round of civil status, a civil warfare. The path towards democracy was never easy for the Athenians.
The man who would profit from Persistratus' legacy, the man who would recognize that the common Athenian was in a way a more potent political force than any powerful aristocrat,
was the man who would really finally embark the Athenians on the road towards democracy.
His name is Kleisthenes. He is in charge of the Athenian state in the years 510-508 BC and it is he more than any other who finally will establish the brilliance of the Athenian democracy.
