We might begin by posing the question that Roman lawyers used to pose to Ibono who profits
by the system.
Well, a number of scholars have pointed out that a great benefit of the system instituted
by Kleisthenes is that it regularizes the raising of an Athenian army.
The Athenian army is raised by tribal contingents.
If you create these 10 tribes that incorporate everyone in Athens, you have a very well organized
muster whereby at a moment's notice, all of the available men in Athens can be enlisted,
put into the field.
The regiments work that way, the officers are selected on a tribal basis and so forth.
So this is the military argument that the Kleisthenic reforms are designed to create
a more regular and more reliable muster.
The difficulty that I have with this particular theory is that it runs the risk in my opinion
of confusing the results of the Kleisthenic reforms with the intentions of the Kleisthenic
reforms.
Yes, it did result in a more reliable muster and an extremely efficient Athenian army that
fought very well and successfully hereafter.
Whether that was what Kleisthenes had in mind as he began the reforms, if that is what he
was planning to begin with, we can't say.
I don't think that such an explanation, for example, would explain the extreme complexity
of the Kleisthenic reforms.
Let me illustrate this with an example.
In one of the tribes created by Kleisthenes, it's coastal third lies in the northeast
of Attica and in that region there are four villages that go together, they're located
near each other, they sent a religious embassy to Delphi every year, they clearly thought
of themselves as being a small corporation, four villages that were closely affiliated.
In the Kleisthenic reforms, three of these stayed together as part of the third of one
tribe, one of them was cut off and was attached to a completely separate tribe.
Now I don't see what sense that makes if your concern is with raising military musters.
It would make more sense, in fact, to keep with the existing units that were already
in place on the ground.
A second theory that is often used to explain the Kleisthenic reforms is an interesting theory,
it's the ancient version of a conspiracy theory.
Kleisthenes was a member of the Alchemyonid family.
According to some historians, the reforms of Kleisthenes were designed to increase the
influence and the power of the Alchemyonid clan in Athenian politics.
How on earth can we know this?
Well, the way the argument is built is as follows.
If you look at every reference that we have to an Alchemyonid in subsequent history and
find out what deem he came from, since we can allocate deems to thirds and thirds to
tribes, we can then say this man's family was located in such and such a tribe.
If you do this with the Alchemyonids, based on some evidence which is not as firm as we
might like it to be, it looks as if the Alchemyonids, as a clan, as a blood related family,
were scattered across three different tribes in the Athenian democracy.
Aha, say the conspiracy theorists.
This tends to demonstrate then that Kleisthenes was attempting to insinuate Alchemyonid influence
across three tribes and therefore to make the Alchemyonids three times more powerful,
instead of being powerful in one tribe, powerful in three.
There's a fairly obvious weakness in that interpretation as well and that is this.
If you take a given clan, relatives, cousins, uncles and nephews who are all willing to
help each other and operate together, if you spread their influence across three tribes,
you may in fact be diluting their influence in the broader democracy because you will
be reducing the numbers of that family in any given tribe.
It's not at all clear that the Kleisthenic reforms would have benefited his own family.
It's not demonstrable in later history and it doesn't particularly make sense with the
evidence as it stands.
So I don't believe that the Kleisthenic reforms were primarily to change the Athenian army
nor were they designed to make his family the Kennedys of the Greek world, as I've sometimes
been likened to, a powerful family with a strong power base in one region.
No, I think there's something else going on here and this goes back to certain themes
that we've been talking about in the lectures so far.
