Lecture 12, Beyond Greece, the Persian Empire.
Welcome back to this, the 12th of our lectures in a series on ancient Greek civilization
and Greek history.
In the course of the last 11 lectures, we've been charting the development of Greek civilization
both through the Bronze Age, then into the Iron Age and now down very close to the classical
period.
And during that time we've seen there have been moments in the history of the Greeks
as in the course of any culture when that history will have abrupt changes and there
will be moments when the cultural flow which has been developing for hundreds of years
will change direction very, very quickly.
We're now reaching such a moment again in the history of the Greeks at the end of the
sixth century.
During the archaic period we have seen the tension within the Greek world, we've seen
the stasis in the various Greek communities, we've seen the different ways in which Greek
states have tried to handle this with Sparta closing down and becoming a rigidly fixed
society and Athens on the other hand exploring much more nuanced ways of dealing with this
in the reforms of Solon, then seeing 50 years of persisted tyranny which truly transformed
the Athenians and finally the triumphant career of Kleisthenes and the reforms of 510-508
BC.
But that nice development that we see going on through the sixth century which begins in
Anarchy and ends in democracy will now abruptly change and the incident, the event which will
mark a completely new direction in the history of the Greeks will be the Persian Wars.
Because that is going to be so monumental an experience for the Greeks, today what I
want to do is to set the stage for looking at the Persian Wars by looking at the Persian
Empire.
I want to see who these Persians were that the Greeks would be coming up against in 490
and 480, 479 BC.
And as we do this I want to do a second thing as well, not just to tell the story of the
Persians but to try to bring out the way in which what we know about the Persians we tend
to see through a Greek filter.
It's not simply that we are trying to understand one culture through the lens of another culture
but that we are seeing the Persians from the point of view of the Greeks who of course
fought against them in 490 and 480, 479 BC and who defeated them.
And so the impact of that victory which we will see in another lecture was of immense
importance to the Greeks is going to have an effect on how subsequently the Greeks
write about the Persians and how then from there how we read and understand the Persians.
So we have two focuses today, trying to understand the Persians and trying to see something of
the way that the Greeks thought about them and how these points of view took shape.
Well first of all let's go back and talk about the origins of the Persians and try to find
out how it should be that these people should end up in conflict with the world of the Greeks.
The Persians really come from an entire milieu in the ancient Near East that has seen a succession
of great civilisations.
From the 4th millennium BC onwards Mesopotamia which is to say modern day Iraq has been the
homeland of a succession of complex cultures and civilisations, Sumer, Akkad, the power
of Babylon, later the Assyrians as well and throughout these millennia in this area of
what is modern day Iraq we have seen civilisations come and go, civilisations rise and fall to
be replaced by new ones.
This endless pattern of invasion, destruction and regeneration has gone on for thousands
of years.
Most of the cultures of those millennia that succeeded each other and swallowed each other
up and then reproduced new power were cultures that were Semitic, their languages are generally
Semitic related to Hebrew and to Arabic today.
And generally speaking the focus of their power, the location of their power was always
that area between the two fertile rivers, the Tigris and the Euphrates, the area the
Greeks knew as Mesopotamia, the land between the rivers.
The Persians are somewhat outside that cultural flow which is poured over the ancient Near
East for millennia.
Over a start their language was Indo-European.
In other words, their language is in the same general family group that includes Greek,
it includes Sanskrit at the other end, it goes in both directions to India and also to Europe
and of course it then includes our language, English and German and French and so forth.
