We might like to recall this, sometimes people forget that the Iranians today, the modern
descendants of those Persians, are not Arabs, they are not Semitic speakers, they speak
a language that is related to ours.
And secondly, not only are they outside of this flow of the cultures of the ancient
Near East in being Indo-European and not Semitic, but secondly, they don't come from
Mesopotamia and finally, that is not really the heartland of their empire when they do
become a great Near Eastern empire.
They originally come from the southern steppes, from southern Russia, and it is out of these
great open steppes that these herdsmen and horsemen make their way sometime around a
thousand BC, this is obviously a very general date.
As they pour south into the high Iranian plateau, they remain scattered in separate
tribes and groups of herdsmen and hunters and riders, and it is not until about 700
BC that they become politically unified.
Even then, they are still relatively weak and they are still on the outer side of that
heartland of the ancient Near East of Mesopotamia.
This will change drastically in 558 BC.
We're now getting to that stage of history when I can give you actual dates, which makes
me very happy compared to talking only about millennia.
In 558 BC, Cyrus the Great comes to the throne and he soon establishes very quickly the basis
of Persian power, the Persian empire, by conquering the neighbouring tribe of the Medes.
And in doing so, he sets off a campaign of aggressive territorial expansion which will
lead into the growth of Persian power across the whole ancient Near East, eventually culminating
of course in their conflict with the Greeks at the beginning of the 5th century.
Cyrus the Great's reign, which lasts from 558 down to his death in 530, sees for example
the conquest of Babylon, that fabled city of Mesopotamia, and in that action the Persians
are transformed from outsiders and invaders to at one moment becoming the greatest imperial
power of the ancient Near East.
By the time of his death in 530 BC, the Persian domain reached all the way from Afghanistan
and the upper north west of India, all the way across Central Asia, as far as modern
day Turkey, the Ionian coast and the very edges of Greece.
This was a vast and extraordinary empire.
Now as we look at the growth of Persian power, inevitably of course as the Persian empire
expanded, it brought them into contact with the Greeks.
The Greeks of Asia Minor came under direct Persian control, particularly after the conquest
of Lydia, Persian control extended virtually all the way to the Aegean.
And you remember that ancient Greece included not only the Greek peninsula but also the
Ionian coast, what we would nowadays call the coast of Turkey.
But by about 514, much of this now was in Persian hands as well.
As this expansion was going on, of course the Greeks knew that there was a great power
coming out of the east, they knew that there was a great power gobbling up the various
smaller kingdoms and domains of Asia Minor.
And in the work of Herodotus, which we'll be examining more closely in the next lecture,
we see the way in which the Greeks eventually would come to comprehend this, to understand
what was going on.
In particular, if we look at the account of Cresus, the Lydian king who was eventually
conquered by the Persians, what we find is that the Greeks were thinking of this in terms
of what we might call not history but rather a morality tale.
The expansion of the Persians was like an inexorable wave coming on and the reaction
that it elicited from people as they came in contact with the Persians said much about
them.
For example, Cresus had believed that his power was invincible and he suffered of course for
his arrogance.
So in retrospect, as the Greeks look back at the Persians and as they write stories
to account for the growth of Persian power, they are thinking in terms of the lessons
that are to be learnt there, lessons not just about who the Persians are but what the Greeks
have learnt from their contact with the Persians.
