Darius continued not to worry about oligarchy or democracy, but rather to worry about what
was really on the minds of the Persians, and that was simply the matter of how to expand
Persian power. He campaigned for the first time in Europe, in Scythia, and by about 514,
under his expansion, Persian authority had reached right to the edge of the Aegean. Greek
cities here had come under the control of the Persians, although in most places the
Persian satraps had been willing to put in a Greek tyrant to act as a kind of puppet
governor. The Persians, as I've pointed out, were generally content to leave native populations
to rule themselves, provided the tribute was coming in to the Persian coffers. They did
so here with the Greeks as well. Persian rule, quite simply for the most part, was not onerous,
nor was it tyrannical. There were some exceptions, but for the most part it wasn't so. And the
best measure for this is, quite simply, that after Persian authority had been thrown off
as a result of the Persian wars, and then the Athenians stepped in to create a league
which required contributions from its various members, the contributions paid to the Athenians
by their allies were assessed at the same amount as the tribute paid by the Greeks to
their Persian overlords. So I think that tells us something about the nature of Persian power,
perhaps it tells us more about the nature of Athenian power. Nevertheless, all was
not sweetness and light, and in 499 there was a revolt of the Ionian Greek states against
Persian authority which culminated in the burning of Sardis by a Greek force which included
an Athenian contingent. This annoyed the great king of Persia immensely, as you can imagine,
and it set in train those momentous events which would lead to an invasion in 490, to
punish the Athenians for the burning of Sardis, and then a second invasion in 480 and 479
where the entire Greek world would face the threat of coming under Persian control. The
details of that actual set of campaigns and the impact on the Greeks I'm going to deal
with on another occasion, but again I want to just finish off this part of the lecture
by commenting on the way in which the Greeks thought about the Persians at this stage
of their contact. Herodotus tells a story of one of the Persian kings in which he dreamt
of seeing two beautiful women yoke together side by side, and this dream was meant to
suggest that one of the women was Europe and the other was Asia, and that this dream was
suggesting that Persian authority would eventually yoke together Europe and Asia, that the Persians
would conquer Europe as well. What Herodotus's story tells us is that in the minds of the
Greeks, they're developed in the 5th century a very clear notion that the Persians were
unlike them, that there was some deep and fundamental difference between the way the
Persians did things and the way the Greeks did things, and that this even was located
in geography, that Asia and Europe were fundamentally different and that the whole reason the Persians
would eventually be defeated was because the gods would not tolerate one power uniting
both Greece and Persia. So this notion of the Persian wars as a massive cultural clash
is something that took shape in the 5th century and in the next lecture I'm going to talk
more about this and discuss the extraordinary significance of this both for the Greeks and
I think for the modern world as well. But what I want to ask at this moment in the lecture
is, is that what the Greeks and the Persians at the end of the 6th century really thought?
Not afterwards, not in hindsight, not after the Greeks had won the war and decided that
this enemy was a great enemy but very unlike them, but actually in the 6th century, during
the reign of Cyrus and Cambyses and Darius, what actually was the contact between them?
What was the difference between them? Were they really two completely antithetical systems?
And I think the answer must be emphatically no, they weren't. The Greeks were in fact
divided among themselves into a number of different states. They were not a single Greek
nation facing Persian might and power, they would only be that temporarily. And the political
choices that they made were not the same throughout Greece. Not every Greek state was
a democracy facing the autocracy of Persia. Some were oligarchies, some had kings, some
had tyrants. There was a great difference all across the Greek landscape. So they were
not the linear or the complete antithesis, if you will, of the Persians.
