I think a much more important point to make is this.
We see, thanks to the Greeks, a great clash between East and West.
But in the context of the 490s, in the world of around 500 BC,
the Greeks were insignificant in comparison to the Persians.
Now, they would become significant in terms of what their culture would leave for us
and our connection to that culture.
But I'm talking here about territory, power, empire and dominion.
And seen in those terms, Greece is nothing more than the very last leg
of a great journey that begins thousands of miles away in the Hindu Kush.
And everything in between is Persian and only those last few inches on the map are Greek.
More importantly, not only is Greece relatively insignificant
in terms of the whole expanse of the Persian Empire,
this I think is really significant,
there were many Greeks living and working in the Persian Empire
and who did not think of the Persians as being a completely foreign and alien people
who were the exact opposite of them.
We know that, for example, as Persian power increased
and as they called upon stone masons to build their extraordinary palaces,
they were importing Greeks from Ionia who were working quite happily in the Persian Empire.
We know of Greeks who were actually living at the court of the great king,
working for him, recording, acting as doctors for the great king and so forth.
So, I think that it is a great mistake to think that at the time
that the Greeks and the Persians first came into contact,
there was an immediate sense that the two were destined to a final confrontation.
That's a view that is dictated by subsequent events,
but in fact, at the time, I think the world must have looked very different indeed.
Now, enough of doing things from the Greek point of view,
let's see if just for a moment we can talk about the Persians themselves in their own terms.
What do we know about this culture and this society that came in contact with the Greeks?
Well, the Achaemenid dynasty, the dynasty of Cyrus and his descendants,
favoured a traditional Persian religion which was centred on the worship of natural elements
and natural forces.
Their gods appear to have been the sky, the moon, the sun, the earth, the fire and water and so forth.
If, for example, you cross the Iranian plateau today,
you will see often from miles in the distance these extraordinary fire altars
where sacred fire was kept burning in honour of the gods.
They particularly honoured, and here I'm talking not of the Persians in general,
but of the ruling dynasty, they particularly honoured the great sky god
who they knew as Ahura Mazda.
And if you see the great inscriptions at Bisitun
where the Achaemenid kings proclaimed their power
using the same sort of language as Akkadian and Sumerian kings had used for millennia before them,
the only difference is that the god who they show over them,
quite literally as a winged figure above the figure of the king,
will be this great sky god Ahura Mazda.
So here we see the Persians both adapting the customs of the early and the early Eastern cultures
and expressing something of their own particular identity and worship as well.
Now, because we've been so used to this idea of the Persians as being the opposite of the Greeks,
as being a tyrannical empire ruled by despots,
as soon as we talk about religion, we usually tend to think that this must have been an intolerant culture.
But in fact, our documentary evidence suggests exactly the opposite.
In one extraordinary instance, we actually have a letter from Darius to one of his satraps,
a satrap who controlled an area that included Greek territory in which there was a sanctuary of Apollo.
And the letter from Darius says to his satrap,
make sure that you do not cut down the trees of this god,
for we have worshiped him long since as did our ancestors.
In other words, in typical Near Eastern fashion,
the tendency of the Persians was not to think of our gods as better than other gods,
but to look for correspondences and ways that they could in fact worship other gods
and bring their power to bear on the power of the Persian empire itself.
The one area in which there really is a marked and undeniable difference between the Persians and the Greeks,
and this would cause many great problems,
was in the hierarchy of the Persian Empire.
The Persian Empire assigned to each of its members a clear status,
not only in terms of which ethnicity you had,
whether you were Persian or Median or Sogdian or Bactrian,
but also within the society of the court, your level.
Now the way this was expressed was that if you met a superior,
you were expected to prostrate yourself in an act the Greeks called proskinesis.
You abase yourself physically,
and then you are lifted by your superior who greets you.
If you meet an equal, instead you greet that person with a kiss.
So these gestures mark a very clear hierarchy,
and of course this would cause immense problems later
when Greeks and Persians really had to live side by side under the reign of Alexander the Great.
