Now, I don't know whether any of you have worn 60 pounds of bronze armor, but the idea
of having a contingent run for a mile over open space and keep order is one that is a
little difficult to imagine.
I'm told that a generation or two ago, an eminent historian attempted to test this by
having 60 pounds of armor made, going to Marathon and jogging across the plain to the sea's
edge.
He had run about 20 yards when he tripped over, hit his head and was knocked out.
However, the story has a happy ending because apparently when he woke up, he was being nursed
by a rather attractive ungraduated student and they were subsequently married.
Another potentially more serious problem with the Herodotene account is that he says that
the horses were absent.
That is to say, the Persian cavalry wasn't there.
And historians would love to know where the Persian cavalry was.
These questions raised some doubts about the veracity of the Herodotene account and
the numbers, of course, raised questions as well.
Such a phenomenally high number of Persians killed and such a low number of Athenians.
Was it in fact a major invasion by the Persians in an attempt to take over and annex the territory
of Athens?
Well, that's certainly the way the Greeks saw it, but it's probably more likely that
it was a punitive expedition.
An expedition that might symbolically assert the power of the Persians, but probably would
not lead to the Persians taking over the city.
One factor to keep in mind here is that the Persian forces were guided to Marathon by
none other than Hippias, the son of the old Athenian tyrant Posistratus, a son who had
ruled on his own in Athens for about 15 years before being expelled.
So it is likely that had the Persians been successful, Athens would not have come under
direct Persian control, but rather would have come back under the control of the Posistratid
family and once again been ruled by the tyrants.
Whatever the intention of the Persians and whatever lay behind the campaign at Marathon,
what we can say with absolute confidence is that the victory at Marathon changed Greek
history.
The victors at Marathon were known thereafter as the Marathon Omikoi, the men who fought
at Marathon, and this was a badge of honour.
To be one of these men was to be one of the elite.
One can't help thinking that in the rest of the 5th century, as the Greeks fought so many
wars among themselves and against each other, that the victory at Marathon must have seemed
like one of the last great, good, honest wars because it had been against a foreign invader.
In that respect, I think the status of the men of Marathon only increased in the course
of the 5th century in the same way that the status of World War II veterans has increased
in this century as time goes on again by comparison with some of the other wars that
we've been involved in since that time.
So the Marathon Omikoi then were heroes, particularly of the Athenians, and the campaign
at Marathon was remembered then as the finest moment in Athenian history.
Darius left Greece as a result of the failure at Marathon and died some years later before
he was able to mount a second expedition to punish the Athenians, and it was left to
his son in the 480s, Xerxes, to prepare what would not be simply a punitive raid against
Athens but would be a major invasion of the Greek peninsula by the forces of the Persian
Empire.
At first early in the 480s he was occupied by a revolt that had taken place in the Persian
Empire, but by the late 480s plans were well in hand for this full scale invasion of Greece.
Now this was to take place both by land and by sea.
Not a small army being ferried across in boats, across the Aegean, but a huge army numbering
if Herodotus is to be believed one million men marching from Asia Minor across the Helispont,
marching across the Thracian coast and then down into Greece.
They would be supported as they marched by a naval contingent which would sail along the
coast supplying them and protecting them, and some measure of the enormity of this undertaking
can be seen if one goes to Mount Athos in northern Greece and sees the canal that Xerxes
planned on cutting all the way through the peninsula so that his fleet could sail from
one side to the other of Athos without having to sail around its stormy and rocky edges.
