This is our 14th lecture in the series on ancient Greek civilization, and today we pick
up our story from the aftermath of the Persian Wars.
In our last lecture we looked at the epic confrontation between the Greeks and the Persians,
looking for example at some of the episodes recounted by Herodotus, the historian who
later in the 5th century pulled together these stories and gave us the story of this extraordinary
event.
We saw in our last lecture that the first confrontation had occurred in 490 with a punitive expedition
sent by the Persian king Darius, which had landed at Marathon but had been successfully
repelled and the Persians had been pushed into the sea.
And then in 480 and 479 in a much larger comprehensive invasion, the Persian forces of the great
king Xerxes had been defeated first at Salamis, thanks largely to the Athenians and their
fleet, and then in 479 at Patea, thanks largely to the Greek army led by the Spartans.
In the period after these Persian wars, I argued, we would see a new culture developing
in Greece and taking shape, and that culture is intimately associated with the power of
Athens, and so today what I want to concentrate on is the story of how Athenian power in the
Aegean in relation to the other states of the Aegean took new shape in the course of
the 5th century, beginning first as a league of Greek states designed to carry on the war
against the Persians, liberating the Greek states of Ionia, but very quickly being transformed
from a league, a Dealian league, as it was called since it was based on the island of
Delos, the sanctuary of Apollo, very quickly being transformed from that free alliance
into an Athenian empire with Athens as an imperial city at the centre of that empire.
That transformation is one that historians have been puzzled over for many years, it's
one that even the Greeks themselves were interested in, Thucydides writes a great many chapters
in his first book trying to analyse this growth of Athenian power, and it's an important question
for two reasons, one is that it is the background, the setting for the flowering of Athenian
culture in the 5th century, and the second reason that it's important is that it is the
growth of this power according to Thucydides that inspired fear in the Spartans and would
lead finally to that cataclysmic confrontation at the end of the 5th century from 431 to
404 BC between Athens and Sparta, the Peloponnesian war. So in a sense we're going to be charting
then the transformation of Athens between the two great wars that mark the Athenian half
century. Let's turn then to this free alliance, the Dealian league, and see how it came about.
The Athenians of course had emerged from the Persian wars with a great deal of prestige
among the Greeks. Their own city had been sacked, not only that the Athenians had been
prepared to abandon their city, a few had decided to stay behind up on the Acropolis
and had been cut down by the Persians when they invaded the city, but the vast majority
had physically lifted themselves, their baggage in their children, and had been transported
across to Troyzene. So the willingness of the Athenians to physically abandon their
city and then to rely entirely on their manpower, their navy to defeat the Persians, had brought
them great prestige and had left them with a kind of moral authority as leaders of the
Greeks. They had played such a big role in contributing to the defeat of the Greeks that
Herodotus at one point actually says that after the gods it was the Athenians who were
most responsible for the defeat of the Persians. In the immediate aftermath of the war, many
of the Greek states, particularly of the Eastern Aegean, the Ionian coast, had decided that
since the Persians had been beaten in Greece, now was the time to drive the Persians out
of their territory, in fact to turn the tables on them and to continue the war into Persian
territory. The great king had sacked the sanctuaries of Greece, now the Greeks would return the
favour and sacked the sanctuaries of Persia.
