The Hellenic League, the League of Greek States, which had temporarily banded together to fight the Persians during the wars,
now continued then under the authority of the Spartan king Porcenius.
But according to Thucydides, Porcenius made himself unpopular by behaving as if he himself were an eastern potentate.
And shortly after the end of the Persian wars, the small states of Greece, those on the edges of the Persian Empire,
actually approached Athens and asked the Athenians to take over the leadership of their alliance.
And so it was then that in 478 was born the Deleon League.
The League of Greek States banded together under the general leadership of Athens with the island of Deolos,
the sanctuary of Apollo as its religious center, formed as a league in order to carry on the war and to take the war into Persian territory
to second burn the cities of the Persians.
Now, between the foundation of this league in 478 and the defeat of the Persians in approximately 468 at the Battle of the Remedon River,
the record of this league actually shows us that very quickly it began its transformation from a free League of Greek States to an Athenian Empire.
And so we need to just go over some of the details of that quick transformation to see it taking place.
In 476, 475, for example, the Deleon League forces expelled a Persian garrison from the northern Aegean from a site in Thrace at Ion.
And at the same time, they also seized the island of Skiros in the Aegean and made it an Athenian colony.
Even at this early stage, then, we see the Athenians combining their anti-Persian campaign with what seems to be the first steps towards an Athenian imperialism
of planting a colony on the island of Skiros.
In 473, the city of Koristos, a Greek city located on the island of Yubia, not very far from Athens at all, was forced to join the Deleon League.
So, already, again, at this early stage, there is an element of compulsion about the relationship between the Athenians and the smaller Greek states.
And then, in 470, the Allied state of Naxos, one of the larger of the Allied states, went into revolt from the Deleon League.
The Athenians lay siege to Naxos, the city was captured, and it was forced once again to join the League.
And these are all events that occur before 468 and this defeat of the Persians at the Battle of the Urimadon River that I mentioned a little earlier.
So, even within the very first ten years, there is a strong element of compulsion in the treatment of the Allied states and other Greek states by the Athenians.
More revolts would follow in the years after.
In 465, the island of Phasos went into revolt and this was an island that the Athenians could not afford to lose from their alliance because it was an island rich in lumber used for the masts and for the hulls of the ships of the Athenian navy.
The island stayed in revolt for three years with the Athenians laying siege to it and then in 462, it was brought back once again into the fold and once again reverted to Allied status, paying tribute to the Athenians.
This transformation of various islands and cities around the Aegean from free allies of the Athenians into subjects of an Athenian overlord, this creation of an empire in other words, was helped by various institutions.
And the most famous of these is that of the tribute or the foros paid by the Allied states to the Athenians.
Now, the Allied states were actually given a relatively straightforward choice, either contribute ships and crews to the navy of the Dylian League or else pay a simple lump sum of silver.
Many of the Allied states chose to pay in money, not to contribute ships and Thucydides' interpretation of this is that by doing so, the Allied states were really paying for their own enslavement.
Because as he points out, when subsequently many of these states went into revolt, they simply had no naval forces with which they could protect themselves against the Athenians.
