So many of them chose to pay with silver rather than to make contributions of
boats. This actually makes good sense and more recent demographic studies looking
at the size of the various cities and the populations of the small islands and
the cities of the Aegean. Many of these studies have come to the conclusion that
most of the states were too small to be able to support a shipbuilding industry.
So for a small island with a community of perhaps only a couple of hundred men
it made good sense. Instead of spending a great deal of money to employ ship
rights, to have ship sheds, to import the tackle that was used, the ropes that were
used and to have your men going off for yearly service in this Navy. Instead of
doing all that, which you couldn't really afford to do, you simply collected tax and
paid it to the Athenians as tribute. So it may not be that we have to imagine the
Athenians here devilishly devising a scheme for the enslavement of the Greeks
but rather a system which was mutually beneficial to both sides. It certainly was
beneficial to the Athenians. For them, of course, it meant that every year they
were required to build ships to maintain an arsenal down at the Piraeus where
every year new triremes were being built or old triremes were being brought back
to be refitted and yet this entire industry was being essentially paid
for by the Allied States, not by the Athenians themselves. So without any
capital invested by the Athenians, if you will, they inherit a thriving ship
industry thanks to the fleet of the Dealean League. Now this is actually very
important to note because the effect of this was to increase the wealth of
Athens, to turn Athens into a kind of an emporium of the 5th century. The volume
of business clearly increased. If there was a fleet being built here then there
were traders coming in bringing goods that might be needed for that fleet and
in fact we can even attest in Athens at this time the beginning of a banking
industry, the first loans of which are examples of bottomary, that is to say
maritime loans. So the central position of Athens as the heart of this
naval empire was made possible by Athens as a trade emporium and it
contributed then also to the development of Athens as a trade emporium and if it
is around this time that we find other Greeks moving to Athens in fact to take
up residency. Probably the best known example of this, the speech writer
Lysias was the son of a man called Kephalus who had been invited to Athens
by Pericles. A foreigner he did not achieve Athenian citizenship, it's fairly
clear that the reason he was invited to Athens is because he was a wealthy man
who could set up a manufacturing industry there. He was an arms dealer. So the
position of Athens as the center of empire as a military power and naval
power and as the trading emporium these really go hand in hand in the
development of Athenian power during the 5th century. There were other
institutions that also contributed directly to the transformation not just
of the Deleon League but of Athens from simply one state among many in Greece to
being the driving force of Greek culture and the central power in the Greek
world at this time. One of these institutions was that of the 700
magistracies. These magistracies were sent out every year from Athens to
collect tribute around the Aegean. These were not professional bureaucrats, they
were not a public service or a civil service. These were Athenian citizens,
men of the Athenian democracy who were now finding if you will employment and
service not only on behalf of the democracy but in a sense on behalf of
the empire as well. The second institution which contributed to this
enormous growth of Athenian power at the time is that of the fleet. We've
already seen of course that the fleet was maintained thanks to the
contributions of the allies but once again if we ask who served in the fleet
the answer is Athenian men, citizens of the Athenian democracy. Now think for a
moment if you will of the impact that this must have had on the citizen body.
Every year hundreds of men if not thousands of men from the citizen body
of Athens are finding service on behalf of the democracy either as magistrates
traveling around the Aegean or as the sailors of the fleet and the soldiers of
the garrisons going out around the Aegean. What we're finding in fact is that as a
result of these institutions there is a kind of simple equation of Athenian
power developing in the fourth in the fifth century excuse me and that
equation is quite simply this.
