Athens equals democracy, democracy equals naval power, naval power equals empire.
Each of these elements contributes to the other and reinforces the other.
Athens equals democracy, democracy equals naval might and naval might equals empire.
So as Athens became more democratic, it also became more imperial.
A third institution that also plays into this development of Athens as both a democratic and an imperial power in the 5th century
is that of the clericies.
Clericies, or clerics as we usually call them, clerics are like colonists.
They are Athenian citizens who are given land in other territory.
But unlike most colonists who then lose the citizenship of their original state
and become citizens of their new place, their colony, clerics instead remained Athenian citizens.
So that the land of a particular territory handed over to the clerics
was really land being taken from the allies and given to Athenians.
A good example of this occurs in 446 BC when on the island of Euboea
two states, Calcas and Eritrea are in conflict.
The Athenians step in, they settle a conflict and the revolt
and then they simply seize much of the land of Eritrea and they hand it over to Athenian colonists.
These Athenians don't become Eritreans, rather they remain Athenians but owning this land.
And in any disputes between say an Athenian cleric and a local
you can imagine where the dispute will be settled in an Athenian court.
So in these very direct ways, Athenian influence is reaching out from the territory of Attica
and being felt all around the Aegean as its navy is supported by the allies
as Athenians are acquiring territory in allied states
and as Athenians every year are serving as the backbone for this democratic navy
which is asserting Athenian power all over the Aegean.
Clearly this was going to have an effect on the way the Athenians understood their own power
and their position in the Greek world and I think that it is around the late 460s
that we see a major shift in affairs in Athens.
By 460, 50 years had passed since the founding of the democracy,
20 years had passed since the Persian wars, a new generation in other words,
a new generation of politicians has had time to emerge.
And the politicians now of the 460s, these young men who are coming to the fore
are men who have grown up with the notion of the democracy, the navy and the empire.
These are the main elements that they see as important to Athenians.
What did they brush up against? Well quite simply an older generation,
a generation of men whose lives and whose thinking had been conditioned by
not the democracy and the navy but rather by the Persian wars,
the great enemy of Persia who we Athenians had triumphantly defeated.
Let me try to specify this even more closely
by considering the careers of some of these major politicians.
In the years after the Persian wars, the leading politician in Athens
was a man by the name of Caimon.
He came from one of the great old aristocratic families of Athens
and he was devoted to the anti-Persian cause.
To him Persia was the enemy.
Because for him Persia was the enemy then the Spartans were not,
the Spartans in a sense were the other Greek force.
Men who might be unlike the Athenians but nevertheless were still Greeks
and therefore basically allies.
So in 464 BC when an earthquake in Asparta precipitated
an uprising of the servile population there, a hillot uprising
and these hillots then withdrew to Mount Ithomy.
Even though this had happened in Sparta, Caimon offered the assistance of the Athenians.
Spartans were their allies.
The offer of help from Caimon was accepted
and an Athenian army was dispatched to the territory of Sparta,
to the Peloponnese in order to help lay siege to the hillots.
It was believed that the Athenians were better at this particular style of warfare.
However, and here's where I think events really mark a new turn.
In 462 Caimon was expelled from Sparta, asked to leave.
According to Thucydides the reason was that the Spartans were afraid of the possibility of revolution.
