Now, it may have been occasioned by the threat of the Persians once again taking advantage
of Athenian weakness after the Egyptian expedition and sailing into the Aegean, but whatever
the actual circumstances, in another way it is a symbolic action because it advertises
that Athens is now truly the centre of this empire. It controls the treasury. So I think
that by 454, at the very latest, it is now quite possible and proper to speak of the
Dealian League as an Athenian Empire. It had undergone a transformation by steps beginning
almost immediately at the end of the Persian Wars, but now by the middle of the century
it was undoubtedly an Athenian Empire and no longer a free alliance. With the removal
of the Dealian League treasury to Athens around 454, Athens was able to proclaim itself as
a kind of imperial city, the heart of the Athenian Empire. And as Athens grew more and
more powerful and successful, the discrepancies between Athens and the allied states grew
more and more acute, making it more and more difficult for allied states to resist the
power of Athens. As Athens came to dominate the Aegean, the volume of trade increased,
all centred on Athens, we find inscriptional evidence showing that the Athenians now begin
to dictate what system of weights and measures will be used around the Aegean. Why? Because
they are the centre of this Aegean economy and they can afford to dictate the standards
by which everyone else will trade. At the same time, politicians leaving their home
states perhaps in exile come to Athens, traders come to Athens, businessmen come to Athens,
exiles come to Athens and Athens grows enormously in power and influence during the second half
of the 5th century as it is transformed into the imperial centre of the Athenian Empire.
The most visible sign of this transformation is in the building program associated with
Pericles. And I think that it is no coincidence if we look at the timing of this building
program that we can link the power of Athens and the buildings of the Acropolis. Quite
simply, around 454, the Deleon League treasury moves to Athens. In 449, only a few years later,
Pericles proposes that a special fund be created using the 5,000 talents, this is not a small
fortune, it is a large fortune, that the 5,000 talent reserve fund of the Deleon League be
given over to Athena. From 447 then to 438, the Parthenon is constructed, a temple in
honour of Athena with the great statue built by Phidias. From 437 to 432, immediately after
the Parthenon, the proper layer, the great monumental entrance to the Acropolis is constructed.
In 435, as the proper layer is being built, they start work on the Eryk Theon, the extraordinary
collection and cluster of cults on the north side of the Acropolis which will now be all
put together in one major complex and from 421 to 408, the Eryk Theon then is completed.
In other words, if you go to Athens today, as you first come into Athens, you will see
the Acropolis from below and you will see the edge of those great buildings peeking over
such as the Parthenon and when you go up onto the Acropolis, you will see these buildings
that we regard as the architectural masterpieces of 5th century Athenian culture and they are
that but there is something more as well. They are the architectural testament to the
power of Athens and to the transformation of the Aegean from a region of disparate and
dispersed allied states to a territory which is now essentially an Athenian Empire. The
Parthenon shows on it the procession held in honour of the goddess Athena and that procession
is a kind of enactment of empire as the allied states send their representatives to Athens.
The Athenians were aware of this power clearly. There is no doubt about it and the interesting
question is how do they articulate this? What did they say? If you could ask an Athenian at
the end of the 5th century, what justifies your power? Is it the white man's burden? Is it the
superiority of your culture? What is it? Well, Pericles gives an answer to that in one of
his speeches. When he says to the Athenians quite simply this, it may have been wrong to
acquire your empire but it would be folly to give it up. The Athenians had no illusions
about the transformation of the Dealian League. They understood as well as anyone else that
the democracy of classical Greece, the democracy of classical Athens was at the same time the
democracy of imperial Athens.
