Welcome back to this, our 15th lecture in the series on Ancient Greek Civilization.
And in our last lectures, we've been looking at the phenomenal change that occurred in
Greece as a result of the victory of the Greeks over the Persians at the time of the Persian
Wars.
And I argued in earlier lectures that as a result of these victories, we can see a new
spirit, if you will, among the Greeks, and particularly in the city of Athens, a spirit
of confidence, which is going to be an important component in the flowering of Greek culture
of the classical period.
And I've also argued that, apart from this spiritual change, if you like, in the Greeks
and particularly the Athenians of the 5th century, there was a material change as well,
quite simply that Athens went from being the victor of the Persian Wars to becoming a center
of a new Aegean Empire, called the Deleon League because it came into existence as an
alliance of Greek states against the Persians, but rapidly transforming itself into an Athenian
Empire.
Now the culture of the classical period is always, of course, and correctly associated
with the democracy.
And even though we've first focused on the growth of Athenian power and might as an imperial
power, what we really have to do, if we're going to understand the culture of classical
Greece at all, is turn our attention now to the workings of the democracy in Athens in
the 5th century.
In other words, we want to work out how the democratic system worked in antiquity.
And as we go through this, it will be interesting, I think, to keep one eye on the Greeks and
one eye on our own notion of what it is that constitutes a democracy.
What are the institutions that shape democratic experience?
Who is excluded from a democracy and who is included in a democracy?
What are the institutions of a society that help to contribute to a democratic spirit?
These are the kinds of issues that I'd like to tease out in the lecture today.
Well, the easiest way to begin and the logical place is with the organs of government.
That is to say, how did the democracy technically function in 5th century Athens?
Democracy of course means the power of the people, the demos, the rule of the people.
And so fundamental to any democracy must be a popular assembly, known to the Greeks as
the ecclesia.
The ecclesia of Athens was open to all male adult citizens.
It met four times per month, there were ten months in the Athenian civic year.
So it met a total of 40 times per year.
Now it is one thing to have an assembly which is open and invites the participation of all
the adult male citizens.
It is another to guarantee that they actually turn up.
And in order to promote democracy and to encourage people to actively participate, citizens were
in fact paid money to attend the assembly, in the 4th century at least.
The rate of pay for attending the assembly was one drachma per meeting.
A single drachma is about equivalent, I won't give you dollar terms because those make no
sense, but it's about equivalent to the wage that a skilled labourer would receive for
a day's work.
So it is a good working wage to actually go along to the assembly.
Of these four assemblies held each month, one was known as the curia ecclesia, which means
the important assembly, and that was the assembly at which the most critical and important
affairs were put on the agenda.
And of course payment then for that assembly was at a higher rate.
You got nine ovals, which is to say one and a half drachmas, a very good rate of pay for
a single day's attendance.
Important decisions of the assembly were voted on by the entire male population present,
but after they had been voted on normally then those decisions would be recorded.
One of the temples in Athens, the temple of the mother of the gods, the metron was used
as a state archive, and in addition to the perishable forms of records, the papyri for
example on which these might be recorded, many of them also were then cut onto stone.
