There is a wonderful anecdote told about ostracism, which is worth repeating, and that is that
early on in the glory days of the Athenian Empire in the 470s and the 460s, one of the
leading Athenians was a statesman by the name of Aristides, and he was so upright that he
was always referred to as Aristides the Just.
Well, apparently an ostracism vote was being held one year in Athens, and as Aristides was
entering the assembly, an old man tugged at his sleeve and said, would you help me?
I need someone to write the name for me, and Aristides asked, whose name do you want me
to write for you?
And you can guess the answer, the old man said, Aristides.
To which Aristides then raised the question, well, you know, what has Aristides ever done
to you that you want to see him expelled?
And the old man replied, nothing, I'm just sick and tired of hearing his name.
That story is actually quite revealing.
I should finish it off, of course, by saying that Aristides went ahead and wrote his name
on the ostracon or sherd, from which we get the name ostracism.
But the story is actually quite revealing, because what it points out is that there is
a syndrome in Athens, which at home we would call the tall poppy syndrome.
If anyone gets too powerful, it doesn't matter whether he's good or bad, he's just too big
for his boots, and so you cut off the tall poppies.
And this is what happened to many leading Athenian statesmen.
We saw in our last lecture, for example, that Caimon was ostracised.
Ostracism is usually associated with Kleisthenes, and it's thought that it was introduced by
Kleisthenes, but there is a real problem with this.
The first known instance that we have of ostracism is in 488 BC.
Kleisthenes reforms you might remember from an earlier lecture were in 508 BC, 20 years
earlier.
It doesn't make much sense that the Athenians introduced the law on ostracism and then failed
to act on it for 20 years.
So it's quite possible that really the 480s mark the time that the Athenians first really
introduced ostracism and first employed it.
And if that is the case, then I think we have a good context for it.
It is in the aftermath of Marathon, a fear of a Persian invasion, and it is not coincidental
that the first people to be expelled are the relatives of the family of Persistratus, who
are suspected of being pro-Persian.
Hippias is leading the Persians back to Athens.
The first man expelled in 488 is called Hipparchus, the name of someone from the family of Persistratus.
Now aside from this quite remarkable institution, and the last thing I should mention about
it is it was actually used very rarely in Greek public life, in Athenian life.
There are only about a dozen people ostracised in the course of the 5th century and none
thereafter.
So it's a kind of an emergency measure.
But in addition then to the assembly and to this dramatic power of the people to ostracise
any leading citizen whom they didn't like, there is also a great deal of power residing
in a smaller group known as the Council, or the Boulet, the term is still used today in
modern Greek.
The Greek parliament is called the Vouli, which is the same word in modern Greek.
This council of 500 actually rarely met as full 500 and really should be thought of as
a council that operates as 10 units of 50.
The 10 units correspond to the 10 months of the Athenian year.
They also correspond to the 10 tribes of the Athenian reforms put through by Kleisthenes.
So each year 50 men representing their tribe serve for one month as the council.
They actually live there at the Pritoneon in downtown Athens and they are really responsible
for the day to day working of Athens' political life.
They are the ones who draw up the agenda for the assembly and make sure that people attend
the assembly that matters are voted on and the decisions are taken.
The work of this council either as the full 500 or if you prefer it's 50 Pritoneis or
presidents is smoothed along by an even smaller council, an executive council made up of nine
men with a chairman and a secretary and the chairmanship rotates every day.
The councillors, the men who are elected to this council are nominated from their deems,
the small units, the municipalities of Attica and once they serve they are not eligible
to serve again for another 10 years.
Now the reason I outline the details of the council and its members is I want to emphasise
here some of the principles that are at work in Athenian public life.
Fairly clearly there is at least one principle here of collegiality, that is to say no one
man has supreme power.
He is always matched by a larger group within which he must operate, a team if you will.
Here is the idea of rotation so that power resides with a group of Pritoneis only for
one month and then is passed on to another group and another group and so forth.
