The other area, interestingly, that he had under his control, was that of the lives of
resident aliens. The people from other Greek states who had come to live in Athens who
could not acquire Athenian citizenship, you could not be naturalized under normal conditions,
only under exceptional conditions, but it was possible to get the ancient equivalent
of a green card, and to be able to reside in Athens. If you did so, however, you were
always considered an outsider, you were known as a medic, and these medics, these neighbors,
if you will, these resident aliens, were subject to a different rate of taxation,
naturally a higher rate of taxation, and were also subject to military service on behalf
of the Athenians. So all legal matters involving, say, a dispute between a medic and a citizen
would be adjudicated finally by the poll mark. Now, these are only the top three. I've given
most detail here because they are by far the most important, but from Aristotle's work,
the Constitution of Athens, the Athenian Politeia as it's called in Greek, we actually know of
dozens, if not hundreds, of minor officials newly elected every year. Like these three
archons, every one of these minor officials serves for only a year and then must be replaced by
someone else from the Athenian citizen body. There are overseers down in the market who go
around making sure that the weights and measures being used by traders and bankers are fair and
legal. There are revenue collectors, of course, in the Piraeus and also in the Agora of Athens,
who are there to collect the tax being received by the state for transactions. There are officials
in charge of public contracts, the land of Athens, where there were rich silver veins,
would be worked by people who contracted to the state to do it, to pay them a certain amount.
These contracts had to be managed by state officials and all of these are chosen by lot
elected from the whole citizen body for one year. So again, these same principles, collegiality,
rotation, annuality, built into every level of the bureaucracy of ancient Athens.
The glory, however, in the eyes of many Athenians of their democracy was not in these magistracies,
not in the boulet, not even necessarily in the assembly. In the popular mind of the 5th century
Athenians, the glory of their democracy lay in the law courts. These law courts were under the
control of six judges, the Thesmotheti, as they were called by the Athenians. But these judges,
unlike judges in our system, certainly unlike judges say on the Supreme Court, exercised very
little direct power. They were essentially there to administer the day-to-day running of the court
and to make sure that a proper judicial procedure was followed. But all final power of decision
making lay with the juries. Now, when I say jury, what may spring into your head is a film like
12 Angry Men. You may have served on a jury and been impaneled with 11 other people. The Athenians
would laugh at you. The idea of a jury of 12 people is ludicrous. For them, the smallest jury
was 501. And that's for minor private cases. More important public cases involving, say,
speculation by a public official would be judged by a panel of 1001 jurors. And in a really major
case, and if we think about the possibility, for example, of impeachment proceedings that
may be looming in our future here, the Athenian response for such a major issue,
unconstitutional behavior or treason, these kinds of things, these would be entrusted by
the Athenians to a panel of 1,501 citizens. So once again, we see in the impaneling of these
juries a strong commitment to the idea of diluting power from individuals through as broad a
spectrum of society as possible. The selection of these jury panels lay with the Thesmythetai.
They actually administered the selection of the juries. But of course, all final decisions
were with the jury who voted by secret ballot. Here I have to tell you a story that does not
run down to my credit, but I'll tell you anyway. The system of voting was managed in Athens,
secret voting, by giving the voters small pieces of discs, if you will, that had little
columns running through them, which could be held by the fingertips so that you could not
see whether the metal piece running through the disc was hollow or solid. If you hold them by
your fingertips, you cover the ends and you can't see whether they're hollow or solid. You then,
as you're leaving, vote by putting one into one urn, that's the voting urn, and then you
put your reject in the other. And as long as you keep your fingers over the end, nobody will know
whether you voted for acquittal or for finding the person guilty. I had a couple of these a few
years ago, which I showed to a classroom of grade seven children, and I made the fatal mistake of
telling a lie in the classroom, which I promise I will never do again as long as I live. The children
said to me, are these authentic? They weren't. I'd bought them in Athens in a tourist shop,
but they had written on one side, Syphos the Mosea, popular vote. And so, you know, this was
written in Greek, and the kids had thought they were authentic. And I told a lie. When the kid asked
me, I said, yes, they are. And the kid then said, how come it then says on the back, made in Greece?
Written in English.
