For example, in one area of Attica, northeast of Athens, in an area called the Tetrapolis,
we have a religious calendar that stipulates the sacrifices to be made on a yearly basis.
We hear of 29 sheep being sacrificed, 9 pigs, 6 goats, 6 rams, 5 oxen, 2 ewes, 1 sow and
a black goat.
These have to be found every year bought and paid for and then sacrificed during the year
in order of a range of different gods and goddesses, and in fact that particular calendar
includes the name of some gods and goddesses that are not attested anywhere else in Greek
history.
So we should imagine a Greek countryside that is thoroughly populated with little local
gods and goddesses who sometimes are later assimilated into the better known gods of
Olympus, Athena and Artemis and so forth, and that the agricultural year, and that is the
year of the vast majority of people in the ancient world, is a year in which human activities
and activities in honour of the gods are woven together in one consistent agricultural and
religious calendar.
These local festivals in honour of gods and goddesses from the countryside could be used
as communities grew and changed, and in fact one of the interesting things about Greek
religion is its flexibility, that the rituals change and grow as the communities need them
to.
So that for example, when Athens becomes a great city in the sixth and the fifth centuries,
it manages to reinterpret some of its older rituals as new rituals that will serve this
emerging community.
For example, the initiation festival held at the Aperturia.
The Aperturia is a festival in which young men were introduced to the members of their
father's religious fraternity, known as their fraters, members of a fratry.
Now this is essentially a religious initiation, okay, where a boy is introduced by his father
and accepted by the other members of this group, but it serves then as the preliminary
stage to the young man being inscribed on the list of a deem as a citizen, so that the
citizen initiation, the civic initiation of a young Athenian, in fact is predicated
on his religious initiation through the Aperturia.
Other festivals that serve these changes in the life cycle, if we want to call them that,
there's a very well known one involving young girls who between the age of 12 and 14 would
take part in a festival in honour of Artemis in her country sanctuary, not in Athens but
out at Browron, and here it seems over the course of a couple of days these young girls
would wear bare skins and pretend to be little bear cubs.
Now the reason for this, anthropologists have explained, in this putting on of the animal
skin they are leaving their earlier civic identity behind, and when they take off the
bare skin and reintegrate it into Athenian society, they do so with a different status.
That is to say they start as girls but they come back to Athens as marriageable young women.
That's why this festival is held, when girls are eligible to take part in this festival
I should say when they're about 12 to 14, because this is the age at which menstruation
begins for a girl typically in the ancient world.
So they go in as children, they play a role for Artemis at Browron and then through this
initiation they are marked now as young women who are ready to marry, to have children and
take their place in Athenian society at the next level.
Various other rituals and festivals also operated at the civic level beyond that just
of the initiation of individuals, and a very good example is the Anthosteria.
This is a festival which was designed to ward off evil spirits from the household, it's
originally associated with the fermenting of wine, it is a wine festival, and it was
performed by each family in the city at exactly the same time over the course of three days
on the last day of which pots and pans were thrown out into the street from the houses
and people called out Keres be gone, which was their way of saying ghosts get out of
the house.
Now it's done at an individual household level but the same action is practiced around Athens
by all families at the same time, in that respect it is actually very similar to something
like the George Passover and a colleague of mine in Japanese history tells me that there
is a similar festival in Japan, the Bond Festival, his little daughter used to enjoy it because
it was an opportunity to throw rice out the front door and she was rather disappointed
to find that it only happened once a year, she was doing it five days in a row until
he had to explain to her, enough is enough.
