The festival which probably best represents the growth and development of Athenian religious
practices in order to accommodate the changes in Athens itself, the festival which best illustrates
that is the Pan-Athenaea. This was an important festival because it was for all of Athens.
That's what the very name means, the All-Athens Festival. And at the Pan-Athenaea, a procession
involving all of the families and citizens of Athens, a procession would take place which
formed up on the outskirts of the downtown of Athens at the Diplom gate, and then it
crossed through the agorada, the central marketplace of town, going across it diagonally, across
the sacred way, before winding its way up to the acropolis, where dozens, sometimes hundreds
of heads of cattle would be slaughtered on the altar of Athena. The meat slaughtered
at this moment was then redistributed back to all the people of Athens. And this became
an important festival, both to celebrate the unity of all Athens, and then increasingly
in the 5th and 4th centuries to celebrate the power of imperial Athens as well. So that,
for example, every four years when the festival was held with even greater splendor, the great
Pan-Athenaea, on this occasion then the allied states would send along a set of hoplite
armour and in addition to that, their cattle as well, all being brought up to the acropolis.
Now this is very interesting. When you get to the acropolis and you go from the western
side of the acropolis and walk east to the altar of Athena, you walk past the Parthenon
and the frieze on the Parthenon depicts the same procession. So here we have the Parthenon
as an architectural expression of this religious procession, which is itself an expression
of the imperial might of Athens. We have regulations from 335 BC which stipulate that the money
raised from the leasing of sacred land is to be used by a clan of priests in order to
buy cattle which will then be slaughtered and sacrificed on behalf of all the people
of Athens. So we have to imagine various times in the year when all of Athens, the whole
city, would be echoing with the cries of cattle being slaughtered, the streets running with
the blood of these animals and then later in the day the smell of their burning flesh
as quite literally everyone in the city part took of this sacred feast growing out of the
sacrifice. If you are in Greece at Easter time or even if you're in this country on
Memorial Day or July 4th, one of these days when it is customary to have barbecues, you
are re-enacting this practice of the Greeks of the 5th and the 4th century. Now I've
been concentrating so far in talking about the act of sacrifice and the various rituals
and festivals that go with this. What I've left aside so far has been the question of
the faith, the inner spiritual life, if you will, of the Greeks. This is an area where
I think earlier generations of scholars made some serious mistakes, particularly scholars
growing out of a Christian tradition that postulated that Christianity's exceeded precisely
because the pagan religion of the world in which Christianity was born could not match
Christianity's appeal in satisfying the deep spiritual needs of individuals. This I think
is a load of bunkum. In fact there is very good evidence to suggest that ancient religion,
we'll call it here pagan religion, the religion of the classical Greeks, fundamentally was
based and sprang from the truest source of all religion and faith and that is that profound
sense of awe that an individual feels in the face of eternity. There are small figurines
that turn up at every excavation in Greece, figurines that people had in their houses,
small figurines of Heracles or of Artemis or of Apollo or of Zeus and there are small
shrines that turn up in every small house that has been excavated in Greece. There is
plenty of evidence then that on a daily basis at the level of ordinary everyday life people
had a strong sense that there were gods active in the world. But even more than that and
much more important than that there is also evidence of what is sometimes called the mystery
cults. Now these mystery cults which are supposed to have appeal to people by giving them a
sense of connection with the divine are often thought to be a late phenomenon of say the
Roman Empire and these cults are sometimes thought to have been the religious experiences
which Christianity found itself in competition with during its early centuries. But in fact...
