The cult Adelucis, the cult of Demeter and Coray, has its roots back in the Dark Ages,
8, 900 BC. This was an extremely popular cult. It was a cult that grew out of, certainly,
an appreciation of nature and an attempt to understand the cycle of nature. That's clear
from the myth behind the cult. You're probably familiar with the myth. As Persephone, or
Coray, as the Greeks often called her, the maiden, as she is out one day, she is seen
by the god of the underworld, Hades. He falls passionately in love with her, drags her off
to the underworld. While she is down there, she eats a pomegranate. In the meantime,
her mother, Demeter, the earth mother, is up on the earth and goes into mourning because
she can't find her daughter. Eventually, she discovers that her daughter is in the underworld.
She goes down, negotiates her release, but because Coray has eaten of the fruit of the
underworld, she must return every year. This is an etiological myth. That is to say, a
myth to explain the causes, the origins of some aspect of nature. In this case, it is
that the earth goes into mourning every year for a period of time, winter, that at the
end of that time, when earth's daughter returns, it is springtime because she is happy and
there is a period of great happiness, when the earth is fructifying, that is the summer,
and then after summer, there is a period when once again, the mother mourns for the daughter
she is about to lose, the autumn, and then the daughter is gone. Now, that's the etiological
myth that is there to explain what's happening at her uses. But the cult is even more interesting
than this. We have evidence for a great cult building called the Telusterian, which is
a Hall of Initiation. And it appears as if those who were initiated into this cult were
purified over the course of a couple of days, both by washing their bodies, probably also
fasting for a period of time, and then quite possibly under the influence of some hallucinogen.
It's been suggested that there is something ingested here that actually triggers off a
hallucinogenic experience. Then at the middle of the night, at the end of the festival,
the initiates are brought into the Hall of Mysteries, where all is dark, but at the climactic
moment, light is brought in, the room fills with light, and at that moment, thousands
of people in antiquity believe this, the initiates had a direct personal contact with the goddess
herself. Not a metaphorical experience, but a direct religious experience. Now, for that
cult to exist for hundreds of years, and to increase in popularity as it did, it became
very popular in the Roman period. These, I think, attest to the fact that there were
many people in antiquity who did in fact receive this direct apprehension of the god, which
is a matter of faith, not of public performance, but of inner faith. There were other shrines
throughout the Greek world that similarly offered the prospect of some direct apprehension
and contact with the god. Apollo's oracle Adelphi, where the god literally infused the
spirit of the priestess. We call it enthusiasm from the Greek enthusiasmus, meaning he goes
into her spirit, and she then gives an oracle speaking in the voice of the god. Zeus at
the donor, who actually spoke through the tree, the great oak tree in the middle of
his sanctuary, whose leaves rustled in the wind, and this was the sound of Zeus actually
speaking to people. And we know from the questions that people asked at these sanctuaries that
it wasn't merely a matter of state policy as to whether or not you addressed one of
these oracles. You did so even as a private individual. Should I spend $500 on my brother-in-law's
hair-brained scheme, or should I keep the money at home under my mattress? People sought
the guidance of the gods for these basic everyday questions. At the cults of Amphthiraeus and
Trophonius, just outside of Athens, the same sort of direct apprehension of the gods was
possible. And probably the best known example, of course, of this direct involvement of the
god comes in the cults of Asclepius, the healing god who from the late 5th century onwards
becomes more and more popular in the Greek world. And we have many inscriptions, particularly
from Epidaurus, which attest to the belief of many people in this god. And there must
have been belief in him, otherwise the cures couldn't have worked. They were faith healing
of a particular sort. So the ancient religious system, I think, did in fact have a great
deal that appealed to the religious needs of people. And in fact, the more that one
looks at it, the more it seems as if some of the differences between the modern world
and the ancient world are really illusory. Let me illustrate. Some years ago I was in
Athens at Easter time and I went to a midnight service in the middle of the night when the
entire church was bathed in darkness until at the climactic moment the priest came forward
with a candle declaring Christosanesti. Christ is risen. To which everyone replied,
Alithiosanesti, yes, he was truly risen and we passed the flame to each other until the
entire room was illuminated. That practice, and I think even the leap of faith that lies
behind it, shows that the Greeks of the ancient world and people of the modern world are really
religiously not that far apart at all.
