Cleansing. Anthropologists have been able to help us even further by pointing out that
the structure of Greek theatre really is very comparable to what we understand of the way that
rights work for societies that usually involve people leaving society, playing a very different role
during their initiation or their ritual, and then being reintegrated in a different way.
Now in a different context, in talking about religion, we've already discussed the way in which that works
for initiation practices for young men and for young girls, in a way we could say that Greek theatre
is a safety valve for the entire community every year by allowing these performances to be put on.
It's for that reason then that we end up with masterpieces such as the Oedipus Rex,
a play in which a man unwittingly has killed his father, married his mother and fathered his own children
who were of course incestuously also his half-brother and sister.
It is not that this in any sense happened in the Greek world, but rather that there is something deep
in the human psyche, Freud certainly thought so and used the story of Oedipus to coin the phrase
the Oedipus myth, that there is something deep and destructive in the human psyche and the passions
of the human psyche that must therefore be laid out so that they can in a sense be controlled
and people made healthier by laying out these problems.
The range of issues covered by the Greek plays is quite astonishing.
Not only these very human passions that lend themselves to psychological readings,
but also dilemmas that are facing a community in transition.
And to this extent I think we should particularly pay attention both to the Antigone and to
the Orestes.
The Antigone you might recall is a play in which a young woman is caught in a dilemma
because her brother who has died in battle has been denied a legitimate burial.
Is she to honour the demands of blood which maintain that she should see her brother given decent burial
or should she honour the requirements of the state by obeying the ruler Creon who is decreed
that the brother shall not be buried.
This is the dilemma of a community that sees itself as essentially made up of families
in which family loyalty comes absolutely first,
but a society that at the same time recognises that something more than family
must hold the loyalty of individuals, namely the state.
And if people do not believe in the state then it cannot stand.
It is a kind of social contract constructed out of our willing agreement.
So in the 5th century we have this real dilemma.
I know my loyalty to the family, I know my obligations to the family,
but what are my obligations to the state particularly if they come into conflict with that of the family?
One of the ways forward in exploring this dilemma was taken by Esclis in the Orestes
And in these plays, as usual, drawn from the early stages of Greek myth,
in this case dealing with the story of the return of Agamemnon from Troy,
in these plays what we find is a family dilemma that will eventually be resolved by the state.
So Agamemnon comes home in a typical Agon scene.
He is greeted by Cleitemnestra who says please step down from your chariot.
The king however does not want to because there is a rich carpet in front of him
and he feels that the step on it would be to pretend that he is some kind of eastern potentate.
So there is a struggle of wills between the two until eventually he does step down onto it.
He goes off stage and the next we hear is the sound of him being butchered in his bath.
Now this is a crisis within the family of course
and it will be answered later by Orestes avenging his father by murdering his mother.
But potentially this cycle of bloodshed and of internecine fighting within the family
could go on indefinitely. How then is it finally to be resolved?
Will it be resolved by the cries of blood, by the furies, the orignies,
or the humanities as the Greeks call them, trying to placate them, the kindly ones?
No. Finally in the last of the plays it will not be resolved that way at all
but rather will be resolved by the goddess Athena coming down and saying
that there will be a court of law which will adjudicate the matter.
Now that court of law that she appeals to is the Areopagus
and that is in fact a true historical institution of the Athenian state.
So what we find in that trilogy is a fascinating development.
A dilemma, a dilemma about loyalty and a dilemma about human passion
being located originally within the family
but being resolved finally by an actual historical state institution.
