So, the players do have a quite overt political context in that respect, and they illustrate
the close connection between the personal and the public, the private and the public
in classical Athens.
Now, if we pursue the anthropological model a little further, we then find that the point
of the plays is that once they are finished and the player is over, then the person is
being cleansed and returns to society, presumably psychologically much happier that he's got
these passions out of the way.
A slightly different model probably underlies comedy, which is the other great genre of
ancient drama that I want to deal with briefly.
Although these plays are also done in honour of Dionysus, they do not attempt to delve
into the psychology of individuals in the same way the tragedy does.
The plays that we know best are those of Aristophanes, the great playwright of the class of comedy
that we usually call old comedy for the simple reason that it comes chronologically earlier,
the new comedy.
And his plays are firmly located in the daily life of the Athens that he understood.
In those plays you all have contemporary political figures like Cleon, for example, being castigated
and held up to ridicule, being called the sausage seller or the tanner or abused in other ways.
These plays are fantastically grotesque.
Figures cavort around wearing huge fallacies.
They are meant to be obscene and they are meant to be both a version of the daily life
that the Greeks around them understood, but also something that was quite unrecognisable
at the same time.
Yet they are firmly anchored in the contemporary world.
In the wasps, for example, the chorus of wasps are actually Athenian jurors.
The sting in their tail is actually metaphorically the sting of always being able to find someone guilty.
And in these plays we find not only the Athenians ridiculing themselves, but even ridiculing
the gods as well.
In the frogs, for example, we get hilarious send-ups of Heracles.
The events are the gist for the comic poet that he comes back to time and again.
So that, for example, in the Lysistrata, we find the women of Athens actually going on
a sex strike in order to make the men of Athens sign a peace treaty.
A humorous comment on, of course, the Peloponnesian War.
So what we find in the tragedies then is a kind of general human quality, a quality
concerned with the psychology of people and in the comedy, something much more specifically
located in the city.
Something created by the climate of 5th century Athens, by the democratic spirit.
In both instances, though, the competitive way in which these plays are put on, I think,
attests to the close relationship between the argon, the competition, the democracy and
the form of drama.
Unfortunately, however, our coverage of Greek theatre ends, to my mind, on a somewhat depressing
note, and that is that in the 4th century we do have examples of plays written in another
style that's called New Comedy and associated with the playwright Menander.
And it seems to me that by comparison with the earlier comedy, which is so vibrant, so
vital, and so deeply connected to the life of the city, the plays of Menander represent
something quite disappointing, something that has turned away from a vigorous study of city
life.
In these plays, most of the plots revolve around the dilemmas within a family, and particularly
the dilemmas of a star-crossed pair of lovers.
They may come from two households that are warring with each other, there may be mistaken
identities, often it is the wily slave who manages to resolve the crisis so that everyone
lives happily ever after.
The plays are valuable in one respect as a window onto the life of Athens at the end
of the classical period, but what we find there is that there is no sense of the public
and the private being connected.
Now what is very interesting, I think, is to take this forward and to see the way in
which these approaches to comedy have come down into the modern world.
Burlesque slapstick comedy, obscene comedy, the comedy of both say Lenny Bruce and the
madness of Maudi Python, these are the sorts of comedic traditions that come straight out
of old comedy.
The comedy of Menander, on the other hand, is the comedy of the sitcom.
It is located within the family, it does not attempt to really reflect a wider world,
and one has to wonder, at the end of the classical age and at the dawn of the Hellenistic period,
when many people have claimed that the city-state was losing its momentum and would now be overwhelmed
and superseded by the great kingdoms of Alexander and his successors.
One has to wonder whether the story of Athenian drama, in some sense, does not bear that out.
We begin the fifth century with stories that are relentlessly honest in dealing with the
human psyche.
We finish the classical period, on the other hand, with stories that are primarily concerned
with making sure that a young boy and a young girl, after many trials and tribulations,
live happily ever after.
I'd suggest that in some respects, that movement reflects a waning of power, an energy that
is now, at the end of the classical period, firmly in decline.
