Welcome back to this our 18th lecture in the series on Ancient Greek Civilization.
In our last lecture as we looked at the phenomenon of theatre of drama in the Greek world, I
tried to present the argument that this was one area in which the experience of the Greeks
may have resembled that of our own world. We have after all Greek plays still being produced
and quite clearly our sense of drama has derived from the Greeks. But I wanted to suggest that
even though there seem to be similarities there are actually deep divides between ourselves
and the Greeks when it comes to the aesthetic experience of ancient drama, when it comes
to understanding the religious context of ancient drama, which I argued was actually
very important, and finally to understanding the psychological impact of ancient drama.
I argued that that institution really worked for the Greeks in a way that was very different
from the way in which we approach drama, whether it be tragedy or comedy in our own society.
This theme of apparent similarity and potential difference is one that I've tried to explore
on a couple of occasions. We saw also that in the experience of democratic life the Athenian
conception of democracy was not the same as ours at all. We saw it also in the question
of religion where finally we came to the conclusion that there were aspects of ancient religion
which actually were quite close to our own, even though they looked markedly different.
If there is one area however where the difference between the Greeks and ourselves is quite
marked and dramatic it is in the area of sex and gender. The question of what makes a man
a man, the question of what is masculinity, of what is the correct way for women to behave
and what is the role of women in society. These are all questions to which the Greeks
gave answers that were quite different from the range of answers that we tend to give
in our own society, particularly on the question of homosexuality where our sense that homosexuality
tends to be the opposite of heterosexuality is not something shared by the Greeks. In
fact homosexuality in the Greek context is viewed in some quarters as part of the coming
of age of young men and is actually a prelude that will lead on into in fact a quite orthodox
heterosexual life. So I want to begin then by talking first of all about the Greek attitude
towards homosexuality and particularly the Greek construction of homosexuality, contrasting
with our own conception of this term and our own wider concept of masculinity. When Philip
stored at Chironia and surveyed the battlefield in 338 after he had vanquished the Greeks
he is supposed to have looked down on the dead of the Theban sacred band and to have
said no one should consider these men guilty of any shameful act. Now who was the sacred
band and why would Philip be making this remark? The sacred band in fact was a battalion of
the Theban army which was believed was made up of matched pairs of lovers. The younger
men fighting all the more valorously because they were there with their older lovers watching
them and the older lovers fighting all the more valorously so that they would not be
shown to have behaved shamefully in front of the young men that they loved, each proving
themselves worthy of the other. This is a clear example I think of the way in which
the expression of homosexuality in the Greek world is not going to be like anything with
which we are familiar. Hundreds of drinking cups are found in excavations particularly
in Athens that show the term callos written on it followed by a name. Callos is the adjective
that means beautiful and it is a masculine adjective. It must mean such and such a boy
or man is beautiful. These are the cups that Athenian men were using at their symposia,
their drinking parties where they were regularly toasting the beauty of the young men whom
they were hoping to seduce. And fairly clearly if we look at the artistic conventions of
Greek culture we see that this all occurs within a much broader cultural perspective
namely the appreciation of male beauty. It was quite commonplace in the sixth, fifth
and fourth centuries to show naked male figures. Very few women are ever shown naked. The statues
of young girls, Korai, maidens are always clothed and it is only really in the Hellenistic
period that we will find statues showing Aphrodite, the goddess of sex, naked. But while she
is an exception in the realm of women it is habitual and normal to celebrate the beauty
of a man by showing a naked male heroic body.
