There is a very famous speech that was delivered early in the fourth century by a character
by the name of Uphilitus, and it is a defense speech.
He's been charged with murder.
The murder with which he's been charged is the murder of a man called Eratosthenes.
Uphilitus found Eratosthenes in bed having sex with his wife.
And so he physically ripped him from the bed and clubbed him to death.
Now he was put on trial on a charge of manslaughter by the Athenians, and he gives a long speech
to explain how it came about that he caught his wife in that situation.
And the way in which he frames that speech is very interesting because it is quite clear
that he has to explain to the audience, the Athenian jurors, the men of the Athenian
jury, something anomalous.
How is it that a stranger could get into your household and have sex with your wife when
you should have been down on the ground floor and your wife should have been living
up the back?
She should have been quite literally inaccessible.
And so we have a long explanation in which Uphilitus explains his wife had given birth
to a child some months earlier.
She was still breastfeeding the child.
It was very annoying for her to have to come up and down the steps every night from her
room to the child's nursery to feed it and to change it.
And so temporarily they had agreed on a change of rooms, and he had moved up into the top
back room, and his wife had moved down into the quarters facing onto the street.
Those quarters would normally be known to the Greeks as the Andron, the men's room.
So even in the actual layout of the house, the woman was expected, like Penelope, to be
in the back reaches inaccessible and out of the way.
Just as in Homer, when Penelope first appears, she is walking down the steps from the back
of the palace, intruding into the conversation of the man until Telemachus says to her, this
is men's business, please leave.
This seclusion of women, at least ideally, if not always carried out in complete practice,
was surely based on a deep-seated suspicion in relation to women.
They were seen as dangerous beings, as something to be scared of.
And associated with this notion that women could be deceptive, that they were trying
to cheat on you behind your back, that they were useless and worthless, which comes up
time and again in our sources, was the notion that women were volatile, that they were dangerous
because of the emotions and the passions that could overwhelm them at any minute.
And again, in a way that is sort of typical of the Greeks, this notion finds expression,
in fact, in the cultic behavior of the Greeks, because a specific cult of Dionysus is actually
given over to women being possessed by the God.
Minads or backhands, the worshippers of Bacchus, Dionysus, experienced a Dionysiac frenzy when
they were actually possessed by the God.
Now, I don't mean this in any metaphorical sense.
I'm not saying this is something that they watched on stage but they didn't really believe
it or didn't really feel it.
I'm saying these people truly did believe and therefore truly were possessed by the God.
Women actually went out charging over the hilltops in examples of a phenomenon called
Orabazia, going wild over the hilltops, tearing off their clothes and, more importantly, tearing
apart any living creature that they came across, whether it be a rabbit, a cow or a shepherd.
These bands of backhands roamed over the mountains and I'm personally convinced that we can be
quite sure that the stories we have about this have a genuine historical heart to them.
The reason is that one of our sources for this material is Plutarch and Plutarch actually
knew the woman, she was a close friend of his, who was the high priestess of one such
cult, so that when he recounts stories, and he has one such story, of women waking up
miles away from where they started their mountain crossing, waking up and having no recollection
of what had gone on the night before, I believe that that is a reliable account and that these
people truly did experience the possession of the God.
So you could argue, in one respect, it is an example of these women performing a function
which confirms the very thing that is most feared about them by men.
Between the two extremes of the dutiful wife in Xenophon and the mother who is tied to
the house and the frenzied worshiper of Dionysus, the woman going wild over the mountains and
representing a natural force that threatens society and culture, between those two extremes
probably lies the real woman.
