So, by the time that the war broke out in 431, Pericles could openly say what everyone
knew.
That is that the Athenians possessed an Arche, an empire, which embraced the entire Aegean.
On the other side, the Spartan sphere of influence was very differently organized.
Sparta, as we've seen, was an isolationist country, a tribe or a people of the Greeks
who tended to avoid involvement in affairs, particularly if those affairs took them away
from their homeland of Laconia and the town of Sparta.
Not only were they generally isolationist in their tendencies, but also the alliances
that they had, particularly with the other states of the Peloponnes, were very loosely
organized in the sense that these alliances did not involve a league in which all of
the allies were subject to the will of Sparta.
These Peloponnesian states, members of the Peloponnesian League, for example, did not
pay tribute to Sparta.
Rather, they made contributions to a general war chest which was used by the entire Peloponnesian
League, a collective war fund, if you will.
Another very important difference, and this was absolutely critical, I think, both in
the development towards war and then in the conduct of the war, was that the Peloponnesian
League, with Sparta at its center, was primarily a land alliance.
It was not directed towards the sea, and for that reason, naval supremacy was not a burning
issue within that league.
Sparta's allies included, for example, states that were almost as powerful as Sparta itself,
sometimes even wealthier.
Corinth, for example, was a much richer state than Sparta.
And in terms of military power, in terms of the sheer number of men who could be put
into the field, Thebes also was almost as strong as Sparta.
And then, in the Peloponnes, Sparta also had a neighbor which was not allied to it, but
in fact, was almost its permanent enemy, the state of Argos.
So the two systems are very different.
During the fifth century, we find Athens becoming the hegemon, the leader of an arch, an empire,
though it is democratic.
On the other hand, we find Sparta, a quite undemocratic state, but nevertheless, the
center of a league which involves a number of other powerful states that counterbalance
the power of Sparta.
Now as we've seen already, a period of conflict erupted in the middle of the fifth century
between 446 BC, the period known as the First Peloponnesian War, and we've noted that that
outbreak, that conflict, coincides also with a shift in Athenian policy, since it was around
this time that Caimon had been expelled by the people of Athens, and in his absence, a
new leader, namely Pericles, had come to the fore and had reoriented Athenian policy away
from conflict with Persia and more towards conflict with Sparta.
But in 451, Caimon returned to Athens, his period of exile was over, and almost immediately
we find the Athenians signing a five-year armistice with the Spartans.
So again, we see the shifts in Athenian and Spartan policy in relation to each other being
dictated by some of the major figures in Athenian politics.
But immediately after this shift, this peace in 451 between Athens and Sparta, Caimon, who
had once again raised the banner against Persia, took an Athenian fleet to Cyprus where he
was killed.
With his death, we see the end of this vigorous anti-Persian policy, and once again the pendulum
in Athens swings back towards those who regard Sparta as the true enemy.
And so despite the fact that an armistice had been signed, in fact war broke out, further
conflict continued from about 450 down to about 446.
So gradually during the 5th century, the two camps are coming further and further apart.
Certainly allies, but now seeing each other as two antithetical systems.
The war itself would break out in 431 BC, and we're going to have to ask why specifically
it broke out, even though we've seen this general sundering, if you will, of the alliance
between these two states.
I think the first thing we have to keep in mind is the role that warfare plays in the
life of the Greeks.
You may have noticed that during the course of these lectures, at various times, we have
come up against different concepts such as eras, strife, in the Hesiotic poems as early
as the 8th century, Hesiot tells us that there are two kinds of strife all over the
broad earth, and he defines these as the good form of strife, which is the ambition that
makes you emulate your neighbor and try to do as well and have as productive a farm as
your neighbor.
And the bad kind of strife on the other side is the spirit of competition that leads you
through jealousy to go in at night and cut down your neighbor's vines.
