It seems to me that we can probably paraphrase Thucydides to get to the true cause of the war.
It was not the growth of power at Athens and the fear that it inspired in Sparta that was the truest cause of the war.
It was the growth of Athenian power and the fear that it inspired in Corinth that was the truest cause of the war.
The war finally broke out in 431 after these various skirmishes.
The war broke out when the Athenians rejected an ultimatum presented to them by the Spartans.
The Spartans had said, if you lift the Magarean decree, this war can be avoided.
So it was clearly a central issue.
Once the war broke out in 431, this first ten year period of the war is normally named for the Spartan king
who led the first invasion of Athens.
His name is Archedamus and so we refer to the first part of the war as the Archedamian War.
During the Archedamian War, the Spartans invaded Athenian territory every year.
Each summer, come March, just as you're getting ready to either plant your crops or to prepare the fields,
income the Spartans and they cut everything down making it impossible for the Athenians to grow any crops that year.
And so each year, in the springtime as the Spartans appeared on the horizon,
the Athenians would pack their bags, collect their sheep and their other movable belongings
and they would move inside the walls of Athens.
Remember that earlier the Athenians had completed their long walls so that the city was now a bastion
not only surrounded by walls but connected by walls down to the Piraeus.
They would come in, the Athenians would come in and from the walls they would watch the Spartans devastating their territory.
Now this extraordinary policy is in fact directly attributable to Pericles.
It is Pericles' defensive policy.
And in one of these speeches, Pericles says to the Athenians,
as long as you have the navy you will be safe because you can supply yourself from your empire.
In a sense the Athenians are giving up their territory, Attica,
and using the entire Dealian League, the Athenian Empire, as their territory.
So the whole scale of this war and as a result the policy of the protagonists is new.
And the Spartans, I'm sure, in the first campaigning seasons
must have been astonished as they marched into Attica to find that there was nobody resisting them
and that the Athenians had simply moved inside the walls.
The Periclean policy that's outlined in his speeches early in the war
maintains that not only should the Athenians rely on the empire and the navy to supply them,
but at the same time they should not make the mistake of trying to make further additions to their empire.
It's hard not to read this without thinking about the subsequent events in the war
because of course the war will end in disaster for the Athenians
for the simple reason that they did try to make additions, conquering Sicily.
So in these speeches set early in the war what we seem to have Thucydides doing
is him trying to understand the underlying lessons of the war,
the underlying reasons why Athens failed,
and then retrojecting these back into his narrative early on
so that from the very beginning of the war we have a sense of the direction that it will follow as the war develops.
This pattern of defensive warfare though it lasted for many years during the war
was interrupted by important events in the second year
because it was in the second year of the war that Pericles died
and at the same time that the Athenians were hit by the plague.
Now these two events I think for Thucydides were deeply affecting.
They summed up for him something critical that the Athenians faced,
something that the Athenians lost so that in many respects the subsequent end of the war
is really a long playing out of the conditions that we find early in the war
at the time of the death of Pericles.
I'd like to develop this a little further by talking about the way that Thucydides
writes this section of his narrative.
The death of Pericles I think for Thucydides suggested to the historian
the passing of all that was finest in Athens.
Pericles in a sense for Thucydides is the embodiment of everything that is best in Athens.
And the physical suffering that comes to Athens in the plague,
which is described immediately after we have Thucydides,
excuse me, Pericles being described,
this physical suffering of the plague I think is meant to suggest a kind of moral breakdown as well.
So that we're seeing Athens at its very finest early in the war with Pericles
and then we're seeing the subsequent descent into a kind of moral abyss,
physical and moral from which the Athenians will not be able to recover.
