This is strongly suggested by the fact that Thucydides juxtaposes Athens at its best and
Athens at its worst in his narrative.
In Book 2, at the end of the first year of the war, we have one of the most famous passages
in Greek literature.
It is the funeral speech of Pericles.
The end of the first year of the war, Pericles is called upon by the Athenians to deliver
the funeral oration, which is a public speech delivered over the bodies of all the men that
have died that year in the war on behalf of the state.
The best speaker is called upon to deliver this, and we know from other examples of this
genre that the usual style was to give a kind of rehearsal of the great events of the Athenian
past.
We Athenians beat the Persians.
We Athenians beat the Amazons.
These Athenians died for us.
And so the present and the mythological and historical past are all woven together.
Pericles chose to do something different.
What he chose to do was to give a speech, according to Thucydides, in which he tried
to define what it was about Athens that made Athens worth dying for, so that rather than
being simply a hymn to the dead men there at the public burial, it is a hymn to Athens
itself.
He says, for example, that our Constitution is not copied from anyone else's Constitution,
but rather it is ours and it is copied by others who seek to be as good as us.
He says at another point, for example, that the freedom that we enjoy in our government,
meaning the autonomy that Athens has in relation to the other Greek states, is also reflected
in our private lives.
And here we have one of the first articulations of a notion of personal privacy being as important
as the freedom of the state.
This is an important point for Pericles because, of course, he's contrasting the Athenians
with the Spartans.
Not for us, a communal society where the individual is subordinated to the interests of the state,
but rather an Athenian model where the state, in fact, is made up of all of these individuals
who themselves enjoy privacy and autonomy in their own lives.
This hymn of praise, in fact, to Athens ends with the rather remarkable claim of Pericles
saying that we are, in fact, a school for Helas, a school for Greece.
Now that's a very ambitious claim to say that you, yourselves, are the model of all
that is best so that all the Greeks look at you.
What is it in that model?
It's that they are the democracy and that it is that each individual Athenian is committed
to that democracy.
In one breathtaking moment in this speech, Pericles turns to the monuments on the Acropolis
and he says to the Athenians, you must look upon these monuments every day and you must
love Athens until your heart is full with love for her.
These words are astonishing.
Can you imagine any statesman today turning around and showing you public architecture
and saying this is what is meant to trigger off and to inspire your love for this system,
namely for this society and culture?
But Pericles can do that because for Thucydides, he represents Athens at its absolute finest.
And yet, and yet, immediately after the funeral duration is over, we then have a description
of the plague.
And the description of the plague takes us into a seventh circle of hell, if you will.
Not only do we get gruesome descriptions of the boils and the pustules and the diarrhea
and the other conditions, the physical conditions, as the physical body deteriorates, but very
quickly Thucydides moves on into what is much more important here and that is the moral
breakdown of Athenian society that is occasioned by this.
Dead bodies were not buried.
People were not cared for by their families because no one wanted to be near these people
in their sickness, so that there is no possible resistance, either physical or moral, to this
breakdown.
What we've got here is a startling juxtaposition and this, I think, is going to be the important
lesson for us to take from Thucydides' early description of the war.
That is to say that in Athens we have a conflict and a contrast between the very best and the
very worst at war with each other.
In our next lecture we are going to look at the latter part of the war where we see the
undoing of Athens in Sicily.
But it's important to note that even from the very beginning Thucydides was aware of
the fact that this war represented Athens at its finest and at its very worst.
