Quite clearly, I think what we're seeing here with Thucydides is a historian who feels that there are lessons of history,
that history can illustrate what is going on in human society.
And I think also fairly clearly, with Thucydides' account of the Peloponnesian War,
we're seeing a kind of historical essay of a new type, not witnessed before in Greek history writing or anywhere else for that matter,
in which the historian, taking contemporary events, tries to distill them and analyse them in a way that will illustrate underlying patterns of human behaviour.
That is, I think, a very modern conception of what the story of history is.
The War for Thucydides is both an event that requires explanation and it is also an illustration of what lies within human beings.
Now, this notion of history is, in fact, very new with Thucydides at the end of the 5th century.
And we can get some idea of the novelty of this and just what a new addition it is to the mental world of the Greeks
if we consider Thucydides in relation to his predecessor, Herodotus.
The two were often seen to be far apart. Thucydides deals with the Peloponnesian War in the 430s,
and later Herodotus deals with the Persian Wars from the 490s and 480s.
But in fact, the two men were almost contemporary, Herodotus living only a few years earlier than Thucydides.
But the quality of their history writing is very, very different.
Because in Herodotus, what we still have, though we have a new idea of history as research,
that's what the word originally means for Herodotus,
what we still have in Herodotus is an interest in telling a good story.
It's an element that the Greeks call Tomothodes and it's related to the word mythos, myth.
A good story is worth telling.
If it's true, so much the better, but the most important thing is to entertain the audience.
So that, for example, you still have a strong sense in Herodotus' history writing
that the gods play a very active role in the affairs of the Greeks
and that trying to weigh up that divine role
and contemplating things like cosmic justice are actually quite legitimate areas for the historian.
So, for example, at one point the Persian fleet is sailing down towards Salamis
and the fleet is hit by a storm and loses many, many boats.
Herodotus' comment on this is that this was the gods way of making sure
that the fleets of the Persians and the Greeks, when they met at Salamis,
would be more evenly balanced.
So, for Herodotus, the gods are still active there playing a role in the affairs of men.
For Thucydides, on the other hand, history was meant to be something quite different.
It was to be sobo, it's the dragnet approach, just the facts, thank you ma'am.
No stories to entertain and he actually explicitly says at one point
that readers may find my work less entertaining because it lacks this quality of Tomothodes,
the mythical entertaining element, but rather audaciously he then says,
but if I can show the way history has occurred and will occur again
because of what's in human nature, then he says,
my work will be a work that will stand for all time.
Try putting that on the front page of your next book.
It's quite a bold claim.
For Thucydides, history is a scientific discipline.
It illustrates the human soul and it illustrates the way that affairs occur again and again in history
because of underlying laws of history that can be seen to repeat.
What are these laws?
Well, there are various ways that you can identify these axems,
but some of them are that weakness, for example, invites the domination of the stronger.
Power always seeks to increase itself.
That compulsion or necessity is an engine that drives history,
that leaders must impose their will on those whom they lead.
These are the lessons that are illustrated time and again
in the various episodes of the Peloponnesian War and the way that Thucydides presents them.
Now, what we're finding in this approach to what we can call scientific history
is Thucydides demonstrating the effect of the current trends in education in Greece in the late 5th century.
As a member of the educated Athenian elite, Thucydides was well aware of the new developments in oratory,
for example, in public speaking, in logic, in science, in medical writing, in philosophy.
All of these areas are reflected in his work
and his intellect is really shaped by a kind of intellectual ferment
that was occurring in Athens in the course of the 5th century.
This was because of the climate at Athens and because of the prosperity of Athens.
