Welcome back to our 21st lecture now in the series on Greek civilization.
In our last two lectures we've been looking at the cataclysmic events which affected the
Greek world at the end of the 5th century, when between 431 and 404 BC the Athenians were
embroiled in a disastrous war with the Spartans, the Peloponnesian War.
And we spent a good deal of time in those lectures talking about Thucydides and the way in which
he saw in these events a story which would illustrate both general tendencies in human
history and also a story which would explain the downfall of Athens by looking back at
the Athenians and their own character, their daring, the quality which won them their empire
would eventually lose them their empire as well.
We pointed out that Thucydides' work breaks off before the war actually finishes, we're
lucky that his work was continued by a historian in the next generation, Xenophon, so that
we know the details of the last stages of the war.
The war finally came to an end in 404 BC after the Spartans had made the decision that many
would say they should have made 30 years earlier, namely to build a navy and to take the war
from the land on to the sea where the Athenians had always been more powerful.
And so it is in the last stages of the war we find actually Spartan fleets in the Aegean,
in that sphere of influence which up until the end of the 5th century had been an exclusively
an Athenian sphere of influence.
And furthermore we find the Spartans also making alliances with the Persians, receiving
Persian gold in order to win over the states of the Aegean away from the Athenian alliance,
the Dealian League, and win their support so that finally after a succession of battles
in the middle of the last decade of the 5th century the Athenians were decisively defeated
by the Spartans and a Spartan fleet under Lysander sailed triumphantly into the Paris.
The Xenophon accompanied by the sounds of flutes celebrating the freedom of the Greeks.
Now this war would of course mark an epoch, it was the end of Athenian power and the glory
of the 5th century, but it is in a way possible to over-emphasize the long-term effects of
this defeat because remarkably, as we'll see in subsequent lectures, Athenian power
rebounded quite vigorously in the course of the 4th century.
Nevertheless it was a war that had a profound effect on the Athenians themselves and I'm
going to be talking somewhat about that today as I try to explain the conditions under which
Socrates was put on trial. What's the connection? Well, first of all we're going to have to
talk about the trends in Greek philosophy in the 6th and the 5th century to try to understand
what the trends are that are represented by the career of Socrates, but I'm going to
be suggesting towards the end of the lecture that the best way of understanding the trial
of Socrates, surely the most celebrated trial of a philosopher or thinker in Western history,
is to be understood in terms of the specific aftermath of the Peloponnesian War, a time
when the democracy was severely threatened, it was in fact disbanded for a period, a time
when Athens lapsed into civil war for a few months, and so a time of great frustration
and anxiety, and I'll be suggesting that Socrates in his single figure in fact drew
to him all those anxieties and that his trial represents the kind of purging of these anxieties
created by the failure of Athens in the Peloponnesian War and its aftermath, so that in a sense
his trial is not really a trial about freedom of speech, as it's sometimes been imagined,
but rather a trial about how a society copes with its failure in a major war, the Peloponnesian
War. I'm leaving ahead by raising those issues. Let's go back and talk about the traditions
of Greek philosophy so that we can chart where Socrates comes from intellectually speaking.
Philosophy is certainly one of the areas in which we in the Western tradition feel a strong
connection to the Greeks, and it would be certainly hard to deny that there is a real
connection tying us to them. It really goes back to the sixth century when Greek thinking
was revolutionized by a group of remarkable men, nearly all of whom came from Ionia, that
western coast of Asia Minor, the area that had been populated by Greek cities from as
early as about a thousand or nine hundred B.C. And so this movement is often referred
to as the Ionian Enlightenment or the Ionian Revolution, and because all of the philosophers
in simple chronological terms lived before Socrates, these philosophers are also referred
to often as the Presocratics.
