So, we see a combination of ideas here, some strictly scientific, the idea of the atom,
some logos, noose, proportion, measure, divine intelligence, almost moving into the philosophical
and theological realm.
One of the very important features for the subsequent course of writing in the Western
tradition is the fact that the Ionian revolution, this philosophical revolution, tended to
use prose rather than poetry as the language in which ideas were expressed.
Poetry increasingly from now on would come to be associated only with tomothodos, that
mythical element we've talked about in previous lectures, stories, fiction, lyric poetry,
epic poetry, while prose would come to be the language of inquiry, whether it be philosophical
inquiry, whether it be historical inquiry, what have you.
And the term used here by the Greeks to connote this notion of prose and investigation, trying
to work out underlying laws behind phenomena, was logos.
It's a word that in Greek can mean both speech, a speech act, logos, word, but it also comes
to mean scientific inquiry as well.
So it's from that range of meanings that we derive our English use of the term logic,
that is to say the investigation of rational thinking.
For many of these pre-Socratic philosophers, the physical world which they investigated
was really only a reflection of a much deeper fundamental and underlying reality.
And in this sense, one of the features or one of the themes that one finds running through
the pre-Socratic philosophers and down into the philosophy of Socrates, Plato and Aristotle
as well, is a problem about the reliability of the senses.
This is still a standard of most philosophical systems.
The senses are unreliable.
We've all seen the basic trick of taking a beaker full of water, putting a ruler inside
it and seeing that it seems to bend.
Now of course it doesn't, but our senses, our visual senses can be tricked into thinking
that it bends.
Proceeding from that kind of observation, namely that the senses are untrustworthy,
the pre-Socratics formulated the notion that the senses really can only give rise to what
they call gunome, opinion.
You think that a phenomenon is so because you observe it to be so.
But in fact, if there is a true underlying reality to the world, it may lie beyond our
immediate sensual apprehension and that knowledge, that understanding of the underlying world,
not tricked by the senses, is what they call epistome, knowledge, from which we get our
English term, epistemology, the investigation of how we know what we know.
True epistome comes about only after gunome opinions have been overturned, surmounted.
So the aim of Greek philosophy as a result of this basic understanding was to achieve
a clearer grasp of the world by distinguishing between its external reality and its underlying
reality.
That's what drives the Greek philosophers, the attempts to do away with externals and
to get to the core underneath.
Now that common enterprise of the philosophers then leads to a very close connection between
what we would call the natural sciences, observing nature, geometry, biology and so
forth, based on observation of the world and then moral philosophy that asks the question,
how should I live in the world?
How should I behave?
So many of the distinctions that we draw between different aspects of science, philosophy,
theology and so forth are distinctions that really don't make sense when looking at Greek
philosophy.
It is a combination of many of these things.
Now that is going to be one of the great traditions that leads into Socratic philosophy, but there
is a whole second one that I have to chart in addition to that and that is the tradition
known as Sophistry or Sophistic Learning.
Along with the scientific revolution that I have been outlining, the 5th century also
witnessed the rise of a new class of teachers, not just philosophers but men who actually
taught classes and were paid for this, professional educators and they are known as Sophists.
