Their philosophical interests included epistemology, how do we know what we know, language, how
does language operate, how do words come to take on their meaning, how the systems of
language developed, geometry, astronomy, biology, all these areas are part of the Sophistic
Enterprise.
But most particularly, and this is what really stuck in the popular imagination, the two
areas that the Sophists were most associated with were rhetoric, training people to speak
and because that training is usually used by the elite, the political class, it means
upper class education, and heuristics, the study of argument, how do you prove your case
against someone else, against something which in its applied form would operate in the law
courts.
So rhetoric and heuristics, public speaking and argumentation are the two areas with which
the Sophists are most associated, at least in the popular mind of the rest of the Athenians
and the Greeks.
So these men were professionals, they actually charged, the best known example of course
is Protagoras, we have a wonderful dialogue about Protagoras written by Plato and in it
you see him gently teaching either by telling stories or by asking questions, a group of
students who've paid money for this.
They're tolerated in Athens and most of these Sophists end up coming to Athens since Athens
has become the intellectual center of the Greek world, but they're particularly associated
with the upper classes because the activities that they teach are those used by the upper
classes and because it takes time and money to attend their classes.
So by the rest of the Athenian population, in the rest of the Athenian population we
actually see quite different attitudes and if we look for example at Aristophanes play
the clouds, what we see there is the Sophists being held up to derision.
So for many Athenians, it reminds me really of the lecture that we had a few days ago
about sexuality where I tried to point out that there was a range of opinions and one
cannot speak simply about the Greek attitude towards homosexuality, here too we cannot
speak about the Greek attitude towards the Sophists.
Socrates came from the same intellectual milieu that produced the Ionian philosophers and
the Sophistic movement as well.
He's an Athenian living in the latter part of the 5th century, trained in these earlier
Ionian traditions, but also meeting and being trained by Sophistic educators as well.
And in fact, his own teaching really reflects something of both of these earlier traditions.
He seems to have originally been trained in speculation about the natural world, we have
some references to his early education, but the mature Socrates that we know from the
Platonic Dialogues is almost exclusively concerned with moral philosophy.
So he's moved away from that earlier Ionian interest into the question of what's the
way to live, and particularly what is the nature of goodness, that became the compelling
question that Socrates attempted to answer.
We also know that he attracted a circle of followers and in this respect he looks like
a Sophist because he has adherents, men such as Critias, men such as Plato and Xenophon.
Now, the fact that he has adherents makes him seem like a Sophist.
On the other hand, there's no evidence that he ever charged, and his defenders will startly
maintain that he never accepted ascent for his teaching.
He never seems to have offered formal lecture classes, and so in that respect he's actually
quite unlike a Sophist.
He wrote nothing like some of the most influential characters in human history, like Christ or
like Buddha.
He appears to have had a philosophical system, but he actually wrote nothing himself.
And in addition to that, he seems to have resisted formulating a coherent philosophical system.
In other words, he did not offer precise guidelines to his students as to the way of seeing the
world in the Socratic style.
Socrates, unlike the Ionian philosophers and the Sophists, however, was an Athenian.
This is an important point because we actually know about details of his career as an Athenian
citizen.
He fought in the Athenian army, he served on the council of the Athenians, and in that
respect he's very much unlike either of the earlier philosophical traditions.
He is a citizen in this democracy as well.
