He also penned a rather strange track which details all the statues and artworks that
were melted down by the crusaders and turned into rather wretched, trashy coins, as well
as the other destruction that went on.
And that work is more in the tradition of a lament, a combination of a panagiric and
lament, which you find in classical literature.
But all three historians together give us a remarkable picture of the 12th century and
really is one of the best recorded periods of imperial history since the age of Justinian.
And this is an impressive achievement, both for the Byzantine educational system as well
as those authors themselves.
In other letters, we see the continuing tradition of Byzantine education through the entire
Chalmenean period.
One is, for instance, in the study of Plato.
This goes back into the 11th century where you had the famous Michael Celis.
Again, I'd mentioned him in an earlier lecture that he was an author on a series of imperial
biographies.
But Celis, who always reminds us that he's actually more brilliant than Plato in many
ways since he's interpreting Plato, but Celis is responsible for the production of important
works of commentaries on Plato, on the collection and editing of the text.
The Chalmenean era also sees an enormous surge in scholarship.
These are often known by classical scholars as the Scolias.
There are Byzantine authors who collected information about ancient authors who edited
the text, especially unusual words, historical background, geographic details.
John Cephalinus, who was a patriarch of the 11th century and also leading intellectual
contemporary of Celis, he's responsible for a number of these Scolias and also is responsible
for an epitome of the Roman historian Cassius Dio.
There was a tendency, I always think of these as the Byzantine version of the reader's
digest to ancient history.
There was a tradition of creating epitomies or bridgements of major classical authors,
and very often these are the only editions we have of those classical authors.
Cassius Dio or Dio Cassius, the author writing in the 3rd century AD on Roman history from
60 BC to Cassius Dio Cassius' own day.
One of the major works in Roman history, really the later sections of it come through
an epitome made in the 11th and 12th centuries.
We're also stunned at the continuity of classical letters, and I can give a couple of examples
of that from the Comedian age.
Manuel I was absolutely delighted with astrology and wrote a whole work on astrology, rather
strange occupation.
Isaac II shows the same proclivities, but it's based very much on a classical model or
ratus.
The fables of Esop and the tales of Lucian, both writers of the classical age, were well
known in Byzantine circles and inspired imitation.
The fables of Esop were so well known that even in a church such as Eski Gumis today,
which is in a remote town in Cappadocia, just north of the Taurus Mountains, in the upper
levels of that church there's a chamber there, which I suspect was used for training students,
in which fables from Esop are actually depicted in the frescoes.
They're very, very faint, difficult to see, but they're distinctly there.
And it gives you some sense of the wide range, and this is a church that was probably just
before the Comedian age.
This gives you a notion of the wide range of classical texts, the adaptation of classical
texts that was available, and part of the Byzantine educational system.
They knew the poems of Homer, they knew the tragedies, all of these were part of the education.
Now to some extent, that education was designed to train imperial officials, a churchman,
Plato was to a large extent studied in order to elucidate the Christian faith.
Very often you get the impression from Anna Komenna or other Byzantine historians that
they know their Homer, they've memorized passages of Homer to pepper their letters or pepper
their own literary accounts or histories.
But nonetheless those classics were well known, they were produced, manuscripts were
copied and distributed in large numbers, and we do know of the existence of imperial
libraries and libraries attached to the great cathedrals, particularly to the residents of
the patriarch and Constantinople, so that you had a literate culture.
And that literate culture even percolated down to the lower levels of society.
The Comedian and the succeeding age, the so-called Paleologian emperors of the late 13th century,
the dissemination of works of hagiography, saints' lives, or the epic diogenes accretace
which is set in the 9th or 10th century, but the version we have is really from the 12th
and 13th century of a great border lord who fought the Muslims.
These were works at a more popular level, they're in the vernacular Greek as opposed
to the very literary atticizing Greek of the distinguished works, and these two apparently
circulate in some numbers.
They have a number of manuscripts coming down to us and gives you some idea of the extent
and range of literacy in the Comedian age.
