Welcome back to now our 22nd lecture in the series on Ancient Greek Civilization.
In earlier lectures, particularly when we were paying close attention to the democracy,
I posed the question of how, where to judge the democracy.
And I suggested in the context of the ancient world, the Athenian democracy was a quite
astonishing accomplishment that it was unparalleled in Macedon, or in Rome, or in Persia, even
in the other Greek states such as Sparta.
And yet, we had to acknowledge, and we've seen this time and again, that the Athenian
democracy was, in another respect, a kind of exclusive club.
That is to say, it was a club for Athenian male adult citizens.
And by definition, those who did not fit into that category were excluded from the club.
We've already seen how, in relation to women, the effect of this inclusive, exclusive dynamic
resulted in an ideal in Athens of women being totally excluded from all aspects of public
life and being secluded in the household.
Now, we've pointed out that may not correspond to the complete historical reality, but it
was the desired ideal in classical Athens.
If there is, however, one group whose exclusion from the citizen body is absolutely integral
to the functioning of the ancient democracy, it is that of slaves.
This is a pervasive feature of Greek culture.
It is ubiquitous, and it is there at all times.
And so widespread is the institution of slavery that, some years ago, a Greek historian posed
the question, was ancient Greek culture based on slave labor, meaning was it slavery that
made possible, not just that it existed alongside Greek culture, but was it that actually made
possible the accomplishments of the classical Greeks?
And I think that's a question that we're going to have to address if we're going to understand
the Greeks properly.
In particular, in particular, excuse me, we're going to have to address the question of how
does a society which strongly believes in the notion of freedom and equality, as did
the Greeks of classical Athens, reconcile such democratic notions with the ownership
of slaves, turning other men and women and children into chattel objects that can be
bought and sold.
So these are serious questions that are going to take us into the heart of Greek society.
Well, first of all, let's try to sketch the position of slaves in the ancient world and
in Greek culture.
They are found throughout Athens performing all manner of tasks, as we'll see in a moment.
They're found at every level of Greek literature and from the very beginning.
If you think back to the Iliad, the earliest of the great Greek poems, the great conflict
that leads to the great warrior Achilles withdrawing from the battle and stranding the Greeks
is that he's in conflict with Agamemnon over a slave woman.
Hesiod, who gives a slightly more real version of life in the 8th century because he was
talking about the world of farmers and everyday Greeks, has as a bit of advice to the would-be
farmer, make sure that you have a house, make sure that you have a wife, make sure that
you have an oxen with a plough and a slave woman to stand behind it.
So from the very beginnings of Greek culture, it is seen to be a core necessity for a Greek
household that there should be slaves.
And historically, if we go back even into the Bronze Age, we can see in tablets from
the Mycenaean palaces, inventories not only including chariot wheels and bales of wool
but also lists of slave women.
So slavery is at the very earliest levels of Greek culture and society.
In classical times, it was completely widespread and found at every level of Athenian society.
Even the poorest Athenian expected to be able to own a slave.
There is a very famous speech in which a poor man, a cripple, is appealing to receive a
state pension from Athens and he is so poor, so blindingly poor for an Athenian citizen,
he says that he can't even afford a slave.
So this is a measure of absolute destitution.
So a free man was expected to have slaves.
He might have a group of slaves that he set up in a workshop, for example.
We know that Lysias, the son of Kefalus, who had come to Athens in the late fifth century,
had a workshop down at the Paris where he had 20 or so slaves turning out shields and spears, an armory.
