at least in the ideal form. And the wealthier Athenians at this time owned huge
estates of slaves. We hear of Nikias, for example, leasing 2,000 slaves to the
Athenian government. So he must have had a huge supply of his own slaves. Now I
don't want to again confuse the ideal world of the Greeks with the reality.
The fact surely is, and there's plenty of evidence of this from the law speech,
as of the 4th century, that there were many farmers, many Athenian citizens who
still lived on the land, who were hard-working, and in fact not all the
farming was actually going to be done by slaves. But what I'm talking about here
is the ideal world emerging in the 5th and the 4th century. We're talking here
about the mentality of the Greeks, if you will, that very complicated and complex
web of values and assumptions and attitudes that make up the outlook of
the Greeks. And here, again, we can see a theme that we followed a few times in
these lectures, just as not every woman was physically locked up in the
back room, and there probably were women in the agorah, and just as not every
Greek adult male was a homosexual, but it was an activity that was in aristocratic
circles, so too there were surely Athenians farming, but the ideal was
that you didn't have to, that someone else would do the work for you, and that
with that free time you would then pursue the activities of a citizen. In later
ages we might call these the activities of a gentleman, or the
activities of a nobleman, but here in Athens they're the activities of a
citizen. So slavery makes possible scole, and scole makes possible citizenship.
Now, I think that in a very interesting way, the operations, the mental
operations that we see at work here, persist into our own time and into our
own culture, and I'm clearly not talking here about attitudes towards labor or
towards slavery, but rather towards culture, and I invite you to consider
this for a moment. In our own culture there is a fairly straightforward
distinction between what is normally termed high culture and low culture.
Instances of the former of high culture would include things like opera, or
ballet, or paintings at an exhibit, such as the Delacroix exhibit currently
playing in Philadelphia. While on the other hand there are a number of forms
of culture that we commonly call low culture, such as weaving, quilting, folk
music, folk dancing, and if we ask ourselves what the distinction between
these is, and clearly there are many influences over the course of time from
the Renaissance onwards and even earlier, but there is a kind of basic
distinction between those that I think in some ways harks back to the Greeks.
We've somehow absorbed the notion that high culture is the culture that is
associated with leisure time. It's culture that is expensive, it's culture
that you pay for with your work. On the other hand there are other types of
culture which are in fact the same as work or grow out of work. The kind of
culture that are not high activities but are done simply by people as part of
their daily lives. Quilts are used on people's beds originally. Folk dancing
is not something that you pay or that you see at court, but something
rather that people are doing when they're having a party as a result of
bringing in the harvest. It seems to me that in our attitude, distinguishing
between high culture and low culture, what we've done is we've inherited this
belief of the Greeks that work pays for leisure and that therefore the culture
which you didn't have to pay for and the culture that wasn't part of the leisure
time that you paid for with your work is really somehow not as important and not
as valuable. To me, slavery takes us to the absolute paradox then of Greek
culture. It is this paradox, namely that the classical civilization undoubtedly
did produce a magnificent culture. We're still marvel at it today, but none of
that culture would have been possible had it not been for the existence at
every level of Athenian society and throughout Greek history of a class of
slaves.
