And so, in one interpretation, the polis is achieving, politically speaking, its culmination
in the 4th century, and it is exhausted as a political form for civic life.
We want to explore that in a moment.
These traditional rivalries of the early part of the 4th century are going to be also influenced
by a new element in Greek affairs at this time, and that is the more active role of
the Persians in the affairs of the Greeks.
The Persian kings and Persian satraps will, with their money, be financing wars between
the various Greek states.
Whenever these wars stop, there is a tendency of Greeks to do battle with the Persians,
and it is in order to prevent that, that the Persians will finance wars in Greece to protect
themselves.
OK, that is the general scope of some of the political affairs we are going to deal with,
but let us pick up our story in more detail at the end of the Peloponnesian War.
It is in 404-403 that we have the Spartans defeating Athens finally and marching into
the Paris, sailing into the Paris, but the Spartans very quickly proved to be unpopular
as the new leaders of the Greeks.
The Spartans instituted a system of governors in the territories which had been part of the
Athenian Empire and had now come under Spartan control.
These governors are called Hamosts, and they have behind them military garrisons, so there
is a direct Spartan military presence and occupation of the various Aegean and Ionian
island and city sites.
And where local governments had been democratic, they were for the most part overthrown and
replaced by the Spartans by boards of ten men called Dekarches.
Now this very direct control of the affairs of the Greeks by the Spartans proved to be
extremely unpopular.
And so it was that the Spartans attempted to salvage for themselves some degree of honour
and some status among the Greeks by in fact taking their war out of Greek territory and
back onto Persian territory.
So we find around 401-400 and into the early years of the 390s, Spartan armies actually
campaigning in Asia Minor against the local Persian satraps.
This was an attempt to create a feeling that the Spartans were the leaders of the Greeks
and that their attention was focused on the common enemy of Persia, not on smaller Greek
states.
The effect of this was to enrage of course the great king and his satraps.
And so using an intermediary from the island of Rhodes, a man by the name of Timocrates,
these Persian satraps actually bribed the states of Greece to form a new union and to
declare war against Sparta.
This is the Corinthian War which breaks out in 396 BC and many historians have observed
and I think they're right that the Corinthian War in a sense is a coda, it's a direct follow
on from the Peloponnesian War lasting from 396 to 387.
The difference however is that the Peloponnesian War you'll remember had been a war between
two great systems of alliance, the Athenians and their allies, the Spartans and their allies.
What we have in the Corinthian War on the other hand is Sparta as the common enemy of a new
alliance and listen to the names of the states in this new alliance.
Thebes, Athens, Argos and Corinth.
Now if you think about it for a moment it is quite astonishing that these states should
be allied.
Thebes and Corinth had both been Spartan allies in the Peloponnesian War.
Corinth we've already seen had many grudges against the Athenians for their growing economic
power.
The Thebans were so opposed to Athens that at the end of the Peloponnesian War they had
actually urged the Spartans to level the city of Athens.
So these are old Spartan allies and enemies of the Athenians.
Now in alliance with the Athenians and in alliance with Argos, the one Peloponnesian
state which had always been hostile to Sparta.
So what we have here on one viewing is an extremely depressing development.
Instead of there being great networks of alliances facing each other in the Greek world what
we now find forming is a single leading power, the hegemon, and an instant cluster of allied
states against that one power.
Whatever their natural interests may be, whatever their prior history may be, ignored so that
a common alliance against a single leading state, Greek state, can be formed.
So there was a great deal of resentment against Sparta.
And this resentment united these former allies and enemies.
