The war concluded and it raged on inconclusively for a number of years with just some petty
raiding in the area of Corinth. It was not vigorously prosecuted, for the most part.
It was brought to a conclusion in 387 and 386 BC. And the conclusion of the Corinthian
War in the so-called piece of Antalcadas, named for the ambassador who negotiated the
piece, is extremely telling because Antalcadas negotiated this piece on behalf of the King
of Persia. This is a common peace treaty. That is to say, it is not just a peace treaty
between two Greek states, but a peace treaty that is open to any Greek state which wishes
to sign on, but it is being brokered by the Persian king.
Now, what I think this suggests to us is that early on in the fourth century, the affairs
of the Greeks have reached a point where there is such general equality between the different
states of Greece that no single state will be able to impose its will on the affairs
of the Greeks. And the second point that this makes most importantly is that from now on,
the king of Persia is going to be an active participant in the affairs of the Greek states.
The line between national and international has now been wiped out. We'll talk a little
bit more about the effects of the king's peace and the other examples of common peace treaties
that we find in the fourth century in a moment. But first we should note that this common
peace treaty, which was supposed to end all the wars in Greece and create stability in
Greece, was really used by the Spartans as an opportunity to simply reassert their authority
in the Peloponnese. So this treaty was meant to guarantee the autonomy of all of the separate
Greek states, but it was used by the Spartans. So we find, for example, in 385, two years
after the peace had been signed, the Spartans forced the people of Mantonea to tear down
their walls and to disperse from their city into five separate villages. Mantonea lay
north of Sparta, and this was seen as a potential threat to the Spartans. So they were imposing
their will on another sovereign Greek territory. In 383, two years after that, the Spartans
once again presented an ultimatum to a small Peloponnesian community that of Flios. And
here the Fliasians were forced to take back exiles who had been kicked out some years
earlier. These exiles were, of course, pro-Spartan in their leanings. So the Spartans proved
to be both an unpopular power around Greece in general, and even after the common peace
to be extremely high-handed in their treatment of the Greeks, particularly close to their
borders. This period of Spartan hegemony reaches its culmination with two quite astonishing
events which take place in the 370s. In 382, a Spartan army marching through central Greece
had, for no good reason, and under no provocation, attacked Thebes and seized the citadel of
Thebes. It remained there occupying that citadel for the next three years until it was expelled
in 379. This was the most high-handed of all of their actions in the 380s. Then in
the 370s these two events take place, as I've said, which really marked turning in the affairs
of the Greeks, and particularly the position of Sparta. In 379, 8, the Athenians issue a
call to all of their current and former allies to resuscitate the Dealian League, the Empire
which had existed in the 5th century and which had been disbanded at the end of the Peloponnesian
War. And very quickly, virtually overnight in the 370s, from about 379 down to the late
370s, the Athenians were able to register all of their old allies, and so once again
were able to claim that they were the center of a naval empire embracing both the Aegean
and even other parts of Greece as well. So they quickly reasserted themselves. This did
not happen overnight as sometimes it's been suspected. We in fact know of treaties in
the 380s that are bilateral treaties between Athens and separate states, an alliance with
Byzantium, an alliance with the island of Chios. So very carefully, in the 380s, while
Sparta is manipulating affairs in the Peloponnes and is outraging the rest of the Greeks, the
Athenians are very delicately forming a series of alliances with individual states. And then
in 379, having made many of these alliances, they then approach all of their allies and
say, let's reform the Dealian League. This time we'll do it without tribute, this time
we will do it without clericies, this time we will do it without garrisons being imposed.
In other words, we will create a better, more perfect version of the Dealian League. And
that was clearly something that was because of and a response to the growth of Spartan
power and the manipulation of the affairs of the Greeks by Sparta in the 380s.
