Welcome back to this last lecture in this series of lectures on ancient Greek civilization.
In our last lecture we were looking at the early part of the 4th century, the so-called
Cinderella period of Greek history, and I presented the argument that while politically the period
represented a dead end in the sense that the Greeks had fought themselves to a kind of
standstill and seemed incapable of producing any better political form than the polis and
seemed mired in this endless cycle of wars and conflict.
I also argue that on the other hand culturally it was still an extremely active and vital
period and that we saw here signs of a transition from the classical world into what will be
some of the dominant themes of the Hellenistic period such as a much greater interest in
the individual in things like the characters of Theophrastus or even in the artwork of
some of the sculptors of the period.
But if we're pulling together our survey of Greek history we really have to finish with
the consideration of the role of Philip and Alexander because the history of the Greeks
that has developed continuously from 100 BC onwards will of course be thought fundamentally
altered now.
It will be with Philip that the Greeks will be defeated as a people, they will lose their
independence and yet at the same time as they are being made in a sense politically insignificant
in the ancient world their cultural influence will be extrapolated over a vastly larger
area as Hellenism, that idea of Greek identity and Greek culture will be taken by Alexander's
troops and his successors and planted as far away as the Hindu Kush.
So we're dealing with dramatic events and with events that represent something of a paradox,
the diminution of Greek independence and yet the explosion of Greek culture over a much
larger area.
We need to talk a little first about Philip himself and about Macedon, the relationship
between Macedon and Greece.
Macedon is a land of inland mountains and valleys with a broad fertile plain then extending
down to the sea and throughout the 5th and the early part of the 4th century this was
for what of a better term a feudal territory, in other words it seems as if rather than
being united under one great king, though there was a Macedonian king, the various local barons
who ruled in their upland areas remained relatively independent and the strength of the king depended
upon the degree of loyalty that he could get from these local barons.
Philip's early reign like that of each of the kings who came before him as far as we
can tell going back 200 years in Macedonian history was taken up with attempting to secure
his place on the throne.
He was taken up with various border wars and during the first campaigns of his kingship
he pacified the tribes that ring the northern and western side of Macedon through a combination
of military victory, marriage alliance and outright bribery and this combination of both
military might and wily diplomacy using any means necessary money or marriage this would
remain the hallmark of Philip's actions throughout his career.
He was in fact a pure opportunist and I draw attention to that because people often speculate
over the motives of Philip, what did he have in mind in relation to the Greeks and then
later the Persians as well and I think the answer to that is very simple and can be summarised
in one word, more, he wanted more and no matter what he had he wanted more than that.
There is really no theory needed to explain Philip, he simply expanded wherever there
was an opening and whenever he was blocked he withdrew waiting until he could expand
once again.
This necessarily brought him into conflict with Athens which historically regarded the
northern Aegean as an area of its influence.
The Athenians had been mining at Mount Pangaeon, for years they had a colony at Amphipolis in
the 5th century up in the north, even men like Thucydides had marriage connections and
probably land holdings up in Thrace.
