It's an easy idea but I actually don't believe it because of the way that Alexander treated
the Persian nobility subsequently and also because I don't believe that finally Aristotle
had a great deal of influence on Alexander.
It seems to me that this young 16-year-old was not particularly concerned with biology
nor with ethics nor with state constitutions.
I think this was a young man who was vastly more interested in learning how to kill people
and to hunt lions.
Strategy, warfare, hunting, the typical training of an aristocrat and of a Macedonian nobleman.
These are what excited Alexander, keeping a copy of the Iliad under his pillow because
he was inspired by the notion of being a Homeric hero.
Now if that's true then I think we can further say that the contemporary who was of some
importance to Alexander rather than Aristotle was probably Xenophon who we mentioned in
the last lecture.
You'll recall that I pointed out that Xenophon was an Athenian gentleman of wide-ranging
interests, had written histories, had written biographies and so forth.
But the one thing that I did not mention about him was that one of the most evocative bits
of writing that we have from Xenophon is a first-hand account of the March upcountry
by a mercenary force of Greek hoplites who were being employed by Cyrus the Younger in
his attempt to seize the throne of Persia.
Now it turned out that in 401 BC Cyrus was defeated at the Battle of Canaxa and subsequently
died.
And at that point a Greek army of 10,000 hoplites, mercenaries, found itself in the middle of
the Persian Empire, cut off from the Greek homeland and certainly cut off from any friendly
forces or territory.
That force managed to march all the way back to the Black Sea before eventually returning
to Greece.
And the story of that triumphant march upcountry as it's called in which these Greek hoplites
proved themselves time and again to be more than a match for the lighter-armed Persian
troops I'm sure had a profound effect on the Greeks of the time.
It was in fact the event that demonstrated that Pan-Hellenism really could work in the
sense that an army of Greeks really had marched all the way into Persia and back again and
had not been defeated or destroyed.
I think that's the model that was inspiring Alexander to march ever onward into the Persian
Empire, the belief that militarily his soldiers were better and in fact in that respect he
was quite right, they were.
Assuming his father's position as captain general of the Greek forces he undertook a
campaign that led to two quick defeats of the Persians at the Granicus River in Asia Minor
shortly after the Macedonians and Greeks had crossed and then secondly at Isis in northern
Syria where it seems that during the night the armies of the great king and of the Greeks
had actually passed each other and found themselves in reverse order the following morning before
fighting a decisive engagement won by Alexander and causing the Persians to flee.
Now at this moment the Persian forces withdrew back into the Persian mainland into the heartland
of the Persian Empire but Alexander chose rather to turn south.
So from Syria he marched through the territory which to make this a little clearer will used
by their modern names he marched through Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Gaza and Egypt.
Now the reason that he was doing this I think is quite simple from a tactical point of view
he was making sure that the Persian forces and particularly the Phoenician fleets of
Tyre and Sidon would not be free to operate in his rear while he was marching further
east.
He was securing this territory so that there would be no attacks on Greece and Macedon by
these forces of the Phoenicians while he himself was further inland.
But that's not what this episode in his history is remembered for.
What became truly important was that as a result of this turning aside and heading south
Alexander made his way to an oracle of Zeus in the western desert west of Egypt at a place
called Siwa and it was there in the desert of this oracle that Alexander was greeted
as the son of God.
Now much ink has been spilled trying to explain exactly what was meant by that or whether
this is a later fiction of historians or whether it actually grew up from a misunderstanding
of the Greek and that for example the priests of the oracle tried to say, oh Pideon oh my
boy but actually said oh Pideos, oh son of Zeus.
