It would be nice to think that one of the most important events in history was created
by a misunderstanding of someone who couldn't quite get their Greek right, but I don't think
that's what happened.
I think he was greeted as the son of God.
And more importantly than that, I think that Alexander began to believe this.
It is from this time onwards that he stopped presenting himself as either the Macedonian
king or the captain general of the Greek forces avenging the earlier attack on Greece
by the Persians, and from now on he styles himself as the Lord of Asia.
He is already thinking of himself as the rightful ruler of this domain, and in doing
so he begins to merge both Greek and Persian patterns of authority.
This continues apace when, at the Battle of Gaugamila, Alexander defeats the Persian
king Darius for the third time, and thereafter Alexander basically takes over as the king
of Persia.
He continues marching east, conquering all the territory across the high Iranian plateau
through Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, and going as far as the Indus River beyond the Hindu
Kush, or excuse me, to the southeast of the Hindu Kush.
And it is only there, after crossing so much of the known world, that Alexander goes no
further.
And it is not the case, as is often said, that he wept because there were no more lands
to conquer.
He wept because his army mutinied and refused to go any further.
Enough, they said.
He turned around, and apparently in a fit of peak, angry at the fact that he had not
been allowed to continue his campaign across northern India, and who knows where, perhaps
finally to the steppes of Beijing, he marched his army across the desert of Godrosia, punishing
them for the fact that they had turned on him.
But the effect of this was disastrous, it not only cost lives, it made him sick and
weak, and when he finally returned to Babylon in 323 he died there of a fever.
Now that is a very cursory and thumbnail sketch of Alexander's conquests, but what really
is important for us to understand is what came out of this.
The whole scale of the Greek world is now going to be vastly different.
All of the affairs that we've talked about in the last 23 lectures have involved, at
the most, Greece, the Ionian coast, perhaps southern Italy and Sicily, and at the very
farthest extremity, perhaps Olbia, up in Ukraine or Marseille, Greek colonies.
But now, a territory which in modern terms would encompass Greece, Turkey, Syria, Lebanon,
Israel, Saudi Arabia, parts of Libya, Egypt, Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Georgia,
Iran, Iraq and so forth, are now all going to be subject to Greek culture.
Does this take root?
How will this work?
Again, this is really the substance of a whole new set of lectures to follow, but let's map
out some of the basic details here.
Eventually, in this new Hellenistic world, the world created by the Macedonian conquest
of Greece and then the conquest of Persia, this world would be the creation of the generals
who came after Alexander.
Some of them were his own bodyguards, some of them were his friends, some of them were
actually the men of his father's generation, the older men who had come along with him
in the invasion.
And in the course of the 30 years that came after Alexander's death, essentially three
great kingdoms would emerge across Greece and the Near East.
And these would be the kingdoms of, excuse me, the kingdoms of Macedon under the Antigonids,
the kingdom of Ptolemaic Egypt, controlled by Alexander's friend and bodyguard Ptolemy,
and the kingdom of Seleucid, Syria, which would encompass areas such as the ancient
city of Babylon, and at various times would reassert its authority as far as the edges
of India.
And then in addition to these three large empires, a number of smaller empires would
take root as well.
In particular, the kingdom of Pergamon, which would be so important in the transmission
of Greek culture to Rome in the first and second century BC, and less well known but
startling the Greek kingdoms of Bactria, of Central Asia, where Greek philosophy and Buddhism
would end up touching and rubbing up against each other, producing a new and fascinating
culture about which much too little is known.
The cultural impact of this expansion of Greece into the ancient Near East is much debated.
