Did Greek culture take root?
Well, in some ways it did.
There are some ways in which the effect of Alexander's conquests
are still to be seen in the very countryside today.
Most notably in the way that Alexander founded cities all over the ancient Near East.
And some of these exist until today.
Samarkand, Kojend, Merv, these great cities of the Silk Route across Central Asia
actually came into existence originally as cities of Alexander and of his successors.
The most lasting influence was found however not so much in the Far East
where eventually local traditions and the rise of new empires would overwhelm the Greeks
but rather close to the Mediterranean coast.
And this I think is very interesting.
It reflects the kind of bias of the Greeks.
Even when they are taken beyond Greece, it is the Mediterranean that attracts them
and they yearn in some respects to still be associated with it.
It's here in Syria where we will find the cities of Antioch and Seljukia and in Egypt
and particularly in the city of Alexandria there
that we'll find a new kind of hybrid culture being created in the aftermath of Alexander.
A hybrid culture which will exist in the Levant until the Arab conquest
and in a sense, it could be argued, remained a cultural domain even until modern times.
The very idea of the Levant as the Eastern Mediterranean is one that in a sense
relies on that that originally Greek culture that lies behind it.
The dilemmas that I think Alexander faced in his conquest
and in his dealings with the people of the Persian Empire
I think reflect something of the quality of Greek culture
and its relationship to the cultures that it came up against.
And I want to talk about this in the last stages now
because I think this will tell us something about the Greek attitude towards other cultures.
Alexander in his guise as Persian king was greeted by Persian noblemen
and others in furious who came to him and abased themselves by lying down in front of him.
This is an act called proskinesis.
To the Greeks this was an action that was performed only properly to a god.
So that when the Greeks saw this to them it was an affront
because it suggested that Alexander was presenting himself as if he were a god.
And yet consider the dilemma of Alexander.
If he were not to do this but rather to allow the Persians to approach him openly and equally
as did the Macedonian nobility he would seem to be somehow less than the Persian king he had replaced.
Proskinesis the very act then of bowing down and showing respect for another authority.
This very action I think summarises the dilemma of Greek culture facing other cultures.
Greek culture was not particularly interested in assimilating or becoming associated with other cultures.
And so in the Hellenistic period Hellenism will really remain a Greek culture of the elite
of a ruling class who consider themselves to be culturally superior to the people whom they've conquered.
And as a result Hellenism will never fully take root as deeply in the ancient Near East
as it might have and will be susceptible to being wiped away by the Arab conquest
precisely because it is only the culture of the elite not of the ordinary people.
There is a papyrus that comes from Egypt that I think summarises something of these attitudes.
It is both funny but also in a way depressing because it is a petition from the Hellenistic period
written by a man to his local official saying would you please help me
because I am being persecuted by two men in my village
and the reason that I am being persecuted is that I cannot make an official complaint
I do not speak Greek.
Being Greek, speaking Greek, being part of Greek culture
which had been something wonderful in the 5th and the 4th century
by the Hellenistic period will become a marker for excluding people
from access to power and from being members of the elite.
So the Hellenistic world is going to represent a triumph for the culture of the Greeks in this respect.
Greek culture will be extrapolated over a much wider area.
In the foothills of the Hindu Kush you can find Greek temples with No Thyself
copied from Delphi and scribed on stone thousands of miles away
but the culture that was trying to take root there was an exclusive one
that showed no interest in dealing with the local population.
And for that reason Greek culture would in fact remain weak
in the face of a concerted outside opposition and at the end of the Hellenistic period
would come under the domination of the other great western culture, the Romans.
Or you may call our customer service representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-832-2412. Thank you.
