Hi, this is Dwayne, and today I'd like to talk about the amazing circle of keys.
The circle of keys is also known sometimes as the circle of fifths or the circle of
fourths.
But when people talk about those, they're talking about the very same thing.
The circle of keys is the same thing as the circle of fifths or the circle of fourths.
And there's all kinds of exciting things you can learn from that, and I'd like to talk
about seven of them today.
The first thing I'd like to talk about is the order of the sharps.
You can learn the order of the sharps as they occur in music.
In other words, if there's a key signature and you see one sharp, that sharp is always
right there, f, okay?
You can count on that.
If there's two sharps, the key signature is always f and c sharp, okay?
Two sharps, f and c sharp.
Three are f, c, and g.
If you have four sharps, I bet you know what the fourth one will be, right?
You'd have f, c, g, d.
If you have five sharps, of course, it's f, c, g, d, and a.
And notice these relationships.
There are fifths apart.
C is five notes higher than f.
If you look at the keyboard, you'll see that.
G is five notes higher than c.
D is five notes higher than g.
A is five notes higher than d.
And the next sharp, therefore, would be e.
And the next sharp would be b.
And the next sharp would be f sharp.
So if you had one, two, three, four, five, six, seven sharps, you would have, oh, I'm
sorry, I already named f sharp, didn't I?
Okay.
If you had seven sharps, you'd have f, c, g, d, a, e, b.
If you have seven flats, the order of the seven flats is just opposite from the order
of the sharps.
In other words, if you have one flat, it's always b-flat.
If you have two flats, it's b-flat and e-flat.
Three flats, b-flat, e-flat, a-flat.
Four flats spell the word b, b-e-a-d, okay?
Five flats would be g-flat.
Six flats would be c-flat.
It looks like b is printed there, but inharmonically, it would be c-flat.
And seven flats would be f-flat, inharmonic with e, but don't call it e, call it f-flat,
okay?
So, that's the first thing you can learn is the order of the sharps.
Second thing is the order of the flats.
That third thing you can learn from this circle is the relationship of keys, the related keys.
If you're on the key of c, it's most likely, I mean, it's most closely related to the key
of f because there's only one difference.
The key of c has no sharps or flats, and the key of f has one flat.
So, the only difference between the key of c and the key of f is that one flat.
And we already learned that one flat is always b-flat, okay?
C is also closely related to the key of g.
Why?
Because there's only one difference, the sharp and the key of g, which is f-sharp, which
we already learned, okay?
There's two differences between the key of c and the key of d, and you know by now those
are the two sharps.
There's two differences between the key of c and the key of b-flat, the two flats in
the key of b-flat, all right?
And so on.
Three differences between the key of c and the key of b-flat.
So, the most closely related keys to one another are the ones that are closest on this circle.
In other words, if you're in the key of e, what are the most closely related keys to
you?
Right, the key of a, the key of b.
The next most likely would be the key of d or the key of f-sharp, okay?
So, either move left or right on the circle, and those are the most closely related keys.
I'm kind of going fast here because I want to cover all seven here at a limited time,
so let's move on to the next thing that the circle of keys relate, and that's the primary
chords.
If you're in the key of c, the primary chords or the most used chords in the key of c are
c, g, and f, in other words, the key itself, the key note itself plus the ones on the right
and on the left, okay?
Those are the most used chords.
So, if you're in the key of b-flat, what are the most used chords?
The most used chords in the key of b-flat are f and e-flat, to the left or right, okay?
If you're in the key of a-flat, what are the most used chords?
Right, a-flat, e-flat, and d-flat.
If you're in the key of d, what do you think the most used chords are?
Right, the key a-chord and the g-chord, the most used chords, okay?
They don't have to happen, but they do.
If you dumped all the songs that have ever been written in a computer, those would come
out.
Those three would come out.
They're called the primary chords.
They're primary because they're indigenous to that key.
And I won't get into explaining why, but they are, okay?
The next thing you can learn from the circle of keys are secondary chords.
We learned about primary chords right there, okay?
That the primary chords are to the left and right.
Well, the secondary chords after the primary chords are the next three, basically three
could be four, to the left of whatever key you're in.
In other words, the primary chords in the key of c are c, f, and g, but the secondary
chords are d, a, and e.
And that's the most likely the order in which they'll happen, too.
In other words, if you're in the key of c, after the g-chord and the f-chord, the next
most likely chord is the d-chord.
The next most likely chord after that in the key of c is a-chord.
The next most likely chord after that is the e-chord.
The next most likely chord is the b-chord.
And the least likely chord is f-chord, or chief left, of course, okay?
So you can always move to the left to find out the secondary chords.
The sixth thing you can learn from the circle of keys are chord progressions, the way chords
want to move.
And chords generally want to move up a fourth.
Quite often they don't always, of course, but you can count most of the time that they'll
move up a fourth.
Quite often, probably, you know, 60%, 70% of the time they'll move up a fourth.
In other words, c likes to move to f, f likes to move to b-flat, b-flat likes to move to
e-flat, and so on, okay?
So they, particularly if you have a seventh, if you put a seventh on c, that chord, c-seventh
will almost always move to f.
If you have an a-seventh, it will almost always move to d.
If you have a d-seventh, it'll most always move to g, and so on, okay?
So chords like to move up a fourth.
They don't always, you got to remember the primary chords, but chords like to move up
a fourth.
And so you can learn just the very basic of chord progressions from that.
And again, there's way more that we can say about that, but I won't say any more right
now.
And then thirdly, or seventh, the seventh thing you can learn from the major circle of keys,
chord substitutions.
In other words, if I'm, if I have the c chord, and I want to make a chord substitution for
it, and I have to ask myself, into what other chord will this melody no fits?
Let's say I'm playing the c chord, but the melody note is g.
So I have to ask myself, what other chord is g in, okay?
And I know from experience, and you could learn this from experience too, that g is
in the e-flat chord, and so I can try the e-flat chord as a substitute for c.
What other chord is g in?
Well, it's in, it could be the third of something, it could be the fifth of something, it could
be the seventh of something, but you ask yourself, into what other chord will this note fit?
Okay?
Well, I'm out of time, so thanks for being with me, and I hope you've learned something
from this amazing circle of fests.
We'll do this again, and I'll take it in more depth next time around.
So thanks for being with me, and bye-bye for now.
