Hi. Greetings, everyone. Welcome. I'm Dan Faberke from the Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics,
one of the co-organizers of this series. First, I want to remind you of the website,
which I'll pop in the chat here. I'm trying to send it to everyone, but maybe I can only
send it to all panelists. Oh, well, maybe that'll appear for you later. We have the chat that
should be available for you this time. So if you are going to have urgent questions, you can put
those in the chat box. If something needs clarifying, we'll be watching for that and interrupt the
speaker to clarify that. But if you have other questions that you think of during this talk
and want to put them in the Q&A box, we'll be sorting through those and bring those out in the
discussion time at the end. All right. Thank you. So this first talk, I'm sorry, we had only one
talk so far. That was by Jack Sostak. And the speaker series website will have his
talk recorded there with captioning service in a day or two. So you can send friends there
when it appears. And we'll try to be recording each one and making that available.
Today, we're going to take a soft matter physics perspective on this interdisciplinary field.
And the speaker is Dr. Anna Wang from the University of New South Wales. So she's in Sydney,
Australia right now, up very early on a Friday morning to join us. So thank you, Anna. Anna
Wang is the Scientia lecturer at UNSW. This is in the US academic system. This would be an
assistant professor. She's the group leader in soft matter and biophysics within the School of
Chemistry. Her bachelor's is from UNSW and her PhD is from Harvard. She was a postdoc with
a last-time speaker, Jack Sostak, in his lab before moving back to Australia.
And the topic today is hierarchical self-assembly of model primitive cells.
After the talk, we'll have questions that we direct from the Q&A to Anna. And then we'll bring in
Arvin Merrigan and Mike Rust, who are University of Chicago professors working in biophysics
areas, among other things. I'll introduce them in more detail when we come to that.
So Anna, would you please say hello and share your screen? And again, thank you for visiting us.
We look forward to your talk. Thank you so much, Anna. Thank you, everyone, for the opportunity
to present to you. It's my absolute pleasure and I am terrified. It is 5.30 in the morning here.
But I'll do my best to give you a sort of overview of the sorts of ideas that Jack introduced last
week during the inaugural presentation of this series. And that's the idea of how life started
on Earth and I'm looking at things that are slightly bigger. So as Dan mentioned, I'm from
Sydney and my undergrad is actually in the rival institution, University of Sydney, but I'm very
happy working at UNSW right now. And it does say that I'm in the School of Chemistry, but
this is our building. It's very nice. I'd like to say that although I'm technically, you know,
teaching and academic in chemistry, my perspective is very much shaped by my previous two experiences
and that of course is my PhD, which was more in colloid and interface science using holographic
microscopy to study that. That was with Vinnie Menoharin and more recently as a postdoc in Jack's
lab. And so my perspective is not like what you might expect from a chemist traditionally speaking.
And I also don't claim to offer the entire perspective of what someone who calls them a
membrane biophysicist might say. So these are my caveats before we start. And so what I wanted
to do in the beginning is to sort of define the problem a bit better in the context of
my particular subfield. So what we're all here to try and understand is how life started on Earth.
And Earth looked probably not like what it does today. It was a very different place. And geologists
have some clues as to what this looked like. But yeah, it's really hard to imagine without pictures
what it could have been like. And when we talk about, you know, what is the origins of life?
How did life start? A lot of people want to first define life. And they ask what is life?
This is something that bothers people, young and old scientists or not. And this is a slide
showing people it's a hotly debated topic. And it's kind of this rabbit hole that we can go into
and spend the rest of the time arguing, which is fine. But I thought the way that many people
in the field have chosen to define their path is not by a defining life per se, but instead of
thinking of some sort of more tractable problem that they can tackle in the laboratory with models.
And so the sort of tack that a lot of people in the field like to take
is to try and create some sort of minimal system that's capable of replication,
it's capable of growth and division. These are very much flavors of, you know, it gives you the
flavor of what we know as life. And the other thing that people try to do is they try to think of
systems that could conceivably lead to life as we know it right now. So we can kind of think about
how we might rewind time from life as we see it today and get back to that minimal system,
or we could kind of see the chemical or physical transitions or evolutionary transitions
that need to take place to bring that minimal system into the complex sort of life that we
see on earth. And so what a lot of people talk about is building a protocell. And so protocell
is defined again differently by lots of different people. But just in the context of the talk today,
I'll show this very simple cartoon. And basically what this is is it's the minimal cell, it tries
to be a model primitive cell, and it has some hereditary information that makes it capable of
evolving. And it also has some sort of compartment. And so basically when we try to design these
synthetic systems, it's really hard to think about building something from scratch that could lead to
lead to life as we know it today without thinking about all of these constraints that we must take
into account in the design and building of these synthetic structures. And so the most obvious one
I guess to mention is that synthetic biologists already know a lot about how to build these things.
So there are constraints in the approaches that people take from the bottom up direction,
and there are constraints from the top down direction as well. If we look at extant life
and try to build a system that's consistent with that, then that really does limit the sorts of
molecules that we use. On the other end, there are prebiotic chemists, so people trying to figure
out how do you make lots of organic molecules on early Earth with the very strange sort of geology
that was present and the very different atmosphere that was present. And so all of these things come
together to provide constraints on how we can build this protocell in a way that's more satisfying
as a tool to understand how life came about. And this is just talking about life on Earth,
and of course there are people who work in the broader field of astrobiology who think about
other life forms with different chemistries beyond what is available on Earth. So it really is
enormous field if you think of it this way. So I mentioned earlier that the strategy that I would
like to talk about a bit more is how to build a protocell. And the first component is what last
week's speaker, Jack Shostak, spoke about, and that is trying to get the information carrying
molecule to replicate itself. And so the first component, in a more general sense, is I like
basically looking back to this quote from Schrodinger. And the idea is people are noticing that
you can inherit things from your parents, but the information carrying substance is very small.
And if something is very small and you can't see it under the microscope, it means it's getting
kicked around like crazy by thermal fluctuations, and that adds noise to the information. So if
information is carried from generation to generation, it must mean that all the molecules carrying the
information are joined up somehow. And so this was this sort of logical deduction that led him
to claim that the information carrying molecule is a polymer. And you can arrive at this very
sort of profound insight from just like very simple observations in the beginning. It just
involves thinking about it in the right way. So I find that as someone who is not trained in
organic chemistry, quite comforting and inspiring that we can still think at that level and come
to insights if we're geniuses like, you know, people like that. So what I'm wanting to tell
you about today though isn't so much about RNA or DNA. It's about the compartment that I just
casually mentioned a few minutes earlier. So if we just have a genetic polymer by itself,
it isn't quite enough to get us to life as we know it. Of course, there are lots of other
ingredients that we need as well like metabolism. But the thing I want to talk to you about today
is the idea of needing a compartment. So first of all, when we think about living organisms,
they are individuals. Sometimes they cooperate, but more or less they're individuals. And a
compartment helps delineate these individual entities. So this is as philosophical as it is
anything else. The next idea is that if you have molecules that actually have a selective advantage,
if they're free to just interact with everything else, then that advantage kind of gets diluted.
Say there's a molecule that's able to copy itself or copy like molecules, it's better if it expends
its energy or resources, copying molecules that resemble itself rather than a distantly related
information sequence. So the cartoon I've joined here is say that the blue molecules
have evolved the ability to copy polygons. But there are lots of red ones around that it could
also copy. That means the red ones are kind of like parasites. They're just sitting around,
but they end up getting the benefits of copying anyway. If instead we separate them into separate
compartments, then what you end up getting is the blue ones near other blue ones and the blue
population can then copy itself more instead of copying the red ones. And the third point on
this slide at least is that having a compartment enables related molecules to encapsulate it
near each other, and then they can evolve and have a shared fitness and fate. And that's starting to
get to that increasing complexity that could lead to something more lifelike. There are lots of
other benefits of compartmentalization as well. And I thought I'd just step through them all because
I think there's a lot to be done in this area. So the first thing is if you have a compartment,
you have some sort of protection from the environment. And that's good if there are
fluctuations in the environment, you're somewhat shielded. The other thing that can happen is
that it enables motility of these entities. So there was that purple thing that was hidden in
the purple cloud of nutrients. But if the nutrient flow sort of gets washed away downstream and you
have a compartment, then the nutrients can still stay encapsulated and be of benefit to whatever
system is inside that compartment. Something else that you can do if you have a compartment is maybe
you can have selective permeability. And that means you can start getting some sort of filtering
like nutrients come in, waste can go out, and that can lead to more complex homeostasis and
regulation. And that really helps with building the complexity of metabolic pathways.
Something else that can happen is that if there is a compartment, then that means there's a barrier
of some sort, whether that's a surface or I guess it's usually a surface. And if you have
that barrier, it means you can generate a chemical gradient to do work with. And this is, of course,
how a lot of life powers itself now with chemical gradients. And then this thing, I suppose,
is something that maybe synthetic chemists would appreciate more. But there are lots of reactions
in lab where if you want to accomplish the reaction, you have to have them in separate vessels.
If you dump everything into the same pot in the beginning, it just doesn't work out.
So if we want to do the sort of sophisticated chemistry that living organisms take advantage
right now, take advantage of right now, it's really helpful to keep things happening in
separate compartments before combining them. It gives you a lot more control over the synthetic
products. This one, I suppose, is maybe more obvious. But if you have a reaction that relies on
this, it's diffusion limited. So the reactants need to collide and then they'll react. If something's
very dilute, the chances of colliding is quite low. If you concentrate it down, then the chances
of them colliding and, you know, that's what the red pair is supposed to indicate. If they collide,
they can react, is much greater when you have a compartment. And finally, if you have compartmentalisation,
then what it enables us to do is to think of populations and start organising these individuals
at the next length scale up. So I'll talk about this a bit more later.
I've been talking very generically about compartments so far. I wanted to just give you a
visual to suggest some types of compartments that people have been thinking about. So there are
liquid-liquid phase-separated droplets that are also very important in biological systems. So
they're definitely candidates for compartments and definitely can condense down systems.
There are also other sorts of ways that you can form a boundary. So this could be an aqueous air
interface like in an aerosol. You can confine things and have things react in there. There are
lots of atmospheric chemists that study enhanced reaction rates or weird reactions that take place
inside aerosols. You can also have hydrogels kind of concentrating things down or forming a sort of
compartment. You can have emulsions, rock pours or between platelets. So there are lots and lots
of different ways that you can form a compartment. And the one that I'm going to focus on today
is this. It's this compartment that it's the big outside delineating entity that life as we know
it has chosen and that's the cell membrane. So what I'm showing here is just a fluorescence
microscopy video of the first cell division of a C. elegans embryo. And it looks really beautiful.
I love this video. The membrane itself is what's fluorescently labeled and you see one cell become
two. And in cartoon form, I think we've all seen this in textbooks maybe. So that's the picture
on the right. And so what that outermost delineating entity is called is either the cell membrane or
the plasma membrane. And what it's comprised of is a lipid bilayer. So we call this a bilayer
because it contains two opposing leaflets of amphiphilic lipid. And so these are like fatty
tails with hydrophilic head groups. And it spontaneously arranges into this bilayer shape
to exclude to prevent the hydrophobic tails from having to interact with water molecules.
And if we scale up a cell to the size of a house, you can kind of think of the membrane
as something being as thin as a smartphone. And the thing that material scientists have found
striking for decades is that if you have something that's the size of house and it has walls that
are that thin, those walls, if you want good ones, they're going to be hard. You have a truck,
the walls are hard. But for the cell, these membranes are really thin. They're just a couple
of nanometers. And they're subject to thermal fluctuations. They're flapping around like mad,
but they still form really good walls and are able to perform a lot of these the functions that
are necessary to maintain life. And so they're unicellular organisms that basically if you
wanted to draw it as a cartoon, a lot of them look like this cartoon here. Just a single cell,
still very complex bits of machinery, they can make all sorts of delicious food. And you can have
cells cooperate and form multicellular organisms that make earth quite wonderful. So the cell
membrane is kind of exists and somewhat responsible for all of these different processes. So the cell
membrane does form that wall. It is the semi permeable barrier that sort of allows nutrients in
or out and it needs to grow and divide for the cell in order to grow and divide. But actually
what I haven't told you about all this time is that although the membrane seems kind of important
and does all these things, it's actually the membrane proteins that do all of the interesting
work. So in order to grow the membrane, to add extra phospholipids to a phospholipid membrane
requires several dozen enzymes to synthesize extra phospholipids, grow the surface area.
And then if you want to then divide the cell, then there's so many other proteins that are required
in order for that process to happen. And so if you just have a lipid membrane, so back to this
cartoon here, if you just have a lipid membrane and you get rid of all of the proteins, what you
end up having is an inert sac, an inert lipid sac. And that's really, really good for life as we
know it because we have these highly evolved specialized bits of machinery to do all of these
functions in a very controlled way. And so proteins really just, they make a sack of lipid alive.
Plus some other things as well. But without these proteins are really in trouble. The lipids aren't
going to do anything by themselves. And so the question that we tend to ask when we think about
building a protocell is that if we think about what could have existed on early earth before
proteins evolved, how do we get any of these processes to happen? And we also just in this
kinetically trapped state where like you just have a sack of lipid and it's flapping around and
in the thermal breeze, but it can't grow. It can't divide. It's just kinetically trapped.
And so the first thing that people thought about was, okay, phospholipids are actually
rather complicated as molecules. On early earth, simple lipids had to have existed.
And so the molecule that I'm going to be talking about most today is essentially soap.
The reason why I'm going to talk about soap is there are many reasons, but fatty acids, well,
soaps, basically are quite simple molecules in comparison. We eat a lot of foods that have
fatty acids. So if we eat fats, it gets digested in our intestines, you end up getting free fatty
acids. And then we absorb those and use them. We can metabolize them.
It's very much part of our modern day biochemistry. So fatty acids, we can see how they might be
compatible with life. And there are also papers such as ones by Itai Budin and Jack who showed
that they have really good compatibility with what we think of as modern cell membranes.
Pretty excitingly, like people have also found that you don't need living organisms
in order to synthesize fatty acids. So fatty acids have been found in relatively high abundance,
and that means still not very much, but they've definitely been found on space rocks. So
what I'm showing you here is a picture of the mergeson, a part of the mergeson meteorite,
and that's a meteorite that fell 51 years ago in Australia. And when people extracted the
compounds from this meteorite, and this is a carbonaceous chondrite, they found that
fatty acids were in relatively high abundance. And so that's pretty cool. It means that whatever
chemistries needed to make them does not need living organisms. And of course, synthetic
chemists have been working really hard and lab to figure out ways to make fatty acids.
And there are a couple of different promising parts depending on the temperature and pressure
that you're considering. But it's pretty exciting that in recent years, people have shown that you
can start with some simple feedstocks and you can create amino acids, nucleic acids, and fatty
acids using prebiologically plausible baritstery synthesis. So this still involves PhD students
and postdocs and other students working really hard in a fume hood, but they try to take steps
that are as uninterrupted or chemically simple as possible to make it as prebiologically simple
as possible, or prebiologically plausible as possible. Okay, so I've been talking about fatty
acids. I just wanted to show you what they look like. This is a phospholipid membrane.
So phospholipids have these two fatty acid tails and a phosphate head group. So the fatty acid
tails are what confer the hydrophobic properties of these lipids. And if we just chop off one of the
tails, we get a fatty acid. So maybe I should have shown this before talking about how great and
exciting they are and how they're found on space rocks. But basically what you see here is an alkyl
chain. And this is a carboxylic acid group at the end. And although it's not big and fancy,
like a phosphatidylcholine, the carboxylic acid group is still polar. And so we can still think
of fatty acids as being amphiphilic. And we know they're amphiphilic because we use soap to wash our
hands. We should be doing that a lot. So yeah, basically soap, we know what fatty acids are.
They're basically, if you have a fatty acid and you bring it to our high pH, then you can get
sodium soaps, potassium soaps, whatever you want. We know what bars of soap are. What happened 40
something years ago, though, was that some researchers also coincidentally in Australia
found that if you used fatty acids that were extracted from vegetable oils like
aleic and linoleic acids, then under certain conditions they could form things that resembled
lipid membranes. And they called these euphorosomes, which sort of stood for unsaturated fatty acid
liposomes, I suppose. And so that was pretty exciting. It meant that soap didn't just have to be
soap. It could form something that kind of looked like a cell membrane. And of course,
in the last few decades, people haven't just looked into fatty acids. There are other sorts
of simple lipids where people have tried to understand the self-assembly and what the
phase behavior is. And what I want to just show you today is this super simple phase diagram
in very, very dilute conditions. So if you imagine having soap and you add lots and lots of water,
what you liberate from the bar of soap are these micelles. And so what micelles are, these are
really tiny, totally invisible under the microscope. I guess you can think of them as balls,
but what they are, these are tiny lipid aggregates. And what happens at high pHs for fatty acids
is that the carboxylic acid head group, if you will, will deprotonate. And that means it becomes
negatively charged. So you have a lipid tail with a negative charge on the end and the charges will
repel each other as much as possible. And that means the lipids will aggregate into these high
curvature structures. And these are what we call micelles. And it's what we wash our hands with.
If you imagine having some oil, it could easily go into the middle of those micelles. So you can
pick up some oil droplets and these micelles can grow bigger and bigger and then you can start
thinking of them as emulsion droplets. Then you wash your hands, it goes down the drain and your
hands are clean. What happens if you drop the pH is that the membrane becomes, or not the membrane,
I gave it away. The fatty acids become, or the soaps become less negatively charged. So you're
dropping the pH, adding protons to the system. And some of the negative charges will become
neutral. And what you get if you go too far, so if you add a lot of, if you add a lot of acid
to some soap is you end up getting all of the molecules be protonated. And that means there
are no negative charges anymore. The molecules don't really repel each other anymore. And what
they can do is stack up pretty neatly and you can buy this stuff. It looks like oil, it feels like
oil. It is an oil. And so that's also not exactly what we want. The behavior that we're interested
in is this middle region where some of the molecules are charged, some of them are uncharged,
and they're actually able to hydrogen bond with each other quite well. And what ends up happening
is they form these, if you can think about it as them forming pseudo pairs, so the negatively
charged one will hydrogen bond with a neutral one. And then it kind of starts looking like a
phospholipid. There are two tails and then these things can pack into flat bilayer membranes or
lamella membranes. And this sort of Goldilocks pH zone is how people can make vesicles out of soap.
So, since the work by Gibbicky and Hicks in the 70s, there have been lots of other papers. I'm just
showing some of the earlier ones. Actually, the picture on the left is something that David Dima
did when he was on sabbatical in Australia. I didn't deliberately try to include Australia this
much. It just came up. So basically, what happened is when they got some of the extract or they got
some of the material from the Merchants of Meteorite, they extracted the organic molecules with
chloroform. And then they basically evaporated off the chloroform, put water in it, and they found
that the gunk that was on the meteorites was able to self-assemble into blobs that kind of looks
like lipid bilayers. And so that was pretty cool. In more recent years, people have really, really
looked into the properties of vesicles that are made from fatty acids. And so people who've
worked with Peter Volder and Pierre Louisie have done tons of work on this. So if you're
interested, look up these two names. What I wanted to tell you, the important thing about
fatty acid aggregates and what I would say is the property of simpler lipid systems in general is
that they are really, really dynamic compared to phospholipids. So a few minutes ago, I was telling
you about how if you root all the membrane proteins out of a lipid bilay membrane of a cell,
you get an inert sac that doesn't do very much. It's kinetically trapped. By contrast, if you
have simpler lipids like fatty acids that have far fewer carbons in the molecule itself,
what you end up getting is these molecules are a bit more soluble, not soluble, they're a bit
more dynamic. And so there's a phenomenon called flip-flop. It's technically what it's called.
And what this is saying is that the lipids in the two leaflets of a bilay membrane,
they're able to traverse that midplane. So you can start on the outside leaflet and end up in
the inside leaflet. And there's an energy barrier to doing this. And it's like really,
really high for phospholipids. And so really, in reality, what happens is that enzymes called
flipases and flopases in living organisms can move lipids from one leaflet to the other.
And membrane asymmetry can be maintained. And that's really, really important for a lot of
biological processes. So flip-flop is a really rare event without enzymes in phospholipid membranes.
By contrast, if you have a fatty acid membrane, flip-flop can be really, really rapid, like
a million times a second. So really, really dynamic. Something else that can happen with
fatty acid aggregates is that there is a significant fraction of the of the lipid that's
actually just free in monomer form or even micelle form in solution. And Itai Boudin
did a lot of work trying to characterize if you just throw fatty acids into
buffered solution, how much of it is in monomer form, how much of it is in micelle form, how much
of it ends up on the actual bilayer membranes. The general gist of having other stuff in solution
is that these molecules are always moving around. So they're moving from a lipid bilayer membrane
into solution. And then it can hop onto a different lipid bilayer membrane. It can hop from
one vesicle to another. And that means these systems can exchange material. It makes them very dynamic.
And what I'm showing you on the bottom is that the same thing does not happen for phospholipid
membranes. The molecules aren't going to hop on and off. They're just going to stay put.
And the last thing is that these lipids can move laterally within their leaflets. And these,
this movement is a lot faster for fatty acid membranes, you know, several fold faster than
for phospholipids. So everything about these fatty acid systems is just that they're very
dynamic stuff is moving around all the time. And in some sense, you can think of think of them as
being less stable in a phospholipid membrane, but maybe being less stable and more dynamic is
a good thing if you don't have all these protein helpers making your dynamic.
So what happens if you throw fatty acids into solution? They self assemble into vesicles if
you get the pH right. And so the picture on the left here will be familiar to a lot of people
who've worked with phospholipid membranes. You basically can't really distinguish between the
two under a microscope. And so you can use the same sorts of tricks to study these. So for
looking at vesicles under a fluorescence microscope, what you end up seeing is you can add some
lipophilic dye. And so that's dye that is has has enough of a hydrophobic component that it inserts
into the membranes, and it'll dye the membranes a certain color. So in this case red,
and then you can see them, you can also throw fatty acids into solution that has stuff in it.
So in this particular case, we bought some RNA that's congeated to a green fluorescent dye,
put fatty acids in there, shook it up, and then diluted it a bit to get contrast with the background.
And what we see is that these fatty acid vesicles form these onions that can encapsulate the RNA
pretty well. And I mean, I didn't invent any of this, this is just what we know in the field.
And so what sort of struck me when I started doing this in Jack's lab, having come from a
colloidal physics lab where we just looked at like perfect spheres all the time, is I wanted to know
how can we get these things to not look like onions, but instead just have one nice,
like some really well separated outer layer, like a cell membrane, like this dyed yeast cell
image that we have here. How can we self assemble these unilamella systems, so single
bilayered systems, rather than these multi lamella systems or these onions?
So I was making onions and I wanted single layers. It's just a much nicer model system to work with,
and then it also sort of makes it, I don't know, it makes it sort of more look more like a living
organism. And so my goal when I was in Jack's lab was to make some giant unilamella vesicles out of
fatty acids. And people know how to do this for phospholipids. To make giant unilamella vesicles,
you basically need to scaffold them with emulsion droplets. So I won't go into detail,
but basically there are all these tricks for doing this. And I was very stubborn about
basically just trying to use a method that was as prebiologically plausible as possible.
There are papers from really amazing sort of early mid-curia researchers. So there's
Eropgozen and also an unsupermanium, who found that surfaces can really help make
giant unilamella vesicles. But I just wanted to do this in bulk. I wanted to throw this into
solutions and see what happened. And very naively, I thought these membranes, if we're at the right
pH, they're still half negatively charged. And so what happens if we just have less salt,
then maybe the negative charges will repel each other more, it'll make the membrane separate.
So very naively, I was making vesicles like the ones you see in the video on the left,
scrolling through. And you'll see that some of them have a higher contrast, some of them
are lower contrast. And this is with phase contrast microscopy, quite heterogeneous.
And when I had less salt in the system, I started seeing samples like what you're
seeing on the right. So spheres where the membrane intensity looked pretty comparable
across the whole sample. And so that got me really excited. I'm like, oh, just add less salt,
this is simple. Anna, may I ask about these, are these videos slices through a 3D space?
Yeah, so it's just me scrolling in the axial direction through a microscopy sample.
Yeah, so I just very naive thought that if you let these systems be more negatively charged,
or at least let the charges repel each other more, then you can get more unilimela vesicles.
And of course, the other way you can control the amount of negative charge on these lipid
membranes is by changing the pH. So I mentioned earlier that if you have my cells or soap,
then you have a lot of negative charges. So at high pH, the membrane is more negatively charged.
But what I was finding is that at high pHs, I was getting these very small dense vesicles. And at
lower pHs, I was actually getting these, these more giant unilimela ones. And that prompted me to
just make a lot of samples, try different salt concentrations, try different lipids. And we
found this sort of pattern where at lower pHs, you get giant unilimela vesicles. And at higher
pHs where they're more negatively charged, you get onions. And what I was seeing before is that
is this effect where if you actually add salt to a system, it shifts that Goldilocks zone for
vesicle formation a bit towards acidic pHs. So what I was actually doing
was shifting from these solid, solid dots at about pH five with a high salt system into one of
these sort of empty, empty circles at a low assault concentration. So it isn't the amount
of negative charge on the membrane that really does anything. And basically can dye these membranes
and quantify the number of leaflets in the bilayer. And we found that these systems that look
unilimela under phase contrast microscopy were probably unilimela. So to explain this,
you kind of had to solicit the help of someone else because my very, very naive theory of more
negative charge means better separation just wasn't working. So James Kint from Emory University was
doing MD simulations. And it's finding that, you know, if you have a lipid bilayer membrane made
out of fatty acids, and there are lots and lots of negative charges. So when I say 25% protonated,
that means 75% of the molecules are negatively charged. Then the bending rigidity of these
membranes is about 5KT. And that's what we were expecting. Lots of people have self assembled
sort of nanoscale unilimela vesicles 20 something years ago, like the Zadassinsky group.
And, you know, they report bending rigidity is about 5KT. If you work with something like soap,
that's what you'd expect. By contrast for phospholipid systems, the bending rigidity is
in the tens of KT, which means that although they do flap around in the thermal breeze,
they flap around less because they're stiffer. The surprising thing that James found in his
simulations was that if you protonated more of the lipid, then the membranes became quite stiff
actually and almost too stiff to measure in his simulation box. And that for us was quite surprising
because what this means is that at these higher pHs where you have a lot of negative charges,
these membranes are softer and able to bend into these like smaller structures. Whereas at a lower
pH, you have fewer negative charges and the membranes actually stiffer. And we were making
these big giant spheres that weren't very, we couldn't see any membrane fluctuations at all.
And so now we have this sort of picture in our minds of how we can modulate the properties of
these membranes just by changing the pH a little bit. So when I say 25% protonated and 50% protonated,
the difference in pH is not very much. So one of my students, Lauren Lowe, has been trying to
tease out the properties of these membranes a bit more. And the technique she's been using
is electrical impedance spectroscopy. And that just means you apply voltage across the membrane,
you see how leaky it is. So the quantity that is measured is the membrane conductance. And that
is the reciprocal of the resistance. So what we're finding is that at lower sort of lower
protonation states, so like pH nine is 25% protonated for a lake acid, you actually have a
membrane that has a much higher conductance that at a lower pH where half the membrane is protonated.
So this means that at higher pH, the membranes are leakier than at lower pH, at least to sodium
ions, which is the main ion we have in the system. And when I say high and low, the difference is
actually quite small. So for a lake acid, 50% protonated is pH 8.5 and 25% is pH nine. So this
very small change in pH gives us quite different behavior, both at the microscopic and macroscopic
levels. Okay, so now we have this model system. We can throw lipids into a solution where it's
buffered at a slightly lower pH and you just leave it on an orbital shaker overnight and it forms
these giant spheres that can encapsulate things. And as a colloid scientist, I was really excited
because I got to work with spheres again. Anyway, they're also useful as a model system because
you can encapsulate things inside. So on the left, we just have some some diets, yellow highlighter
dye. In the middle, we have some dyed nanoparticles encapsulated inside. You can really load them
up. And on the right, there's a video of some colloidal particles trapped inside and they're
diffusing. So these could be used maybe as rheological pros to study the effects of
confinement. But it's just a nice sort of simple model system that is pretty easy to make in a lab
with no technology. So lots of colloid directions to take it. But back to this idea of like,
how does having a dynamic system like get us weird properties that we don't get with phospholipids?
One of the things that people have done for years is the picture on the left here actually.
So people have added membrane material to a system containing membrane. So in this case,
you can add some soap to a solution of fatty acid vesicles and just see what happens.
And at the nano scale, this was done by the Pierre-Louisie-Louisie group and also Peter
Volder. They saw a division at the very nano scale. They saw it under cryo electron microscopy.
Ting Zhu from JAXLAB also did this with the onions with the multi-lip mellow vesicles and found
that they can form really thin filaments that he could divide by shear. So just for fun, I decided
to add some more soap to these systems and these vesicles can definitely take up the extra soap,
the extra lipid membrane material. And the surface area volume ratio increases because the surface
area is growing. And what you see is that these lobes form and they pinch off. So
I'll just put a box around, I don't know, some random vesicles so you can watch what happens to them.
But basically there's, the green stuff you're seeing is dyed RNA molecules. So they're just
inside so we can see what's going on. And basically these things form spheres again pretty soon.
They started off as big spheres and they ended up as little spheres at the end. And so this
this division behavior is very much still possible for these giant unilimela systems
and they don't seem to leak at least very much. Another question about your video,
was that one in real time or is it sped up or slowed down? It's in real time. Okay, thanks.
Yeah. Okay, so I guess for the last little bit, I was talking about this final point,
which is enabling the idea of a population if you have compartments. So if you just have a
bunch of RNA molecules and you have 20 of them, you could call that a population of RNA molecules,
but it's hard to sort of do anything more sophisticated than that. So what I'm talking
about here is if you have stuff inside lipid vesicles or protocells, you can start arranging them
and maybe that arrangement can first some benefit. Maybe it protects the things in the middle. I don't
know. So if we wanted to form a colony or a population out of compartments,
if we look at all the compartments I showed earlier that weren't lipid membranes,
how I kind of think of them is that they're all sort of droplet based. So they're kind of
a droplet of liquid, whether inside air or inside a rock or inside oil or inside more
aqueous solution. And they're kind of these like 3D volumes, like they're very much 3D
compartments. Whereas for a membrane, what we have is this 2D surface in addition to the 3D
volume that's encapsulated inside. And so if you have two droplets and they come towards each other,
there's usually a non-zero surface tension to that droplet and droplet air or droplet oil or
whatever, interface. And if there's a surface tension when two droplets meet, they will coalesce
and that's like an energetically favourable process to get two droplets to coalesce.
Whereas if you have two droplets that are membrane bound, what ends up happening is that
membrane is physically a wall. And in order to get two lipid membranes to fuse with each other,
typically requires like an input of energy. And so if you have two lipid membrane encapsulated
compartments, you have two vesicles interact with each other, you can actually get them to
start sticking together and forming colonies instead of just making a massive droplet.
And I think that's something that's quite cool about vesicles or lipid bilayer based systems,
is the idea that they're colloidally stable. So they'll diffuse around and if they bump into each
other, they usually don't just aggregate. So if we want to create a population, if we want to stick
things together, because maybe these are all sort of offspring of each other, they're all the
results of division and therefore they're genetically related, they want to share fitness
or something like that. You might want them to stick together. So what I'm showing here is that
if you have a special mutant that's creating a beneficial molecule, you want it to be able to
share it with maybe its neighbours that are genetically related. So to get these usually
colloidally stable structures to start sticking to each other, we usually need to add an adhesive
or there must be some source of attraction. So in living organisms, we have, of course,
proteins that can help cells stick to each other. There are also fuzogenic peptides and
other sorts of polymers that are produced to help cells stick to each other. In synthetic biology
systems, people often use depletants like polyethylene glycol to get vesicles or liposomes to
stick. You can also use things like divalent cat ions. So something like calcium or magnesium
can sort of bring negatively charged things closer to each other. And you can also even
just have oppositely charged lipid bilayers and of course they will stick to each other and sometimes
they'll even annihilate each other like they'll stick with such the tensions on the membrane
be so high because the attraction is so high that the whole thing just bursts. So what we're
finding in our systems is that we're forming these like cloudy aggregates in our fatty acid system.
So if you look in the top left, that's just the bottom of an eppendorf tube and there's a bit of
gunk. And so what we've done is we've picked up that piece of gunk and looked at it under a microscope
and that the white stuff, it actually does cream to the top. It floats and so we scroll through
a sample where we've tried to pick up that white floaty stuff and what we see is that
there are vesicles down below. So this is actually a phase contrast image that's been
false coloured. That's why it looks so grainy. And when we get through this sample and almost reach
the end of our travel in the microscope, we can actually see that the white floaty stuff under
the microscope looks like these adhered lipid vesicles and actually there are a lot of facets.
So right now we're paused on a frame and you can see that there are lots of red
flat bits and so the adhesion is real and I say that they're adhered because when we flick
these floaty bits, if we flick the tube, it disperses quite readily and so what we have
adhered vesicles are not hemifused. So hemifused means that the innermost walls where they're
touching have fused and you can't detach to hemifused vesicles just by shaking. I'm going to have to
do something a lot more catastrophic than just shake it. Right, so right now what's happening in
lab is we're trying to understand where this adhesion is coming from because they're arranged
into this sort of nice structure where they're all nestled in next to each other. What we feel
like is happening is that there's a very weak adhesive force that's at play, otherwise they
wouldn't be able to do that. So for those who haven't thought about self-assembly very much,
what I mean by this is that if you have things that are subject to thermal fluctuations then
they jiggle around in water, they undergo Brownian motion. If there's a strong adhesive
interaction between two vesicles, when they collide they will stick and maybe they won't
be able to rearrange that much. At least this is what's true of solid particles, I guess for
lipid bilayas, it could be quite different. But if you have weak adhesion, what ends up
happening is that thermal fluctuations can help rearrange your vesicles a bit and then you can
end up forming these highly densely packed structures. And the way we sort of want to quantify this
in self-assembly is by talking about the energy relative to the thermal energy kt.
So if we have a system where there's pretty weak adhesion, then thermal fluctuations will be
able to help you rearrange the structures so that they are able to find their ground state,
or like the lowest energy state, the state in which you have vesicles touching the most other
vesicles. And so we can start thinking about things like if we have a population of vesicles
and some of them are big so we can see them but actually there are small ones, there may be the
small ones can act as a depletion. So this sort of can think of it, it's an entropic effect,
but you can kind of think of it as like the little ones are pushing and then they're not able to
sit in between the two big vesicles. In fact, they'll have more room to move around if you get
all the big vesicles to aggregate. So that's the depletion interaction, you get very weak
attractive potential that way between spheres. But we know that our vesicles don't have to
stay spheres, they look very spherical, but they're actually able to grow and flatten out.
And so if we take into account the interaction between two flat surfaces and something a weak
attractive potential like, so weak attractive interaction like depletion can give you a very
weakly attractive potential. So this is at this point still hypothetical. Basically if you have
two vesicles that can flatten out against each other, you can maybe get them to stick
kind of, I mean this is a very weak interaction if you have thermal fluctuations they're still
going to win over this sort of weak attractive interaction. But maybe if you have a very weak
attractive interaction and you also really have kind of a network in place, then you can add one
vesicle to the edge of a network and having multiple contacts with other vesicles is actually
enough to keep it in place. So that will win over thermal fluctuations. And so that's what we think
might be happening now. System there's some source of very weak attractive potential and then
we're able to form these networks. And I'm sure that these vesicles being able to like grow and
flatten out against each other is one reason why this network is able to form. And so this is
something we're looking into more. So yeah, basically I hope I've impressed upon you that
you know these systems that we're trying to work with within the protocell community are very
dynamic compared to phosphillipid systems and it gives them some sort of weird
properties and they're pretty fun colloidal objects to work with. And what I kind of want to see
you know in the field and also like in my own lab is how far we can push this whole like
cell-like behavior without incorporating any proteins. Like can having a very sort of dynamic
membrane get us far or are we going to run into traps somewhere and then we're going to have to
add extra things to the system like mineral particles or peptides or I don't know whatever
else like heat in order to to get all these cell-like behaviors to to happen. So in the last
few minutes I wanted to touch on a couple of things which is you know future directions for
protocell research and I've talked like about it's like what I've done is like a tiny tiny sliver of
all the literature on even fatty acid vesicles. So the world is vast and you know there are lots
of people working on these different compartmentalization strategies and they're all very important
not just for understanding the origins of life but also life on earth right now. So these are
just some names lots of amazing work happening there and it's it'd be nice to do more work on
understanding how these different strategies for compartmentalization can work together.
For our particular system a single chain and for files I've been talking about
using fatty acids but of course there are other molecules that kind of look like fatty acids that
can insert into fatty acid based membranes that people have been working on for a long time.
So other lipids and it's worth understanding how lipid interactions give you different properties
of the lipid membranes and also how all of these other components interact with the lipid membrane.
Start taking a more sort of systems level approach is definitely where the field is heading.
So the one I wanted to elaborate on a bit more was how mineral particle interactions with lipid
membranes can do something. So there was a paper that kind of quietly came out in Langmia
20 years ago basically and the paper just said like glass slides are dirty. If you have fatty
acids and you don't clean your glass slides then you can grow bunches of grapes and they look great.
Under the microscope they look like you're growing beautiful vesicles but that's just the
consequence of the glass slide being dirty. So what I'm showing you here is a sample of
the Unilemella vesicles that I've been making on a dirty glass slide and we do see these big
bunches of grapes growing and they're really high contrast they're really visible and what I've
read about is that if you do have some oil in a system in a lipid bilayer system sometimes it
can incorporate into the mid plane of a bilayer. So I've been talking about the outer leaflet and
the inner leaflet as being the the lipid bilayer but you can actually add things into the middle
and being able to add oil into the middle could really help modulate properties like permeability
or or stability or even rigidity. So that's a that's a pretty fun direction to go I think you can
you can probably modulate the properties a lot. Something else that I kind of found accidentally
was that even if you have conditions where multilemella vesicles form if you add some
mineral particles in this case olivine what I found is that the vesicles can
lock up and become bigger and and then what I'm showing you here is I've added dye to the outside
so what you're seeing is how much room are the lipid vesicles taking up there's exactly the
same amount of lipid in the left picture as in the right image and the vesicles just take up more
room if you add mineral particles so there's something about having them in the system that
increases their the volume that they take up and that means it increases the amount of stuff they
can store inside. Ereps group in Norway showed that if you have phospholipids then interacting with
a higher energy surface you can drive these phospholipid multilemella vesicles to sort of spread
out create nanotubules and then these nanotubules will pop up into big round spheres these giant
unilemella vesicles and so lipid surface interactions are really important and on the other end of
things if you look at tiny surfaces so like nanoparticles or small mineral particles they can
definitely change the membrane curvature and maybe help with processes like division.
Yeah I guess you know there are lots of other things we can do there's competition between
vesicles that can take place because they're dynamic because monomers can exchange between
lipid biland membranes and there's a lot of great work that's come out of members of Jack's lab for
that more population stuff and just sort of understanding why this stuff happens at the
thermodynamic level at the biophysical level I think is pretty interesting. So my time's up I just
wanted to thank my student Lauren for doing the electrical impedance spectroscopy work
and Charles and Bruce in Sydney for getting us onto that technique and of course to Jack for doing
you know changing my life trajectory turning me from like solid colloid appreciating person to
soft colloid appreciating person also about the bigger exciting questions in science
and to James for doing ND simulations and thank all of you for having me here and for listening to
my early morning ramblings. Thank you so much I'll clap on behalf of everyone.
So we have been having a few questions piling up in the chat that the panelists can see and so
I'll ask a couple of them and then bring in some other panelists. So a first one is from Amanda
Farah and she says could you go into more context for why the onions are bad? She says I understand
that cells have a single bilayer but is there a reason to believe that early systems weren't
onions they naively seem there it would be nice to have sub-compartmentalized systems.
Yeah for sure I think the um I mean having multiple bilayers is probably critical and
necessary given how relatively delicate these these bilayers are compared to phospholipids.
I'd say if you have too many like the onions I showed I don't really have a good way of quantifying
how many bilayers are there but it could be like hundreds or thousands and at some point
permeability is going to be an issue if you can't get anything in through the membrane then it's kind
of dead. Yeah but I think that's probably the only bad thing for having too many layers is that
it gets sealed off too much. Okay and Gregory Rassilov asks how large are the fatty acids
which have been synthesized in quote-unquote prebiotically plausible conditions?
I'll just say that on the carbonaceous chondrites you get up to like C8
to 8 carbons long whereas the the length of the tail? Yeah this is the number of carbons in the tail
or in the molecule whereas most most of the data I showed you was within 18 carbon
lipid and that's definitely not something that we expect to be in great abundance on earlier
it's just a convenient it's a convenient molecule to work with in lab.
Okay I and Gordon Push notice that the pHs that you had for completely different
conditions were rather finely tuned like a rather near narrow range and we both wondered
how how that matches up with early earth conditions.
Oh yeah so the yeah the pH of the narrowness of the pH is a bit ridiculous for the system I'm talking
about so it turns out if you use shorter lipids then the pH range shifts and so then the pKa
of the carboxylic acid group is about 4.5 for some reason when you get them.
Uh can you uh de-jargonify it for the astronomer right here? Yeah try that one again on me.
Yeah so these the goldilocks zone for these for these lipid molecules is about the pH which we
call it pKa so that's like half of it's charged and half of it's uncharged and the pKa of that
functional group like the the the head group the hydrophilic head group is basically vinegar it's
it's like vinegar it's acidic acid and and that stuff is like acidic it is it is sour
and so the pH range if you just look at that the pKa is about 4.5 and so vinegar is like 4.5
it doesn't form bilayer membranes but but the carbon the 18 carbon system I was showing you
it's pKa or parent pKa is about 8.5 so you can kind of make everything well a lot of things in between
using shorter chained lipids or you can mix it with different lipids which I didn't get a chance
to talk about you can mix it with different lipids to shift that pH range around a lot
and so I wouldn't say the pHs I was working out like anywhere close to what could have existed
on early earth but I'll also just add that sort of more recent thought is that you know
but maybe maybe the general public doesn't doesn't know about is maybe the geological
origins of life the setting wasn't deep in the oceans it's not in a sort of vast homogeneous space
but instead on the surface so this could be in hydrothermal a surface hydrothermal environments
it could be sort of slightly subsurface or even in shallow ponds on the surface and if you have
those sorts of structures then you can have very different pools of water at very different pHs
that are just meters away from each other and so you can have very heterogeneous surface
environments that can give you all sorts of different chemistries that wouldn't be possible
in ocean environments and that's like not the main argument over like surface origins of life
or ocean based origins of life but it's just it's just one of them okay thank you so now let's ask
the panelists to turn on your camera please and I'll first introduce Arvind Murrigan
he's an assistant professor in the James Frank Institute he teaches in the physics department
uh can you give a wave Arvind and um his interests are quantitative biology materials design
non-equilibrium dynamics theoretical computer science and and with respect to the origin of
life he's working on evolutionary dynamics and directed evolution in the lab to understand
the evolution of mutation rates um we also have Mike Rust who's an associate professor in the
department of molecular genetics and cell biology and with joint appointments in the
department of physics and the institute for genomics and systems biology he's studying
in his lab the most ancient circadian rhythm known and how it evolved we also have
signed into the call and they can be called on and speak up if they wish
the co-organizers who you met last week if you were joining the call and also Jack Sostak
who's been invoked a few times already so thank you for joining us and would one of you like
to pick up the conversation with something you've heard or one of the open questions still in the
Q&A? Well I wanted to ask sort of a general question that you touched on with all of the
enzymes that are present in modern cells to kind of remodel membranes and put more material into
membranes it seems like modern cells modern life has this property that it uses reactions where
there are huge kinetic barriers to prevent them from happening spontaneously is exactly what you
said basically so you need a catalyst to allow you basically you have regulation you get a catalyst
to allow reaction to occur and somehow you have to get from a kind of prebiotic state where things
are able to happen spontaneously uh in that in the direction of now having regulated biochemistry
so I just wonder if you have any thoughts in general of how life might have gone from the kind
of systems you're talking about to like how like what would the intermediate steps be like to get
to like a phospholipid based system where you need catalysts to make everything happen?
Yeah so I guess I'll ramble a bit and then Jack feel free to jump in others as well um
yeah so I guess if if the earlier systems were just like a lot messier just a little more like
fluctuations and concentrations of everything um it's very inefficient things are slow uh
then if if there was something that could catalyze anything whether it be a mineral particle that's
encapsulated or like a peptide anything then that would really give that particular entity an
evolutionary or selective advantage and so I think that would just sort of take over um and those
those would be sort of leaps um in progress and with the liquid thing in particular um so
Itai Bhutan did a lot of work um in Jack's group about studying what happens when you have blended
fatty acid and phospholipid membranes and um basically there's a there's a really strong
drive towards having phospholipid membranes I mentioned that these these fatty acids can
move between jump between vesicles jump between bilayers and um if you just have a system that
has a little bit of phospholipid in it it'll gobble up fatty acids from surrounding solution and
basically cannibalize all the lipid material and so that that really puts everything else that are
at a disadvantage because they they shrink um and even disappear so I think that
like when I first read that paper I was pretty excited and blown away and and that's just for
the for the lipid story um I can't comment much more on the on the chemistry um I don't know if
others wanted to add anything to that
Maybe I could just follow up with uh a little bit on that and uh it was a question
um so in in modern biological systems there's you know incredibly complicated protein catalyst
that mediate the fusion of membranes to get over as you mentioned the fact that there's a high energy
barrier that prevents membranes from fusing spontaneously but and we don't want very much
fusion right because we want to have separate compartments but occasional fusion events could
be really useful for sort of horizontal gene transfer speeding up evolution so I wondered if
you what is the speculate about any processes that you think might allow a little bit of
membrane fusion to take place pre-biotically Yeah um so yes in in synthetic biology I mentioned
that people have all these tricks to get vesicles to stick to each other and fuse and
we actually had a visitor uh Tetsuya Yomo in Jack's Thud for quite some months and
and together we're like yeah we're gonna get these fatty acid vesicles to fuse they're actually
really relatively pathetic as compartments can fit to phospholipids this should be easy
and we could not get them to fuse for months it was really frustrating we tried using depletons we
tried using um like dry down cycles even and that's just completely catastrophic things burst
um what I think must be necessary is some localized heating or maybe some mineral particles
so like stress out the membrane and alter the curvature or maybe some some other sorts of ligands
like peptides or um peptides or other lipids just to just to change like what curvatures
favoured in the in the lipid membranes um really puzzled by that we also tried the
divalent cat ion tricks if you add calcium or magnesium to the system you can get vesicles to
stick but that also makes soap scum in these systems you just get precipitate and stuff starts
leaking out so yeah it's really really tricky the closest I've gotten is um I've seen that
you know pairs of vesicles will become hemifused um so I didn't get a chance to talk about that
today but in our systems you definitely see hemifused vesicles and it might just be like
application of uh you need an increase in membrane tension from something anything
so the next steps might be to actually do micro prepared aspiration apply attention to membranes
and see if we can um force it to happen because it was a really for everyone out there it's really
hard getting these things to fuse without without like heating I think okay now I'd like to call
on Arvind if you have a question yeah um that was a great talk Anna um I was wondering it seems
to me like the view of the field is um you've got these got these vesicles and inside them you'd
have this sort of information rich RNA molecules carrying out you know tasks maybe with some
specificity some sequence is better than others um whereas the vesicle itself um it's sort of
in sometimes it's made of just one kind of fatty acid or it's not really contingent on
having mixtures um is that quite accurate or can you have different kinds of fatty acids and then
have this budding procedure depend on who's present or more broadly like can you have
these vesicles like their behavior be contingent on the RNA they're encapsulating
yeah so I guess I'll work backwards um there was a postdoc Neha Kamat who's now a faculty
member at Northwestern University I believe um and she sort of found a way to you know basically
you can have the lipid interact with stuff inside if you have a bridge and so that that coupling can
definitely happen um I can imagine that if you have RNA sequences that are being actively copied
and then there's a peptide sort of linking them to the membrane that it can cause changes in
membrane tension locally perhaps and so that's pretty exciting um and definitely we're thinking
about the membrane itself um I think the general thought is of course on earlier like the membrane
had to be very heterogeneous in composition it wasn't going to be purely fatty acids there are
going to be some other fatty molecules with different functional groups on the end um I think
I will say that you know for most of the molecules that would have existed on earlier they should be
able to equilate pretty quickly so if you have if you mix a population of vesicles with two different
membrane types um they they'll start exchanging membrane material immediately and that information
in a sense kind of gets lost but maybe it can drive some other interesting behaviors so I know
Sharif Menzi and Duhan Topolaka working on this right now um in Italy slash Canada
okay thank you um we I'm curious about uh Arvind's research in evolutionary uh dynamics within the
lab um what does it mean to do directed evolution in the lab and is it essentially the kinds of
things Anna was telling us about today um that uh well I mean so what what it means to do evolution
in the lab is uh what I meant was something like um well what we are doing is uh directed evolution
in yeast so in that sense it's not um not directly tied to origin of life because it's a pretty complex
organism um but the questions we ask when you do it in the lab um you're often the question we are
asking is evolution of mutation rates um so essentially you speed up evolution by um setting
up every the whole process at higher mutation rates and the question we focused on is maybe you
could say conceptually related to uh certain questions in origin of life because we'd like to ask
when you get this copy a machine that copies um in our case DNA but early on RNA that machine
makes mistakes um and making some mistakes is a good thing because that's what enables evolution
not make at the same time making too many mistakes can be bad right so we are trying to um so usually
these questions you just try to ask by um looking at current extent organisms looking at how mutation
rates vary between different organisms um but we think maybe in the lab if you can play the tape
forward if you can uh evolve in different conditions and see when mutation rates go up when they go
down you know maybe it tells you something but i don't want to be for something i mean we didn't
think of it as an original life question because we're asking it in a pretty complex organism
but i actually maybe that it's i could turn that to a question and ask um do you feel like um in a
that um questions that people work on in more complex organisms can somehow at least metaphorically
inform um original life questions like if we study how polymerase is evolved in yeast could that
ever have anything to say about you know ribosomes or naturally
oh this is i'm not the first to answer this question so i'm going to say one sentence and
hand it over to jack um but i definitely think seeing like if you if you see changes in things
that work really well in biology um it's like you know how robust is it to mutations or or changes or
i know there's a technical word for this but you know chopping it up into bits um
then that can be really insightful and um having no very little background in chemistry um before
joining jack's lab i was kind of like blown away when i realized that what what everyone was using
in lab to do these RNA replication um or primary extension experiments was to use
magnesium as a catalyst and that's definitely what's in the middle of polymerase doing the
work as well so um i think you know a lot of the the parts that are doing the chemistry
are probably still highly conserved it's just like in a fancier container
but that's my very naive view of it um i don't know if others like jack want to add anything
they know way more about this than i do yeah so what is what is working with uh
biological material have to do with the origin of life
i mean you know we we try to take whatever lessons we can from extent biology and certainly all these
ideas about uh perhaps optimal mutation rates are are really interesting i think for a while
we're going to be struggling with getting uh error rates damn low enough to actually enable
evolution but then as soon as you get to that point perhaps with the ribosome
then all these questions that people are addressing in you know modern living organisms
would be something we could possibly start to look at with evolving particules
okay um mike russ noticed a question he wants to bring out go ahead mike
yeah there's a question from the chat i thought was um an interesting general question or general
topic about the surface area to volume ratio of these vesicles or protocells is there do you
think of it as that there's this is a question from ron arc i'm roof raising um is there a surface
area to volume ratio that's either optimal for the property to the vesicles themselves or that
is optimal for thinking about the development of life is it a constraint on the on the is there
a constraint on the chemistry and what you can achieve i guess is the second part of that question
yeah i think um i mean to to divide these things we definitely need a lots of excess surface area
so that's um can maybe about be a bottleneck in some systems is how if you're ready to divide
how do you get that extra surface area just wait for a chance event um like what do you do so
i think that that to me has always been like um but maybe what is tricky for phospholipid
systems is you can't just grow that phospholipid membrane with more phospholipids whenever you
want um yeah i think there must be some limitations as to like you know how much how effective transport
is across that membrane i think if you get too small um then encapsulation you know very few
molecules get encapsulated inside but we consider like reasonable concentrations of like material in
biochemistry like in the in the micro molar regime once you get down to nano sized vesicles
then you have single numbers of those molecules inside and so maybe that's too small um at those
small length scales the curvature of the membrane is also um quite high and so that probably alters
the transport in and out so like high surface area to volume ratio is good because then you have
you can get lots of stuff in and out but um but maybe not by going too small um not sure
yeah it's not something i've thought about much beyond growth and division
um mike do you have anything on from your expertise to add to that one
i don't know if i have any particular expertise but i guess it is a it's you know commonly observed
that microbes living in nutrient poor environments there tends to be a pressure to make the
it just as you were saying on it to make the surface area to volume ratio high
it's easier to bring things across the membrane um is you know relative to the volume um yeah i'm
just i'm not i'm interested if that's uh if achieving like irrelevant curvatures essentially is a
is an important constraint or is that something that came much later potentially uh yeah i guess
it i guess it's a you know in thinking about these origin of life questions it's kind of
there seems to be like a a general problem at least with my thinking of like what is the
what are the essential things that had to to happen early and then what can be kind of fixed up
later on so i don't have i wonder if you have any thoughts about that
yeah i'd say maybe the the question early on about like onions bad maybe that's sort of more important
like if if control of nutrient flows is what dictates the success of an organism then
then the number of layers that are there like not too many but not too few is is probably more
important than curvature but it is weird that most cells are kind of the same size like i've
never thought about that before um yeah prokaryotic cells anyway oh yeah yeah um i would say that for
these these simpler amphiphilic molecules if you build like something too gigantic then
that doesn't they don't seem to be too stable um yeah in experiments where like add a bit of
salt to the system the bigger ones definitely pop before the smaller ones
okay and uh just to follow on that with uh physics understanding of these
vesicles and um so when they're they can merge and become just a bigger one correct
yeah they'll have to talk they would have to change the curvature
yeah so just like uh uh a two-dimensional map can't which is zero curvature can't be put around
a three-dimensional surface something's got to give like the there has to be a lot of rearrangement
of the um lipids right yeah a lot of rearrangement um there are certain lipids that will favor what
people call like stalk and neck formations the formation of very narrow structures um that also
have a bit of curvature the opposite direction from from the curvature of the cell like the other way
um yeah and that and that topological change it is it is energetically costly which is why
no which is what makes these things stable but um it's also why there are lots of proteins are
needed to to facilitate that process and regulate it so the proteins and enzymes you talked about
in dividing cells there are there just as many needed for fusing them to make bigger
bigger vesicles I think yeah I think there are uh because division involves also like
moving chromosomes around and it's it seems to be a bit more complicated but that final fusion
step um there are snares that proteins called snares that help regulate that and I think the
simplest system I've seen is people have um put some DNA onto cholesterol so cholesterol goes into
the membrane and there's DNA sticking out and they can put a complementary strand onto a separate
population of vesicles and if you get the orientation of the DNA right then it really the hybridization
of the DNA really forces these uh lipid bilayer membranes close together and sometimes there's just
enough I don't know maybe there's enough chaos or disorder that like the lipids just spontaneously
like skip everything and just merge like it just merged so I don't think I think I've seen a lot of
the picture of like step a step b step c to how diffused two lipid bilayer membranes but sometimes
just skips from a to c in this sort of chaotic way and um I'm not sure if that's the actual
mechanism for that DNA mediated fusion but um yeah sometimes you just need to get them close enough
and it happens for some reason a little bit of mess and for them to be close to close enough to each
other I have a question that might betray my lack of knowledge of um lipids uh biochemistry but um
where where do these lipids come from like these fatty acids where are they synthesized and could
their synthesis or covalent modification be coupled to this compartmentalization process in the first
place that is like you know more synthesis of the fatty acid you know contingent on compartmentalization
of you know some reactions or um I think in in our cells it's uh we there are enzymes that take
acetyl coase so acetyl is this like ginormous molecule and oh sorry no acetyl is like two
carbons and coase this ginormous molecule and so these two carbon blocks are joined together by
enzymes um and they get sorry well I mentioned your prebiotic soup um oh in the prebiotic soup um
oh yes that's that is a that's a that's a good question I don't know about fatty acid specifically
but Claudia Bonfier and John Sutherland recently published a a jack's paper where they did look
into um basically cycling a pool of chemicals around and um basically you can build up uh you
can build up these simple two-tailed lipids um from the from the cyclic process and and they
do self-assemble into membranes spontaneously um and then I don't yeah actually Jack I don't know if
you want to add to this but I don't know if there's actual coupling between like the formation of
bilayers themselves and like how that alters the chemistry yeah I think that's something that it's
actively being looked at in the Sutherland lab and maybe Claudia is also following up on that so
it's not a very well studied area of prebiotic chemistry but it sure is important
okay so um I have to step in as moderator and uh say hey look at how the time is flown we're at
the top of the hour thank you all for joining us and thank you so much for getting up early Anna
thank you for invoking John Sutherland he will be here later in the speaker series which I popped
into the chat um and we we have just we're going to keep going we're going to be posting the slides
Sarah Walker is the next speaker and I will be hosting her talk um thanks for bringing that up
Matt and so you can see the rest of the series here uh Anna we'd love to have you back you can
sit in on these discussions um anytime uh if you're willing to get off that early and uh
and anyway um we look forward to having everyone back um throughout the series so
thank you all for coming and thank you to Arvin and Michael Jack also uh for joining us
have a good afternoon everyone
bye Anna oh thank you so much
you
