Welcome all. My name is Andre Takmakov. I'm the chair of chemistry here and I'd like to welcome you to the University of Chicago's origin of life seminar.
And it is a pleasure this week to welcome John Sutherland from the MRC lab for molecular biology out for our series.
John's been working in the area of prebiotic chemistry for well over two decades and has just become one of the most influential scientists in the field.
He's really been recognized with with all sorts of awards for his work, including fellowship in the Royal Society and the Royal Society's Darwin Medal.
And from the research side, you know, the significance of John's work in recent years for us chemists, what we're really familiar with is a series of studies that have really shown compelling proposals for how ribonucleid precursors
for an RNA world came from very simple building blocks that we would expect to see in an early earth environment.
But, you know, beyond the chemistry, John's influence extends across the spectrum of this interdisciplinary field.
Not just in terms of research, but also in terms of leadership, he's currently the co director of the Simons Foundation, collaborative on the origin of life, which has 26 members across the globe.
So we're very pleased to have you join us, John. Welcome. We look forward to your time.
So thank you very much for the kind introduction, Andre. It's a pleasure to be with you. I've enjoyed watching previous lectures in this series and I hope I can live up to the standard that's being set for me.
So if I just share my screen.
And hopefully you can now see my presentation.
Is that right? Is that okay? That's fine. Great. Okay, so I'm going to talk about a lecture or give a lecture I call origins of life systems chemistry and I'll define a little bit more precisely what I mean by systems in a few minutes.
When you think about the origin of life, there's really two ways to approach it. One is to think from chemistry or geochemistry up what might be produced on the early earth and how could that give rise to the origin of life.
And alternate ways to look down from biology and try and deduce by looking as deep as you can into biology what might have preceded it.
So starting with the geochemistry up approach, I think for Chicago, this is a very famous picture of a very famous experiment meant to simulate lightning in a reduced atmosphere on the early earth producing a brown sort of gooey mixture from which
amino acids such as glycine and traces of other amino acids could be isolated after hydrolysis.
But great and iconic experiment no doubt about that really set the set the stage for the whole field of prebiotic chemistry investigation.
And why should lightning in a reduced atmosphere be the place on earth which gave rise to building blocks the precursors needed to originate life, why not submarine vents or drying lagoons, atmospheric aerosols.
The list is endless the early earth offers you very, very many possibilities in terms of different scenarios to imagine.
And it's difficult to know which one to choose and just guessing at one seems to be a sort of overly random approach.
So I think the bottom line, certainly to me from geochemistry is that there is insufficient constraint from geochemistry on its own to delimit prebiotic chemistry.
And the clue as to what the geochemistry was which particular scenario was the real one or the realistic one that would be enormously helpful, but on its own as it stands we don't have that guidance.
So let's think about biology down approaches the origin of life you could for example use phylogenetic analysis to try and deduce the more ancient sequences by comparison of sequences and constructing a phylogenetic tree.
And that gets you back to as far as the last universal common ancestor, maybe a little bit before that.
And the last universal common ancestor or group of ancestors was really a very complex organism or collection of organisms, which was performing translation and had chemiosmosis and so on so it's a very advanced organism.
And it's not particularly informative about the actual origin of life which on this sort of diagram would be way you know deep in the earth.
An alternative way of using biology down to think about the origin of life is to try and either experimentally by knocking out redundant genes in a simple organism construct a very simple cell.
So you can either do that experimentally or you can do it hypothetically just by thinking about it.
But even a simplest cell is still quite complicated because if you want to have a system capable of Darwinian evolution you need informational molecules.
If you want to do stuff and build things you need building blocks and energy to do that with.
It's difficult to make and replicate things without some form of catalysis so you'd arguably want catalysis as well. And finally, there's not much point in genetics or metabolism without compartments.
And so you really need these four, if you'd like subsystems to get the whole system to work in a minimal cell.
This has created big problems for the chemists because trying to imagine how a whole system like that could assemble a biologically places huge demands on hypothetical prebiotic chemistry.
When you start to think about it you think surely different chemistry is a needed to make the various subsystems and surely these different chemistries would interfere with each other.
So 3040 50 years ago, pretty much everyone in the field thought it was going to be impossible to get everything in one go.
So they all decided that maybe something came first and gave rise to the other subsystems and that was everyone agreed that something had to come first at the time they agreed.
They differed as to what they thought would have come first so there were those who recognize the importance of genetics in biochemistry.
They were positive that a nucleic acid must have come first and this gave rise to the RNA world concept. There were others who said, metabolism is more important. This was because of their background.
And so they said metabolism must have come first and iron sulfur world, for example, has been proposed by such people.
And there were others who said proteins must have come first and still others who said membranes or classifies must have come first.
So there was a broad agreement that something must have come first and then disagreement as to what came first and this really polarized the field or quadruple orized it.
You know, you take a square room at a conference in prebiotic prebiotic chemistry, people partition into four corners and trade insults with each other.
I've been listening to these sorts of debates for several decades. I started worrying that, you know, all of these people are actually making some good points and some bad points and maybe we ought to just rethink this this approach a little bit more.
And in particular we started to worry about dividing the overall system into subsystems because if you actually look at the cellular subsystems the machine, for example, that makes RNA is a machine made out of protein.
The machine that makes protein on the land is a machine made out of RNA.
So separating RNA and protein seems to be what caused some intellectual difficulties.
Membranes are not just composed of lipids they're chock full of proteins and indeed one of the proteins in membranes is a protein that's crucial to metabolism.
It's the ATPase which harnesses the proton gradient across the membrane and uses it to convert ADP and inorganic phosphate into ATP, the universal currency used in metabolism.
Finally, if you look at metabolism itself, metabolism is network of about 1000 or so compounds a few thousand reactions.
That is regulated really carefully in biology because you can't have the whole thing running all the time, it just creates an uncontrolled mess.
And so the regulation is not just at the level of, for example, feedback inhibition and our story about the level of proteins it's also at the level of translation and the level of transcription.
So RNA and proteins are involved in metabolism of course all the reactions of metabolism essentially all of them are catalyzed by proteins.
And that's partly because biology wouldn't be able to switch them off if they weren't reactions which were catalyzed by proteins if they were reactions which went to their own accord.
So the subsystems all look to be very interconnected and separating them seems intellectually awkward to me.
And so we started to think along a different line which was that conclusion that people had drawn previously that completely different chemistries will be needed to make the various subsystems.
That's an assumption. It's not proven by any any experimental evidence.
Furthermore, the assumption that these different chemistries would interfere with each other had not been experimentally investigated.
And if the answer to these two questions is no, then it's possible that the whole system might be able to self assemble.
And that was intriguing to us and so we set about investigating this and the method that we were going to use the modus operandi to investigate this set out below.
We would without much constraint just experimentally evaluate the synthetic chemistry of what I've called the various subsystems.
We would try and make it look pre-varted but we wouldn't be too constrained with just scope out chemistry until we found chemistry that made the various bits and pieces in a convincing way.
We'd use any commonality of intermediates products or byproducts to merge subsystems, because it might be an intermediate in one synthesis let's say of amino acids was also an intermediate in synthesis of nucleotides or lipids.
I would suggest that the subsystems were in fact linked by the chemistry that generated them.
When we've got a lot of the chemistry to work, we'll be able to infer from the chemistry, what sort of rough geochemical scenario would be allowed to enable that chemistry to take place.
For example, if we found that a large number of the reactions needed ultraviolet light that would that would suggest a deep sea vent scenario is not a good place to do the chemistry but a surface scenario would be a good place.
We're not just going to let one chemical clue in a close up, we're going to look for multiple chemical clues so we have a much better idea that the scenario that we infer is something approaching the right scenario.
And finally, as I alluded to earlier, once you get a hint about the scenario it's going to start giving you consequences of that scenario that you hadn't thought about before you feed those back into the chemistry and if that makes the chemistry work better.
You start getting the feeling that's a good scenario, the chemistry gets better and you toggle back and forth between these last two points and ever improve the scenario and ever improve the chemistry.
At least that was the plan.
So what are we going to be looking for? Well, not this sort of chemistry. This is the sort of chemistry we do typically in academia, it's actually based upon the difficulties that the early chemists had in purifying compounds and in analyzing what was going on.
And this made them tend towards using reactions of this nature because it was easier to analyze and easier to purify the products. But of course you're not limited in how many starting materials you can have in chemistry or how many products you can make.
So that homogeneous solution around bottom flask, clearly that's very, very restrictive and we need to think more broadly and you'll see as this talk goes on that we've ended up with a sort of scenario in which we invoke chemistry occurring in mixtures and that's what I mean by systems.
So mixtures of compounds flowing across a surface under irradiation on the surface of the planet. Let's develop that as we go on and come back to it.
What sort of starting materials are we allowed to have on the early earth? Well, we need carbon and nitrogen. We also need phosphorus, oxygen, sulfur and hydrogen.
Hydrogen and oxygen can come from water, phosphorus and sulfur we can discuss a bit later. Just thinking about carbon and nitrogen.
The oxidation level is important. Biology uses nitrogen, almost always in its most reduced form, which is the oxidation level of ammonia, also the oxidation level of nitrogen in hydrogen cyanide.
In carbon, there's a little bit more spread of oxidation level, fairly even some very oxidized compounds in biology, but by and large, compounds tend to gravitate round about the oxidation level of formaldehyde and simple sugars.
Notice also that biological molecules have many carbon-carbon bonds in them, so we need a way of making bonds between the single atom or single carbon feedstocks and incorporating heterotons along the way.
So I know that I've got a mixed audience today, so I don't want to go into too much heavy-duty organic chemistry, but these are general concepts which I think are reasonable for us to consider in a general way.
Why are there difficulties in joining molecules together to make bigger things? Well, taking formaldehyde, which is the right oxidation level for most of biology,
you can't join two formaldehydes together easily to make a two-carbon sugar, because formaldehyde's like a little bar magnet, and the carbon's, let's say, the north poles, and joining two north poles together is electrostatically difficult.
You need a trick which inverts the polarity of one of the magnets, and that in chemistry is called oompa-long.
You can be really brutal to formaldehyde and heat it with concentrated solutions of calcium hydroxide at high pH, and under those brutal conditions you do convert it into a mixture of products.
But it's a very messy mixture of sugar products and hydroxy acid products.
And there is a little bit of ribose in there, less than 1%, but it's mixed up in a mess of all sorts of other compounds, many of which are closely related, making separation of the ribose to use to make RNA very, very difficult.
So formaldehyde chemistry isn't really very useful to us, formaldehyde on its own.
It's much easier to make a bond from formaldehyde if you add something like hydrogen cyanide. So hydrogen cyanide, it dissociates, pKa is about 9, so at 9 you have an equal distribution of these two sides of this equation.
And cyanide is a very good nucleophile. It wants to add to delta-positive carbons, does so very efficiently to make this molecule glycolonitrile.
So glycolonitrile is something I'll have a bit to say about later. But this chemistry to make glycolonitrile requires cyanide and formaldehyde, and it's cumbersome to start with two feedstocks.
We'd rather start with one feedstock. So we realized that we could convert hydrogen cyanide into formaldehyde by reduction and hydrolysis.
And it turns out the reduction is best carried out using electrons, single electrons or hydrogen atoms derived from those electrons.
So hydrogen cyanide reacts with an electron under proton to make this intermediate immunal radical, and that chemistry goes well because the immunal radical is a stabilized radical.
So we get the electron by UV irradiation of an anion, in this case a sulfidic anion hydrosulfide.
And the immunal radical then picks up a hydrogen atom, becomes this imine. This imine can then hydrolyze with loss of ammonia to formaldehyde, and the formaldehyde then is produced in situ.
It reacts with cyanide to make glycolonitrile.
Using sulfidic anions to reduce cyanide, we call this cyanosulfidic chemistry as a shorthand.
Now the chemistry doesn't necessarily stop at glycolonitrile.
If you've got enough reducing power in the system, the glycolonitrile gets reduced. It's an electron withdrawal nitrile, it gets reduced to an imine, and that hydrolyzes to a carbonyl compound, which is the two carbon sugar glycoaldehyde.
I repeat those three reactions, a blue reaction, a pink reaction, a red reaction. I homologate, I increase in size by one carbon, the two carbon sugar to the three carbon sugar.
So just taking hydrogen cyanide, hydrogen sulfide, we tend to use a trace of copper which expedites the redox cyclone.
You irradiate that and you get good yields of two and three carbon sugars.
It's a very toxic mixture, hydrogen cyanide, hydrogen sulfide, compound that safety has an issue with UV irradiation, and you make sugars.
So we're very sort of interested to discover this chemistry about eight years ago now.
Now to cut a long story short, while we were developing that chemistry, we were taking clues from it as to what sort of scenario on early earth might enable it.
Impact was key to that chemistry, to that scenario, and impact was partly due to the fact that we needed hydrogen cyanide, and hydrogen cyanide can be generated as a result of plasma chemistry.
Plasmas are generated when medium sized or larger meteorites impact the earth. Of course, you can't see much evidence of how much impact there was on earth, but you can get an idea of it by looking at the moon.
On earth, of course, weathering and plate tectonics, subduction has raised the record of cratering, but you can get an idea of what the earth went through by looking at the moon and its intense impacts at the beginning of the history of the earth.
You can study impacts by generating plasma in two ways. You can do it with lasers or high velocity impacts, and we collaborate with some colleagues in Europe. This is, I think, what used to be the largest laser in Europe.
It's in the Czech Republic, and you essentially multiply a very broad, very wide beam of light using photomultipliers, and then focus it to a point where you have your sample and spark a plasma fireball, and you then look and see what's generated by spectroscopy afterwards.
We're not the first to do this by any means. Lots of people have done this, but we did it on a couple of atmospheres, which are of interest. One was a reducing atmosphere, and you can see you generate lots and lots of HCN.
But even in an oxidizing atmosphere, just carbon dioxide, nitrogen, water, you can generate HCN as well.
So HCN is easily generated by impact.
But it's generated, and it's basically produced in the atmosphere, and you've got to get it down into water, enabled to do chemistry with it.
And the partitioning between gas phase and solution phase is governed by Henry's law, and there are certain limitations to that. You can overcome Henry's law if you do chemistry downstream of the dissolution.
So for example, most people are familiar with weathering of CO2.
It dissolves in water, becomes hydrated and dissociates, and if you add alkalinity to this to displace the equilibria to the right, you essentially end up with carbonate, and carbonate can precipitate as the calcium salt.
And in the same way others had suggested, and we've also suggested that hydrogen cyanide could be weathered, if you like, by reaction with ferrocyans to generate ferrocyanides.
This equilibrium is extremely favorable, particularly if you mop up the excess protons with alkalinity.
Now cyanometallates, it's not just a sort of, you know, a guess or imagination, these have actually been identified recently in meteroids.
So here a pentacyanocarbonyl ferrate species was identified, and a tetracyanobiscarbonyl ferrate.
So invoking ferrocyanide on the early earth, I think is quite reasonable in light of these, these data.
So we then need to get the cyanide back from ferrocyanide, and you can in principle do that by radiation, but it's, it's not very efficient, but you can do it very efficiently by heating.
And of course, sort of geothermal heating, either heating through basically geothermal heating or heating by additional impact can provide the heat you need to do this.
So if you heat ferrocyanide salts, you get different products depending on the nature of the caton with which the ferrocyanide anion is associated.
Magnesium ferrocyanide ends up giving you magnesium nitride calcium ferrocyanide gives you calcium cyanomide sodium and potassium ferrocyanide give you sodium and potassium cyanide.
And at very high temperatures, calcium cyanomide and carbon equilibrate to give calcium carbide nitrogen.
So you end up with depending on the counterion you end up with a variety of different compounds sodium potassium cyanide though generated in the dry state.
And then if you dissolve them in in quantities of water which are smaller than the original quantities, for example by limited rainfall, you can generate concentrated solutions of cyanide on the early earth.
So we're thinking about this chemistry taking place as rainwater or meltwater runs across a surface in a in a fluvial system of some sort with confluences chemistry taking place, you know, in the flow of this system, and then mixed
chemistry is resulting from conferences mixing two different streams of different histories.
So we're thinking about this chemistry under the influence of solar radiation.
So, given such a scenario, and the various feedstocks I've talked about, we can now define a reaction network, as long as we can access significant quantities of hydro sulfide.
So we realized that we could make hydro sulfide if a stream containing cyanide passed over a metal sulfide iron sulfide or copper sulfide these are known to be dissolved by cyanide solution with the liberation of HS minus.
So that was our original source of the sulfidic anions for cyber sulfidic chemistry.
And using HS minus to do the reductions we managed to work on a network, which produces about half the amino acids of extent biology, a variant of the diacyl phospholipids of biology.
So we're talking to two of the nucleotides the perimidine nucleotides we've now in unpublished work on chemistry that gets us to a denicine and in the scene so not not not both canonical purine ribonucleosides but one of them and and something that functions as an equivalent of the other.
And there's not much else besides generated by this network. And we think this network would need several streams to construct the various parts of it or to enable the various parts of it, but I put the various parts together just so you can see the connectedness of the network.
And I wanted to go back to a point I've made earlier about intermediates in synthesis linking different subsystems because there's, it turns out a nice example of that.
If you, without looking at the synthetic chemistry just look at the products nucleotide products, the amino acids leucine and valine and diacyl phospholipids.
They don't look related. There's no way that you can say they look related just by looking at the final products but if you realize that they're all made from glyceraldehyde, which contributes these three carbons of the nucleotides.
And after our summarization to diadroxyacetone and reduction, which generates about 30% glycerol 30% acetone, the glycerol ends up being the backbone of the lipids.
And the two methyl groups of the acetone here end up being the geminal dimethyl groups of valine and leucine after reductive homologation.
And the connectivity is apparent when you look at the synthetic chemistry, not when you look at the final products and so we think now that the all the subsystems are linked by connected synthetic chemistry.
And this bodes well for for imagining that all of the subsystems might have emerged at the outset.
We've got to do better than that, though, because what we've done thus far is with reference to a diagram like this where we're looking at the degree of aliveness over time, or as the systems complexity increases.
We've got degree of aliveness as a variable, partly because no one, no two people can agree as to what constitutes alive. So according to NASA's definition of life, basically, I think a mule is not counted as being alive.
So it's debatable. And so let's not worry too much about that debate. Let's just say there is a point beyond which it's undoubtedly alive and below which it's undoubtedly not alive and there's a bit of a gray area in between.
But thinking of this way allows us to break it down into a series of steps, which collectively transition you from the non alive to the alive.
Whereas individually, any one of these steps, any one of these innovations doesn't transition the system from not alive to alive.
But going through a series of transitions is easy than having one very improbable transition. So this is guiding our future work.
So we're not going to talk about what we've done, and which is not yet published on some of this, because Jack gave you Jack Shostack gave you a very good introduction as to how you can have an innovation in a system of of nucleotides and short
nucleotides by learning how to do template copying chemistry.
Other things would be, for example, learning how to, how to replicate vesicle something the Shostack lab has also demonstrated synthesis of peptides, particularly a coded synthesis of peptides would be a major innovation in the system.
But I'm not going to talk about those. I'm going to talk about some chemistry down here that might have helped some of the transitions taking place round about here on this diagram.
I'm also going to point out something which I found profoundly humbling, which is that, when looked at in the context of a diagram like this the first 25 years of my career have effectively advanced us from this point at the origin to somewhere
around about here. And that that is indeed humbling.
So, to go from the sinusulfidic network that I've just described to you to the way biology now does it is really interesting biology doesn't do anything like the sinusulfidic chemistry does it does it in a very different way and what I've drawn for you here is just a simple set of reactions about
35 of them all catalyzed by enzymes in modern biology, which would be required to get you from one carbon feeds carbon dioxide and nitrogen to the same products that the sinusulfidic chemistry network made.
And this is an extraordinary complex set of biochemical reactions, all as I say catalyzed by enzymes.
I'm going to position from sinusulfidic chemistry to this way of doing things take place. That's an intriguing question.
There were some other things that I should bring up for you which is that, you know, we present our work and we and we talk and collaborate in enjoyably with geoscientists and astronomers and so on.
The planetary scientists and astronomers were saying to us look hydrogen sulfide is not nearly as abundant as sulfur dioxide outgassing of sulfur dioxide on earth and Mars was probably about 10 times the outgassing of hydrogen sulfide.
And so doing your chemistry globally would be difficult without that amount of sulfide.
Why not think about sulfide, which derives by the hydration of sulfur dioxide in water if you could do it with sulfide sulfides much more abundant.
So we listened to them to secret and dimeter and Zoe.
And we went and tried the cyanide homologation chemistry with sulfide and indeed it works it works actually really well and there are certain advantages to using sulfide, you can optionally also use ferro cyanide in this chemistry.
So we listened to them and that as we had hoped when I described our motors operandi that feedback from from the geosciences community would help the chemistry, if we'd managed to get, you know, the chemistry and the scenario sort of right.
We also had other colleagues basically telling us that if you want to concentrate phosphate in a body of water, you need to avoid calcium, because calcium of course would precipitate calcium phosphate and a good way of avoiding calcium is in an alkaline lake, where carbonate
basically accumulates and precipitates the calcium calcium carbonate.
And we, this is also actually an alkaline lake is a good way of actually accumulating sodium potassium ferro cyanide.
But we recognize that actually it wouldn't just concentrate carbonate and phosphate, but it might actually additionally concentrate sulfite, because sulfite in the presence of calcium precipitates as calcium sulfide so this alkaline lake might give us carbonate and sulfite together.
And it's a lake, it's on the surface of the planet, it's going to be exposed to UV radiation.
So in work which is as yet unpublished but but will be published very soon, a colleague of mine postdoctoral colleague a very bright young man Zway Liu took a solution of carbonate and sulfite, and just irradiated it, and then use NMR spectroscopy to look and see what
he did. And I don't know about him but I was gobsmacked by what I saw in the NMR spectrum. And that is, we could see clearly by the March means these are all above a certain level, quite a high level.
The products which are in the orange and green boxes, the compounds in green boxes are one carbon products, formate sulfite alert to formaldehyde and methanol.
The first thing ones in yellow boxes oxalate tartrate tartrate is a very famous molecule organic chemistry and you can make it just by taking bicarbonate and sulfite and irradiating it with UV light.
Tartronate malonate glycolate.
And so these products are interesting some of them are starting to look like, you know, things that are useful to biology.
We delineated this reaction network by sort of guessing at what was going on, and then taking presumed intermediates and moan products and subjecting them to the same reaction conditions to see what they gave.
And in that way we could piece together what we think is a fairly, a fairly accurate set of reactions and it's free radical chemistry and some additional photochemistry.
When we took these various intermediates and products and subjected them to the reaction conditions, one intermediate or product stood out and that was glycolate.
And glycolate gave some really interesting products here they are in these orange boxes. Here's the glycolate in the blue box.
And glycolate is especially interesting because it's the hydrolysis product of glycolonitrile. And remember I told you that the sinusulfidic chemistry, if you have enough reducing power you make lots of things, but if you don't have enough reducing power.
You can't stop at glycolonitrile. And so the chances are that glycolonitrile would have been more common than the full set of sinusulfidic reaction products at various locations on the earth.
And hydrolysis of glycolonitrile over geologic time period of years would give rise to glycolate. And if you subject glycolate to a radiation in the presence of sulfite, you get reduction and oxidation of it.
It generates a radical I'll call a dot reduction and the oxygenation creates a radical I call B dot and B dot can pick up a hydrogen atom and make acetate or can pick up a sulfite radical make sulfur acetate.
But more interestingly, these A and B radicals can recombine. It turns out to A's makes tartrate 24% yield of tartrate.
It's reduced to give male it and may like can also be made by a and B reacting together reduction of male it gives succinate the succinate can be made by two molecules of B reacting to radical B's reacting together radical B's can also recombine in a slightly
different way to give these other products. Then finally, tartrate and male it can be oxidized to give these radicals, and these radicals can recombine with a and B to give die hydroxy citrate hydroxy citrate and citrate.
So citrate may late and succinate of course our components or constituents of the of the Krebs cycle citric acid cycle.
So this is a biological product acetate is is of course, means a big part of metabolism.
So carboxysulfidic chemistry is what we now call this because we're using carboxylates CO2 bicarbonate or carboxylates like glycolate for the chemistry.
And we're using sulfidic anions again as the source of reduction and redox.
It makes interesting products. And we can populate directly with those products part of the Krebs cycle. So these orange box products are the products I've just shown you that we get from carboxysulfidic chemistry starting from CO2, or and or glycolate.
So there's the citrate, the male eight and the succinate directly in the Krebs cycle.
So if we start thinking about biology, which has originated on a rich diet, fed to it by sinusulfidic chemistry, that rich diet contain ribonucleotides lipids amino acids and so on.
When biology starts to run out of these materials, it has to learn to make them from other things available in the environment. And so if it's fed these materials.
It has to learn how to use them to make the same final products amino acids lipids and ribonucleotides. And we can, we think that just learning a couple of very simple enzyme or ribosome activities would populate the whole Krebs cycle.
Let me show you what I mean.
Evolve a broad substrate specificity or promiscuous hydroxy acid dehydrate is activity.
That would reversibly dehydrate male eight to fumarate.
It would reversibly the high dehydrate citrate to scissor connotate and then rehydrate it to isocitrate all of equilibrium.
Hydroxy citrate would be dehydrated to an enol and to atomization of the enol would give you oxaloacetate oxaloacetate can decuboxylate partly to give you pyruvate hydroxy citrate would dehydrate region specifically to give you this enol which will
automize to this keto acid, which would decuboxylate to alpha ketoglutarate.
So you get you can populate the whole Krebs cycle just with a promiscuous alpha hydroxy sorry hydroxy beta hydroxy acid dehydrate is activity.
An oxidase activity shown in red would convert glycolate to glyoxylate isocitrate again to this alpha keto acid and tartrate would be oxidized to dihydroxy fumarate which I draw in this form to emphasize the fact that dihydroxy fumarate decuboxylates
spontaneously to the two carbon sugar glycol aldehyde malonate is of course an ideal precast to make fatty acids.
So we think biology could have started on a very rich diet of nitrogen containing and carbon containing materials, and then being weaned on to a less rich diet of carbon containing molecules and ammonia.
So it manipulates carbon frameworks in the without having nitrogen introduced and then introduces nitrogen late stage through transamination chemistry of oxaloacetate to make a spartate for example alpha Kg to make glutamate for example.
And finally, here's a sort of an arrow representing the time as we transition from a heterotrophic origin with sinusulfidic chemistry providing everything through to sinusulfidic chemistry providing glycol and nitrile, because it hasn't played out fully.
Hydrolysis of the glycol and nitrile giving glycolate and then carboxysulfidic chemistry glycolate giving a medium rich mixture of intermediates which biology could learn to turn into its final products.
Finally, when that gets depleted from the environment.
The even leaner mixture of products that you get from just the carboxysulfidic chemistry of CO2 would take the system further to becoming self sufficient and eventually the system would become self sufficient and learn how to make its products from carbon and nitrogen and you've arrived at a situation which is one which is pure autotrophy.
So this is something that intrigues us we're intrigued also in progressing from building blocks to through, you know, progressing in increasing stages of aliveness.
And lastly, we're really interested about something that's a big topic for the next couple of years and that's Mars.
The destination of the Mars 2020 mission, Jezero crater is a crater which was filled with water became a lake, you can see the watershed in artificial color shown here.
And the lake filled and eventually breached but the breach didn't actually lose all the liquid, all the water from from the basin.
And that basin then eventually dried out and was overlaying with various materials. Apparently it's got carbonate in it, which bodes well.
And there's some, some volcanic material it's thought which might even be lava, which will be consistent with geothermal heating of materials which have been laid down either by evaporation or sedimentation.
So it's all very related to the sort of scenarios I've been discussing throughout this talk. So we're absolutely fascinated by seeing how this pans out course the Martian timeline gives you free flowing water episodically.
Even when the, even when the first phase the first, you know, predominantly aqueous phase has dried out.
You see a lot from the from the from the mineralogy of Mars about the presence of carbonate sulfate. There are even people now reinterpreting some of the MSL and Viking data suggests that Mars actually might have a significant quantity of oxalate on its surface.
Because I'd be intrigued to see if that oxalate is also associated with acetate and would the isotopic signature of those molecules match the isotopic signature of oxalate and acetate made by the CO2 reduction chemistry that Zywa Liu has discovered.
So I'm extremely excited and wait with baited breath to see what Mars 2020 finds.
Firstly, we're also interested beyond Mars. So here's another talented young individual who floats between my lab and the lab of Didier chaos in astronomy here in Cambridge.
And what Paul has recognized is that because our chemistry uses light, and because the substrates that we use in the dark, if there is no light, they can undergo other reactions which Paul refers to as dark chemistry.
So looking at how much light is available on an exoplanet.
You can essentially get an idea as to whether the sort of chemistry I've discussed could play out or whether dark chemistry would prevail. And so Paul has used this to define the abiogenesis zone, which fortunately the earth lies in.
And where the abiogenesis zone overlaps the habitable zone becomes, I think, an interesting place if astronomers want to constrain the number of exoplanets they want to look at to maximize their chance of finding really interesting things on these exoplanets.
So, although I'm predominantly a chemist as Andre pointed out at the beginning, I've learned over the course of my career that being a single minded or narrow minded chemist on your own, doesn't get you very far in origins of life research.
You absolutely have to collaborate and learn from colleagues and other disciplines and we have learned a lot. There's a lot more to learn and I look forward continuing to learn from those colleagues.
I'd like now like to thank a couple of people. I'd like to thank the group who've done this work those in bold and the ones who are still in my group.
And they're very talented bunch of young people, very brave to work with cyanide and hydrogen sulfide while I jet around the planet, talking about their work.
I would never be able to do that sort of chemistry. And in fact, they wouldn't allow me in the lab to do it. I'm quite sure.
They've been funded by two organizations that recognize the value of long term funding, stable funding in this sort of area so you can just get on and do what you want to do without having to meet short term milestones.
That's the Medical Research Council in the UK, and the Simons Foundation there in the US, which is very generously supported our work and work of others in this area over the last eight or so years.
Colleagues in astronomy and Geosciences have helped us particularly on the recent carboxy sulfidic chemistry and colleagues in the European mainland through these EU talking shops and colleagues worldwide in the Simons collaboration on the origin life have contributed enormously to this work.
So I thank all of them. And finally, I thank you for your kind attention.
Sorry, John, only one one person clapping here but I'm sure there's plenty out there muted.
Thanks very much. Wonderful talk.
Got a lot out of it.
What I'd like to do is continue with some questions and some conversations about, you know what John's talked about.
I encourage everyone to participate and you can do that by typing your questions or topics you'd like discussed into the Q&A box.
And just before we get started, let me just introduce the rest of the panel here that's going to help me out.
So if you're new that are regulars you'll recognize Jack Shostack, our first speaker in the series and he's back. So we have some real chemists.
I can discuss what's been going on. And we also have Fred Cheslow.
So one of my co organizers from the Department of Geophysical Sciences so
Thanks folks.
We are coming in so I will go straight to one of them.
John, this is from Truanda.
Is it possible to have prebiotic cobalt homologue of E12 and iron homologue of he to mediate more efficient radical chemistry.
Could these metal complexes co evolved with all the really fascinating radical chemistry you showed here.
So could still use extensive radical chemistry to deal with challenging reactions.
Lovely, lovely question. Yeah, no, it's so I should point out that we actually got into the field of prebiotic chemistry when during my PhD I watched a lecture by Albert Eschenmosa talking about the potential prebiotic derivation of B12.
A brilliant lecture 20 years ahead of its time showing that a complex looking structure like that could actually be the result of very simple chemistry.
So I think the short answer to you is that I think yes you could actually start to imagine synthesis of some of these co factors.
I'm not an expert in the tetrapyrrole field, but I think Albert showed that you could generate or you have a chance of generating some of those structures because there are certain elements to their formation which are predisposed.
I would just point out one other thing to you which is that in a recent experiment with the club oxysulfid chemistry, we can see methanol being converted to ethanol.
And the way in which it happens we think is that ethanol is oxidized to the hydroxy methyl radical which dimerizes to make ethylene glycol.
The ethylene glycol is then oxidized by one electron to make a radical, which then loses water, because it's it's a leaving group on a carbon adjacent to a radical center, and that generates an enol oxy radical which picks by hydrogen atom become astal to hold.
And that is actually exactly the same as the way, for example, it's very similar to ribonucleotide reductase radical chemistry and it's very similar very similar to the dial dehydrate is chemistry which is a B12 catalyzed reaction.
I think some of the B12 and related cobalt type chemistry might actually be catalyzed by or brought about by sulfite radicals in the presence of bisulfite to so you get you get a redox transformation through radicals so very interesting question fascinating subject.
So nice questions come in, but Jack, I'll pass it to you, maybe you'd like to take some or ask you.
Well, yeah, I had a question, if I may.
So I really like your diagram at towards the end of going from purely heterotrophic system and through some stages towards an autotrophic system.
I'm trying to understand how metabolism emerged from the pre biotic chemistry is really fascinating, but it had, when you get to the point of selecting for new catalytic functions it has to happen one at a time and presumably something that confers an advantage.
So if you think of some feedstock for nucleotides or lipids running out. What would you connect first to the carboxy sulfitic.
Lovely question Jack of course it can't be, you can't do the whole job lot in one go of course it's got to be you know one after the other, trying to deduce you know what the actual sequence was I think might be might be too big an ask.
There are certainly some, you know, interesting prospects so I think one of the ones we're interested in is the attachment of purine nuclear bases to phosphoribosalparaphosphate, because I think you know RNA is going to be something which is required in abundance.
And that chemistry basically in biology, the actual, the linear pathway whereby purine nuclear bases are assembled on the sugar is painful to behold I find difficult to think that biology first did it that way.
The salvage pathway is very convincing and so if you've got nuclear bases lying around in the environment, and you learn how to make phosphoribosalparaphosphate and actually couple those two species together, then I think that will be a big advantage very early so that that's one of the ones we were toying with but I'll go back to my original answer Jack and say yes, it's got to be stepwise.
But working out what the actual order might have been is, you know, is beyond me, basically, it's, I think, input from other people might be a big contribution there.
Yeah, I think it'd be very nice to have at least a handful of steps that look like they could have occurred early and then people who like to evolve new ribosomes can go and see if that can be done.
It's also interesting when you look at the Krebs cycle because the Krebs cycle of course with oxaloacetate and alpha KG, the easiest amino acids to generate from Krebs are aspartate and glutamate.
And it turns out that in the sinusulfidic chemistry and there are other arguments which are more complex we don't want to assign aspen glue to the genetic code straight off.
But if you start to learn that you can very easily access them from Krebs cycle that might be a good time to start adding them into the genetic code so I think the process of going from sinusulfidic chemistry to carboxysulfidic chemistry and so on,
might be associated not just with the learning of biosynthetic reactions but the expansion of the genetic code as you learn pathways to new amino acids, you expand from let's say, eight amino acids, you know, up to maybe 17 and then you add the last three, much later.
So I think that those ideas should probably be thought about in parallel.
Yeah, great. Thanks.
Fred, did you want to jump in?
Yes. Firstly, I just want to echo John that was a fantastic talk. Thank you so much for sharing with us.
I have plenty of questions of my own but I want to start off with a question that comes from one of our graduate student in my department Andy Herd, who has asked several studies have shown that under UV irradiation iron two plus can be efficiently photo oxidized to iron three
plus. And this mechanism has been proposed as important on the early earth for removing dissolved iron two plus and precipitating ferric iron oxy hydroxides.
How critical is iron two plus to your scenario and conversely, does ferric iron pose any problems and I'll add to that that Andy also echoes and says that was a fantastic talk.
Well, thank you very much. It's always a pleasure to talk, you know, to an audience to ask questions and that's another interesting question so iron basically is interesting from a couple of points.
First of all, we have wondered whether you could actually use the electron that's lost from iron two upon photo oxidation to reduce CO2.
But I think there's a difficulty with that, which is that what you would generate would be iron three and format. And it's known that irradiation of iron three and format actually goes back to iron two and CO2.
So you just set up a futile cycle.
So I think with iron two, you want to lose the electrons to protons and generate hydrogen.
And so you, you iron two will be oxidized iron three and you get hydrogen given off at the same time.
So the alkaline lake scenario, then, of course, you've got a high concentration of carbonate so you will believe the mineral is called Siderite is that right Fred.
You are asking the wrong person for that one.
Okay.
The iron carbonates I think would precipitate so I'm not sure the extent to which free iron would would interfere with some of that chemistry.
Iron three is actually is something which we were actually quite keen on having because iron three if you let that react with cyanide that generates ferrite cyanide iron three hexa cyanide and that's actually a very useful one electron oxidizing agents for prebiotic chemistry so
going back to your original question and being a bit more precise for you, we thought about the role of iron and I think I don't see it as being negative. In fact, I see think I see it as being positive.
Can I bring up there's a question from Roy Black in the Q&A.
This goes back to the idea of the complex mixtures that you know you find from some prebiotic chemistry like that on meteorites.
He asks if the info of those organic compounds those complex mixtures would be helpful or problematic.
Yes. Well, I think it depends on who you ask. So, there are people who view in full of organic material as manner from heaven.
There are others like me who view it as, you know, with apologies, space trash.
And the reason for that opinion that I have is because, by and large, our studies of meteorites that people have done have shown that they contain a very large number of compounds, hundreds of thousands, maybe even millions of compounds.
And so they're very, very diverse. And what that means is that if you want to start going to the next stage of the chemistry where you're starting to string building blocks together.
You've got something very dilute has to react with something else very dilute to make the next product in the presence of thousands or hundreds of thousands of other compounds, each of which could react with your two building blocks.
So it just makes the subsequent synthetic chemistry very difficult. I would much rather that the material came in on a larger impactor and just got atomized.
And the atoms then recombined to give me cyanide, because with cyanide we can make a mixture which is much less complex.
It's still we hope, and this is just how we hope it's sufficiently complex, but not too complex.
And so, you know, you should talk to other people, and you'll hear a different opinion because there is still quite a large number of people who like the idea of bringing certain organics.
I guess, Bennu will be very interesting as well because, you know, Bennu will tell us something about, you know, what the organics are before they've been sort of subjected to delivery conditions and so on.
I think it's going to be very interesting. Perhaps we should sort of have the jury out until we find out about Bennu.
I'll take a question from the audience here. This is from Gordon Push. Trent Stubbs had all published in Nature Chemistry last month that the components of the Krebs cycle can also spontaneously emerge from reactions between
oxalate and pyruvate under what they describe as mild aqueous conditions, that is a pH around five and temperature around 70 C. Is this scenario also consistent with your cyanosulfitic hypothesis?
This is the work of Krishnamurthy and Springsteen. It's a beautiful paper, very, very nice idea, very clever realisation that if you take the compounds in the Krebs cycle and convert them to the homologous alpha keto compounds in those cases where they aren't already alpha keto compounds, alpha keto carboxylates,
that some of the reactions which are difficult in the Krebs cycle become easier. They don't become really easy, they become easier. And I think the beauty of that idea is a major strength of that paper.
I think all pre-biotic chemistry, you know, practiced by people like Ram and great chemists, all of that has advantages and disadvantages. And I've told you the advantage first because I'm an optimist, but I have to tell you the disadvantages.
The disadvantage is how you get a concentrated solution of glyoxylate or pyruvate and a biotically and oxaloacetate is also required because the decuboxylation of oxaloacetate coupled to itself aldol, which is the precursor citrate, that requires pretty high concentrations of oxaloacetate.
Oxaloacetate is prone to decuboxylation. So, you know, our chemistry has got strengths and weaknesses. This new chemistry has got strengths and weaknesses. It's connected in the sense that we're both aiming at Krebs cycle.
Does that answer your question? I hope that answers your question.
That'll do just fine. Thanks.
If I could ask another question from the Q&A, but it also, I'm going to generalize it because it's related to a question that I had and thought of.
So the original question was posted by Benjamin Hayworth whose question was, do yield of sugar products depend on the duration of UV irradiation?
And I want to generalize the kind of the question. I was really intrigued by the scenario that you outlined in terms of the rivers feeding into a common pool and kind of moving through almost a processing along the Earth's surface.
I was curious, have you thought about the relative, the time scales that would be necessary in order of building up the concentrations or driving the chemistry to the level that would fit into the scenario, the systems that you were looking at?
So I think the best answer to that is that we're taking our very first cautious steps in that direction because it's outside of my comfort zone.
So I've got to establish contacts with people who know a lot more than me about that sort of thing. And we're doing that through the Simons Foundation and outside.
Yes, the synthesis of the sugars, it does depend on the photon flux and on how long you're exposed to a certain photon flux.
And we've been trying to connect that with what's known about the early sun by analogy to other stars, similar stars.
And the only difficulty in that is that in its early history, the sun was almost certainly sporadically flaring. And Dimitris Asloff told me just the other day that some of those flares, the intensity of the UV radiation is three orders of magnitude higher than it is when the sun's in its quiescent state.
So because you don't know, you know, what the exact history was of the earth, it's going to be a little bit difficult to sort of start pinning down what the yield of sugars would have been in what location at what time.
So I think we might never be able to provide you a sort of more accurate answer than that.
Coming back to Fred's point about the fluvial system, when you do chemistry in a laboratory, any synthetic chemist will tell you that you can't make a lot of interesting things in one pot, you know, across the board.
So you can sometimes make four or five interesting compounds. But if you want to make a large number of compounds, you've got to have some sequence to your chemistry.
And yields are important because if byproducts build up, they start to interfere. So yields are important, but also the ability to purify intermediates.
If there's a geological, the plausible way of purifying intermediate, for example, if one of those rivers starts to dry up concentrations of a compound go up and it starts to crystallize.
Other materials washed away in the mud or liquor that goes downstream and then fresh water comes in and the river takes a different course you could end up producing a stream containing a pure compound where previously had an impure compound.
So these sorts of considerations are an attempt to get a geochemical scenario, which is equivalent to what chemists do in the lab.
Because of course, people rightly criticize those who was in the synthetic chemistry community who imagine that this chemistry could take place on the early earth because they say there weren't any chemists on the earth to do it in sequence.
So we're trying to think of ways in which progression across a terrain could encounter reagents sequentially. So how could they be deposited?
Of course, if you have an evaporite, evaporites are laid down in inverse order of solubility. And if they're then thermally metamorphosed, you could have different materials at different points down a gradient on a terrain which was a thermally metamorphosed evaporite.
So by flowing across that you can encounter reagents in sequence. You could have light on them in sequence and you could then join two streams and at the conference do new chemists.
It's by no means sort of well worked out. It's a toddler not yet walking, I would say, that you can see where we're trying to go.
Thank you.
That was fantastic.
Thank you.
So we still have some chemistry questions before we kind of head on the more general topics.
Well, it seems that once you have formaldehyde and cyanide, you can get to glycolaldehyde without having to have a photochemical reduction, namely through unbelunged chemistry with another molecule formaldehyde.
Well, actually, it's something we've thought about that you could do benzoin type chemistry, but benzoin chemistry is pretty inefficient. Well, I don't think it really works at all unless you have an aromatic aldehyde making your cyanohydrin, just to give you that extra stabilization of the
cyanide adjacent to the nitrile.
We've thought about tricks we could use, you know, that would produce glycol nitrile with a substituent on oxygen, which would increase the acidity of the alpha proton, but we've not been able to pull that off.
And so we prefer the reduction chemistry which very simply converts the nitrile to the amine and then it's the aldehyde.
But if you can, if you can come up with a way of doing benzoin type chemistry for non aromatic aldehyde, cyanohydrin, then please do.
Okay, can I ask a more general question then? I don't usually like these more philosophical questions, but there is one thing about all this that still bothers me a bit, which is that it seems like everything is focusing towards RNA.
And we know from work of Escher Moser and many others that there are a lot of things that look like they could be viable, genetic polymers. So do you think that RNA is the only way to get to life, or do you think there might be other possibilities?
So, for anyone else who's listening to this one, Jack and I have discussed this before, and we have slightly different opinions.
Not radically different. I think Jack's feeling is that, you know, if you get close to RNA, natural selection will get you all the way to RNA.
And I think that's certainly a valid position to take. And Jack's got experimental data to support that position as well.
My own gut feeling for what it's worth is that, you know, I would prefer to be able to get straight to RNA. Now that could just be the synthetic chemist in me wanting to get a clean kill.
But, you know, I just, I kind of think it would be, would be, would be neater. But that's, that's not a very good, you're right Jack, it's philosophical, but I prefer pure RNA, I'd prefer to get to straight RNA.
Let me give an example, right, when, when Albert Eschenmoser invented or discovered TNA, threous nucleic acid.
There was a lot of excitement that this might be something that it looked like it might be easier to make, it looked like a decent genetic polymer.
There's a lot in the end, but, you know, maybe there are other things out there. It just seems like, you know, chemistry is so huge. Why should there only be one answer?
Well, that's, yeah, I hear what you're saying. I'll give you one difference between TNA and RNA. You could make the TNA intermediates using the chemistry that we found to make the RNA intermediates.
There's a difference, and that is that the intermediate on route to RNA crystallizes really easily, and it crystallizes as a conglomerate, which means that if there is any enantiomeric excess in the starting glyceraldehyde, it's amplified during the crystallization step.
The threose amino oxazoline and the erythrose amino oxazoline don't crystallize very easily.
They crystallize more rapidly than the ribose amino oxazoline. And because they don't crystallize, there's no opportunity to make things enantiomatically enriched.
So, but that, Jack, is my only weapon to use against your argument.
I think that's an interesting puzzle.
Actually, I had a fairly similar, more specific question, and that one of the messages I took away from your talk was that the scenario is, it really starts with some basic chemistry, but an enormous multiplicity of chemical pathways early on in this process.
And, you know, in some sense a gradual funneling of processes and complexity, you know, to ending up where we are. And, you know, my impression is also that, you know, if that's really the way it is that a bias of these pathways, for instance, by the, you know, environment on a planet or just
what's present to react, it seems like you could just sort of tilt this network in a different direction. Do you think that's possible, or do you think you'd actually end up in the same spot by some other path?
Andrea, that is, that gets right to the very heart of it. I think it's, this is something Paul Rimmer is interested in, which is, you know, how many streams do you need, what's the chance of that? The more streams you need and the more intersections and so on, that the less deterministic it becomes and the more contingent it becomes.
You know, it is, and this, of course, has a bearing on whether, you know, you think this might pan out on another planet, might this be deterministic, or any planet which is rocky and has HCN because of impacts and so it's all going to get down the same route.
And I think that's a really interesting discussion. I just combined that a little bit with what Jack was talking about. This business of, you know, what's biology offered and to what extent can it choose from what it's been offered to take the right things.
Most of the discussion of amino acids, for example, in the old literature says that prebiotic chemistry may a whole range of amino acids. It's partly because of the milliurea experiment.
And biology then chose the ones that were best for it on the basis of function.
But let me give you a difficulty I have with that argument, which is that if you have, let's say, 100 amino acids, you have 10,000 different dipeptides, and you make the peptides longer, the numbers just go astronomically to the point that you get effectively homeopathic dilution of any useful sequence.
So I had, if you do make something, which is how can you recapitulate it. And so, to me, it would be much easier if the chemistry just turned out to make, you know, either all of the extant amino acids or a subset thereof that via a restricted genetic alphabet would enable function.
And biology is given that and it happens to work. And because it works, we're here.
I just, you know, that that accords with my particular sort of mindset, more than this sort of selection process. And I think that's partly Jack's background compared to my background, you know, Jack Jack's one of the pioneers of selects.
So power of selection.
I agree with you on this one. There's a very nice example.
A little while ago from Nick Hudson's lab. So, ornithin, which is made in your pathway on the way to argument is not incorporated into peptides because of forming a lactone cyclic lactone.
And so there's a chemical reason why, even though it could be made and used for something else, it doesn't get into into peptides. And the same with some of the shorter chain diamino acids.
Yes, a lot of chemical selection needs to be taken into account.
There is chemical selection. And I think that one of the things that's happened in this field is that chemists have heard about Darwin and natural selection.
And so they think, well, if we have a big complicated mixture, we can just have selection and that's some magic that the biologists have told us about and that will solve all our problems.
But natural selection is what you need for natural selection is very well defined. You need to have replication, mutation and selection.
And so, when you're thinking about pre-biotic chemistry before you've got to that point, I don't think selection is as powerful by any stretch.
And so, to a certain extent, the Victorians hyping Darwin, you know, such that, you know, everybody in the English speaking world in particular, you know, just goes around thinking Darwin said this.
And that's perhaps permeated into a field which it shouldn't permeated into too much.
I'll jump in with one of my general questions also.
You know, an amateur in the business, I have it beaten into my head that you need water for any scenario, you know, of life on anywhere.
But I think I learned from you now there's another part of this need radiation in some form, you know, in your case UV radiation.
I'm guessing there's another similar lesson about when she draw from geology that must be a necessary requirement.
I'm just wondering if you can comment on that. Is that wrong?
No, I don't think that's wrong. And I'm glad to hear that teaching methods where you were educated was similar to those where I was educated.
Things were literally beaten into our heads.
In fact, I've had to unlearn quite a lot of things that would be equal to my head, because they just, you know, weren't too useful.
Now, I think water, there are people out there who talk about chemistry in other solvents, giving rise to life based on other solvents.
But I think that's, it's too early to rule that sort of thing in, you know, and so let's not consider ruling it out.
Let's not bother ruling it in yet makes makes the discussion easier. So I think water is, yes, what's essential, some form of energy and that's still something we're really struggling about which is how to convert, you know,
environmental energy, how to convert that into chemical energy we've made some, you know, tentative first steps but I'm not particularly happy with them I think that requires a lot more effort to understand how you get chemical energy.
And that uses energy via this wonderful invention of chemiosmosis.
But you need to have a thick membrane that's that's impermeable to protons to actually have a gradient that you can maintain so you can harness that and then you need a very advanced protein machine to harness it.
You can couple that to anything which you can, you know, any form of redox disequilibrium in the environment biology now uses via chemiosmosis and electron bifurcation to sort of extract energy from everywhere.
But right at the very beginning would have been really difficult to get environmental energy and so I think that's that's a nut that's definitely not being cracked yet and something that needs consideration.
So we talked about irradiation as well, Andre. Well, there's a group, Albert Tharnback has shown you can generate hydrated electrons and then do this sort of chemistry from, from radiolysis so gamma radiation.
So you could do it using high energy electrons, for example, those electrons which were celebrated by Jupiter's magnetic field, power those into aqueous solutions on Jupiter's moons, and do this sort of chemistry so I think one has to, you know, keep an open mind, and
start thinking about the chemistry and start thinking about how it might apply in other situations, but water and irradiation of some sort, you know, I still think are essential.
It's the photochemistry of water under UV and hard UV is unbelievably complicated, just an incredible soup of ions and radicals, strange species that you can generate.
Having said that, the atmospheric chemists have done a very, very good job at understanding complex, you know, reaction networks in their photochemistry studies, extraordinarily well to the extent that they can actually put things into computers and model things.
People sometimes ask me, can't you just put, you know, measure some rate constants, put them into a computer and predict all your product. I say,
no way, so we're way behind the atmospheric chemists on that.
But yes, you're right, it's complicated chemistry. No doubt about that.
We handed back to these folks in just a second, but since you sort of said that magic word energy sources that sort of reminded me about this question from from the audience, this is from David Archer.
I'm not a writer to this field but I read the idea that alkaline hydrothermal events. That's lame to 2010, which provide each to that can drive organic carbon production, and the idea that the oldest carbon assimilation pathway the Seedle co a can be reproduced by an iron nickel alloy that might be present there
can you speak to this hypothesis.
Let me touch on a couple of aspects of that so the idea that you could use a gradient and actually use hydrogen and the pH gradient to reduce CO2 for example there's been bouncing around for many years.
Just this year just recently a paper in PNAS appeared showing that you could with a with a with a very thin membrane in a model system, and the big pH gradient you could generate format as much as one micromolar format.
By way of comparison in this photo chemistry that zewell use done. If he starts with 100 millimolar by carbonate he can convert 53 produce 53 millimolar by car format rather that's 53,000 times the concentration you can generate in that event.
So the the other chemistry that's often alluded to in support of deep sea vent ideas is this generation of activated acetate this Huber and Wachter Husser experiment where they showed that you know freshly precipitated iron nickel sulfides could actually take CO and methane file and make an activated acetate
in I don't know 40% yield and they showed by trapping with aniline that it was an actually an activated species.
That gets you from CO and methane file to an activated acetate where does the methane file come from. That's absolutely not clear.
And going back to the first one, you can hydrogenate CO2 at equilibrium to trace a format, but where'd you go from the format. How'd you how'd you make CC bonds.
So I think the deep sea vent idea was based upon a guest scenario.
And it wasn't deduced from experimental chemistry and then people use the guest scenario to think about what chemistry might take place and they've had 30 plus years and those are the two major results that they've had.
I think you just simply have to weigh those results against the results that other people have had for sufficient scenarios and see what you're more convinced by.
Thanks.
And I wanted to just follow up again. This is going to this question will put you on the spot a little bit and it is a bit philosophical. So you can dodge as well as you'd like.
But to give you some context. One of the things I do is I teach a class for non scientists about the exploration of the solar system and we always end with a discussion of whether or not we're going to, you know, that NASA is now developing plans to search for signs of life elsewhere
in fact already doing that as you said what in terms of their exploration of Mars. And the question I inevitably get is whether or not I think life exists outside of the earth.
And I, to be perfectly honest they tell them it depends on my mood in the morning, you know how optimistic or pessimistic I may be.
Well, you know, the scenario on Mars and as you now think about this systems approach to possibly leading to the conditions where life might form.
Would you like to speculate or say how optimistic you are in terms of our exploration of Mars or elsewhere in terms of how a system like this might work on another planet or under different conditions.
So the short answer Fred is, you know, we don't know I don't know. And that is actually not just the short answer it's also the best answer.
So, but I will, you know, I will be I'll take the bait and take it take the concept a little bit further.
We have been funded by the Simons Foundation and Jim Simons was an award winning mathematician before he went into the world of finance and he came up to me at one of these meetings and said, you know, what are the chances of life elsewhere.
He thinks in a probabilistic way.
And I said, well, you know how many planets are the Jimmy says well, you know, of the order of, let's say 10 to the 22. Of course, I joke with him that's not even a mole of planets, actually.
But, but anyway, it's a lot of planets.
And so, if the chance is, you know, less than one in 10 to the 22, we're alone. If it's more than one in 10, 10 and 22, we might have neighbors.
But I think that's the best way to address it in a probabilistic sort of way, which is why Paul rumor is so interested in this business of streams, trying to get a better handle on what the chances are.
I think it also depends on the extent to which you believe as to how many ways that you might get to life. There are.
And that's a difficult one because if, you know, in fact, we're working with people and collaborating with people who are trying to create synthetic biologists.
And I've no doubt that there will be possible synthetic biologists with different informational molecules and so on.
But the question is how many biologists could actually come into existence on there of their own accord on a rocky planet.
I don't know, but I would not be surprised if the answer was one.
So that's as much philosophy as I'm allowed, even at this time in the evening.
I think the statistics angle on a lot of the things you've talked about is important. That's part of why I asked about pathways because lots of biological processes involve enormous numbers of pathways which you know creates for, you know,
dramatically increases the opportunity for no physical processes to happen if you have lots of paths to choose from.
We are coming close to the end here. We don't have much time, so we won't be able to answer everyone's question.
Jack, did you have any, anything else that you wanted to bring into the conversation.
No, I don't think so.
Alright, in that case.
Well, maybe we'll give the last question to one of our audience members.
We haven't talked about this. Doesn't this is from Lawrence Lerner.
Doesn't the distribution of organics on meteorites give insight into what compounds are formed without human intervention.
Absolutely it does. And, and I think it certainly tells you that you can make very complex mixtures of organics pretty easily.
I mean the meteorites we've, we've been sampled on earth basically don't all come from one parent body. So, you know, multiple parent bodies have been doing organic chemistry to make these highly complex mixtures.
There's no doubt that you can make stuff from feedstocks. I think making, you know, making the right sort of mixture.
We don't, I don't think meteorites, I don't think meteorites make the right sort of mixture. So I think it's a clue as to what sort of chemistry can take place. Yes.
I think we need to have more constrained chemistry to actually make the right sort of mixtures. And so are the meteorites basically saying that this sort of chemistry took place but it was, you know, instead of having the stream separating it
it was all happening in one stream or all happening in one bit of meltwater, you know, inside a planetary precursor.
So that wasn't the right separation. Is that what it's telling us or is it telling us it was different chemistry. Well, I would sort of suggest that in the future we might get a handle on this from some of the work that's being done in, in John Islay's lab Caltech, Kate Freeman and Penn State,
the isotope signature of organics and relating isotope signature. This is looking at the, you know, C 1213, 016, 1718 and so on, but individual positions in molecules and correlating that with the synthesis, because the synthesis is associated with isotope effects.
And so essentially synthesis according to a certain method produces one molecule with a fingerprint synthesis of the same molecule by different method produces the same molecule with a different fingerprint.
So one thing that's going to be important in the future is looking at the fingerprint of organics from meteorites relative to fingerprint from our chemistry.
I'm Christian Murphy's chemistry and looking at the fingerprint of organics on Mars, organics be detected on Mars, I'm sure more will be. Are they just, you know, material that's been delivered exogenously, or were they synthesized in situ.
If they were by what sort of chemistry. So I think my spectrometry will give you a better answer to your question in the next few years.
I am going to resist the urge to ask any more philosophical questions and thank you, John, very much. It was a wonderful talk learned very much.
And we're delighted that you made the time to pass up dinner.
It was a pleasure.
Pleasure and thank you for the attention and the questions very much enjoyed it.
Thanks very much. That was great.
