These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by the teaching company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines. The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Sensation, Perception, and the Aging Process, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Francis Calavita.
Dr. Calavita is an emeritus associate professor of psychology at the University of Pittsburgh where he has been teaching for over 40 years.
He received his BA in experimental psychology from the University of Maryland and his PhD in physiological psychology from the University of Indiana.
He went on to complete a two-year postdoctoral research fellowship at the Center for Neural Sciences.
In addition to his position at the University of Pittsburgh, he holds an adjunct faculty position at Florida Atlantic University.
Professor Calavita has published over 30 scholarly articles in the areas of sensory processes, perception, and recovery of function following brain damage.
He is the author of one book, Sensory Changes in the Elderly.
Professor Calavita's teaching excellence has been rewarded with five teaching awards, including the prestigious Chancellor's Distinguished Teaching Award.
This is the highest award for teaching excellence bestowed by the University of Pittsburgh.
Professor Calavita prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical notes, and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1. Sensation, Perception, and Behavior
Hello, my name is Frank Calavita and it's my pleasure to invite you to this series of 24 lectures that we're going to share together dealing with three separate aspects.
One, the way our sensory systems collect data from the world around us and translate it into a language that the brain can understand.
A second facet of the course will deal with the way that the brain takes this sense data and creates complex perceptions out of it, which actually define our reality.
And the third component of the course will deal with the way the aging process can alter both the receptors' functions and our perceptions.
Before we get into the actual content of the course more thoroughly, I need to share with you some background information about myself.
I do this not because my background is especially interesting or exciting, but it will help you to perceive the perspective that I'm taking, the orientation of the course, and it may save some surprises or disappointments down the road.
Many times when I teach a class and the students know that I'm a psychologist, they immediately expect that we're going to talk about things like personality disorders,
and mass murders, and perverts, and schizophrenics, and interesting things like that, and sometimes they're disappointed when they find out that I'm actually a biopsychologist by training, not a clinical psychologist,
and that in fact we're going to talk about sensory processes and some of the mechanisms by which the brain recovers following brain damage.
Let me share with you a little bit of my training and experience.
I received my PhD in what was then called physiological psychology back in 1964.
I then completed a two-year United States Public Health Service postdoctoral fellowship in a neuroscience laboratory where I studied techniques of experimental surgery and electrical brain stimulation and recording from the brains of awake, free-moving animals.
Since the brain possesses no pain receptors, it is an advantageous way to collect data if you are using electrophysiological techniques to have the animal awake and alert.
Then I embarked on a 20-year research career that followed two directions.
One, I call the neural correlates of sensory discrimination where I attempted to study what aspects of the auditory message would be analyzed at different levels of the auditory system, going from the midbrain to the cerebral cortex.
Another line of inquiry that I pursued was techniques of training animals to regain sensory and perceptual capacities following brain damage.
I guess in a sense what I was looking for was animal models of rehabilitation for human victims of brain damage.
I share this information with you in the hope of minimizing any surprise that you may experience when you find that this course has quite a bit more what you might call hard science than you might have expected.
So I invite you to be patient, you may find some of it interesting and informative, and in any event you're going to be exposed to it, so make the best of it.
In addition to my university affiliation, for the past 20 years I've maintained a small private practice in clinical neuropsychology, specializing in the assessment of people with head injuries and learning disabilities.
In fact, I share this with you to explain why some of the examples that I will use of points covered in some of the lectures are actually based on some of my clinical observations in my practice.
I will of course protect the anonymity of the patients that I may refer to.
One more point about the flavor of these lectures.
I am an academic psychologist. I've spent 40 years teaching at a university.
Academic psychology has only one common denominator and that is an interest in human behavior.
At the present time there are over 55 different divisions of the American Psychological Association.
Many of them use different techniques and different jargon and they have different populations that they're interested in, children or the elderly or people in groups or whatever.
But all 55 divisions have one thing in common that and that is an interest in behavior.
So we will attempt to relate the information that we talk about to human behavior.
Let me start out by sharing with you a brief history of the close relationship between academic psychology and the study of sensation and perception.
So let's go back to the first person to call himself as a primary designation, a psychologist.
I mean there have been for hundreds and hundreds of years people with an interest in psychological phenomena,
but their primary designation was usually physiologist or physician or philosopher or something like that.
In 1879 along comes an individual whose primary designation of himself is that of a psychologist.
This was a German by the name of Wilhelm Wundt who in 1879 is credited with establishing the first psychological laboratory at the University of Leipzig.
Now because he was the first one to formally call himself a psychologist, he got to define this new science and he got to decide what its basic goal would be.
So Wundt called this new science of psychology the scientific study of mind, thereby dooming it to failure.
Because science can only deal with things and Galileo told us this back in 1600, science must deal with things that are public, repeatable and measurable.
Mind, while it may be interesting, is none of the above.
But Wundt didn't know that he was dooming psychology to failure by calling it the science of mind.
So let's pursue this history a little bit further.
Not only did he define psychology, but he established its basic goal.
He said the goal of psychology shall be to discover the basic elements of mind, the basic units of mind, or to put that another way to discover the structure of mind.
So Wundt's School of Psychology started at Leipzig, Germany in 1879, was called the School of Structuralism.
It migrated to the United States by way of one of Wundt's students who established a structuralistic psychology program at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York.
It really didn't catch on in the United States because American scholars were fascinated by some of the theories of Charles Darwin and they didn't want to know what the structure of mind was.
They wanted to know what its function was, what did mind do for us, what evolutionary advantage did mind give us.
So a competing school of academic psychology was started at the University of Chicago and they called themselves the School of Functionalism because they were interested in the function of mind.
They wanted psychology to be useful. If we could discover the function of mind, maybe we could raise our kids smarter or run our schools better or make prison more of a rehabilitative rather than a punishing experience and treat people with mental and emotional problems.
So their hearts were in the right place, but unfortunately they kept mind as their subject matter.
They defined psychology still as the scientific study of mind, again thereby dooming it to failure even though their goal of psychology was now to discover the function of mind.
And psychology seemed to be languishing until 1913 when a brash young psychologist at Johns Hopkins University by the name of John B. Watson founded the School of Behavioristic Psychology or Behaviorism.
Behaviorism became the dominant school of psychology till the early 1970s, so this was really a revolutionary thing he did.
The founding of behaviorism is generally taken by historians to be 1913 because that's the year that Watson published his monograph, Psychology as the Behaviorist sees it.
And in that monograph, he said, if psychology is to be taken seriously as a science, we need to model ourselves more after sciences, obvious sciences like physics and chemistry.
They deal with things that are public, repeatable and measurable. Mind is none of the above.
So he proposed that we get rid of mind as our subject matter and we substitute behavior, which is why it's called behaviorism.
So he said the definition of psychology shall be the scientific study of behavior.
And he said the basic goal of psychology shall be the prediction and control of behavior.
Now that word control made a lot of people nervous. Oh my God, they're going to control our behavior.
So slowly the goal of psychology got changed from the prediction and control of behavior to the prediction and understanding of behavior.
But the effect of the matter is that if you can understand something, then you are in a position to control it.
So Watson threw out the experimental method that the structuralists and functionalists were using, which was the introspective method where they would get people to introspect and look within and share the contents of their minds with the experimenters.
Not very scientific at all. But when you throw out an experimental method, it behooves you to replace it with another one, hopefully a better one.
And in this regard, Watson was very fortunate because around the time he was looking for a new experimental method for psychology, the works of Ivan P. Pavlov, the Russian physiologist who is famous for his studies of classical conditioning, became available in the United States.
And Watson said, aha, that is the experimental method that psychology needs, the method of classical conditioning.
Watson applied Pavlov's methods. He actually did some conditioning experiments with babies that by today's standards would be viewed as highly unethical and he would probably have ended up sued and or in jail.
But in any event, there was no APA ethics committee at that time and he did the experiments and it looked like his behavioristic approach would be a fruitful one for understanding human behavior.
Behavioristic psychology, as virtually everyone knows who has ever taken introductory psych, is sometimes designated by the little notation SR psychology.
And of course the S stands for stimulus and the R stands for response.
Now students like this because they think that it's a convenient shorthand way in their notes to refer to behavioristic psychology without having to write it all out.
Well actually that little notation is doing a whole lot more than simply providing a shortcut for note taking for psych students.
It's actually saying three very important things.
SR psychology is saying psychologists acknowledge and accept the principle of determinism that is acknowledged and accepted in all of the other sciences.
Physics and chemistry operate under the assumption that we are living in a deterministic universe where cause and effect is happening, where things do not happen randomly, capriciously or haphazardly.
And psychology is saying hey we accept the principle of determinism too. We think we live in a deterministic universe.
This little notation SR psychology is saying something else that's very important.
It's saying we believe that behavior is deterministic and predictable and we throw out any notion that behavior operates under the premise of free will.
So they're making a statement specifically about behavior that not only is physics and chemistry deterministic but psychology is and we have no use for free will as an explanatory concept.
If behavior operated under free will, why bother having a science that attempts to study lawfulness and behavior?
People can do whatever they want. Animals can do whatever they want if we're operating under free will.
And the third thing that this little notation SR psychology says is that if you really want to understand the response, the R, the behavior, you need to know what the S is, what the stimulus is.
So that in fact behaviorism marks the beginning of this close connection between the study of sensory processes and academic psychology.
You can't understand the behavior unless you understand what stimulus elicited the behavior because that behavior did not occur spontaneously all by itself.
Behavioristic psychology says behavior has reasons. It doesn't happen spontaneously.
And sometimes a behavior will seem strange to us or unexplainable or based on ESP or something like that.
And what it usually amounts to is that we don't know what the stimulus is.
I can think back to an experience I had when I was 11 years old.
It seems like we always had cats and so I can remember being in the living room listening to the radio and the cat is stretched out on the rug looking quite content.
All of a sudden the cat perks up his ears and runs to the door and I'm thinking, he just went out a little while ago.
He can't need to go out again, but you open the door and out goes the cat and I close the door.
What on earth got into that cat that he would leave this nice warm living room to run outside in such a rush?
And the next morning when you get up to go to school, you open the door and there's a dead chewed up mouse on the porch.
How did he know that mouse was out there? They're so quiet. I didn't hear a thing.
Years later I'm taking a class in a psychology class in sensory processes, sensory psychology, and the instructor introduces me to the concept of the sensory world.
And it's something I had never thought about before.
Cats and people live in the same physical world. We're all here on planet earth, but the cat's sensory receptors can detect things that my sensory receptors can't.
They were in the same physical space, but the cat can hear things I can't.
The cat's hearing extends in a frequency range three times higher than the human ear.
I learned as an undergraduate psychology student that cats can hear in the ultrasonic range, which is the range in which mice communicate with each other.
And I'm thinking back, gosh, I wonder if that cat was actually hearing the mice vocalizing in the ultrasonic range out on the porch.
That would be it. I didn't hear it. It wasn't part of my sensory world, but it is part of the cat's sensory world.
Now, behavioristic psychologists have to be very much aware of the sensory world of different animals if we're going to use animal subjects for experimentation.
For example, the cat can hear things in the ultrasonic range, but the cat doesn't see color vision the way we do.
The cat has only black and white and shades of lightness and darkness for a visual field.
It cannot see the wide range of hues that the human eye is sensitive to.
So just as I was puzzled when the cat perked up its ears and ran to the door, so the cat would be puzzled if the cat and I went for a ride in the car and I stopped at a red light.
What's he stopping for? The cat can't see that the light has turned red.
So cats and humans live in different sensory worlds.
Dogs and humans live in different sensory worlds.
The dog, and we will talk at a greater length about this when we get to the sense of smell, the dog can smell things at a thousand times weaker concentration that the humans can smell them.
I have a true experience involving a dog, a wife, and a Halloween costume that I will elaborate on at another time, but I'll give you the short version now.
I wore this really elaborate Halloween costume and I came up to the house to fool my wife and I knocked on the door.
She was fooled, but the family dog got one whiff of me and knew exactly who I was and didn't pay me any attention whatsoever.
That's because the dog's sense of smell is incredibly, incredibly acute.
So dogs live in a different sensory world than people because they're smelling things we can't imagine the existence of.
Scientists were baffled by the bee's ability to leave the hive and fly miles away and find a honey source, find his way accurately back to the hive,
communicate by means of some wigwag dance where this honey source is, and all the other bees fly right to it.
What navigational system does the bee use?
It became more understandable when we discovered that the bee's visual system can perceive ultraviolet light.
And the bee was using ultraviolet light as a guidance system.
The human visual system doesn't see ultraviolet light because bees and humans live in different sensory worlds.
So we were unclear about how this bee was able to navigate this way.
Certain snakes called pit vipers can actually perceive infrared radiation.
The human eye can't.
Now, living warm-blooded organisms give off infrared radiation, which means that a snake, a pit viper, can see you in the dark.
You can't see the snake, but the snake can see you.
So many of the behavioral differences between different animal species, cats, dogs, bees, snakes, humans, and others that we haven't mentioned yet,
these behavioral differences are actually due to the fact that even though we're all living in the same physical world,
the characteristics of our sensory receptors are such that we're all living in different perceptual worlds.
Now, in this course, we will see that not only do cats and bees and snakes and dogs and so on live in different sensory worlds,
but young people and old people in a very real sense also live in different sensory worlds
because as we age, predictable, unavoidable changes occur in all of our sensory systems.
So young people see differently and hear differently and taste differently and smell differently
and perceive pain differently than older people do.
And these behavioral differences, the behavioral differences between young people and old people in many instances can be related to these differences in the sensory worlds.
So we will go through in the 23 lectures to come all of the sensory systems, the auditory system, the visual system,
the chemical senses, taste and smell, the vestibular system, the kinesthetic system.
We will give special treatment to pain even though it's actually part of the skin senses because of its special significance.
And we will see in all these cases how the aging process can bring about changes in sensitivity in these different sensory systems as we go along.
Okay, now it is true as far as it goes to say that our behavior is determined by our sensory worlds,
not by what's really out there, but by that part of the physical world that our particular sensory systems are tuned into.
However, it is more accurate to say that our behavior is determined not just by our sensory world, but by our perceptions.
And so this course will also go to great lengths to describe for you the difference between a sensation and a perception.
A sensation, very simply, is when some physical energy, sound waves or light waves or touch or whatever, impinges on a receptor at a super threshold intensity.
And then you say, I hear something or I see something or I feel a touch or whatever.
A perception is when that sensory experience acquires meaning and it is the brain that gives meaning to our sensory experiences.
The brain stores as memories our previous experience with a given sensory event such that when this sensory event occurs again,
the brain integrates this perception of this sensation of this physical stimulus with our previous experiences with that stimulus and we have a perception, a meaning.
Now what this means is that the same stimulus situation can have entirely different perceptions, different meanings for different people.
Let me give you another example from my boyhood with cats.
We had a cat. We'd had this cat for years. It was the old cat.
The old cat had had a certain experience with our electric can opener.
The old cat had learned that whenever it heard the electric can opener, if it ran into the kitchen, it was very likely that that cat was going to get fed because we would open its canned cat food with the can opener.
So my little brother got old enough that he wanted his own cat and so we now had an old cat and a new cat.
And one day both cats are lying in the doorway and somebody runs the electric can opener and the old cat runs into the kitchen to get food and the new cat runs upstairs and hides under the bed.
So both of these cats experienced the same stimulus but their perceptions of it were entirely different.
The old cat had had one past history with this noise and the new cat just perceived it as some scary thing that you should get away from.
Eventually after the new cat got more and more experiences with the noise of the can opener, it would also run to be fed.
This is what I mean about how your previous experiences with a stimulus situation can influence your perception of it, the meaning that it has for you.
Let me give you another example from the perspective of humans.
This is a hypothetical situation. We are in Vatican Square.
There's a big crowd in Vatican Square and our attention is drawn to two people who don't know each other but just by chance they're standing close to each other.
One of them is a Roman, a local citizen of Rome who happens to be a devout Catholic.
The other individual in Vatican Square is an Asian tourist who is actually Buddhist who doesn't know anything about Catholicism or the rituals of Catholicism.
So they're standing there and all of a sudden a puff of white smoke is emitted from one of the upper regions of the Sistine Chapel.
And the Roman falls to his knees with tears in his eyes. He's so happy. They've chosen a new pope, a new vicar of Christ, a new leader of the Catholic Church.
So his perception is as I've just described. The Buddhist takes a look at the smoke and he says, I wonder if something is on fire up there.
The same stimulus, different perceptions because of different past histories.
Actually, John B. Watson, the founder of behaviorism, was very much aware of how your previous experience with a stimulus could influence your perception of it.
In one of his experiments that probably was unethical, he took a pre-verbal little boy by the name of Albert and he gave Albert a rabbit.
And Albert is sitting there happy with the rabbit and a co-worker of Watson sneaks up behind Albert and clangs two big pieces of metal together making a terrible noise and scaring that kid very badly.
The kid had a startled response. So he's crying and carrying on. Eventually he calmed down. Watson gives him the rabbit again.
The assistant sneaks up behind the kid and makes the noise again. After just a few pairings of the rabbit with the noise, whenever they gave that child the rabbit, he had a fit.
So Watson had succeeded in creating a learned fear because he wasn't born fearing the rabbits through the past experience.
Now, what do you think that child's perception is when he encounters a rabbit?
Now, because fears, once conditioned, are extremely long lasting.
A contemporary of, well, he was actually a little older than Watson, did a fear conditioning experiment in sheep.
What he would do is he would present a tone, beep, and then he would give the sheep an electric shock, beep, shock, beep, shock.
Pretty soon whenever the sheep heard that tone, they would start jumping and acting very nervous and unhappy.
When they were well conditioned to fear this tone, this fellow turned those sheep out to pasture for 10 years.
At the end of 10 years with no intervening experience, they were brought back into the laboratory, the tone was turned on and they were still scared and jumping around.
So the best guess is that Albert, the young boy that Watson did this fear conditioning experiment on, was probably negatively disposed toward rabbits for the rest of his life.
Because if a sheep can remember something for 10 years, there's no reason why a human couldn't remember it for many, many times longer than that.
So it is our perceptions that give meaning to sensory events and our perceptions are based on our previous experiences with something.
In this case, Watson intervened and determined what this kid's experience is we're going to be.
Now, let me just make two statements about perceptions.
One is that perceptions define our reality, not the physical world, but our perception of the physical world.
And our perception is based on the brain's interpretation of it.
So for instance, the eye is the organ of seeing, the ear is the organ of hearing, but the brain is the organ of perception, because it is the brain that stores these memories and what have you.
And what that means is that anything that affects brain functioning can actually affect our perception.
Our perceptions are not locked in place, they are also capable of changing.
Let me give you another example of this harking back to our friend, John B. Watson, and the behavioristic movement.
There is no evidence in the literature.
There is no reason to believe that Watson ever did anything to decondition Albert, if you will, to get him over his perception that rabbits were somehow dangerous and they were to be afraid.
By the way, Watson also discovered that once he conditioned Albert to fear the rabbit, if he brought him a white rat, he would also show fear.
If he handed him a handful of cotton, he would show fear.
If he showed him a Santa Claus mask with a beard, he would show fear.
Or if he tried to give the kid the fur collar off a woman's coat, he would show fear.
So we know something else, that perception can generalize to other objects that are similar to the one that you had the original experience with.
In the case of Peter, a second little boy, Watson demonstrated that perceptions are not locked in place, but if you give the individual a new set of experiences, you can change the perception.
This experiment, which I will run over very quickly, starts out the same as the situation with little Albert.
Actually, he used a rat with Peter, so Peter is sitting there and he brings him the rat, and the kid shows no fear of the rat.
He pats it and he actually looks like he's enjoying himself, but the assistant makes the awful noise again.
After a few pairings of rat and noise, any time they bring this rat to that child, he's like the cat that heard the can opener for the first time.
He would like to run up and hide under the bed, but of course he's just a little child and he can't do that.
Now, Watson wanted to demonstrate that using the principles of behaviorism, you could change this individual's perception of the rat from a fear stimulus back to a neutral stimulus or even a slightly positive stimulus by changing his experiences with the rat.
So, now he comes toward the rat and he's holding in one hand, toward Peter, with the rat in one hand and a peanut butter and jelly sandwich in the other hand, which this little boy happened to like very much.
So, the child is tensing up because he sees that rat, but he sees the peanut butter and jelly sandwich and nobody's making that awful loud noise by being a careful observer of behavior and coming closer.
And if he sees the child tensing up, Watson backed up, and if the child then relaxed, he'd come forward again.
Eventually, he achieved a situation where the child was eating the peanut butter and jelly sandwich with one hand and patting the rat with the other hand.
He had given this child a new set of previous experiences with the rat that changed his perception of the rat from something to be feared to either something neutral or something that at least would do you no harm.
So, we see that perceptions are not fixed in stone, that in fact they can be changed if we change the meaning and meaning is stored in the brain.
So, this is a lesson that Watson was aware of back in the early 1900s that still sounds remarkably modern.
And it also explains how different people can have different perceptions of the same stimulus because of different previous experiences, as we've said.
In the time remaining, let's see if we can quickly summarize some of the points that we've covered today.
Psychology went from being the science of mind to the science of behavior in 1913 due to the efforts of John B. Watson, the founder of behaviorism.
Watsonian behaviorism is signified by the little notation SR psychology, which tells us that if you want to really understand the response, you need to understand the stimulus.
But you and I know that it's even more important to understand the subject's perception of the stimulus because it is in the perception that we find the reality that is actually influencing and controlling behavior.
And so, in our next lecture, we will pay special attention to the distinction between a sensation, which is simply some information from one of the senses, and a perception, which is how the brain packages that to create our reality.
Thank you.
