Lecture 2 Sensation and Perception, A Distinction
Hi, welcome back.
In lecture one, we talked about some of the history of behaviorism and how the behaviorists
knew that a complete understanding of behavior required some knowledge of the stimulus that
elicited that behavior.
We talked about different animals living in different perceptual worlds and different
sensory worlds and how the perceptual world determines their reality.
In lecture two, I want to continue discussing the distinction between a sensation and a
perception.
At first, I need to make you aware of another uncertainty that makes the understanding of
behavior a little bit more difficult.
And that is, even within an animal's sensory world, it's sometimes difficult to tell exactly
what that animal is paying attention to.
I want to introduce you to the phenomenon of selective attention.
At this very moment, I and you were being overwhelmed by a whole array of stimuli and
we must choose, either consciously or unconsciously, which of this array is important enough for
us to attend to and which we should tune out, because it's impossible to tune into everything.
For instance, at this very moment, I'm receiving sensory input from my ring, from my watch
band, from my shoes, from my socks, from my belt.
I can hear the hum of the lights and the sound of the air conditioning system, but we determined
that there's not any important information there and we tuned that out.
Well, sometimes different animals have different preferences about what to tune in and what
to tune out.
In selective attention, sometimes we make a conscious decision to make more sense of our
sensory world and not be overwhelmed by it.
You've had this experience, you're reading a book, you're really focused in on the visual
modality and you don't hear somebody call your name or you are listening on the telephone
and you miss some interesting visual event out of the window.
So sensory events fade in and out of our consciousness as we shift attention.
This business of selective attention can sometimes make the understanding of an animal's behavior
more difficult.
The same with a human, but let me give you an animal experiment that was quite puzzling
until we realized that the animal wasn't paying attention to what we thought it should be
paying attention to.
I was involved in a project where I was teaching cats to pay attention to patterns of blinking
lights to see if cats could discriminate complex patterns of blinking lights and they were
doing really well, in fact, better than I had expected.
Then we discovered, shockingly, that one of the cats in this study was blind and yet
it was learning as well as all the other cats, a blind cat learning to discriminate patterns
of blinking lights.
It turns out that not a single one of those cats was paying any attention to the blinking
lights.
They were listening to the faint ticking sound as the little heating elements in the light
bulbs clicked on and off.
The cats had decided to turn that into an auditory pattern task without telling us.
Had that one cat not been blind, which we discovered because its behaviors out of the
experimental chamber were quite unusual, it wouldn't move without being lifted.
It couldn't find food unless we put it right in front of it.
The discovery that a blind cat was able to do this task caused us to look more closely
at what the animals were attending to.
They were attending to the sound rather than the blinking of the lights.
Selective attention.
Two points about selective attention.
It is critically important for everyday functioning.
We must tune out the hum of the incandescent bulbs or the fluorescent bulbs.
We must tune out the sound of the ventilation system to pay attention to the important stimuli
around us because we only have a finite amount of attention to distribute between all of
the stimuli in our world.
Anybody who has difficulty with selective attention and managing it is going to be at
a disadvantage in everyday life.
For instance, take the case of an individual with ADHD, attention deficit slash hyperactivity
disorder.
By the way, two-thirds of the young people diagnosed with ADHD do not outgrow it and
that means there are actually more adults with ADHD than there are kids.
Many of these adults are undiagnosed.
One of the core symptoms of ADHD is a problem of impulse control, of focus, of paying attention
to one stimulus and not being distracted by another.
That's an example of how a failure of selective attention can cause problems with one's everyday
life.
A more extreme example is some forms of schizophrenia are actually thought to involve a total failure
of selective attention such that the affected individual totally loses the ability to decide
what stimulus is important and what stimulus is unimportant and so they pay equal attention
to everything and as a result they are overwhelmed by their sensory environment and as a defense
against this they tune everything out.
They don't know what's important, they can't discriminate what's important and what's not
important and in self-preservation they tune it all out.
So selective attention is a critically important phenomenon for humans and for lower animals
too.
We will talk more about some of the physiological mechanisms underlying selective attention in
future lectures.
Ok, let's get back now on task and talk about the distinction between sensation and perception
keeping in mind that even knowing something about an animal sensory world or its perceptual
world there is still this issue of selective attention and what the animal chooses to pay
attention to.
The first school of psychology to pay systematic attention to the distinction between the sensory
world and the perceptual world that is the sensory world plus what meaning it has taken
on for us was the school of Gestalt psychology founded in Germany in the early 1900s, right
around 1900.
The founding of Gestalt psychology occurred if you can believe the historical record more
or less by accident.
The founder of Gestalt psychology, a German scholar by the name of Max Wertheimer, reports
that he was taking a train trip and one stretch of train tracks where the train was going
along a line of trees and the sun was shining behind these trees and as the train would
pass a tree the sun would create a shadow of that tree and it would fall on the wall
of Dr. Wertheimer's cabin on the train and what would happen is one shadow would appear
and then the train would move on and that shadow would disappear and another one would
appear and the train was moving at such a rate that instead of seeing a shadow appear
and disappear and another one appear and disappear Dr. Wertheimer had the illusion of movement.
It looked like something was moving along the side of the car here and he was so struck
by this that he never reached his destination that day.
He got off the train at the next stop and he got a hotel room and he went to a children's
toy store and he bought two strobe lights and he bought a viewing screen and he got
some sticks and he began to work on what has come to be called apparent movement.
What he did was he set these lights up so that they would blink on and off at different
intervals and he puts a stick in front of the lights and a viewing screen such that
when the light shines on the stick from this angle there's a shadow on the screen.
Then this light goes off and the other light goes on and shines on the stick from this
angle and there's another image of a shadow on the screen and by playing around with the
inter blink interval he was able to create not the appearance and this appearance of
two separate shadows but one shadow moving back and forth.
He had created a demonstration of the phenomenon that we now call apparent movement.
Now that's a nice demonstration but he perceived great significance in this.
If you can't tell the difference between real movement and apparent movement it must
be because the underlying brain fields are identical in those two situations.
The Gestaltis believed that when we experienced some sensory phenomenon it created brain
fields, electrical fields which they thought they could actually measure if they have the
right equipment to do this.
So if you can't tell real movement from apparent movement it must be because the brain field
underlying that apparent movement is identical to the electrical brain field that is created
by real movement.
So the Gestaltis became strongly aware and strongly convinced that what determines our
reality is not what's physically out there but the electrical fields in the brain that
are ongoing.
So they in fact made a formal distinction between what they called the geographical
environment, what is actually out there, our physical world, what we've been calling it,
and what they called the behavioral environment.
That is our interpretation of the physical world that was actually what was determining
our behavior.
Here's an apocryphal story that the Gestalt psychologists used to make the distinction
between the geographical environment and the behavioral environment.
Picture this scene.
It's a cold wintery, blustery snowy night and there is a country inn perched on a hill
and you can tell that the innkeeper is in because there is smoke coming out of the chimney.
And then if you were to look inside this country inn you would see that the innkeeper is having
a very bad night.
The weather is so terrible there are no customers.
So he's back behind the bar polishing glasses and every now and then he looks up, he's watching
the door.
He doesn't want to ignore any customer that might come to visit him that evening but he
sees nobody.
He looks up from polishing his glass on one occasion and here is a customer sitting in
the corner and the innkeeper is somewhat embarrassed.
He said, oh sir I didn't mean to ignore you but I didn't see you come in and I've been
watching the door very closely and the customer says, well you didn't see me because you're
watching that door and I came in this door and the innkeeper says, oh surely you jest
except he probably said it with a German accent.
The innkeeper says nobody comes in that door and the guy said, well I came in that door
and the innkeeper said, would you mind telling me how you did that?
He says, certainly.
I rode my horse across that big snow covered field out there.
I tied my horse up outside and I came in through the door.
The innkeeper said, sir you just rode your horse against the frozen lake of Constance.
He rode over a frozen lake very deep, very cold on a horse.
If that lake had cracked, if the ice had cracked you would be dead.
By this time the customer was dead because he died of a heart attack when he heard he
had ridden his horse across a frozen lake.
This story makes a distinction between the geographical environment and the behavioral
environment.
Geographically that was a frozen lake out there but the customer's behavior was that
of somebody riding over a snow covered field.
It is the behavioral environment that determine the behavior, not the geographical environment.
It's what we believe.
This was the distinction that the Gestaltis made and it turns out to be a meaningful distinction.
Our behavior is determined by what we perceive, by the meaning that the situation has for
us, not what's really, really, really physically out there.
It is the brain that determines the meaning of events in our physical world.
Let me give you some examples of the distinction between a sensation and a perception to make
this point.
I'm pressing one hand to the other.
I'm getting a physical experience of touch on my hand.
That's a sensation.
It doesn't have any particular meaning to me.
On the other hand, suppose I get that same stimulation on my hand by shaking hands with
somebody and I get a wimpy, weak, wet, sweaty, limp handshake.
I might very well have a feeling of revulsion.
That's a perception.
Or let me give you another example.
You suddenly spy a long lost article that you've been looking for for months, the feeling
that you get.
That's a perception.
Or unexpectedly you smell the perfume or aftershave of your loved one and you get this sensation
of love and warmth and tenderness.
That's a perception.
Or I'm leaning to the side now and I'm getting vestibular stimulation.
My vestibular system, which we will talk about later, is telling me you're leaning over.
So I straighten up.
It's no big deal.
It's not meaningful to me.
But think about the vestibular stimulation that you get if you're a motorcycle rider,
as I'm sure some of you are, and you're going around a curve and you're leaning into it
and you're going perhaps just a little bit faster than you ought to, but it's exhilarating.
The vestibular stimulation in that situation is creating a perception.
So it is the brain that contributes to our perceptions.
Now if the brain is the organ of perception, which it is, then anything that influences
brain functioning has the ability to influence our perception.
Let me give you an extreme case.
You can take a hallucinogenic drug such as LSD, and we know because people used to do
this experimentally.
In the late 1950s, college students were recruited to take LSD for experiments.
The outcomes were dangerous and inappropriate, and that stuff is now off the table.
But there are papers in the literature indicating what happens when you give LSD to somebody.
And one of the things we know is that their electrical activity in their brains becomes
highly abnormal and irregular.
So we know LSD can change the way the brain is functioning, and we also know that LSD
can dramatically alter our perceptions.
That's just a dramatic example.
You change the way the brain is working, and you change the perceptions.
Some of the perceptual experiences that people under LSD have had are worthy of a Fellini
movie.
I mean, it's really bizarre.
You don't even have to look at brain changes as dramatic as LSD.
Take the case of being in a highly emotional state.
We know, again, because of having EEG electrodes on people when they are in different emotional
states, that it changes dramatically the way the brain is functioning.
When you're in a highly emotional state, your perceptions are not to be trusted.
Now, you know who knows that?
Trial lawyers know that, because the eyewitness testimony of people who have seen criminal
behavior take place, it's highly unreliable, because your brain is in an abnormal state
when you're in a highly emotional state, and your perceptions are bound to be inaccurate.
Even though you would swear what you were seeing was the way it really happened.
I once saw a less dramatic demonstration of this in a classroom.
A young colleague of mine wanted me to sit in on one of his classes and give him feedback
on his teaching style, and he arranged a demonstration to show how emotional state can influence
perception.
He was standing in front of the class with his lecture notes, reading the day's lecture
and what have you, and he had arranged for somebody in the class from the front row
to get up, run over, grab his notes out of his hand, and yell, this class is so boring
and run out the door, and the rest of the class, and this was a class of about 400 students,
was not in on the little staged event here.
Then what he did was, he said, quick, everybody, write down what you saw.
He can't let something like this go uninvestigated.
Write down a description of the person who did that, and the class dutifully wrote down
a description, and then he had them pass in the descriptions, and he theatrically picked
the most deviant descriptions, but the point was that people were so far off in their description
of this guy, what kind of shirt he was wearing, his height, whether he had a beard or a mustache,
or what he was wearing.
At the conclusion of reading some of these very deviant descriptions, he had the culprit
come back in, and people were just baffled that their perceptions had been so off.
So yes, emotional state changes brain functioning, changes perception.
Our previous conditioning history can also influence our perception, and different people,
of course, have different conditioning histories, and so different people can be in the very
same sensory situation, but have very different perceptions of it.
I will remind you of the experiments on dogs conducted by Dr. Ivan P. Pavlov, the Russian
physiologist.
One of Pavlov's dogs might very well hear a tone, and begin to wag its tail, and salivate
a dog who had not been engaged in one of Pavlov's studies, might hear the tone, quickly lose
interest, and go about his doggy business.
So our previous conditioning history can most certainly influence our perceptions.
An example, as a child, you may well have had a frightening experience with a dog or
any animal, but maybe you were snapped at by a dog as a child.
You may have no memory of the original fear event, and yet that memory trace is still
present in primitive circuits in your brain, especially those circuits that can tap into
the emotional system in the brain.
And so you may have a fear of dogs that goes all the way back to childhood, and yet have
no remembrance of that original fear episode.
So yes, our individual conditioning histories can most certainly influence our perception.
Our expectations can influence perception.
If we expect something to happen, we are programmed to see this thing happen, and we're more likely
to see it, whether it happened or not.
Our motivational state, psychologists have studied people and their interpretations
of the Rorschach inkblot series, and it turns out that the more hungry you are, the more
food responses you give to these ambiguous inkblots, which mean nothing.
But the people see food responses, oh, that looks like a pork chop, oh, that looks like
a tuna fish sandwich, if they're hungry.
So emotions influence perception, expectations influence perception, our motives influence
perception, our individual conditioning histories influence perception.
We may see a dog as a fear object if we're afraid of dogs.
Somebody else may perceive it as man's best friend, this lovely pet running around.
Cultural conditioning also influences perception.
And cultures are trained to believe different things, and in fact this influences the way
that people from one culture perceive somebody from another culture, and vice versa.
I will give you one quick example here, because we're going to talk more about cultural factors
in perception toward the end of the course.
In the United States, for example, we train our children that when you speak to somebody,
you look them in the eye, because when you look somebody in the eye, you're telling them,
I'm telling you the truth, I'm open and forthright and direct and honest, and you can believe
that because I'm looking you right in the eye.
Well, what this means is that if you're talking to somebody and they look down or they don't
look you in the eye, you have a negative perception of this individual.
The fact of the matter is that there are some cultures who train their members not to make
direct eye contact.
The Japanese, for example, the Japanese find because of cultural conditioning, direct
eye contact, rude and aggressive, and in fact they are trained not to make direct eye contact
because they don't want to be offensive.
So here, a Japanese businessman and an American businessman are having a meeting and the Japanese
businessman is looking away and the American is thinking, what's this person trying to
hide and the American businessman is making direct eye contact and the Japanese businessman
is saying, boy, this person is intrusive.
As a matter of fact, I heard a Japanese businessman, I've been, had the good fortune to travel
to five or six cities in Japan, and I heard a Japanese businessman say, being around Americans
is so tiring because they're always looking at you.
They just find direct eye contact inappropriate.
On one of my experiences, I'm having a humorous moment here.
I took a group of 30 students through a Japanese open market in Kobe about five years ago.
One of my students was six feet eight inches tall and he was head and shoulders above the
rest of us on two heads and shoulders above all the Japanese in this market.
You could see the Japanese, they knew that they didn't want to be caught looking at this
huge American and most of them, to their credit, they just went about their business and looked
straight ahead.
But a couple of them couldn't resist and they would look up at this guy and if they caught
us seeing them look, they would be all embarrassed because they knew they were behaving culturally
inappropriately for a Japanese.
So yes, cultural factors do play a role in perception and we will see more examples of
that as I said later in the course.
Now, personality factors.
Your personality actually determines to a certain extent how you will perceive the world.
Let me give you an extreme example.
Because you are a diagnosable paranoid personality.
Now when people hear the word paranoia they think about paranoid schizophrenia, it doesn't
have to be a form of schizophrenia.
Mild paranoia is in fact a personality disorder.
If you are overly suspicious, if you are constantly of the belief that people are talking about,
you are plotting against you or have it in for you, that could be a form of paranoia.
How the world view of a person with a paranoid personality differs from somebody with a more
optimistic open view.
The paranoid personality views every move you make through this filter of suspicion and
hostility and fear, if you will.
So yes, personality type can also influence perception.
And in keeping with the theme that is going to run through virtually all of our lectures,
let me say a little bit about the aging process and its consequences for personality.
Because in fact there are such consequences.
As we age our perceptions will actually change.
Now there are several reasons for this.
Let me just mention a couple of them.
One is that the aging process gives us the opportunity to acquire wisdom.
Doesn't mean that we are going to take advantage of that opportunity and get wise, but nobody
is born wise.
So if you are going to get wisdom, the thing that is going to give it to you is the aging
process.
If you learn from your experiences and you are open to new experiences and what have
you, yes, wisdom.
There are three good things that accompany the aging process.
One of them is the ability to acquire wisdom.
Unfortunately I forget what the other two things are.
Anyway, how does acquiring wisdom change your perception?
Well, for example, younger people, and there is evidence in the literature to support this,
are more likely to have their perceptions of somebody and somebody's behavior and somebody's
abilities influenced by their degree of physical attractiveness.
We'll talk more about this at a later time too.
The older we get, the more likely we are to realize the truth of the expression beauty
on the skin deep.
So there are some aspects of perception where this opportunity to acquire wisdom do in fact
create a difference in the way we perceive the world.
Another way that the aging process contributes to changes in perception is that every generation
has a shared experience that gives them shared beliefs.
For instance, in my generation, in my day of growing up and what have you, and people
older than I, we had kind of a negative view of tattoos and body piercing and stuff like
that.
So older people are more inclined to have a particular perception of somebody with tattoos
and body piercing than newer generations that have had a different shared experience and
different beliefs because body piercing and tattoos are much more common now.
So that's another example of how the aging process can bring about changes in your perception
that different people may have different perceptions because of the age in which they grew up,
the time period in which they grew up.
The final aspect of age and perception that I want to share with you has to do with the
fact that we actually do undergo personality changes as we age.
There are several examples of this.
One that I want to mention to you is that as we age we actually tend to become more conservative.
Now I don't mean that as we age we're more likely to vote Republican.
I don't mean conservative that way.
What I mean is that as we age our approach to living becomes more conservative and the
reason for this is because we can be less confident in the accuracy of the sensory information
that we're getting because with age our sensory systems begin to decline in their sensitivity
and in their acuity and we are aware that we may be making a mistake.
Again, I'll give you a personal example.
I've been at the University of Pittsburgh now for 40 years and I've seen a lot of changes.
Our building moved from one part of campus to the psychology department to another part
of campus and so I don't get back over to the old part of campus very much anymore.
A few years ago I had occasion to go back to the old part of campus where our old building
used to be and there's a little shortcut that I used to take.
It involved vaulting over a fence about three or three and a half feet high and I used to
actually look forward to this.
I would walk up to the fence, put my hands on it, vault over the fence, feel proud of
myself and go on my way.
So a few years ago I walk up to the fence, put my hands on it and I think, what if the
kinesthetic feedback that I'm getting from my legs is inappropriate and I don't lift
them high enough and I fall over the fence on my face and some students see me and then
I'm thinking, well, I'll just put my glasses on because I hadn't jumped over this fence
since I started wearing reading glasses.
So I put my glasses on and I thought, now I'll be able to watch and make sure I get
my legs high enough and then I thought, well, what if I jump and my glasses fall off and
even worse than I land on my, I started going through all of this and I thought, this is
ridiculous thinking about all this stuff in the old days, I would have walked up, put
my hands on it and vaulted over the fence.
But in the end, common sense went out, I thought, what if I twisted an ankle, it would take
too long to heal.
I walked around the fence.
I'm not saying I'm proud of it, but I acknowledged the fact that there were things that I needed
to be aware of that had not been a problem when I was younger and I was aware of the
fact that I'd become more conservative.
I know that if I break something, it's going to take longer to heal.
Okay, it's time to wrap up in our next lecture, which will be lecture three.
I will begin talking about a specific sensory system, namely the visual system.
So until then, have a good day and I'll see you soon.
