Lecture 3 Vision, Stimulus and the Optical System
Welcome back. In lecture two we talked about the distinction between sensations and perceptions,
we identified the brain as the organ of perception and we talked about some factors that can
influence brain functioning and the change that this brings about in our perceptual capacities.
Lecture 3 marks the first of a series of lectures where we actually look at the different
sensory systems and identify the ways that which receptors change physical energy from
the world around us, that is sound or light or touch or smell or taste or pain or what
have you, changes these physical sensations into the language that the brain understands,
namely electrical impulses. You see the brain itself is totally unresponsive to light or
sound or touch. The brain doesn't even experience pain and the reason for this is because the
brain possesses no receptors, so the brain receives information from all of the sensory
systems what the brain itself only knows what the receptors tell it. The brain is only
sensitive to electrical impulses, so our receptors act as the transducers, the interface
between the physical world and the brain. We're going to start our discussion of the
sensory systems with the visual system, that's not quite an arbitrary decision, it turns out
that most people if you ask them what their most important sensory system is they will say the
visual system, so it's traditional in textbooks of sensory psychology and what have you to start
with the visual system. Actually it's not a unanimous belief that the visual system is our
most important sensory system, for example Helen Keller who as you may recall was both blind and
deaf felt that deafness put her at more of a disadvantage than blindness. Helen Keller wrote
that blindness separates you from things in your environment, but deafness separates you
from other people, the medium of language being unavailable to somebody who is deaf.
So the other organisms that would disagree that vision is the most important sense are
virtually all other organisms but people. It turns out that phylogenetically speaking
that is across the phylogenetic scale the chemical senses are much more important than the visual
senses. There are no animals that don't possess some form of chemical sensitivity, smell or taste
or a combination of the two called the common chemical sense, but there are plenty of animals
who don't have vision and or hearing the way we do. So phylogenetically speaking vision is
not the most important sense and there are some people who think that maybe deafness is more
harmful to our interactions with other people than blindness. In any event we're going to start
with the discussion of the visual system. I propose that first we talk about the nature
of the physical stimulus. What is it that the visual system responds to? And your answer would
be well it responds to light. What do we mean by light? Well it turns out that light is electromagnetic
radiation, but not all electromagnetic radiation is light. We'll get to that in a minute. Electromagnetic
radiation was first discovered and measured in the late 1880s by a physicist named Heinrich Hertz.
Professor Hertz was the first one to generate radio broadcast waves which are a form of
electromagnetic radiation and the first person to measure them. And we'll have a little bit more
to say about Professor Hertz at a later time in the in the course. Anyway light is electromagnetic
radiation. Now the full spectrum of electromagnetic radiation is incredibly long going from the x-rays
which have a wavelength of one nanometer which is one billionth of a meter. So we have one nanometer
at one end and at the other end we have the radio broadcast waves with a wavelength of 100 meters.
So it's incredibly broad. Of that full spectrum of electromagnetic radiation the part that the
human eye is sensitive to is known as the visible spectrum and it only extends from 400 nanometers
to 700 nanometers. A very infinitesimal portion of the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
Now let me alert you modern science has a bit of a quandary, a bit of a problem in dealing with
the physical stimulus for light because in most instances it is convenient and informative to
think of light of electromagnetic radiation between 400 and 700 nanometers as traveling in
continuous transverse waves. The kind of thing you would see if you threw a rock into a pond and
the waves would ripple out. On the other hand some of the characteristics of light are best
understood if we think about light as traveling in discrete packets. For example if a photography is
using a light meter to measure light intensity the result may well be expressed in photons.
Photons are thought of as discrete packets of energy, discrete packets of light. So some aspects
of light are best understood by thinking of transverse waves and other aspects, namely the
brightness, the intensity of light is best understood if you're thinking in terms of discrete packets
of energy. So don't let that throw you it's just a little something we have to deal with.
Okay the visible spectrum extends from 400 nanometers to 700 nanometers. The 400 nanometer
end is called the short wavelength end. The 700 nanometer end is the long wavelength end. The short
wavelength colors of the visible spectrum are the blue violet colors. The long wavelength end are
the reds, the orange and reds. So we can replicate an experiment done by Sir Isaac Newton in the
late 1600s where Sir Isaac passed a beam of white light. White light is made up of all of the colors
of the visible spectrum. Passed the beam of white light through a prism and he then displayed the
light reflected out of the prism on a viewing screen. And what Sir Isaac discovered was that
when you pass light from a medium of one density namely the air through a medium of another density
namely the glass of the prism that the different wavelengths of light from 400 to 700 have different
indices of refraction. They bend different amounts as they pass through the prism. And so what comes
out the other end we pass white light into one side of the prism and coming out the other side
is the visible spectrum ranging from high frequency from high frequencies of wavelength to low.
So that we see coming out the other end red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet.
And that is always the order of the visible spectrum from high to low whether you're looking at a
rainbow or whether you're looking at an effect, a rainbow effect that occurs when your neighbor is
missing his or her lawn. Whether you look at the sunlight reflecting off an oil slick in the street
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet from high to low wavelengths. There's a simple
mnemonic device to remember the order of the visible spectrum. Just remember the name of the
fictitious character Roy G. Biv, Roy, R-O-I, red, orange, yellow, G, green, Biv, blue, indigo, violet.
Okay so now we know that the visible spectrum goes from 400 to 700 nanometers that the blue
end is the short wavelength end and the red end is the long wavelength end.
Let's talk about some other physical properties of light. For example, we know that the speed of
light is an incredible 186,000 miles per second. That is absolutely incredible. A beam of light,
if you were to stand on top of a mountain and flash a beam of light, it would travel around
the circumference of the earth seven and a half times in one second. You know, I can't even talk
about the speed of light without, against my will, thinking about the astronomical unit, the light
year. A light year, of course, is the distance that a beam of light will travel going at 186,000
miles a second in a year. And the closest star to our solar system is four light years away.
It would take a beam of light four years to get to the closest star to our solar system,
traveling at 186,000 miles a second. That's why I never took any astronomy classes in college.
My brain can't comprehend them. It's like trying to comprehend the national debt or Bill Gates'
bank balance. Light years blow me away. In any event, the speed of light is so great that compared
to the speed of light, the speed of sound is laughably slow. The speed of sound being 1110 feet
per second. So sound is traveling at 1110 feet per second and light is traveling at 186,000
miles per second. And this leads to some practical considerations. I remember as a Boy Scout,
we were taught that we could estimate the distance from us that a lightning storm was doing its
mischief. When we saw the flash of lightning, we began counting. 1001, 1002, 1003, 1004,
1000. If you got to 1005, we knew that the storm was about a mile away. Because of course,
a mile is 5,280 feet and the sound is traveling at 1110 feet per second. And the lightning,
you can consider instantaneous. Now you can keep track of the course of the storm. Is it coming
toward you or moving away from you? Another practical consideration of the enormous difference
between the speed of light and the speed of sound can be seen in events like the Olympics.
Prior to 1960, the sprint events were started by a starter's pistol. Runners take your mark,
get set, go, bang. Somebody analyzed years and years of Olympic records and they found that
the people in the lane closest to the starter pistol were winning just a little bit more frequently
than you would expect by chance. And it turns out that at that level of excellence,
even the slight advantage of being a little bit closer to the starter pistol gave the people
in the near lane an advantage, both in the swimming events and in the running events.
And so beginning with, I believe it was the 60 Olympics, instead of using a starter pistol to
start the sprints, either swimming sprints or running sprints, each competitor got an
individual beep under his or her starting blocks. So now all's fair in the Olympics,
both swimming events and running events, because the difference in the speed of sound
vis-a-vis the runner in the first lane and the runner in the far lane has now been
removed as a factor. Okay, what else can we say about the physical stimulus?
You now know the visible spectrum and you know the speed of light. Let's talk about the miraculous
instrument that responds to light and changes it into electrical impulses so that the brain
can be aware of what's going on. And that, of course, is the human eye. Now the
lecture will be most meaningful if you have access to a lateral view of the anatomy of the eyeball,
because we're going to be talking about some of the structures in the eyeball.
What we are going to do is divide the structures in the eyeball into three categories. The eyeball
contains what I'm calling supporting structures. It's including neural elements and it's including
the receptors. What I want to do first is talk about the supporting structures. Probably in lecture
four we will talk about the receptors and the neural elements in the visual system.
The supporting structures in the visual system are elements that in and of themselves do not
lead to the release of neurotransmitters and do not lead to the release of electrical impulses.
Rather, the supporting structures make the visual stimulus more accessible to the receptors.
An example of supporting structures in another sense may help clarify what I mean by supporting
structures. In the sense of touch, the hairs on your skin are certainly not receptors and they're
not nerve fibers. They are supporting structures. It turns out that they amplify light touches
and make this light touch more accessible to the receptors. That's what I mean by a supporting
structure. In the visual system, the supporting structures do things to the light to make it a
more attractive stimulus for the receptors. Let's take a hypothetical beam of light and pass it
through the eyeball and we'll talk about the supporting structures that this hypothetical
beam of light encounters on its way from the front of the eye to the back of the eye.
If we shine this hypothetical beam of light into the eye, the first structure that this
beam of light encounters is the cornea. The cornea is an example of a supporting structure.
It doesn't generate electrical activity and it doesn't release any chemical transmitter
substances. The cornea is what we call a fixed optical instrument. Okay, so we pass this beam
of light through the transparent cornea. The next supporting structure that our beam of light
encounters is the pupil of the eye. Now, the pupil of the eye is actually a hole in the iris.
The iris is that part of the eye that gives it its characteristic color. When we talk about
eye color, someone who has blue eyes or brown eyes or green eyes, we're actually talking about what
color their irises are. And of course, the iris color is an inherited characteristic. Now,
the iris has the interesting capability of increasing or decreasing its opening,
which we call the pupil, by some ciliary involuntary muscles. In very, very dim light,
the pupil may actually open up because of the iris, the muscles in the iris. The pupil may
actually open up to a diameter of 8 millimeters. On the other hand, in very, very bright light,
the pupil may narrow down until it's only about 1.5 millimeters in diameter. Now, what is the
benefit of this? Well, in very, very dim light, the eye opens up to its full extent to give us
access to the relatively sparse level of illumination to make it more likely that we will detect
objects in our environment. In very, very dim light, the pupil narrows down to 1.5 millimeters
in diameter to keep from overstimulating the sensitive retinal elements with a light that is
perhaps dangerously bright. Just for completeness, let me mention that there are other circumstances
besides the ambient light intensity that determines pupil size. A researcher by the name of Eckerd
Hess about 30 years ago discovered that pupil size is also influenced by whether you like
or dislike the thing you are looking at. I don't have time to go into how Hess hit upon this,
but it's an interesting story. In any event, he did an experiment, excuse me, where he
measured pupil size by keeping people in a light, a level of illumination that kept the pupil not
in its totally open state, not in its totally closed state, so that he could measure changes in
either direction, and he showed them different pictures. This was around the time that a scary
shark movie was playing in the theaters, and when he showed people a picture of a shark,
their pupils tended to get smaller. When he showed people pictures of cuddly,
chubby, gorgeous little babies, their pupils tended to get larger. He also was moved to do
an actual experiment on pupil size, thinking that it might actually serve as an index of
a form of nonverbal communication that may take place below the level of our awareness.
Very quickly, he got a group of male subjects, and he told them that they were involved in a
project on problem solving. Go into the next room and pick a female partner. In the next room,
Hess had twice as many females as he had males, and he had treated randomly half of these women
with atropine sulfate, which dilates the pupils. So the men go into the next room, and they were
told to randomly select a female partner. They picked all the women with big pupils, and Hess
thought, isn't that interesting? They found something appealing about these women. He asked
them, why did you pick those women? Oh, it's just something like somebody I could work with,
or they seemed like they would be cooperative. I don't know, I just had a feeling. So then he
went back, he thought maybe just by chance, there was something about the appearance of these women,
so he let the atropine sulfate wear off the first group, and then he used atropine sulfate on the
group of women who were not chosen the first time, and he got a new group of men, and he said,
go pick a woman to solve problems with. They again picked all the women with big pupils.
So Hess believes that we react to somebody else's pupil size. If somebody looks at you and their
pupils are narrow little coals, you get a creepy feeling, and if their pupils are big, you feel
like maybe there's some chemistry between you. Inverable communication, unverable,
nonverbal communication. Well, okay, anyway, the pupil is another example of a supporting structure.
Now, let's take our beam of light through the lens of the eye, which is another optical instrument.
The lens and corny are the optical instruments of the eye, the corny of being a fixed optical
instrument, the lens being what we call a variable optical instrument, because whereas the cornea
cannot change its optical properties, the lens can. When we look at something far away in the
distance, the lens of the eye gets long and skinny. When we look at something up close,
the lens of the eye gets short and fat and bulgy, okay? Now, it turns out that there are muscles
known as the ciliary muscles that control this shape of the lens, and it turns out that the
ability of the lens to change its shape is due to the fact that the lens possesses an elasticity.
The long, thin shape is the default shape. When the ciliary muscles are relaxed, the lens assumes
the long, flat shape. When the ciliary muscles tense up, the lens gets short and bulgy. This is
why sometimes if you're doing near work, you can begin to feel a fatigue. You get a fatigue that
seems to be coming from the eyes. We talk about eye strain. That's actually ciliary muscle strain,
because those muscles are tensing there to keep the eye short and bulging. The way to resolve
and reduce eye strain is to gaze into the distance and let your eyes assume the default shape,
the long, skinny shape, which relaxes the ciliary muscles. So anyway, the lens on the corny are
the optical instruments of the eye. We'll talk a little bit about them later when we talk about
visual anomalies, but let's go to the back of the eye, where we find another interesting
supporting structure known as the coroid coat. The job of the coroid coat is to absorb stray light
to keep it from bouncing around in the eye. See, ideally, a beam of light enters the eye. It passes
through the cornea. It passes through the pupil. It passes through the lens. It strikes a receptor,
which transduces it into electrical impulses and tells the brain, hey, a beam of light just
entered the eye. But sometimes a beam of light will enter the eye and it will miss a receptor.
Now, there are two things that can happen when a beam of light misses a receptor. The beam of
light can either be absorbed or it can bounce back out of the eye. The problem with light
bouncing back out of the eye is it may well strike a receptor on the way out, and the receptor will
be aware that a beam of light entered the eye. But it's striking the receptor from a direction
that does not have any coherence with events, with places in the visual field, and we will end up
with blurred vision. So to prevent blurred vision, we have this coroid coat at the back of the eye
and a beam of light that misses a receptor is absorbed by the coroid coat and kept from bouncing
out of the eye. This gives us greater acuity. Now, there are some animals who are willing to
sacrifice acuity for sensitivity. Let me elaborate. If you were a cat or a possum or some nocturnal
creature instead of a human, your coroid coat would not be absorbing stray light. It would be
reflecting it. So if you are a possum, say, with a reflecting coroid coat, a beam of light might
miss the visual receptor and then bounce back out of the eye and stimulate a receptor on the
way out. So you, as a nocturnal creature, say, hey, something is out there. Unfortunately,
because you've got stray light bouncing around on your eye, your vision is a little bit blurred.
So possums and cats and other nocturnal creatures are willing to trade acuity for sensitivity.
The cat can see things moving at night that we can't see, but we can read fine print that a cat
cannot read because the cat has greater sensitivity. We have greater acuity. This differentiation
between sensitivity and acuity will be elaborated on when we talk about the receptors and neural
elements in lecture four. But for now, I want to point out that in humans, the coroid coat absorbs
stray light, giving us greater acuity. And in nocturnal creatures, it reflects stray light.
You've probably had the experience of driving in the country and you come over the crest of a hill
and there's some woods animal crossing the street and it looks at you and it's night and you see
your headlights reflecting back out. You see these two glowing coals in the possum or whatever animal
it is. You are seeing their reflecting coroid coat at work. You won't see a human's eyes glow
in the dark like that because the coroid coat in humans, unless it's overstimulated by the
flash of a flash camera, then you get that red effect in the picture. But under normal levels
of illumination, the coroid coat absorbs stray light in humans. Okay, I indicated that the most
common visual anomalies involve the optical instruments of the eye, the lens and the cornea,
the fixed optical instrument being the cornea, the variable optical instrument being the lens.
The two most common visual anomalies are called presbyopia and myopia. Presbyopia is the more
common of these two. In presbyopia, what begins to happen and this happens for most people as a
consequence of the aging process. In presbyopia, what happens is the lens of the eye begins to
lose its elasticity and it can no longer assume the short, fat, bulgy shape necessary to focus
on near objects. In most individuals, presbyopia has developed by age 45 to the point that you
can no longer get along without some kind of optical correction. In your 30s, it's begun,
but all you do is you begin to learn to move things farther and farther from you to read them.
By the time you're in your early to mid 40s, your arms are too short to hold them any farther away,
then you must resort to the device of reading glasses to correct the missing optical properties
that have occurred in the lens because of the loss of elasticity. By the way, the ability of the
lens to change its shape has a name. I might as well tell it to you. It's called accommodation,
A-C-C-O-M-M-O-D-A-T-I-O-N. We talk about the ability of the lens to change its shape due to its
elasticity as accommodation. So we can say that by age 45, the lens has lost its ability to show
accommodation due to a loss of elasticity. Reading glasses are the answer for most people.
The other visual anomaly that involves a focusing problem by the optical instruments of the eye
is called myopia. Now, myopia comes about when the eye becomes elongated. In some people,
for some reason, the eyeball has a tendency to lose its spherical shape and become elongated.
Now, the lens and cornea are not aware that the eyeball has become elongated,
so the lens and cornea are still focusing things where the retina used to be. See,
in presbyopia, what happens is the focusing has lost its strength so that objects are brought to
focus behind the retina, and the result is blurred vision. And the way you deal with presbyopia is
you wear convex lenses to make the focusing occur sooner so that it again comes to a sharp
point on the retina. In the case of myopia, the eyeball has become elongated, and the lens and
cornea are still focusing where they should have been focusing, except the retina isn't there anymore.
And so what we use as an optical correction for myopia is concave lenses to make the
optical correction necessary to again bring things to a sharp focus on the retina.
So presbyopia, as I said, occurs in most people by age 45. I should tell you that it can happen at
any age. In fact, presbyopia has been identified in some infants. My point is it's very rare in
younger people, and it's rare in infants, but it does occur. Myopia, on the other hand,
tends to run in families. The thing is somebody who has a visual correction for myopia
is still going to come down with presbyopia at a later time. In fact, you've probably heard the
expression, two wrongs don't make a right. Well, at least in one instance, in dealing with optical
corrections in the eye, sometimes two wrongs can make a right. If as a young person you are myopic,
because of an elongated eyeball, by the time you're in your 40s and presbyopia has occurred,
and the focal length has increased, it may well be that now objects are focusing perfectly on the
retina, the elongated retina. So that a young myopic person may need glasses when he or she is young,
and then when they reach 45 and presbyopia kicks in, they may not need the glasses anymore.
So the simplest corrections for both myopia and presbyopia are, in fact, glasses, eyeglasses.
There is a more complicated correction that many people are aware of, and some people have
experience called Lasik surgery. In the case of Lasik surgery, a laser beam is used to actually
reshape, reconfigure the cornea of the eye. Now, Lasik surgery can be used to correct either
myopia or presbyopia. The problem is, you can only get Lasik surgery as a corrective measure
for one condition, and if you get corrected for myopia as a young person, you're still going to
need glasses when you become presbyopic later in life. Now, there is also a procedure
involving Lasik surgery called monovision, where they will correct one eye for myopia and the other
eye for presbyopia. However, this is not easy for many people to adapt to and adjust to. You've
got one eye that's working for near vision and the other eye working for far vision. It does have
some implications for binocular depth perception, which we will talk about at a later time, but
most experts suggest that if you're okay with glasses, that's probably the way to go,
rather than having some surgical procedure that becomes irreversible. And it's certainly the
case that Lasik surgery should be done only with a great deal of forethought if you're a young person
and your optical system has not finished changing. Okay, so in lecture three, just to
summarize, we talked about the nature of the physical stimulus, the wavelengths of the visible
spectrum, the speed of light, and we talked about the job that the supporting structures do in
preparing light to be transduced by the receptors. In our next lecture, we will talk about the
transduction process, and we will talk about the receptors and the neural elements and the
job that they do in preparing and transmitting this signal from the retina to the brain. Thank you.
