Lecture 4, Vision, the Retina
Welcome back.
In lecture 3 we talked about some of the physical characteristics of the visual stimulus, the
characteristics of light that give it its particular color, and we talked about the supporting
structures and the job that they do in giving visual acuity such a boost.
Now we're going to talk about some of the elements on the retina, namely the receptors
and the neural elements, whereas the supporting structures make vision more acute, the receptors
and neural elements make it possible, without them we would have no vision.
Let's start by talking about the receptors.
The human eye is described as having a duplex retina.
This is because we have actually two types of receptors on the retina at the back of
the eye.
As most people know, or many people know, these two receptors are called the rods and
the cones.
These two categories of receptors have different functions.
They look different, they have different names, and they contain different photopigments,
so let's elaborate on some of that.
Of course rods and cones are named because of their physical appearance.
Rods are tall and rod-like, cones are shorter and cone-like, so they call them rods and
cones, but there are more important differences than that.
They have different functions and they have different numbers in the retina.
Rods for example, not only are they bigger, but they are far more numerous.
There are approximately 120 million rods in each human retina.
Each eye has 120 million rods and only six and a half million cones, so rods far outnumber
cones in the human visual system.
Rods are also found in a different spatial location from cones.
If we view the eye as a sphere, then of course the front of the eye is taken up with the
optical instruments, so the posterior two-thirds of the eye contain the retina, and the rods
and cones of course are found on the retina.
On the retina, rods are found out in the periphery of the visual system.
They're out on the edges.
As we move toward the center of the eye, the number of rods drops off until we get to the
macula, which is the middle portion of the eye, that part of the eye that you focus on
when you want to read the fine print.
The peripheral macula still has a few rods, but it's mostly cones, and in the very middle
of the macula, we have an area known as the fovea, which we will talk about at a later
time.
The fovea is 100% cones, no rods.
Rods are found out in the periphery and cones are found in the macula, and this is because
of the important functions that each of these two categories of receptors mediate.
Let's start with the rods.
Rods function very well in dim light.
They don't need a whole lot of light to see, which means that our peripheral vision is
that part of the visual system that operates better in dim light.
They are also very good at detecting movement, far better than the cones.
For example, I'm going to hold my finger out in front of me, and then I'm going to
slowly move it around, focusing straight ahead, and I'm going to move my finger until I'm
no longer aware of it.
Now, if I want to become real aware, all I have to do is wiggle it, and the movement
jumps out.
Rods are very good at detecting movement in dim light.
The problem with rods is that they do not perceive color, and that's why our night
vision is only in black and white, because the rods which are functioning in dim light
do not perceive color.
The other problem with rods is they don't have very good acuity.
You would never dream of reading something by holding it off to the side, because the
rods don't have good acuity.
The cones, on the other hand, do have great visual acuity, which is why we use central
vision to read fine print.
Cones also have the benefit of permitting us to see color.
Cones mediate color vision rods do not.
The downside of cones is they don't work well in dim light, and they're not that great
at detecting movement, especially in the periphery.
We have two aspects of the visual system, one that is good for color vision in normal
levels of illumination and having good acuity, and the other mediating the perception of
movement in dim light out in the corners of our eyes.
Both rods and cones operate by virtue of the fact that they contain chemicals known as
photopigments.
The rod pigment was discovered about 150 years ago, because if you take an animal that has
a rod cone visual system, such as people, well, you wouldn't do this with people, but the
resus macaque monkey has a color vision system identical to the human's eye, so if you get
a resus macaque retina and you squeeze it out, you squeeze all the goo out of it, mostly
what you're getting is the rod photopigment, because rods are bigger and they outnumber
the cones, so it was possible 150 years ago to examine the rod photopigment.
When you pour it in a test tube, it was purple in appearance, so they first started calling
it visual purple, then then changed its name to rhodopsin, which is the name for the rod
photopigment.
When you shine light on a test tube of visual purple, the stuff changes color right in front
of you.
It bleaches from purple to gray.
Now in a test tube, it stays that way.
In the visual system, it regenerates back into visual purple, which is why we can keep
seeing over and over again, whereas in the test tube, it bleaches once and it's finished.
The photochemical process that occurs when you shine light on a photopigment is called
bleaching.
It's actually a chemical change.
We know some things about rhodopsin from these early studies.
We know that it is maximally sensitive to a wavelength of around 500 nanometers.
Now because rhodopsin, which is found in all the rods, is found in a structure that does
not have color vision, the rods don't know that 500 nanometers is a bluish-green.
The cones can perceive 500 nanometers as a bluish-green, but the rods see it in terms
of lightness and darkness because they don't have color vision.
The cones possess three separate photopigments.
There are three categories of cones.
One cone contains a photopigment that is maximally sensitive to 419 nanometers, which is a blue.
Now these three categories of cones have overlapping spectral sensitivities, so a blue cone might
also be able to see red and green, but not as well as it sees blue.
One pigment is 419 nanometers, which is a blue.
This is found in some cones that we call the blue cones.
Other cone pigments contain a photochemical substance, a photopigment that is sensitive,
maximally sensitive to 531 nanometers, which is a green.
Some cones possess a photopigment that is maximally sensitive, that is bleached maximally
by 558 nanometers, which is a red.
So we have what is called a trichromatic color system because our visual system can match
any color that the human eye is sensitive to by signaling to the brain the relative amount
of blue, green and red that that particular color excites by virtue of how much excitation
it produces in the three categories of cones.
Rods are unable to perceive color because there is only a single rod pigment and you need
mixtures of activity in different pigments to produce color mixture in the brain.
So that's it, the rods are out of luck in that regard.
Color blindness or color weakness occurs when a particular cone pigment is either totally
lacking, which is rare, or deficient, which is much more common.
So our visual system, as I said, is called a trichromatic visual system.
Now only animals that possess both rods and cones are capable of color vision, and not
all animals do.
For example, the cat has an all rod retina, which is why the cat doesn't see color.
The cat has an all rod retina, it can tell shades of lightness and darkness, but it
can't see the array of hues that the human visual system is sensitive to.
The benefit of the rods, as I said, is that they can let us perceive movement in dim light.
Now this was a greater practical significance in earlier decades than it is presently.
For example, in both World War I and World War II, they didn't have the sophisticated
tracking devices in radar and sonar and what have you that they have now.
So if a sailor was standing night watch on a battleship, they were told, if you hear
the droning of an airplane engine, look off to the side of where you hear that droning
because at night you're much more likely to detect in dim light something moving with
the rods than with the cones.
So practical use was made of this as soon as it was discovered that the rods are better
at detecting movement in dim light.
Hundreds of years ago astronomers also made use of the different functions of rods and
cones in that if an astronomer expected some astronomical event and they knew in what quadrant
of the sky to look, they would look off to the side giving themselves a better chance
to detect this event.
So the rods and cones then complement each other, acuity versus sensitivity, movement
versus color, they've each got something to add to our visual ability.
An interesting, I find it interesting anyway, point about animals with all rod retinas.
You can play, not play a trick on them, but for instance in earlier decades in psychology
most experimentation was done on the albino rat which has an all rod retina.
The problem with doing experiments on rats is that they are nocturnal creatures.
They prefer to be active at night and to sleep during the day.
So the people who are training these rats would prefer to sleep at night and be active
during the day.
How do we get the rat to cooperate?
Well, what we do is change the rat's day night cycle.
What we do is remove all the light bulbs in the colony room and in the testing chamber
and replace them with red lights because the rods do not see red.
Five hundred nanometers is too far from five hundred and fifty eight nanometers and the
spectral sensitivity of rod ops does not extend to five hundred and fifty eight nanometers.
So when you have a red light on, the rat thinks it's dark.
You can come into the laboratory, turn the red lights on, the rat says, ah, it's dark,
it's time for me to be active.
Now the human eye can see nicely in red light.
So we train the rats and run them in mazes or do whatever we want to do with them and
then when it's time for us to go home, we turn the red light off and we turn the overhead
lights on and leave them on all night.
So the rat says, ah, it's light, it's time for me to go to sleep.
So we make the rat adapt to our sleep and wakefulness cycle by using red lights in the
day and white lights at night.
By the way, there was also a practical significance to the rods not seeing red, again harking
back to World War II, fighters, fighter pilot aviators who were flying a night mission or
bomber crews that were flying a night mission needed to dark adapt to be as visually sensitive
as possible.
And the way that you dark adapt is you sit in the dark for forty five minutes and let
all the rod ops in regenerate.
Now if you're going out on a night mission and you may be shot down or killed or you're
going to be nervous and here you have to sit in a dark room for forty five minutes, well
it was discovered that you can dark adapt pilots very nicely by putting red goggles
on them which the rods don't see and letting them wait for their turn to take off being
in the ready room with their buddies where they can talk or play cards or do anything
they want.
The rods don't see red light.
They only see lightness and darkness and they only see if the stimulus is in the vicinity
of 500 nanometers.
I know this seems odd but that's the way it works.
Now let's talk a bit about the neural elements.
There are two layers of neural elements on the retina in addition to the receptors, the
rods and cones.
These two layers of neural elements are called respectively the bipolar cells and the ganglion
cells.
Now before I get into the contribution that the bipolar and ganglion cells make to vision,
let me share with you that because of the presence of a layer of bipolar cells and a
layer of ganglion cells in front of the receptors and if you have a diagram of the eyeball this
would be a good opportunity to take a glance at it.
A beam of light enters the eye, passes through the cornea, through the pupil, through the
lens and then before it can get to the receptors it must go through a layer of ganglion cells
and a layer of bipolar cells.
This appears to be a serious design flaw with the retina.
In fact the human retina is described as an inverted retina because it looks as though
it were designed just backwards.
You would think it would make more sense to have the light first strike a receptor then
strike a layer of bipolar cells if you need them and then a layer of ganglion cells and
the axons of the ganglion cells form the optic nerve and take the information to the brain.
But that's not the way the human eye is designed.
In fact I read just recently as you may be aware there is renewed interest in this debate
between proponents of intelligent design and proponents of the Darwinian evolution position.
One opponent of intelligent design said look at the human eye, what is intelligent about
that?
You've got bipolar and ganglion cells blocking light from reaching the receptors.
Well there may be other examples of lack of intelligent design and the design of the human
body but that's not one of them.
It turns out that the way the human eye is designed is the only way it would work because
of the fact that these visual receptors operate by bleaching when light shines on them and
regenerating when they get a chance they have high metabolic needs and the only way that
the visual receptors can in fact continue to bleach and regenerate continuously is if
they are actually in physical contact with their nutrient source which is a highly vascularized
layer right behind the receptors known as the pigment epithelium.
The visual receptors must be in physical contact with the pigment epithelium to get the energy
they need for this constant bleaching and regeneration that underlies the transduction process.
So the fact that we have an inverted retina is a great compromise.
The visual system is about as sensitive as you could get given the constraints that they
must be in contact with their blood supply for energy needs.
Anyway, we do have these two layers of neural elements, the bipolar and ganglion cells.
Let me give you some approximate numbers to make a point not just to fill your head with
trivial information.
We know that there are 126 million receptors, 120 million rods, 6.5 million cones.
There are 50 million bipolar cells and 1 million ganglion cells.
So what we have is 126 million receptors being stimulated by light, bleaching, generating
electrical impulses.
Those electrical impulses are fed to 50 million bipolar cells and then the 50 million bipolar
cells in turn feed their information to 1 million ganglion cells.
The 1 million ganglion cells have long neural processes known as axons, nerve fibers, which
then go back through the bipolar cell layer and through the retina and form the optic
nerve and go on to the brain.
So if time permits, I will talk a bit about this, but where the optic nerve, where the
1 million axons of the ganglion cells squeeze out of the eyeball, they push the rods and
cones out of the way so that each eye actually has a tiny blind spot, which many of you may
be aware of, where the receptors are moved out of the way so that the optic nerve can
leave the eyeball.
Anyway, what's the significance of the fact that we have 126 million receptors, 126 million
and a half feeding their information to 50 bipolar, 50 million bipolar cells and 100 million
ganglion cells?
Well, to be aware of the significance of these numbers, you need to know something else.
You need to know that the distribution of bipolar and ganglion cells across the retina
is not uniform.
It turns out that most of the bipolar and ganglion cells are located in the macula,
in the macula, where we have a relatively small number of receptors.
We have six and a half million cones in the macula.
Out in the periphery, where we have 120 million rods, we have very, very few bipolar and ganglion
cells.
What is the significance of this?
The significance of this is that out in the periphery, we may have as many as 10,000 rods
signaling their information and channeling it down to a single ganglion cell.
We have enormous spatial summation out in the periphery, in the macula, on the other
hand, where we have a relatively small number of cones to begin with, and we have the bulk
of the bipolar and ganglion cells, especially in the fovea, the very centromost portion
of the macula.
You may have a one-to-one relationship where one cone is channeling its information to one
ganglion cell.
This is the factor that makes the acuity so great in the fovea and the sensitivity so
great in the periphery.
100 or 110 years ago, it was thought that rods were innately more sensitive than cones.
An individual rod was more sensitive than an individual cone.
We now know that that's not true.
Rods and cones individually are probably equally sensitive to light.
What makes the periphery so much more sensitive and the fovea so much more acute is the distribution
of neural elements.
Out in the periphery, let's say you have very faint movement taking place, as in the
example of looking straight ahead and moving your finger until you're unaware of it.
I'm not aware of my finger now.
I move it and I detect the movement.
What's happening is perhaps 10,000 rods or maybe a million rods are experiencing this
and they're signaling their information to 100 ganglion cells.
The ganglion cells signal the brain, but they don't give the brain spatial information.
They don't say what exactly is doing the moving, which is why the periphery of the eye, sometimes
you will detect something moving, but if you want to know what it is, you have to turn
and look at it.
The 10,000 to one ratio in the periphery gives the periphery of the eye great sensitivity,
but what is lacking is acuity.
On the other hand, in the macular region where you have in the fovea, at least perhaps a
one to one relationship between a cone and a ganglion cell, the coherence between each
point in the visual field is maintained on the retina.
There's a one to one relationship.
A point in the visual field stimulates one point on the fovea and one ganglion cell takes
that information to one spot in visual cortex and the acuity is maintained.
So the difference between sensitivity and acuity from the periphery to the fovea is
not due to individual rod cone differences, but rather due to the distribution of the
neural elements.
Now let me deal with a question that I am frequently asked by students.
We talk about the fact that the transduction process is mediated by light sensitive photo
pigments that bleach when you shine a light on them.
And students want to know, is it possible to stare at something and not move and bleach
it all out and make that thing disappear?
If you don't give the receptors a chance to regenerate?
The answer is theoretically yes, but in actuality, no.
And that is because try as you may to focus and stare at something and make it disappear.
You can't do it because the eye is constantly engaged in three types of involuntary movements
that prevent you from focusing on a straight edge without deviation.
The eye tendency is to drift off focus, a slow drift, terminates at a quick flick.
So our eyes, even though we're not aware of it, are constantly drifting and flicking
like this.
In addition to the slow drift and the fast flick, the eyes also are engaged in about
120 cycles per second, 120 to 140 cycles per second tremor.
Our eyes are showing this tremor.
Now this tremor is so faint, it's about the diameter of a single receptor that we're not
even aware of it, but it makes it very difficult for us just by an act of will to focus on
something and not move our eyes.
Now if you cancel out these involuntary eye movements, and there are certain experimental
techniques for doing this, you can make a visual scene disappear.
Let me give you an extreme example.
You've probably all heard of the phenomenon of snow blindness, where travelers, they've
lost their way in the Antarctic or something like this, and the sun is shining and there's
glare off the snow and wherever they look, they're being stimulated by bright light.
You will actually bleach out all of your photo pigments and you become snow blind.
Is that permanent?
No.
If you go in a dark place and cover your eyes for 45 minutes, 40 minutes let's say, the
pigments will regenerate, but you don't want to stand there for 40 minutes with your eyes
closed because something might come up and eat you, or you might fall over a cliff or
something like that.
So the snow blindness can be a very, very dangerous condition.
There's an example of where the pigments are not given sufficient time to regenerate.
They can't keep up with the rate at which they're being bleached by the intense light.
There's a less dramatic experimental demonstration of what happens when you bleach the pigments.
A long time ago, some German researchers devised an experimental apparatus called a Gansfeld.
This was a sphere, large enough for a person to get into, and the sphere was made out of
polished aluminum, sort of like being in a big spherical mirror.
Now you could shine a monochromatic light through a hole in this Gansfeld, this uniform
visual field, and the light would reflect all around.
So if you used a 558-manometer light, you're seeing a bright red.
Wherever you look, the same red.
What would happen is, in a matter of minutes, that light would have faded from a bright
red to kind of a washed out red, and then to a pink, and then to a washed out pink,
and eventually all you would see is gray.
And if you stayed in there long enough, your vision would fade.
You could bleach out all the light, but it shows how quickly colors bleach out.
You can start losing color vision in a matter of a few minutes.
Of course, all you have to do to restore your vision is close your eyes.
In the case of the cones, because there are so few of them, and because they're smaller
than the rods.
If you close your eyes for five minutes, you can regenerate all your cone pigments.
It does take a full 40 minutes to regenerate the rod pigments, because there is so much
of it, and there are so many rods.
So if researchers have plotted the restoration, the regeneration of the rod and cone pigments,
and you see a break after five minutes, there's a little bump in the curve.
That's because after five minutes, all the cone pigments are regenerated back in place,
and it takes another 35 minutes for a total of 40 minutes before all the rod pigments
have regenerated.
Now, it is also possible, using an experimental technique, to cancel out the three kinds of
eye movements that are constantly going on involuntarily in the eye, and actually make
scenes disappear.
A researcher by the name of Pritchard devised one technique.
What he did was, he built on a little contact lens, a little platform, and he mounted a
miniature slide projector on this platform, and he made sure it was off-center so that
it didn't block the pupil, and this little side projector could actually project images
on the retina.
Now, this cancels out the eye movements, because if the eyeball drifts or flicks or tremors,
the projector is also drifting, flicking, or engaging in tremor, and the image is stabilized
on the retina.
So, for instance, if he focused on the retina, produced on the retina, the image of a human
face, the silhouette of a human face, and the subject wore this device long enough,
what would happen is the face would begin to fade, and the face would, in fact, disappear.
He demonstrated that parts of geometric shapes fade and disappear with time if you wear this
little contact lens with the slide projector on it, and that, in fact, it is theoretically
possible to stare at something and make it disappear if you find a way to cancel out
the involuntary eye movements.
A student of mine claimed that he had developed a way to do this.
I don't necessarily recommend this, but the student told me that after talking about this
and being interested in it, he decided to use his index finger.
Please don't try this, and he held his eyeball still.
He thought he could cancel out the involuntary eye movements in that regard, and he held his
eyeball still, and he claimed that he looked at something, and he could make it disappear.
I tried it, and in fact, you can demonstrate.
It's probably not a good idea to go poking your eyeball, and I'm not, again, I'm not
recommending this, but apparently one student was able to actually hold his eyeball and cancel
out the movements, and he was able to make a visual scene begin to fade and disappear,
and I sort of replicated that just to see if he was telling me the truth, and he was,
but it's probably not a good idea.
So let me see, we have talked about the receptors, the neural elements, we've talked about the
difference in the functions of the rods and cones, that the cones perceive color vision
and the rods do better with movement under dim levels of illumination.
We talked about the contribution of the bipolar and ganglion cells.
I told you that the one million ganglion cells send their axons out of the eyeball, forming
a blind spot.
Let me, there is a simple demonstration of this if you have never mapped out your own
blind spot.
Close one eye, pick a spot on the wall, and what works very nicely is a pencil with an
eraser.
Eraser up so that it's an eye level, focusing at the spot on the wall, I'll use my thumb
here.
Slowly move the pencil, and when you reach the blind spot, the eraser will disappear,
and then when you continue to move the pencil, the eraser will reappear.
You need to close one eye because the blind spot is in slightly different locations in
the two eyeballs, which is why most people are not even aware that they have a blind
spot.
One eye at a time, now I've made the top of my finger disappear, and now it's back,
now it's disappeared.
You can do it in both eyes, focus on a spot on the wall and do this.
As a matter of fact, a martial arts expert told me that when you are really into the
fine points of karate, you never throw a punch straight at your opponent.
You want to come to the side and maybe sneak it into his or her blind spot before they're
aware of it.
In fact, the blind spot is well-known and well-documented, and apparently martial arts
experts try and make use of this.
In our next lecture, we will talk about vision beyond the optic nerve, which of course relates
to some aspects of the visual message that are analyzed at different levels of the visual
system.
Thank you.
Thank you.
