Lecture 5 Vision Beyond Theoptic Nerve
Hello and welcome to lecture 5.
In lecture 4 we talked about some of the functional differences between rods and cones
and the way rods and cones interact with the neural elements, the bipolar and ganglion cells
and how this interaction results in the periphery of the visual system having greater sensitivity
and the central region, the macula, especially the fovea, having greater acuity.
Today we're going to continue a discussion of the visual system
talking about the way two different broad categories of visual perception are analyzed
at different levels of the visual system.
One of these categories of visual perception is more primitive.
It is innate.
That is, it's based on the maturation of pre-existing nerve circuits
and it's located in subcortical regions of the brain.
The other category of visual perception is of a higher order nature.
It depends more on learning and experience
and it depends upon the integrity of neural circuits in the visual cortex.
Let's start out talking about the more primitive category of visual perception first.
Let's give it a name.
Let's call it object location.
Object location refers to the perceptual ability whereby we can be aware of the existence of objects in space around us
without giving it conscious thought and not know exactly what these objects are
but just have a sense that they're out there.
For example, I can detect something to my right.
I don't really know what it is.
I look and I see it's a door.
Object location is known to depend upon midbrain circuits.
Let me give you a quick anatomy of the brain lesson.
The most primitive part of the brain, evolutionarily speaking,
millions of years older than the rest of the brain, is the hindbrain.
The hindbrain does little more than keep us breathing and keep our blood pressure up and what have you.
It's concerned with the vital functions.
It doesn't do anything intelligent.
It just sits there and keeps us alive.
About a million years after the hindbrain, another layer of cells grew over it that we call the midbrain.
This is the level at which object location is managed at the midbrain level.
The midbrain actually has two broad classes of responsibilities.
One, it maintains our level of sleep, wakefulness and arousal,
so that midbrain damage will put you in a deep coma.
The other important role of the midbrain is to mediate reflex orientation to sensory stimuli,
and here's where object location comes in.
The midbrain actually mediates reflex orientation for more than just visual stimuli.
For instance, if I'm walking down the street in a car backfires,
midbrain circuits cause me to orient toward it.
I don't stop and think, hey, what was that noise? I better look.
I'm already turning before I'm consciously aware of the car backfire.
The midbrain has the capacity to cause us to center sudden unexpected stimuli,
get it on our midline, so I hear the noise and I'm lighting it up with the midline.
If a flash of light occurs over here, I don't stop and think,
gosh, should I look and see? I'm already orienting toward it.
Also for touch, if I'm walking down a dark alley and something taps me on the shoulder,
I don't stop and think, maybe I should turn around and see who that is.
Maybe I know this, no, I'm already wheeling around midbrain stuff,
and then thinking comes later.
Now the part of the midbrain that is especially responsible for visual orientation,
orienting to visual stimuli and being aware of visual objects in the field,
is known as the optic tectum.
Now tectum is a Latin word meaning roof,
and it turns out that this part of the midbrain that's responsible for
orienting to visual stimuli or being aware at some primitive level
of where they are in space around us,
it's on the top of the midbrain or the roof of the midbrain,
thus it is called the optic tectum.
Now in addition to mediating our awareness,
a primitive awareness of where things are in space with regard to our position in space,
the optic tectum also makes us especially sensitive to sudden movements in the visual field.
So you may be aware of nothing happening and suddenly you detect a movement and you orient toward it.
So here are two categories of object location mediated by the optic tectum.
One, a primitive awareness of where things are around us
without necessarily knowing exactly what they are,
and two, a tendency to alert to sudden movement.
Now there is a third function of the optic tectum in the context of object location.
The optic tectum automatically elicits protective responses of a duck and cover nature
if the visual system detects something moving rapidly toward us.
Let me give you an example of such a phenomenon that I experienced a few months ago.
In our house, my wife likes flowers in the appropriate season,
so we have hanging baskets around the front porch and around the back porch,
and it's my job to water them every night.
What I usually do is I take the baskets, the hanging baskets down,
and I hose them and give each plant its full measure of water and then put them back up.
One night we got home late, my wife wasn't looking, I was going to take a shortcut,
I filled the watering can and I'm going to run from basket to basket
and just give it enough water to kind of get it through the night.
Okay, so I'm watering one basket and I'm reaching, I can't really see what's in it,
and all of a sudden something comes hurtling out of that basket, racing straight from my head
and I drop the watering can and I duck and cover and I'm struck a glancing blow.
None of this at the conscious level, I don't have a clue what happened.
Then I turn and I watch this thing and I hear the flutter of wings
and it slowly recedes in the dark and I realize that a bird had nested for the night
in this particular hanging basket.
And I was watering the bird and I startled the bird and it came racing out of the basket.
Narrowly, I suppose it could have done me some harm if it stuck me in the eye with its beak,
but the midbrain saved me by causing me to duck and cover.
These are examples of object location.
You can see that they do not involve any cognition, it's all automatic, it's all reflexive,
and they have a protective function.
Now, in the other category of visual perception, we called object identification.
This refers to our ability to be aware of the fine details of objects around us,
not just where they are relative to our position in space, but what color are they, what form are they,
what is their identity, what are these things, are they moving, in which direction,
at what rate of speed, etc.
Now, object identification is a very important perceptual ability
and we're going to treat that separately in a later lecture.
So, I'll say no more about it except that it does depend upon learning and experience
and it does depend upon the integrity of the occipital cortex,
the primary visual cortex at the back of the brain.
Now, it is possible to see a dissociation between object location and object identification.
These two categories of visual perception, which go together in most cases in normal human beings,
can be dissociated, and we can see this in two situations.
We can see it in the case of human patients who have experienced brain damage,
involving the occipital lobe, and we can also see it in certain animals
whose visual systems do not extend beyond the level of the midbrain.
There are such animals.
Let me talk about the human situation first,
where we can see a dissociation of object location from object identification.
Patients with occipital lobe damage are blind.
They report their visual fields to be dark and empty.
They do not see a light.
If it's shined in their eyes, they are blind.
Now, picture this situation.
This phenomenon is called blind sight that I'm about to describe,
and it sounds like it couldn't be real, but it is.
You can take one of these blind people.
Now, this will not work if your blindness is due to degeneration of the retina
or severing of the optic nerve or something like that.
This can only be demonstrated in people whose blindness is due to cortical damage at the cerebral cortex.
You sit such a person at a table and you say to them,
there is an object on this table in front of you.
Please reach out and grab it.
Now, the people think you're fooling them and some of them get a little bit angry.
What do you mean?
You know I'm blind?
No, please humor me.
Please reach out and try and grab the object.
Now, finally, you can convince them to go along with this,
although they think it's absurd, but they reach out and lo and behold, they touch the object.
And they are startled.
They have no idea they were about to touch an object.
Blind sight.
They don't know what it is until they feel it.
But these people identify objects by touch, not by sight,
and they identify people by the sound of their voice or by their odor if it's somebody they know very well.
But they have no functioning vision, at least none that they're aware of.
But they can reach out with their eyes open, of course,
and touch objects on a table in front of them.
Or you can do another.
You can put them in an empty room with one object and they can say,
the experimenter can say, there is an object in this room.
Can you point to it?
And they say, of course, I can't point to it.
I'm blind.
Humor me.
Try and point to the object.
And they say, oh, OK.
And lo and behold, they point to the object.
So what is happening here is that these midbrain object location circuits are still intact.
But because they operate without awareness and without volition or cognition or intelligent input of any kind,
the people are unaware of their existence.
They still have no object identification.
They don't know what things are.
But at some primitive level, they know where they are.
But they're not even aware that they know where they are,
suggesting that some aspects of perception can take place without awareness.
Now, very quickly, I will tell you that I saw,
I was personally involved in a demonstration of what I now know is blindside in CATS in the late 1960s.
I was engaged in a research project studying recovery of function following damage to sensory parts of the cerebral cortex.
And one group of CATS had been prepared with extensive brain damage in the visual cortex.
They were, for all intents and purposes, blind.
They had to be lifted out of their cages and they had to be put in front of their food and they were blind.
Now, I had at that time an animal caretaker who was a very caring person.
He was going to be a veterinarian when he graduated from school.
And he cared very much about animals.
Now, I remember instructing him, I said,
Nick, this bank of cages contains blind CATS.
Let them out for exercise, but let them out one at a time so that you can monitor them
and they don't bump into things because they're blind.
Well, I came to the laboratory, to the colony room unexpectedly one day,
and Nick had about six of these blind CATS out at the same time.
And I said, Nick, I asked you not to let all the CATS out at the same time
because you can't monitor them and they can get hurt.
He says, Nick, I've been working with these CATS for months now.
They never bump into anything.
And I thought, oh boy, I wish you had listened to me
because one of the CATS was taking off at a good trot
and it was running straight for a wall.
And I thought, this CAT is going to break its nose,
but just before it ran into the wall,
it stopped, leaned forward and smelled the wall.
I saw another CAT running for a table.
We kept the CAT fruit up off the floor for sanitary purposes on a table
and it was running straight for a table leg.
Instead of banging into the table leg, the CAT stopped
and he leaned forward and he rubbed on it.
They looked like they were trying to investigate
what this thing was that they just didn't run into.
Somehow these CATS were able to avoid bumping into things,
but they looked as though they didn't know what it is they had just avoided bumping into.
And it's now clear to me that this was sort of a CAT version of blindsight.
They didn't know what was around them,
but at some primitive level they could keep from bumping into it.
Okay, object location and object identification, then,
are the two broad categories of visual perception.
Both of them require another ability,
the ability to perceive depth in the visual's field, depth perception.
In the case of object location, it's clear and obvious.
In order to locate something in space, in order to be aware of its position,
you have to know how far from you it is.
So you can see there that object location would involve an ability to perceive depth.
In the case of object identification, it's a little less obvious
why you need to have depth perception to identify things,
but let me give you a quick example.
Part of object identification is knowing what these things are.
It turns out that a toy automobile about three feet from you
would take up the same space on the retina,
would subtend the same visual angle, to put it in more technical terms,
as a real car 70 yards away.
Now your ability to tell that one is three feet away and one is 70 feet away,
70 yards away, would be important in proper identification
of which one is the toy and which one is real.
So depth perception turns out to be an important part
of both object location and object identification.
Now it turns out that just as in the case of the two broad categories
of visual perception, object location and object identification,
one is more innate and one is more based on learning,
the same is also true of depth perception.
There are two categories of depth perception cues
that we use to judge the distance from us to objects in the visual field.
One of these categories of depth perception is more innate,
unlearned based on neural circuits that are present at birth
and only depend upon maturation.
And the second category of depth perception cues
is in fact based more on learning and experience.
Let's talk about the more primitive category of depth perception first.
This is a category based on what are called binocular depth cues.
Now binocular means depth cues that require the simultaneous use of both eyes.
Binocular depth cues, there are several different categories.
One is called binocular disparity.
Now the two eyes are about three inches apart in a typical adult human.
They'll be a little less far apart in a child or an infant,
but the two eyes are far enough apart that they each have a slightly different perspective
on objects in the visual field.
Binocular disparity is based on the fact that the brain is receiving
an overlapping image from each eye.
There is overlap in the two visual fields.
Now when you're looking at something close to you, the overlap is quite great.
As we look at things farther and farther away,
the degree of overlap of the two retinal images is slightly different.
The brain is able to calculate the degree of overlap from the left eye and the right eye
and come up with an estimate of the distance that we are from this object, binocular disparity.
The classic experiment in depth perception in infants
was done by a developmental psychologist by the name of Eleanor Gibson.
Let me give you the punchline first.
Experiments on children and infants suggest that binocular depth cues are in place and usable
by infants by the time they're three and a half months old.
By the time an infant is three and a half months old,
this infant is able to use retinal disparity to gauge depth.
Let me tell you about Eleanor Gibson's classic experiment.
She used a piece of laboratory equipment that she called the visual cliff.
Some of you may have heard of this.
These experiments are very famous.
It was a large table with a clear plexiglass top,
half of which was painted flat black,
and half of which was left clear.
Eleanor Gibson would put babies of different ages,
some of them too young even to crawl on the visual cliff.
The deep side would be the clear side that the baby could see through.
If a baby was too young to crawl and it was put on the deep side,
it would fuss and cry and carry on.
If it was old enough to crawl,
it would quickly scramble from the deep side to the shallow side,
which was painted flat black.
It was clear that these babies were ill at ease on the deep side of the visual cliff
because they could perceive depth.
They could see, hey, I'm up here and the floor is down there.
If Eleanor Gibson would put babies on the shallow side
and try and get the mother to coax the baby onto the deep side
with a bottle or a preferred toy or just calling the baby,
the baby would crawl right up to the edge of the shallow side,
right where the flat black ended and the clear plexiglass started,
but the baby would go no farther.
You couldn't get babies to go onto the deep side.
Now, these experiments on the visual cliff
were interpreted as suggesting that babies, young babies,
babies even too young to crawl, have depth perception.
There were people who challenged this and said,
well, how do you know that baby didn't fall
even when it was a few weeks old?
How do you know the baby didn't learn something about depth, et cetera, et cetera?
Another investigator took up this problem
using a slightly different, well,
significantly different technique from Eleanor Gibson's
and was able to use animals, some of which were only a few hours old
because this researcher studied baby crabs, kittens, puppies,
human infants, virtually any animal
because the animal didn't have to do anything but sit there,
or in the case of the crabs, I guess, stand there.
So here's the experimental situation.
The animal is put on a little stand.
The animal faces a viewing screen
and using a rear projection technique,
the investigator projected a black dot on the viewing screen.
Now, the animal's eye movements were monitored,
so it was possible to tell when the animal was looking at the black dot.
When the animal looked at the black dot,
the aperture on this rear projection camera
so that the animal couldn't see a projector
or anything that was actually behind the screen,
the aperture would be open and that black dot
would suddenly, symmetrically and systematically increase
to a big black dot.
And what the animals did in every case was a duck and cover move
similar to what I did when that bird came hurtling toward me.
The way these experiments were interpreted
was that depth perception cues involving both eyes being innate,
what the experimenter did was replicate the situation
by going from the small dot to the big dot
that would occur if somebody were to throw a baseball at your nose.
When it's far away, it's taking up a relatively small part of the retina
and as that ball gets closer and closer,
it's taking up more and more of the retina until just before it hits you,
it's filling up a rather large part of the visual field.
So what the interpretation was was that these animals were acting as though
a collision was imminent,
like they were about to get hit in the beak or nose or whatever they had.
Now, other people said,
well, how do you know that they're showing concern
because of circuits that are trying to ward off a collision?
Maybe they were just startled.
So the experiment was done over with a new group of animals,
except this time when the baby animal was on the platform,
the large dot was presented on the screen
and when the animal was looking at the large dot,
the dot because of changing the lens setting on the projector
would narrow down to a small dot.
The response you got was qualitatively different
from the response of going from the small dot to the big dot.
When you go from the big dot, it's not a dot,
from the big spot to a small dot,
the animal sort of looked forward
and rather than ducking back and it appeared,
if we can anthropomorphize,
it appeared to be curious, hey, what's going on?
So it appears that the retina is pre-wired,
that if something suddenly changes its size on the retina,
even if it's just a projector screen with different size dots,
we're going to duck and cover.
This is another example of binocular depth cues.
Okay, so binocular disparity is a binocular depth cue
where the two eyes have different angles on the target
and the overlap of the visual image in the brain is compared.
Another binocular depth cue is called binocular convergence.
Now this only works for distances of 8 or 10 feet away or closer
and you can do a demonstration of binocular convergence yourself.
There are muscles that control the movement of the eyes,
the ocular motor muscles
and it turns out that these muscles provide kinesthetic feedback to the brain
and the brain can actually calculate the depth of an object that we're looking at.
Here's a way to demonstrate this for yourself.
Hold your arm out as far as you can and look at your index finger
and then slowly bring it toward your nose
and concentrate on any sensations you might get from the ocular motor muscles
and you'll begin to feel a tightness in those muscles
and this tightness is an indication that these muscles are sending
kinesthetic feedback to the brain telling the brain,
hey, we're pulling the eyeball closer and closer so the object must be closer and closer.
This is another example of a binocular depth cue.
The second category of depth cues,
the ones that are more based on learning and experience
rather than pre-wired circuits are called monocular depth cues.
Now you can imagine from the name monocular
that these are depth cues that can be used with a single eye.
It is still possible to perceive depth if you're blind in one eye.
People who are blind in one eye can still qualify for driver's licenses.
They can still perceive depth perhaps not quite as well as using binocular depth cues also
but well enough not to be engaged in traffic accidents
at any greater frequency than people with both eyes functioning.
Monocular depth cues are the kinds of cues that an artist would use
to produce the effect of depth in a two-dimensional painting.
Monocular depth cues are clearly based on learning and experience.
They're not innate.
Look at children's art, for example.
Children don't know how to use monocular depth cues.
If a child is going to draw a picture of two figures,
one supposedly behind the other,
they might make both figures the same height
so that one looks like it's standing on the other one's head.
Artists know that if you want to make one figure look smaller,
one figure look farther away, make it smaller.
This is an example of a monocular depth cue.
The monocular depth cues that are used by artists
include such things as, well, what I just mentioned, relative size.
If you want to make one thing look farther away, make it smaller.
Another example of a monocular depth cue would be overlapping or superposition.
Make the object that is supposed to be closer overlap or cover
a part of the object that's supposed to be farther away.
Now, there are ways you can play tricks on people
by cutting parts out of the...
You can make them the same size, but you can fool people this way
and still make them think one is farther away.
Psychologists sometimes like to fool people
by messing with monocular depth cues.
Okay, so relative size overlapping haziness.
An artist knows that if you want to make a scene appear to recede in the distance,
you draw the parts that are supposed to be more distant.
Rather than clear and distinct, you make it more hazy.
This is a very effective monocular depth cue.
Another monocular depth cue is what is called the texture gradient effect.
In the texture gradient effect, for instance, if you're drawing a cobblestone street
and you want to make it appear to recede in the distance,
you make the cobblestones in the foreground bigger
and you also make the outline, the shape, clear and distinct.
The next layer of cobblestones, you make the border,
the outline a little less distinct, a little less distinct
until you just kind of hint at a border for the cobblestones in the distance.
So a texture gradient is a rather effective monocular depth cue.
Another monocular depth cue is linear convergence.
If you have ever stood on a railroad track and looked off in a distance,
the railroad tracks themselves appear to converge in the distance.
So linear convergence is an excellent monocular depth cue.
The fact is that linear convergence has some practical uses.
Landscape architects, for example, if they want to produce the effect of a driveway
being longer than it really is, they're building a really nice house,
but maybe they don't have enough room in the front of the house
for an appropriately long driveway.
Instead of making the two edges of the driveway parallel,
an architect may converge them in the distance
and it really does, in fact, give the effect of making the driveway longer.
I'm reminded of a trip that I took to Agra to see the Taj Mahal a few years ago.
The Taj Mahal is a magnificent structure
and part of its magnificence is due to the fact that the two twin towers
on either side of the main building are not really vertical.
The architect, even that long ago, gave them a barely perceptible tilt
to create a depth effect that you can appreciate from a distance.
If you have occasion to visit India,
make sure you take a trip to Agra and make sure you visit the Taj Mahal
and revel in its beauty and its magnificence,
and take a look at those twin towers on either side of the Taj,
and with this pre-warning that they're not really vertical,
you will be able to see the effect that the architect was trying to maintain.
Quite impressive.
Okay, so what we have talked about today was the fact
that there are these two broad categories of visual perception,
object location and more primitive perceptual ability
based on innate pre-wired circuits that only depend upon maturation
to exhibit themselves and object identification,
a higher order perceptual ability that depends upon learning
and experience and the integrity of the cerebral cortex,
especially the occipital cortex.
We also indicated that an accompaniment of both object location
and object identification is the ability to perceive depth
and that we have two categories of depth cues,
one that is innate, namely the binocular depth cues,
and one that is more dependent on learning and experience,
namely the monocular depth cues.
In our next lecture, we will wrap up our treatment of the visual system
by talking about changes in the visual structures
that occur as a consequence of the aging process.
And we'll see, for example, that age-related changes occur
in the visual supporting structures, in the visual receptors,
and in the visual neural elements.
And we can attempt to minimize these changes by living intelligently,
but some change is inevitable and we just have to come to grips with that.
Thank you.
