Lecture 6, Vision, Age-Related Changes
Hi, welcome to lecture 6.
In lecture 5 we talked about the two broad categories of visual perception.
Object location, which is mediated by the optic tectum and object identification, which
is mediated by the visual cortex.
Before I get down to business and talk about age-related changes, which is the topic for
lecture 6, let me just elaborate on object location and object identification in light
of some tragic events that have recently taken place in South Florida.
Three young women have recently been killed by alligators.
Alligators are an example of one of those creatures that does not have any visual system
above the level of the optic tectum.
What we know now is that alligators are working with pretty good object location capabilities,
but not very good object identification capabilities, meaning they frequently don't really know what
they're eating.
They are attracted by movement and they are attracted by large objects that they can detect,
but they really don't have any idea what they're eating, which is why, for example,
when they try and hunt down the killer alligator, one way to detect which was the alligator
that did the killing was cut them open and see what you find, and sometimes what you
find in alligators is fishing boots and baseballs and inedible objects, because anything that
moves is fair game.
This is especially true because we're having an unusually hot weather season in Florida,
and alligators being poichilla therms, cold-blooded animals, become more active in the heat, and
they use up more energy and they need more food and they become even less discretionary
about what they eat.
So the same is true, by the way, for sharks.
Their visual system stops at the level of the optic tectum.
They're attracted by movement.
They're also attracted by jewelry, for example, because remember the optic tectum causes a
reflex orienting to a flashing light, and so the light reflecting off jewelry could
attract the attention of a shark.
But they're also not sure what they're eating until they actually get a taste of it, which
is why sometimes sharks will take a big bite out of a surfboard or a life raft or something
of that nature.
So yes, they're dangerous, but it's not malicious.
They really aren't sure what they're eating.
I'm sure they'd much rather eat a poodle than a basketball, for example, but that's
what's happening, and we need to be aware that these creatures are dangerous and they're
kind of indiscriminate about what they bite, so just stay away from them.
Okay, let me get back on track here and let's talk about age-related changes in the visual
system, and all of the structures in the visual system do change with age.
Let me just start with the iris and the pupil, and then we can talk about the optical instruments
of the eye, the corny and the lens.
The iris, remember, is that part of the eye that gives the eye its characteristic color,
blue or brown or green or what have you.
With age, the iris begins to lose its color.
Now you may say big deal.
Well it can be a big deal.
The iris loses its color with age because pigment granules begin to slough off the iris.
Now in the anterior chamber of the eye there is a fluid called the aqueous humor fluid,
the anterior chamber being the space between the cornea and the lens.
Now this aqueous humor fluid provides nutrients for the lens and cornea.
Aqueous humor is being constantly created, about a teaspoon a day is created, and as
new aqueous humor fluid is created the old fluid drains out through passageways.
These pigment granules that slough off the iris can actually help block the channels
through which aqueous humor fluid drains out of the eyeball, and so new fluid is being
created and the old fluid is either slow to drain or maybe it doesn't drain at all, and
what happens is the pressure, the fluid pressure in the anterior chamber of the eyeball builds
and builds leading to the condition known as glaucoma.
So the change of color in the iris can be a problem.
In addition to pigment granules, tissue sloughs off the lens and can also contribute to these
obstructions in the passageways.
When the pressure in the anterior chamber increases above normal, which is called intraocular
pressure or IOP, when your IOP gets dangerously high the pressure is transmitted from the
anterior chamber right through the eyeball and can actually lead to damage to the optic
nerve and some of the retinal elements, glaucoma can lead to blindness.
So people should be tested for glaucoma regularly, the test is painless and quick, and if that
intraocular pressure is too high, corrective measures need to be taken.
There is no pain involved in glaucoma, so you won't be aware that you have it unless
you get a glaucoma test.
Glaucoma is likely to occur in 10% of Caucasians by age 70 and 20% of African Americans by
age 70.
So this appears to be due at least in part to the fact that African Americans are more
prone to hypertension and hypertension is a contributing factor in glaucoma.
Okay so the iris does contribute to the increased likelihood of glaucoma when the pigment granules
begin to slough off.
Another age-related change in the iris can be seen in the fact that a swelling begins
to occur with age right around the border of the iris that surrounds the pupil.
Now what this does is it prevents the pupil from opening to its full extent in dim light
so that what we find is with age our pupils become unable to expand to the full 8mm diameter
that was possible when we were young people.
This failure of the pupil to open to its full extent makes it more difficult for older people
to function properly at night and they may have to give up night driving or things of
that nature.
In some extreme cases the swelling around the border of the iris becomes so great that
the pupil of an older person cannot change its size at all.
It stays the same size regardless of the ambient light conditions.
Okay now let's take a look at the optical instruments of the eye, the cornea which we
call a fixed optical instrument and the lens which is a variable optical instrument.
One age-related change in the cornea that's relatively minor is called the arcus senilis
which if you translate from the Latin means the senile ring.
Virtually everybody by age 50 can show some early signs of the formation of this arcus
senilis.
The complete arc is usually not seen until you are in your 60s.
As a matter of fact I checked in the mirror last night for my arcus senilis and sure enough
I have an opaque ring right around the border of the cornea where the cornea blends into
the whites of the eyes which are known as the sclerotic coats.
There is in fact a dark colored ring around the eye.
Now what does this do?
Well it reminds you that you're in your 60s the other thing it does is it cuts down slightly
on your peripheral vision but basically it's probably the most harmless age-related change
that takes place in the visual system, the arcus senilis.
A more how shall I say harmful debilitating change that can take place in the cornea with
ages is the tendency for the cornea to lose its transparency and take on a cloudy color.
Now when the cornea is young and healthy it is virtually transparent to all wavelengths
between 400 and 700 nanometers.
As we age we are more prone to corneal infections, maybe we get a scratched cornea that heals
with a scar, we're also prone to wart-like groves on the cornea so that it is possible
as we age for the cornea to lose more and more and more of its transparency and eventually
our patterned vision is somewhat impaired.
In the case of a badly scarred or clouded cornea the only alternative is a corneal transplant.
This is not such a big deal really because corneal transplants are the most effective
and at least problematic of all of the transplants because they are virtually untroubled by the
rejection process.
So you don't have to take steroids or things to suppress your immune system after corneal
transplants.
The reason that the cornea is virtually immune to the rejection process is the cornea has
no blood supply.
So corneal transplants can in fact correct clouded or scratched or scarred up or warty
corneas.
So when people donate their eyes to an eye bank the only part of the eye that is useful
is the cornea.
The rest of the eye, some people think that they can transplant other parts of donated
eyes but it's the cornea that can be transplanted.
Okay so the next optical instrument that I want to talk about is the lens which we call
a variable optical instrument because it has the capability of accommodation, changing
its size due to its elasticity.
Well there are three age related changes that take place in the lens.
One of them we've already talked about, Presbyopia, by the time you're 45 your lens
will have lost enough of its elasticity that you're going to have to for most people wear
reading glasses.
Okay so we know about that one.
Another age-related change that takes place in the lens is the tendency to develop cloudy
particles in the lens, opaque particles.
Now when you are in your 60s some degree of this cloudiness is the rule not the exception.
And when this cloudiness becomes serious enough that you have your eyes examined the diagnosis
that you will usually hear is cataracts.
Mild cataracts are not serious enough to require surgical treatment.
Probably the main consequence of mild cataracts is that you will experience glare in bright
sunlight or in bright artificial lighting.
Looking at the world through mild cataracts is like looking through a car windshield with
a thin layer of road grime on it.
You know how when the sun strikes your windshield and the windshield is dirty you get that glare
effect.
Well that's what's happening with mild cataracts which is why you will see in sunny areas older
people wearing peaked caps and walking around with their hands shading their eyes like this
because they're experiencing more glare than younger people.
When your cataracts get too severe to live with the only alternative is cataract surgery.
There are no eye drops or special diets that will make cataracts go away.
You have to bite the bullet and have cataract surgery.
It's nowhere near as onerous as it was in earlier decades where they had to make a large incision
and cut the suspensory ligaments and pull the cloudy lens out with a pair of forceps.
Now the cloudy lens can be liquefied by ultrasound.
They bombard it with ultrasonic waves and then you can suck out the liquefied lens with
a suction pipette and put a plastic lens implant in the same location that the lens you were
born with used to have.
Now the problem is the plastic lens implant can't change its size.
It doesn't show accommodation.
So if you have a plastic lens implant that's calibrated for distant vision you're still
going to need reading glasses for near work.
Some people who perhaps are shut-ins and don't get out much maybe they would have their plastic
lens implants calibrated to read and on rare occasions when they do go out they would wear
glasses for distant vision.
But you're going to need two optical corrections with cataracts.
Now the downside of cataract surgery is that in 3% of people who have this surgery a serious
potential consequence is detached retina.
Now I'm going to talk about detached retina in the next few minutes but I will say that
3% of cataract patients are at risk for detached retina.
Okay the third change that takes place in the lens in addition to the loss of accommodation
and in addition to the formation of cloudy particles that result in what we call cataracts
is a tendency for the lens to lose its transparency and take on a yellowish hue.
This happens in humans and also happens in cats, dogs and monkeys any older animal if
you do a dissection of the eyeball and look at the lens an older animal will have a lens
with a slightly yellowish appearance to it.
The consequence of this in humans is that it tends to reduce our sensitivity to the colors
of the visible spectrum across the board.
This decrease in color sensitivity is especially evident for the short wavelength end of the
visible spectrum especially the color blue.
The blue violet end of the spectrum is more seriously impaired by the yellowing of the
cataract lens of the eye than the red end of the spectrum.
This is one of the reasons why sometimes stylishly dressed older women will have a blue appearance
to their hair because they've used some kind of a blue rinse to dress their hair and their
hair is actually bluer than they realize it is and it's bluer than the older men who
hang out with older women think it is but young people can see that these older women
have blue hair and it's because they have lost their sensitivity to the short wavelength
end of the visible spectrum because of the yellowing of the lens.
There are also some age related changes that involve the visual receptors and one of these
changes is a metabolic change.
The visual receptors slow down in their ability to regenerate photo pigments so that while
we are aware that a normal healthy young human can come out of the bright sunlight and sit
in the dark for about 40 minutes and regenerate all of their pigments and their visual system
will be as sensitive as ever for an older person it's going to take another 10 or 15
percent in the dark before all of their visual photo pigments have regenerated.
Now I mentioned earlier that one of the consequences of cataract surgery in approximately 3 percent
of the people. By the way that means that 97 percent of the people who have cataract
surgery are not going to have any problem but for 3 percent there is an increased likelihood
of well not only an increased likelihood 3 percent of them are going to experience detached
retina so let me talk about that just very shortly.
The detached retina, the retina of the eye actually begins to peel off the back of the
eye sort of like a curtain being drawn either down or across if the peeling goes from left
to right instead of up to down. What's happening in the case of the detached retina? Well remember
there is this fluid in the anterior chamber of the eye known as the aqueous humor. There
is also a substance in the posterior chamber that goes from the back of the lens to the
back of the eyeball known as the vitreous humor. Now vitreous is actually a transparent
collagen gel and it packs the posterior chamber of the eyeball, gives the eye its nice round
shape and it also holds the retina against the back of the eye. With age there is a tendency
for this collagen gel, this vitreous humor to pull away from its attachment at the back
of the eye making it much more likely that the retina will begin to peel down like improperly
glued wallpaper peeling off a wall. Now what happens in the case of cataract surgery that
could make this process more likely? Apparently the process by which the lens is liquefied
with ultrasound changes or appears to change some of the characteristics of the vitreous
humor making it more likely to pull away from the back wall of the retina and permit the
detached retina process to occur. The way they treat detached retina, well one way to
treat detached retina is an injection of some gas like nitrogen into the vitreous humor
and the gas acts like filling a balloon and it will help press the retina back in place
and then it can be photocoagulated with a laser beam, in other words sort of like spot welded
back to the back of the eye to keep the retina from peeling off because if the retina peels
off completely then you have no functional vision left in that eye, the retina is just
lying in the bottom of the eyeball. Another age-related process that affects the receptors
is called macular degeneration, in fact it's called age-related macular degeneration, it's
frequently abbreviated AMD, age-related macular degeneration. There are actually two subcategories
of age-related macular degeneration, one is called wet macular degeneration and the other
is called dry macular degeneration. In wet macular degeneration what happens is abnormal
blood vessels begin to grow under the receptors in the fovea, the fovea just to review the
getting is the very center of the macula which is densely packed with cones and where you
have that one-to-one relationship between cones and bipolar cells. So in the case of
wet macular degeneration abnormal blood vessels grow under the receptors in the macular region
of the fovea and these abnormal blood vessels are leaky and they leak blood and the blood
causes a bulge so that an initial sign of macular degeneration is that if you look at
straight lines they appear to be wavy so that if you're looking at a grid for example you're
focusing on this grid you will see instead of seeing right angles the grid will have
a distorted appearance and this is a sign that you should seek help. Macular degeneration
is progressive there is no cure what they try to do is slow the growth and development
of these abnormal blood vessels sometimes they are coagulated with a laser beam sometimes
the progress can be slowed with prescription medications and things of that nature but
the condition will get worse. Eventually your straight ahead vision will be so blurry that
you will be unable to recognize human faces. This is wet macular degeneration is the most
serious category of macular degeneration. Dry macular degeneration progresses more slowly
it's more treatable by prescription medications and fortunately dry macular degeneration the
less disruptive form is by far the most common wet macular degeneration is less common.
Another age related change that can be seen in the receptors has to do with their blood
supply. Remember the visual receptors need to be in actual physical contact with their
blood supply the pigment epithelium because they need high nutritional supplies to constantly
be regenerating new photo pigments. Well it turns out that the blood vessels in the pigment
epithelium are susceptible to the same debilitating effects that blood vessels in any part of
the body are susceptible to. Arterioscholarotic changes and atherosclerotic changes in other
words those blood vessels can also show a hardening and a constricting of their diameter
or they can show the build up of fatty plaques that limits or in some cases totally constricts
blood flow. So what can happen in fact I've heard one
ophthalmologist refer to this as mini strokes on the retina. What can happen is a particular
region of the retina may in fact be deprived of blood and suffer from anoxia because of
a mini stroke in that particular portion of the retina. This can lead to the development
of additional blind spots in the individual system. I can remember when I was well I had
to be less than six years old because that's the last time I saw her. My grandmother when
she read she used a big magnifying glass and I remember I'd watch her read the paper with
this huge magnifying glass and once she went out of the room and I picked it up and I looked
through this magnifying glass and the letters were enormous. It made individual letters
so big. Years later I learned that what she was doing was making the written words so
big that they went beyond the boundaries of what apparently were multiple blind spots
in her visual field probably due to these mini strokes.
In addition to changes that take place in the receptors there are also changes in the
neural elements of the visual system the bipolar and ganglion cells. Ganglion cells especially
because there's only a million of them to begin with so the depth of even a small percentage
of retinal ganglion cells can have a significant effect on vision. Now remember the distribution
of ganglion cells across the retina they are far less in evidence out in the periphery
of the eye which is why we may have as many as 10,000 rods sending their information to
a single ganglion cell so the loss of even a relatively small number of ganglion cells
out in the periphery can have a significant impact on peripheral vision and the ability
to detect movement and night vision which is another reason why as we age our ability
to function visually in under conditions of dim illumination is reduced significantly.
I spend considerable time in South Florida and I swear I'm not making this up but in
regions of the country where you have a high percentage of young people the singles ads
in magazines say something like must love children or must love dogs or no smoking or no drug
in South Florida a lot of the singles ads that older people take out have the stipulation
must be able to drive at night because that becomes more and more of a problem as we age.
Okay so retinal ganglion cells begin to die off and atrophy with age and of course that
means since the nerve fibers of the ganglion cells form the optic nerve that means we're
also losing optic nerve fibers. As I indicated it's more of a serious consequence out in
the periphery than it is in the foveal region where most of the bipolar and ganglion cells
are located. Another consequence of these degenerative changes in the optic nerve has
to do with conduction speed. Neurons that have a large diameter and are heavily insulated
so that they don't short circuit have the most rapid conduction speed. Conduction speed
in a large diameter heavily myelinated nerve fiber is about 110 meters per second that's
about the upper limit of conduction speed in the human body. As we age however there
is a tendency for nerve fibers to decrease in diameter and for the insulation known as
the myelin sheath that electrically insulates them from their immediate neighbors to become
thinner and so conduction speed becomes slower and slower and slower. By the time you were
in your 70s you may have lost 25% of your conduction speed so maybe instead of conducting
at 100 to 110 meters per second your neurons are now conducting at 75 or so meters per
second. I mean that's not terrible but it does have some consequences for well things
like your detection of flicker. There is a phenomenon called critical flicker frequency
abbreviated CFF that is sometimes tested by neurologists to get a sense of the efficiency
of nerve conduction. Now CFF involves seeing what is the fastest rate of a flickering light
that you can detect before it blends into a steady light. For normal healthy young people
the flicker rate that they can detect before it blends into a steady light is about 44
flickers per second. Now you see in most buildings in the United States the house current is
110 volt 60 cycle alternating current meaning that the light that you are probably experiencing
right now is actually flickering 60 times per second. That is above our CFF so we don't
experience a disturbing flicker. If it were possible to reduce this house light flicker
from 60 flickers per second down to 55 you would still not be disturbed, 50 you would
not be disturbed. By 45 some of you would begin to see a disturbing flicker. If instead
of a group of young people we were measuring CFF critical flicker frequency and a group
of 70 year olds we would find that you would have to lower that flicker rate an additional
25% down to 33 flickers per second before they would begin to see a disturbing flicker.
This is indicative of the fact that as we get older our nervous systems conduct information
more slowly and we are less able to follow rapidly occurring visual stimuli. Now a warning,
I once was demonstrating CFF to a group of excuse me people of different ages using a
strobe light and I started at a high intensity of flicker and I began to slowly reduce the
flicker and I would have people put their hands up when they could no longer, when they
could now begin to see it stop being a steady light and begin to see flicker. It turns out
that a flickering stimulus is a very potent stimulus for driving the entire EEG wave and
if people are seizure prone they should not look at a flickering light. This experiment
that I was doing to show people how a steady light if you reduce the flicker rate can be
seen as a flicker could have had disastrous consequences because as a matter of fact somebody
started showing signs of seizure and I quickly turned the light off and luckily this thing
abated but you should not play around with a flickering light with people that may or
may not have a susceptibility to seizure disorder if you don't know whether they do or not.
One more point quickly about these age-related changes in talking about things like detached
retina and cataracts. They are primarily a condition that occurs with age. There are
two segments of the population however that are at greater risk for detached retina and
cataracts and these are professional boxers and professional soccer players. It turns out
that repeated blows to the head can greatly increase the likelihood of detached retina
and or cataracts so we need to keep that in mind and avoid blows to the head whenever
possible. In our next lecture we will begin a discussion of a different sensory system,
the auditory system. Thank you.
