Lecture 8 Hearing the Inner Ear
Hi and welcome to lecture 8. Just to recap, in lecture 7 we discussed how sound waves
of between 20 and 20,000 cycles per second produce vibrations in the eardrum. These vibrations
are transmitted through the middle ear by the chain of bones known as the ossicles and
they are delivered to an inner ear structure known as the cochlea. In today's lecture
we are going to talk about what happens to those sound waves when they reach the inner
ear. Now first let me describe the cochlea. It is a bony structure that resembles a snail
shell having two and a half turns in the human ear, three and a half turns in the guinea
pig ear, different animals have different configurations in the cochlea. In order to
get a better understanding of the cochlea we are about to do an impossible experiment
with it. Let's grab it by the fat end which is called the basal end or the base and it
is pointy end which is called the apical end or the apex and let's stretch that thing
out as if it were elastic. What we find when we stretch out the cochlea and get it out
of its coiled shape is that it is about 35mm in length. We also see that the cochlea is
made up of two canals, an upper canal known as the scala vestibuli and a lower canal known
as the scala timpani. And the upper and lower canals are separated from each other by a
flexible membrane known as the basilar membrane. It is also the case that the upper and lower
canals are filled with an incompressible fluid known as perilymph. Perilymph has the consistency
of blood and it is about 20 times thicker, 20 times more viscous or dense than air. This
will become significant in a few minutes. Alright, the scala vestibuli has an opening
at the basal end that is covered by a flexible membrane. This opening is known as the oval
window. The scala timpani also has a window into it that is covered by a flexible membrane
and the scala timpani's window is known as the round window. The upper and lower canals,
the scala vestibuli and the scala timpani can communicate with each other through a
small hole in the basilar membrane at the apical end of the cochlea known as the helicatrima.
Now we know just about enough to begin to figure out how the cochlea does its job. You
only need to have another piece of information and we will be ready to go. The footplate
of the stapes, remember, the stapes being the final bone in the ossicles that transmit
vibrations through the middle ear, the footplate of the stapes fits nicely into the oval window
and fits snugly against the flexible membrane in the oval window. When the oval window is
moved in by vibrations from the stapes, it causes pressure on the incompressible perilymph
which is transmitted down and around and through the helicatrima and the pressure relief valve
is the round window. So when the oval window is pushed in, the round window moves out.
So we have a situation where air molecules impinging on the ear end up causing the back
and forth movement of the perilymph in the cochlea. Okay now, when you move an incompressible
fluid back and forth over the surface of a flexible membrane, it is a physical property
of such a system that the membrane, the basilar membrane, moves up and down. Remember there
are 15,500 auditory receptors on the basilar membrane known as hair cells because each of
these little receptors has 3 or 4 hair-like tufts projecting out of it. Above the hair
cells is a stiff inflexible immovable structure known as the tectorial membrane. When the
basilar membrane is moved up and down by the back and forth movement of the perilymph,
the hair cells are actually physically displaced, physically sheared, physically bent against
the tectorial membrane. This turns out to be the necessary stimulus for the experience
of hearing. So the oval window moves in, the round window moves out. The oval window moves
out, the round window moves in, the perilymph moves back and forth, the basilar membrane
moves up and down, the hair cells are physically sheared against the tectorial membrane. When
the hair cells are physically sheared, they release a neurotransmitter that produces electrical
impulses that travel to the brain and the brain experiences what it interprets as sound.
Now remember from lecture 7, we talked about the three attributes of the auditory stimulus
that the ear can analyze. These were the source of the sound, sound localization, they were
the loudness of the sound and the frequency or pitch of the sound. Remember that sound
localization occurs because we have two ears and sounds typically reach one ear a little
bit faster than the other ear and they usually are a little bit louder in one ear than the
other depending upon which side of us the sound source is located on and that there
are cells in the superior olivary complex that can compare time of arrival differences
at the two ears and give us an estimate of where in space the sound is located. Remember
it's most difficult to locate a space, a sound source on the midline because the cues are
equivalent at the two ears. Okay so sound of a time of arrival we've talked about briefly
previously. Let's talk a bit about loudness. The way that loudness is analyzed in the cockley
is as follows. A loud sound produces a greater extent of movement of the basilar membrane
and the way it does this is because the eardrum is pushed in and out to a greater extent,
the ossicles vibrate to a greater extent, these vibrations produce greater movement
on the oval window and the round window and greater force between the movement of the
perilymph and the basilar membrane is moved up and down to a greater extent, producing
a greater extent of shearing of the hair cells against the factorial membrane which results
in a greater electrical output from the hair cells transmitted to the brain. So when the
brain gets more electrical activity it knows the sound is louder. When the brain gets less
electrical activity from a population of hair cells the brain interprets that as the
sound being softer. So loudness is coded in the brain by the number of electrical impulses
which is determined by the force with which the hair cells are sheared against the basilar
membrane. The other attribute of the auditory stimulus that we said the ear can analyze
is frequency. Now this, I find this story fascinating. In order to share this fascination
with you I need to give you a little bit more information about the basilar membrane and
then I'm going to share with you some very fascinating work by a very interesting man
who took an interest in the human ear because it was so much more effective and had such
higher quality sound resolving properties than the telephone equipment that he was working
with at the time. Anyway first let's talk about the basilar membrane. I'm going to
introduce the basilar membrane by describing it as being equivalent to an impossible guitar
string. Now let me remind you of some of the characteristics of guitar strings. A thin
tightly strung guitar string when stimulated is going to give you a high frequency. Most
people know this. A guitar string of medium size diameter and strung to a moderate extent
if you pluck it it will give you a mid-range tone and a fat loosely strung guitar string
when plucked will give you a low frequency tone. Well the basilar membrane contains all
those characteristics in it for the following reason. As we go from bass to apex the basilar
membrane changes its width. It goes from being a thin guitar string to a fat guitar string
continuously. At the basal end the basilar membrane is only 0.04 millimeters in width.
As we move toward the apex the basilar membrane increases its width until at the apex of the
cochlea it's 0.5 millimeters in width. That's a significant increase in width from 0.04
to 0.5 over a distance of 35 millimeters. The other interesting physical property of
the basilar membrane is that in addition to having a different width going from bass to
apex it has different factors of stiffness. It is a hundred times stiffer at the basal
end than it is at the apical end. So that essentially the basilar membrane is acting
as a continuously changing guitar string as we go from bass to apex, changing its resonance
properties from high frequencies to mid-range frequencies to low frequencies as we go along
its length. This gentleman, the communications engineer
that I alluded to briefly a moment ago, is named George von Beckershey and he is credited
with creating a model of frequency analysis on the cochlea that is considered to be generally
accepted as the way the ear works. Now Dr. von Beckershey, as I said, was working as
a communications engineer. This was in Budapest, Hungary in the 1930s and he was in fact so
impressed with the quality of the human ear that he more or less lost interest in the
telephone equipment he was working with and he began to wonder how does the ear analyze
sounds, different frequencies of sounds. And in a way I'm not quite sure how he did it
but he managed to come into possession of a freshly deceased human body. Now the fact
that the human cadaver was freshly deceased is important because none of the membranes
had dried out, none of the fluids had begun to deteriorate, so he was able to work on
a human ear that could do everything except signal the brain with electrical impulses.
So what Dr. von Beckershey did was he drained the perilymph out of the scala timpani and
the scala vestibuli and he replaced it with a saline solution with a suspension of shiny
aluminum particles in it. Then he drilled holes in the cochlea so that using a dissecting
microscope and fiber optics techniques he could look in and watch what was happening
on the basilar membrane when he presented different frequencies of stimulation to the
cadaver's ear. What Dr. von Beckershey saw when he presented a high frequency stimulus
was that the back and forth movement of this fluid that he had put in place of the perilymph
caused a bulge or a wave to occur in the basilar membrane. Back and forth movement of the perilymph
in a normal living person would cause a bulge too. The bulge however was located at a place
along the basilar membrane that corresponded to the frequency of the input stimulus and
the resonance properties of that particular part of the basilar membrane. In other words,
von Beckershey presented a high frequency tone to the ear. This bulge which was equivalent
to the bulge you see in the ocean when a wave is forming which is why his model was called
the traveling wave model. This bulge is reminiscent of a wave forming in the ocean. If a high
frequency is presented to the ear the bulge occurs at the basal end of the cochlea and
basal hair cells are stimulated by being sheared against the tectorial membrane. As he lowered
the input stimulus to the cadaver's ear this bulge moved from the base toward the middle
of the cochlea, the middle of the basilar membrane and as he continued to lower the frequency
the bulge moved to the apical end. So there is a bulge that is produced in the basilar
membrane by different frequencies and this bulge will occur at different locations along
the cochlea based on the physical characteristics of the membrane, the impossible guitar string
characteristics of the membrane. It's been called the traveling wave model of hearing.
Dr. von Beckershey was so impressed with this that he wondered if the ears of all animals
worked the same way with this traveling wave notion. You see the hair cells are all identical.
Hair cells in and of themselves can't tell us anything about frequency but the basilar
membrane determines which hair cells will be stimulated and send messages to the brain
by the mechanical arrangement of the basilar membrane. So when the brain receives messages
from the basal turn hair cells the brain learns to say ah that's a high frequency tone. When
the mid range hair cells are stimulated by virtue of a mid range tone and the middle
of the basilar membrane being sensitive to that frequency the brain says ah that's a
mid range tone and of course for a low frequency tone the apical hair cells are stimulated
and the brain learns to interpret that as a low frequency tone. Dr. von Beckershey studied
animals all the way from the mouse to the elephant to see if all of their ears all of
their inner ears analyze frequencies the same way and in fact it was the case. The story
of how he came in possession of an elephant is probably worth quickly relating to you.
He was wondering where am I going to get an elephant and he happens to read the Budapest
daily newspaper one day and there's a little filler item about ah gee it's too bad but
the elephant at the zoo died so he quickly calls the zoo and he says here you have a
dead elephant can I have it and they said well ordinarily there'd be no problem but
we've already sent it to the glue factory rats. Well what he did was he dispatched a
couple of his assistants to race to the glue factory and they had already disposed of the
carcass but miraculously the head was still intact so they got this elephant head and
they took it back to him and he dissected out the middle ear and excuse me the inner ear
the cochlea of this elephant and there of course was this huge basilar membrane and
the huge canals and what have you but it worked the same way. The traveling wave model also
is the way that an elephant's inner ear analyzes different sound frequencies. So the cochlea
causes the hair cells to be stimulated and the hair cells go into the eighth nerve connect
with fibers in the eighth nerve and they tell the brain about these different frequencies.
Speaking of the eighth nerve let's do a little math. I mentioned earlier that there are 15,500
auditory receptors on the basilar membrane. Well somebody finally got around to counting
the number of nerve fibers in the eighth nerve and in the auditory nerve and there was an
inequivalence it didn't quite add up. It turns out that there are 15,500 receptors but there
were 16,000 fibers in the eighth nerve. Now what are these extra 500 fibers doing? By
the way the gentleman who discovered this was named Rasmussen so these extra 500 nerve
fibers in the eighth nerve were originally called the bundle of Rasmussen. Later on it
was discovered that these 500 fibers did actually originate in the part of the brain part of
the brain known as the superior olivary complex which we in the business abbreviate by calling
it the olive and they ended in the cochlea actually connecting with hair cells in the
cochlea. So the name of this bundle of fibers was changed from the bundle of Rasmussen to
the olivocochlear bundle because it is a convention in this particular branch of science to name
fiber bundles in the brain according to where they start and where they end because then the name
gives you some anatomical information. So somebody hearing olivocochlear bundle would know oh this
starts in the olive or superior olivary complex and it ends in the cochlea. Similarly if a fiber
bundle starts in the spinal cord and ends in the thalamus we call it the spinothalamic tract. If a
fiber bundle starts in the thalamus and ends in the cortex we call it the thalamocortical tract. So
now the olivocochlear bundle is in line with other bundles of nerve fibers in the nervous system
at least in terms of its name. But it turns out that perhaps a little more vocabulary is in order
here. Nerve fibers that come from the outside of the body into the brain are known as afferent
nerves. Nerve fibers that carry information from the brain back out to the periphery are called
efferent nerves. 15,500 of the eighth nerve fibers are afferent. They are carrying messages from the
receptors to the brain. The olivocochlear bundle is efferent. It was carrying information from
the brain back to the receptors. What could it be carrying? What information could the brain be
sending to the receptors? Well further research was done, electrophysiological research, animal
studies and so on. And it was discovered that when you electrically stimulate the olivocochlear
bundle you desensitize auditory receptors. And the notion was proposed that perhaps the olivocochlear
bundle is a neural mechanism that contributes to the phenomenon that we discussed earlier called
selective attention. So animal experiments were done where an animal's hearing sensitivity was
being measured in behavioral ways that I don't have time to get into. And while the animal's
hearing sensitivity was being measured they would stimulate its olivocochlear bundle and its
hearing sensitivity would decrease. So it may well be that when we are engrossed in reading a book
or watching television or something like that and we choose to focus on the auditory modality the
brain actually turns down the volume on our auditory system so that we are less likely to hear,
well not only less likely to hear random noise and distractions but less likely to hear somebody
call our names and less likely to hear the telephone ring. And it is also likely that this
mechanism, this efferent mechanism of the brain sending nerve fibers out to the senses may have
its its analog in other senses besides audition. It may well be that there are physiological
mechanisms underlying the phenomenon of selective attention. Okay, another point I would like to
make about this issue of hearing and hearing sensitivity is that there is a distinction
between air conductive hearing and bone conductive hearing. Virtually everything I've been talking
about to date is an example of air conductive hearing where sound waves enter the ear and set
up vibrations in the eardrum and the eardrum vibrates the ossicles etc and it's delivered
eventually by the foot plate of the state piece to the oval window. That's an example of air
conductive hearing. We also hear through bone conductive hearing. Now remember other substances
besides air molecules can carry sound waves. Remember Tonto heard the train coming by putting
his ear to the steel rail so sound waves travel in steel. Sound waves also travel in bone and this
is another way that we hear. Low frequency vibrations can actually be set up in the major
bones of the body and these vibrations can be transmitted to the temporal bone. The temporal
bone is the hardest bone in the body. It's the bone in which the cochlea is encased. When you put
your fingertips behind your ears you are touching your temporal bone and if you're in a private
place where you won't embarrass yourself talk out loud and you will feel vibrations from the sound
of your voice in your temporal bone because what's happening is the vocal cords are setting up those
vibrations directly in the temporal bone and the temporal bone is transmitting those vibrations
directly to the cochlea and the peri-lymph in the cochlea without going through the middle ear
and the ossicles or any of that business. So we hear through two media air conductive hearing
through the air and bone conductive hearing through the bones. Most people the first time they hear
themselves talk over a tape recorder are surprised at what their voice sounds like and most of us are
disappointed when we hear ourselves. What's missing is the bone conductive hearing components
because when you talk you hear yourself in two ways air conduction going out your mouth and
into your ears and through bone conduction the vocal cords directly stimulating the temporal bone.
When you hear yourself over a tape recorder you're hearing yourself the way you sound to others
primarily through air conductive hearing. Now I'm also going to do a demonstration of bone
conductive hearing. Remember bone conductive hearing works best for low frequencies. Air conductive
hearing works best for high frequencies. I have two tuning forks here. This one when struck produces
a frequency of a thousand cycles per second. I'm going to strike it I'm going to hold it to my ear
and I'm hearing a nice pure thousand cycle per second tone. Now I'm going to press the butt
of this tuning fork against my temporal bone and I hear absolutely nothing because the temporal bone
is unable to faithfully transmit or transmit in any way frequencies of a thousand cycles per second.
Now I'm going to pick up this large tuning fork which is tuned to a frequency of 125 cycles per
second and again I'm going to tap it and I'm going to listen and I'm hearing a low frequency
125 cycle tone. Now I'm going to press the butt of the tuning fork against my temporal bone
and again I hear 125 cycle per second tone and it's localized to the right side.
Now I'm going to do this again except I'm going to press the butt of the tuning fork
to the center of my skull and again I hear a 125 cycle per second tone but now it is not localized
to the right ear. It sounds like it's coming from a phantom sound source located right above
my head because the the sound cues are equivalent to both ears and so the the brain interprets it
is coming from someplace along the midline. Okay bone conductive hearing can actually
be transmitted through any of the major bones in the body even with my suit jacket on I'm going to
now try snacking this tone this 125 cycle per second tuning fork and pressing it to my elbow
and you're going to have to take my word for it. I can hear this tone the vibrations are being
transmitted through the major bones reaching the temporal bone and being transmitted on to the
cochlea that's bone conductive hearing. Now there is some clinical relevance in knowing the difference
between air conductive hearing and bone conductive hearing because some types of hearing loss affect
one type of hearing more than they will affect the other type of hearing so for example if an
audiologist is trying to determine what type of hearing loss you have and there are three types
there is conductive hearing loss sensory neural hearing loss and central hearing loss and they
have differential effects on on either air conductive hearing or bone conductive hearing.
So for example if I were going for an audiological evaluation the audiologist might very well do
something akin to what I just did here test me with high and low frequency tuning forks
through both air conductive hearing and bone conductive hearing. Now I'm going to talk a little
bit more about conductive hearing loss today I'm not going to say anything more about sensory
neural hearing loss or central hearing loss because central and sensory neural hearing loss are
examples of hearing loss that are much more likely to occur as we get older and in the lecture
to follow this one in lecture nine I'm going to be talking about age related factors and hearing
loss. I am going to talk a little bit more about conductive hearing loss now because that is the
only category of hearing loss that occurs with equal well actually with greater frequency in
children and young people as it does in the elderly. So and conductive hearing loss is a type
of hearing loss that can be diagnosed by comparing the differences in air conductive hearing and
bone conductive hearing. So let me share with you some of the types of conductive hearing loss
that we might find in well children as well as older people. One type of conductive hearing loss
is what we call obstructive hearing loss and this is when something is obstructing
the sound waves entering the ear and of course it's going to be more harmful for
air conductive hearing than bone conductive hearing. So if an audiologist tests and finds
that air conductive hearing is pretty bad but bone conductive hearing is intact you immediately
suspect obstructive hearing loss. Obstructive hearing loss can occur if a child for instance
sticks jelly beans in his or her ears. There was actually a case in a school one of my children
went to where a young boy had the habit of pulling the erasers off his pencils and sticking these
rubber erasers in his ears and sometimes he would forget they were in there or sometimes they would
be in so deep he couldn't do anything about it. In the case of obstructive hearing loss from objects
that kids stick in their ears it may sound funny but it's actually better if they stick it in both
ears and have bilateral hearing loss because if they stick an object in one ear they can still
hear out of the other ear and many of them are content to get a long hearing with one ear
and this becomes a problem because the longer that ear goes without adequate stimulation the more
likely that the problem is going to become more complicated. So if kids are going to stick things
in their ears in terms of identifying that they have a problem and getting it dealt with it's
better if they stick them in both ears. Bilateral hearing loss. Another form of conductive hearing
loss is called otitis media. Now otitis media is the general term used when some medical condition
and infection and inflammation or some kind of irritation causes the accumulation of fluid
in the middle ear and fluid in the middle ear impairs air conductive hearing again because it
impairs the ability of the ossicles to vibrate freely and loosely and transmit vibrations
faithfully. So when otitis media is diagnosed and here again it's best if it occurs in both ears
because if it occurs in a child in only one ear especially if the child is is young and unaware
of the fact that the some issue is going on with the hearing. So it's better if otitis media occurs
in both ears too. My youngest daughter when she was a child appeared to be susceptible to
otitis media and we would notice that she wasn't as responsive and she didn't seem to hear us so
well unless she was looking at us and we would have her checked and sure enough she had a hearing
loss and the physician would on a number of occasions recommend that tubes be put in her
ears to permit this fluid to drain out. This is a procedure that apparently quite a few young
people go through. My daughter needed it probably on four occasions for some reason she was susceptible
to otitis media but she seems to have outgrown it. I'm not going to tell you how old she is because
she would hate me if I did but she's now an adult with children of her own and she has had no
recurrence of these problems. Now here's the thing about otitis media. We think of it as something
that is likely to happen in children and that's true. It can happen later in life too. It's not
simply a condition of children. The other thing about otitis media is it can happen in animals.
The family dog can have hearing loss from otitis media. The family cat can have hearing loss from
otitis media from fluid in the middle ear. I had a first-hand opportunity to witness this situation.
We were engaged in an experiment teaching cats to perform complex auditory pattern
discrimination tasks. Now the cat is an exquisitely sensitive auditory animal and they
usually learn auditory tasks quite well if you reward them appropriately but one cat was lagging.
He was just not catching on and I couldn't imagine what was going on because the other
cats were learning this auditory task quite rapidly. Well as it turns out this animal must
have had some kind of sickness because the animal died about a third of the way through the experiment
and post mortem we examined his auditory system and when we opened up the middle ear
we felt very bad about not being aware of this sooner. The middle ear was packed with pus. As a
matter of fact both of his middle ears were packed with pus. This cat had a serious conductive hearing
loss due to otitis media. So the family animals are at risk for this condition too.
Okay to wrap up in this lecture we talked about the way that the hair cells on the
basilar membrane analyze frequencies and intensities and we talked about the olivococular
bundle and selective attention and we've talked about the various categories of conductive hearing
loss and in our next lecture we will continue our coverage of the auditory system restricting
ourselves to age-related changes in auditory functioning. Thank you.
