Lecture 9, Hearing, Age-Related Changes
Welcome to lecture 9. In lecture 8 we talked about the way that the auditory hair cells
on the cochlea resolve frequency analysis and we talked about things like the olivocochlear
bundle and selective attention and also talked about a type of hearing loss known as conductive
hearing loss. In lecture 9 we are going to restrict our attention to the aging process
and the way the aging process changes our physical structures for hearing and how that
in turn alters the way we perceive sounds. I can give you the punchline first. Virtually
every aspect of hearing is diminished to some extent by the aging process. Our ability to
perceive sound levels is impacted. Our ability to discriminate different frequencies. Our
ability to discriminate human speech. All of these show decreases with time. Our ability
to follow rapidly occurring auditory stimuli. Okay, so that's the broad picture. However,
I will say that there are a few bright spots. For one thing, hearing loss associated with
the aging process is now recognized as not being as great as was formally believed and
it has to do with something we discussed briefly in an earlier lecture, the fact that personality
changes tend to occur with aging. More specifically, we appear to get more conservative in our
approach to life, more cautious if you will. Now sadly, one of the reasons for these personality
changes is the fact that we live in a society that basically has negative attitudes toward
the elderly and we kind of take on those attitudes ourselves and we become very sensitive to
making mistakes and errors and we learn to value accuracy over speed. So what happens
in an audiological evaluation is if you're a young person and the audiologist says, put
your finger up when you hear the tone and you think you heard the tone, up goes your
finger because you're not that worried about making a mistake. An older person may think,
well, that might have been the tone but I don't want to make a mistake so I'll wait until
I'm sure and then I'll put my finger up. And so for personality reasons, older people
were perceived as having worse hearing than they actually did. Okay, so that's a little
bit of a positive note. The fact is it's been known for hundreds of years that as we age,
our auditory capabilities are diminished somewhat. In one of the earliest recorded systematic
experiments, a group of human subjects of different ages were blindfolded and a whispered
message was delivered to them. And it turns out that when you are 50 years of age or younger,
you could hear this whispered message when the speaker was 10 meters or more from you.
So from 51 to 55, the speaker had to move a couple of steps closer. They could hear
this whispered message from 8 to 10 meters distant. When you went to 56 to 60, you had
to be 6 to 8 meters from the speaker. When you were 61 to 65, it was 4 to 6 meters from
the speaker. And when you were 65 to 70, you had to be from 1 to 4 meters from the speaker
to hear this same whispered message. So in fact, hearing loss as a function of the aging
process is for real. Now this hearing loss takes the form of impacting both bone-conductive
hearing and air-conductive hearing. And we will look at some of the ways that both air-conductive
and bone-conductive hearing are impacted by aging. Let's take air-conductive hearing first.
The ear canal, the external auditory meatus, is made up of cartilage. And cartilage shows
the generative changes as we age. So what happens is the opening to the ear canal gets
smaller and the diameter of the ear canal changes as these degenerative changes in the cartilage
take place. Another age-related change that affects air-conductive hearing has to do with
physical changes in the eardrum itself. As we age, the eardrum becomes thicker and stiffer.
And of course, this means that it requires greater pressure to vibrate the eardrum so
that whereas a healthy young person can hear a tone of .0002 dynes per square centimeter,
a very faint amount of pressure, we're going to require, as we age, considerably more pressure
to experience a threshold sound. It's just part of the game.
Another factor that contributes to deficits in air-conductive hearing in the elderly is
a condition called otosclerosis. Now, this is a hereditary condition, but it shows signs
of affecting people in about 10 percent of the cases. 10 percent of the population shows
some degree of otosclerotic changes. In otosclerosis, there is a tendency for a soft bony growth
to form where the foot plate of the stapes fits into the oval window. Now, in its early
stages, this has a minimal effect on hearing sensitivity, but as that bony growth continues
to thicken and grow, it can eventually totally immobilize the foot plate of the stapes and
no vibrations reach the oval window and the peri-limp in the cochlea.
A problem is that sometimes otosclerosis only occurs in one ear and the person gets used
to getting along as best he or she can with the other ear while the otosclerotic condition
gets worse and worse and worse. And if that ear remains immobilized long enough, it will
begin to show degenerative changes in the receptors themselves. The receptors need to be stimulated
to stay healthy. So now when somebody is diagnosed with otosclerosis, in earlier times the physician
would make an incision in the eardrum and go in with a surgical implement and fracture
the bony growth. This was called a stapes mobilization procedure. The problem is, if
you are prone to otosclerotic changes, that bony growth is going to grow back again and
again and again. The procedure now for treating otosclerosis is to go in through the eardrum
and disarticulate the stapes and just throw it away and replace it with a prosthetic stapes
made out of metal or Teflon, something that doesn't have any tissue reaction but won't
grow to bone. So that procedure can be done once and then you are fixed.
About one percent of the population has serious hearing loss from otosclerosis. As a matter
of fact, historians believe that the cause of Beethoven's deafness was otosclerosis because
his hearing got worse and worse and worse, probably as the stapes fused to the oval window
and the reason they believe this is because apparently he could still hear by bone conduction
if he were to put his ear and his head and his temporal bone right on the piano when
he played it, apparently through vibrations, he could still hear the note. So the best
guess is that otosclerosis was the cause of Beethoven's deafness.
Now let's talk about some changes in the temporal bone leading to deficits in bone
conductive hearing. Remember bone conductive hearing is best for low frequencies and the
temporal bone where I'm putting my fingertips right behind the ear picks up vibrations
and transmits them directly to the cochlea. As we age, the temporal bone becomes brittle
and porous and it loses bone density and its ability to transmit low frequencies is impacted
negatively. By the way, it's not just the temporal bone that shows these changes with
age. Our bones in general show degenerative changes. Here's the thing, bone is not lifeless.
Bone is living tissue. Our bones are constantly being degenerated and reabsorbed and new
bone is regenerated to take its place. That's why bones heal. Now as we age, the degeneration
and absorption process continues at the same rate but the regeneration process slows down
which is why we lose bone density and that's why bones heal more slowly as we get older.
So what's happening in the temporal bone is a microcosm of what's happening through our
whole bodies as these degenerative changes occur in the bone. Now there's something we
can do about it. Make sure you don't have a calcium deficiency and engage in weight
bearing exercise and that will slow the progress of this. When too much of this loss of bone
density and bone porousness and brittleness occurs, the condition is diagnosed as senile
osteoporosis and we want to stay away from that.
Another condition that is directly related to age and its effect on hearing is so common
that it has its own name. It's called presbycusis. Presbycusis is defined as a progressive loss
of hearing for high frequencies as a function of age. Now let's take a look at that definition.
Progressive, that means the longer you live the worse it gets. Loss is perfectly straightforward.
You're losing your hearing. High frequencies as a function of age. So what happens is we
begin to lose high frequencies and by the way this starts before you even reach age
20 because when you're a child you can perceive frequencies of up to 20,000 cycles per second.
By the time you're in your late 20s maybe you're only hearing 18,000 cycles per second.
By the time you're in your 30s you've probably lost a few thousand cycles off your upper
frequency range at that age. By the time you're 60 your dynamic frequency range is less than
half of what it was when you were a child. By age 60 most of us will have no hearing
for frequencies above 8,000 cycles per second. Now luckily virtually most important speech
sounds occur in frequency ranges well below 8,000 but you may lose a couple of high frequency
components to speech sounds. But basically when you're 60 Presbycusis is not playing
a significant role in our inability to understand speech.
Now Presbycusis is a phenomenon that is not just found in industrialized societies like
ours where we have all this noise pollution. Cultural anthropologists who have studied
people all over the surface of the planet have sometimes done hearing tests on some of
these people that live in non-industrialized societies where they don't listen to buses
and Harley-Davidson's and jet planes and things of that nature. And what they discover
is that in every society the older people do in fact begin to lose high frequency hearing.
It's not as prominent as it is in our society because noise contributes to that. But Presbycusis
seems to be a characteristic of the human ear and the aging process.
Now we have some anatomical studies suggesting what is going on. Microscopic examinations
of human cochlear material suggest that as we age atrophy begins to occur in basal cell
basal turn hair cells. That is the basal cells are the ones closer to the oval window and
the round window begin to atrophy. And the older we are the further this atrophy progresses
from the base toward the apex. Now what is the factor that makes basal hair cells so
vulnerable to age-induced degeneration? Well it seems to be the case that basal hair
cells are at risk because they are so close to the oval window. And every time the oval
window is stimulated and that traveling wave of umbecuses is generated the basal hair cells
are stimulated at least in passing. So whereas mid-range and low-frequency hair cells are
stimulated when a mid-range or low-frequency tone is presented the basal hair cells are
involved at least briefly every time a sound is produced. And apparently this is a so they
wear out as a factor of overuse with age. Now in addition to Presbycusis there is another
phenomenon that is associated with the aging process that I would like to share with you.
I have to introduce a new vocabulary term to you. I'm going to be talking about a structure
called the stria vascularis. We haven't mentioned this before. The stria vascularis is a thin
highly vascularized tissue layer found in the inner wall of the cochlea. Right on the
inside of this bony wall of the cochlea is this strip of tissue known as the stria vascularis.
It's got a very interesting capability. The stria vascularis can generate a plus 80 millivolt
DC electrical potential. So when researchers early in the process of learning how the auditory
system works when they stuck electrodes into different parts of the cochlea they were surprised
to find a DC potential, a plus 80 millivolt DC potential being generated and they finally
tracked it down to this highly vascularized tissue layer, the stria vascularis. This DC
potential has been called the standing DC potential because it's there regardless of
whether the animal is awake or asleep or eating or hearing something or not hearing
something the standing DC potential is a constant. Now what could it be doing? This 80 millivolt
plus 80 millivolt is an unusual electrical event to record anywhere in the body. What's
it doing here in the cochlea and the stria vascularis? Well people began to think about
the stria vascularis in light of another interesting anomaly dealing with the auditory system.
It turns out that the electrical output of stimulated hair cells on the basilar membrane
is actually greater than the mechanical input of being sheared against the tectorial membrane.
Then people just kind of accepted that. Well that's kind of interesting but it's good news.
The electrical output is greater than would be predicted from the mechanical input to
the receptors to the hair cells. Then somebody said what if the stria vascularis is acting
as a battery and it actually amplifies the electrical output to the hair cells and makes
our hearing more sensitive than it would be in the absence of this DC potential. So animal
experiments were conducted where researchers occluded the blood supply to the stria vascularis.
They either reduced the blood supply or cut it off entirely and what they found is that
they could lower the electrical potential of the stria vascularis from plus 80 to plus
50 or 40 or they could totally abolish it and they measured the hearing sensitivity of
animals who had had the stria vascularis tampered with in this way and the more you occlude
the blood flow to the stria vascularis the worse the animal's hearing gets. So the hypothesis
that the stria vascularis acts as a battery to amplify the electrical output of the hair
cells appears to be an appropriate hypothesis and it's still one that has not been disproven.
Now let's extrapolate from these animal experiments to the human situation. Can we say that the
generation of the stria vascularis is partially responsible for the decreases in human hearing
sensitivity over time? Possibly because analysis of human cochlear material when you do a microscopic
evaluation of the inside of the cochlear wall you see that the stria vascularis does in fact
show signs of atrophy. So there's a very good chance that the decrease in hearing sensitivity
of the human ear with age is at least in part to the atrophy of the stria vascularis with
the resulting decrease in the standing DC potential. Okay let me mention another problem
that the aging ear has to contend with. As we age we fall victim to more and more illnesses
as our immune systems begin to weaken and so on we are more at risk for opportunistic
organisms, microorganisms and antigens to work their miscephalons and we have to take
more drugs. Well it turns out that some drugs are appropriately classified as ototoxic
drugs. An ototoxic drug is a drug that kills hair cells. Let me give you a well known and
famous example. Streptomycin, the antibiotic, is an ototoxic drug. Streptomycin used to
be the drug of choice to treat tuberculosis and so they would treat patients with tuberculosis
and their tuberculosis would get better but they would start losing their hearing. It was
discovered that Streptomycin kills hair cells and it is no longer used except in special
cases and for research purposes and so on. So Streptomycin is an example of an ototoxic
drug. There are seven other mycin antibiotics that are known to have ototoxic properties
and there are several diuretics that are known to have ototoxic properties. So we have here
a situation where as we get older and need more medications we have to be very careful
that our health care providers know about which drugs have ototoxic properties and which
ones are safe and what have you. Now taking ototoxic drugs in this country is far less
of a problem than it used to be because of widespread knowledge about ototoxic drugs
and what they can do to us. It remains a problem in the developing countries where there are
some life threatening illnesses and you seem to have a choice of taking a drug that may
hurt your hearing or dying of some disease and people are going to opt to take the drug.
So it's still a problem, more of a problem in some other countries than it is in this
country. Streptomycin still exists, it's still used but it's used primarily for research
purposes in psychoacoustics laboratories and well let me give you an example. Some years
ago the iron ear hospital a team of researchers was using Streptomycin to selectively kill
certain hair cells. They were working in the guinea pig so they drilled holes into different
portions of the guinea pig's cochlea and they applied Streptomycin directly to the
hair cells because they wanted to make the equivalent of blind spots in the visual field,
they were making blind spots in these animals' auditory field. They would put Streptomycin
directly on the hair cells and you could watch them, watch the hair cells shrivel up and die
right under the microscope. So that's about all that Streptomycin is good for unless you
don't care about your hearing. Okay, now I'm going to talk about the effects
of noise on the aging auditory system but I need to remind you that noise is bad for
anybody's auditory system at any age. Just a couple of quick examples of this. A team
of researchers from the iron ear hospital affiliated with my university some years ago
took a couple of cages of guinea pigs out to the greater Pittsburgh airport and they
had permission to leave them by a runway where jet planes landed and took off all day. They
left these guinea pigs on the runway for one day and then they collected the cages and
bring the guinea pigs back to the laboratory where the animals were sacrificed and their
auditory systems were microscopically analyzed. They had lost in one day 90% of their hair
cells from listening to jet aircraft. Now being up there on the runway is incredibly
loud and most of us are much too smart to listen to anything like that. But let me give
you another example of how noise at any age is something to be avoided. I have taught
for the past 30 years a course called sensation and perception and one of the things I sometimes
do is bring an audio oscillator and a speaker to class and do a free field audiological
test for the students. I say okay we're going to listen to tones. You're going to hear what
tones sound like and I can start at 50 cycles per second and turn the dial and go to 100
and 1000 and 10000 and just for fun I mean this free field audiological evaluation has
no clinical significance because it's you know people are sitting on the sides and way
in the back and what have you but just to give them a feel for what different frequencies
sound like and just out of curiosity I always say I'm going to now turn the dial up when
you stop hearing the sound put your hand up and by prediction to myself is because these
are 18 and 19 year olds that they're probably going to hear around 18,000 cycles per second
and it always amuses me to see at what frequency I can no longer hear it which is getting lower
and lower year by year. So I'm cranking up the dial and I notice a young man in the front
row right in front of the speaker who should be hearing it the best at 12,000 cycles per
second he puts his hand up so I don't want to stop and call attention to this I continue
turning up the dial and sure enough the rest of the class stop hearing it 17, 18 sometimes
18, 5 cycles per second I say let's do that again very quickly I thought maybe he misunderstood
put your hand up when you don't hear the tone and I crank it up again at 12,000 he puts
his hand up when the class was over I asked him if he had a minute or two to talk and
so we were talking and I said you know I was a little concerned that you stopped hearing
that tone at 12,000 cycles per second have you had any middle ear problems or any medical
conditions or anything no I said well what are your hobbies and outside interests what
do you what do you do in your spare time he says oh he says I belong to a trap shooting
club and I'm a small game hunter and I'm a target shooter I said oh so you shoot guns
a lot yes I do do you wear ear protection do you wear ear plugs or ear muffs no I don't
need them I'm used to it so I made two suggestions to the young man and I hope he took them both
if you're going to keep shooting wear ear plugs even if it doesn't look good or it's
not macho it'll save your hearing he's already lost he's got the hearing of somebody in his
50s and he's 18 years old the other thing I suggested was that he go to an audiologist
and get an accurate audiological assessment so noise is a no-no at any age and it's especially
a problem as we age because the aging ear is more sensitive to noise induced hearing
loss than a younger person this is especially true in industrialized societies such as ours
with loud buses and as a matter of fact if a young person and an old person both mow
their lawn with a power mower and the engine is too loud or the muffler is faulty the young
person may get away with doing that for a few years before they experience measurable
hearing loss in an older person a matter of months and they will have hearing loss a rule
of thumb is any situation that you find yourself in that produces a ringing in your ears get
out of that situation this ringing in the ears is an injury discharge an irritation discharge
of the eighth nerve it's called tinnitus t-i-n-n-i-t-u-s tinnitus so if you're in a situation
and you come out of that situation and your ears are ringing don't go there anymore it
isn't worth it now it doesn't mean that you've got permanent hearing loss but it means that
if you stayed in that situation long enough you probably would experience some degree
of permanent hearing loss there are some medications that produce tinnitus for example
in large enough dosages aspirin will produce a ringing in the ears this is a well known
phenomenon people who are taking aspirin to manage their arthritis and one day the arthritis
really kicks up so they increase their dosage and they hear this ringing in their ears now
luckily the ringing in the ears associated with aspirin if you discontinue or reduce the
dosage the ringing goes away so that's a reversible hearing loss but anytime you're hearing a
ringing in your ears you're hearing at a less than optimal level of sensitivity now
historically there have always been occupations that had a lot of occupational noise associated
with them and people who went into that line of work just knew they were going to go deaf
but sometimes they needed the money or they had no other alternative for example during
the industrial revolution in England when power looms were invented these steam driven
looms so people who were English weavers and worked in these factories with these power
looms in a matter of years their hearing would be ruined but they needed to work to support
a family or what have you we have a similar phenomenon in this country when I was a kid
we used to hear the expression boiler makers deafness so and so has boilers makers deafness
it turns out that people who worked in boiler factories hammering the boilers and riveting
the boilers and beating on the whatever they eventually went deaf too now the government
is much more concerned with industrial noise levels now and there are rules and regulations
and so on one of the earliest rules of thumb that some federally funded researchers discovered
had to do with a relationship between temporary hearing loss and permanent hearing loss what
they discovered was if you work in a job where at the end of the day you had a ringing
in your ears what they would do is they would let you work at that job for eight hours then
they would give you a five minute rest in a quiet environment and then they would measure
your hearing sensitivity so the formula was temporary hearing loss five minutes after
an eight hour shift is equal approximately to the degree of permanent hearing loss that
you're going to experience if you work in this job eight hours a day for ten years so
they were able to come up with these kinds of equations okay continuing our discussion
of age related changes in the auditory system let's move on to the auditory nerve the eighth
nerve by the way as you're going to find out sooner or later the eighth nerve is only
half auditory and it's half for the vestibular system so I'm calling it the auditory nerve
for convenience its technical name is vestibulococcular nerve but auditory is shorter the auditory
nerve does in fact show degenerative changes as a function of the aging process what happens
is we will lose some nerve fibers and the remaining ones will their diameter will shrink
they will become smaller in diameter and as you may recall as nerve fibers get smaller
their conduction speed is reduced like the CFF phenomenon and vision as the optic nerve
shrinks our ability to perceive rapid rates of flicker is diminished so what happens in
the case of hearing is as the auditory nerve shows these degenerative changes we have problems
in speech intelligibility and speech comprehension especially if somebody speaks rapidly okay
now there are some measures we can take to combat this we can simply assertively say
to somebody please when you talk to me slow down speak up and look at me I've had to
do that with my wife I'll be in one room in our condo and she's in another room and
I hear this murmur and I say dear if I can't see you I can't understand what you're saying
so please look at me when you talk to me and the communication process will work out much
better so if we tell people to slow down to speak up and to look at us that will help
somewhat with the intelligibility and comprehension problems that we will face with aging the
other point I would like to make is that presbycusis the progressive loss of hearing for high
frequencies you would have to live to be about 130 before presbycusis would encroach on the
frequencies that include major speech sounds most major speech sounds so we don't have to
worry about some day not being able to understand speech unless you're planning to live to be
130 the other point I want to make is that conductive hearing losses for the most part
are fixable so if that's the problem get it fixed and sensory neural hearing losses all
but the very most serious can be improved significantly with some of the newer more effective hearing
aids so I guess it's time to wrap up in this lecture we have talked about age related changes
in the auditory system our next lecture will deal with the introduction of a new sensory
system the cutaneous system the so-called skin senses thank you
