Lecture 10, The Cutaneous System, Receptors, Pathways
Hello, welcome to Lecture 10.
In Lecture 9 we talked about age-related changes in the auditory system and we discussed
such things as presbycusis and the increased susceptibility to noise-induced hearing loss.
In Lecture 10 we're going to be talking about the cutaneous system, sometimes referred to
as the skin senses.
Now this sensory system is a bit different from hearing and vision.
The first two senses we talked about permit us to react and respond to events at a distance
from us.
They don't have to be moving.
In the case of audition, these distant events have to result in movement so that air vibrations
reach the ear.
The skin senses, the cutaneous system deals with events that are happening right on the
surface of the skin.
The most typical cutaneous events that we would experience would include warm or cold or touch,
light touch, deep touch, vibration.
Pain is also frequently considered as a part of the cutaneous system, but because pain
is different in so many important ways, I'm going to save a discussion of pain for a separate
lecture when we focus on pain entirely.
I will start out by telling you that the cutaneous system is our largest sense organ.
We have approximately two and a half square meters of skin.
Now that's a ballpark figure.
Some of us have a little more than two and a half meters, some of us have a little less.
But approximately two and a half square meters of skin, yards, meters loaded with millions
of receptors.
So the skin is our largest sense organ.
Skin is composed of four different layers.
The outermost layer is called the dead cell layer.
Now that makes some people feel creepy to think that we're covered with dead cells,
but they're actually good for us.
These dead cells help us to ward off microorganisms, and they also protect us from dangerous wavelengths
of electromagnetic radiation, so the dead cell layer is actually a positive thing.
The next layer in these four layers is called the epidermis.
This is a thin layer of live cells, and what the epidermis does is it continuously regenerates
cells to replace the dead skin cells that are constantly sloughing off of our skin.
We are losing dead cells regularly.
In fact, sometimes we help the process along by using a luffa in the shower to scrub off
dead skin cells.
So we have the dead skin cell layer, which is a protective layer.
Then we have the epidermis, which produces new cells to become the dead cell layer.
Then we have the dermis, the third layer of skin, and the dermis contains tiny structures
known as encapsulated end organs, which we now recognize are some of the sensory organs
of the cutaneous system.
Under the dermis is the subcutaneous fat.
Let me just back up a minute and say something else about that dead cell layer, because it
really does have a negative effect on some people, and they wonder, does everybody have
dead cells?
Yes, everybody does have dead cells.
In fact, even developing fetuses have dead cells, which is why amniocentesis works.
When a pregnant woman undergoes amniocentesis and they withdraw a sample of the amniotic
fluid, what they are looking for is dead cells that the fetus has sloughed off, so they can
test these cells for genetic anomalies, and that's also how they can tell the sex of an
unborn child by looking at the chromosomes in one of these sloughed off dead skin cells.
Okay, so it's not a bad thing.
It's probably a good thing that we have a dead cell layer.
Alright, let's talk about some of the research that permits us to have an understanding of
how the cutaneous system works.
Let's go back about 150 years when some of the first systematic research on the cutaneous
system was done.
A typical experiment in those days would be interested in a phenomenon called punctate
sensitivity.
What these researchers discovered was that each point on the skin is sensitive to a different
kind of cutaneous input.
In a typical punctate sensitivity experiment, an experimenter would get an ink pad and a
stamp, and stamp a grid on the forearm or on the chest or on some body part or other,
and this grid might be several square inches, but that particular part of skin would be
divided up into little one millimeter squares, one millimeter squares.
The subject would be blindfolded so that he or she didn't know what they were being touched
with, and then they would square by square, try and find out what cutaneous stimulus this
piece of skin was sensitive to, and they discovered what we now call punctate sensitivity.
They might find one square that was sensitive to deep touch but not to light touch.
They might find another square that was very sensitive to warm but not to cold.
They might find another square that when stimulated was very likely to produce pain.
They might find another square that was sensitive to nothing.
You could poke that little square with a pin and the subject wouldn't feel anything.
So they found warm squares, cold squares, pain squares, light touch squares, deep touch
squares.
Now you remember 150 years ago the instrumentation was rather primitive, somewhat inventive but
primitive.
For example, to measure light touch and deep touch sensitivity, they used something called
a one fry horse hair.
One fry, I guess, was the first gentleman to think of this.
It turns out that hairs from different parts of the horse have different diameters like
whiskers or tails or what have you.
And it turns out that when you use a horse hair, it always bends at the same amount of
applied pressure so they could deliver the same stimulus over and over again at the same
pressure because they would push the horse hair until the hair bent and then they would
know that that was the same stimulus they wanted to use repeatedly on all their subjects.
A thick hair would bend at a more intense pressure and a skinny horse hair would bend
at a lighter pressure so they attempted to achieve some standardization of stimulation.
So they would use one fry horse hairs to measure touch and pressure.
They would use thin wires dipped in baths of either warm water or cold water and monitor
the temperature to measure warm and cold spots and they would use a sharp instrument
and poke the individual to produce feelings of pain.
After the punctate sensitivity experiments taught these early researchers that the skin
is not uniformly sensitive to all cutaneous inputs, they took the next logical step and
started doing anatomical studies.
What is under the skin?
Now let me just digress a minute and tell you something about skin researchers.
A lot of them appear to be masochistic because when they need a piece of skin to lick out
under a microscope, frequently they take the skin off themselves.
So in one experiment, for example, one of the researchers himself had a grid stamped
on his arm and they measured touch and pressure and warm and cold and pain, and they did a
map of this piece of skin.
Then he had his forearm anesthetized and he had that patch of skin cut off and they looked
at it under a microscope and they discovered in the dermis what we now call the encapsulated
end organs.
By the way, I know some incredible stories about these skin researchers and some of the
things they've done.
One had a nerve severed in his forearm so that he could, as the nerve regenerated, find
out whether all the senses came back together or whether cold came back first and then touch
and then pressure.
Another one had a hole drilled in his tooth so he could see what it felt like when you
stimulate your tooth pulp.
Another one, it's too creepy to continue.
Anyway, the skin sample that was taken from this researcher's forearm was investigated
microscopically and they discovered these petinian corpuscles and mycenae corpuscles
and Krausen bulbs and ruffini cylinders, the so-called encapsulated end organs.
The mycenae corpuscle was thought to be the receptor for light touch.
The petinian corpuscle was thought to be the receptor for deep touch or pressure.
The Krausen bulb was thought to be the receptor for cold and the ruffini cylinder was thought
to be the receptor for warmth.
What was left in the skin in the dermis was free nerve endings which were kind of wispy
little nerve endings that didn't have an encapsulated end organ in bulb on them and
they were thought to be the receptors for pain.
Now enough punctate sensitivity experiments had been done over about a decade or so that
we can make some general statements about skin sensitivity.
One thing that the punctate sensitivity experiments told us is that touch sensitivity is greatest
out in the periphery of the body and touch sensitivity gets worse as we move toward the
midline.
We also found, or not we, but they found that pain sensitivity is greatest along the midline
of the body and gets worse as we move out to the periphery.
Now this makes perfect sense because if you come into a darkened room with maybe cinder
block walls and you're fumbling around for the light switch with your fingertips, if
the fingertips had great pain sensitivity that would be excruciating.
So since the fingertips don't have great pain sensitivity we can rub the cinder block
wall and we find the light switch and we turn the light on.
So pain sensitivity along the midline, what sense does that make?
Well the brain and the vital organs are along the midline.
So by having such great pain sensitivity along the midline we are given an early warning
if something is about to injure the brain or the internal organs and so we want pain
sensitivity to be greatest where the vital structures live and we want it to be least
out in the periphery so that we can explore our environment through touch without experience
in pain.
The touch sensitivity that is greatest in the fingertips and as we move away from the
fingertips toward the midline, touch sensitivity gets worse and worse.
For example, using my fingertips I can feel right through the material of my pants pocket
and I can feel a quarter here and I can feel a money clip here.
You can identify objects by your fingertip even through the clothing.
Now if I try to use the palm of my hand I can feel something is there but I don't know
what it is and something is there and if you use your forearm you can't even tell that
anything is there plus it looks funny.
So it works out pretty good to have maximal sensitivity in the fingertips.
Okay now this business of pain sensitivity being greatest along the midline that's true.
The two parts of the body that have the greatest representation of pain receptors are the corneas
of the eyes, a scratched cornea for example is incredibly painful and the eardrum and a
ruptured eardrum is also very painful.
Now there are a few interesting exceptions to the statement that pain sensitivity is
greatest along the midline.
For example, the brain has no pain receptors and the brain cannot experience pain.
Many of you may know that brain surgery can actually be done under local anesthetic where
you use an anesthetic agent to get through the scalp and the skull and the dura but that
once you're in the brain the patient can be awake and alert and communicating with the
surgeon because you can poke the brain, prod the brain, cut the brain, cauterize the brain.
Since the brain has no pain receptors it's unaware of pain.
The brain is only aware of information from other receptors.
The brain receives pain messages from the rest of the body but itself is insensitive
to pain.
Now why would this be?
If pain receptors are supposed to warn us of danger by the time something is in your
brain probing around it's too late to warn you so I guess Mother Nature figured why waste
pain receptors.
The same is true of the internal organs.
It turns out that while the connective tissue that holds the internal organs in place is
loaded with pain receptors once you get into an organ itself for instance the gallbladder
doesn't have any pain receptors but the tissue surrounding the gallbladder is loaded with
them so the great pain associated with gallbladder surgery is due to the connective tissue not
the gallbladder itself.
Another interesting, that's not the interesting, exception to pain being so prevalent in the
midline of the body is a couple of spots in the mucous linings of the cheeks and I don't
know what the function of this is.
I saw a demonstration of it when I was 13 years old.
There was a state fair and some buddies of mine and I wanted to sneak under the tent
of the Huchikuchigirl performance but we made an error in judgment and I know it's not politically
correct to use this term but we sneaked under the flap of the freak show tent and we were
there just in time for the human pin cushion and the ringmaster said ladies and gentlemen
here comes the human pin cushion and this poor guy walked out and the ringmaster said
four year entertainment and enjoyment.
The human pin cushion will now stick hat pins in his face and he sticks these hat pins through
his cheeks and he stuck them all the way through and he opened his mouth and the hat pins were
wiggling at us like this through his mouth and I thought wow that must hurt and I'm up
close and I'm looking and I see that his cheeks are all pock marked and I thought to my little
13 year old self I'll bet he doesn't stick them anywhere else.
The ringmaster said he could but I bet he always sticks them there because his face
is kind of scarred up.
Decades later in studying the sense of pain I read that for some anomalous reason there
are a few spots on the mucus linings of the cheeks that are relatively devoid of pain receptors
and this human pin cushion guy must have accidentally discovered that those many years ago.
Alright for the most part though pain sensitivity is greatest along the midline.
What else can we say from the punctate sensitivity experiments?
We can say that cold spots are more numerous on the body than warm spots.
We can say that no punctate hot spots have been discovered.
They tried dipping a probe in hot water and touching the skin.
You might feel it as warm but the sensation of hot remained a puzzle.
It was also the case that cold receptors in the skin appear to be more superficially
located than warm receptors.
Estimates from the latency of a subject's verbal response you know you touch them with
a cold stimulus they can say cold faster than if you touch them with a warm stimulus they
can say warm.
It's been calculated that cold receptors are located 0.1 millimeters beneath the surface
of the dermis whereas warm receptors are located 0.3 millimeters below the surface of the dermis.
Let me get back to this business of there not being any hot spots on the skin.
Researchers began to puzzle over this and the following experiment ended up providing
some interesting information.
You took two coils of wire metal coils and you put one in warm water and one in cold
water and then you mesh them together so that you have alternating metal bands of warm and
cold.
You say hold this they put it in their hands and they yell and they drop it and they experience
burning heat.
So researchers discovered that the sensation of hot comes about when you have simultaneous
presentations of warm and cold.
This experiment can be done in a sensation and perception class.
You have coils with a warm water flowing through them and a coil with cold water flowing through
them and you mix them together and you have a blindfolded subject touch it.
Now it doesn't burn them or hurt them but it gives the sensory experience of burning
hot.
So hot is equal to warm plus cold.
About 20 years later electrophysiological studies of animals indicated what was going
on here.
It turns out that what we've been calling cold receptors are actually extreme receptors.
A cold receptor on the skin will stimulate activity in a cold nerve going to the brain
at a temperature of about 15 degrees centigrade.
If you slowly increase the temperature eventually this cold nerve stops firing and by the time
you get to 40 degrees centigrade it's been turned off for quite some time and a warm
nerve begins firing.
As we increase the temperature above 40 degrees centigrade and get back to say 50 degrees
centigrade which is hot that original cold nerve starts firing again.
So it turns out that what we've been calling the cold system fires into cold and it also
fires again to hot.
Now the way the brain can tell cold from hot is when the stimulus is cold only the
cold system is firing.
When it's hot both the cold and warm systems are firing simultaneously.
So the expression the experience of hot depends upon simultaneous activity in the warm and
cold systems.
This gives us some insight into the phenomenon called paradoxical cold that some people have
experience.
I have if you're about to take a shower and you turn on the water and you're distracted
and you know putting away your shaving or whatever then you jump in the shower and the
first sensation you get is boy this is cold and then you realize it's burning hot.
Remember hot is simultaneous activation of the warm and the cold systems but the cold
receptors are located more superficially so if you were to plunge your hand into hot water
or jump carelessly into a hot shower the first experience you're going to get is a brief
experience of cold before you realize you're actually scalding yourself.
This phenomenon is called paradoxical cold and we can now understand that based on what
we know about the warm and cold receptors and their relative positions in the skin.
Okay the view of the cutaneous system that I have been sharing with you to date has been
called the specific receptor view of the skin senses where the belief was there is a receptor
for warm and there is a receptor for cold and there is a receptor for pressure, light
pressure and deep pressure.
People began to take a second look at the specific receptor position in the 1950s.
So the specific receptor view held sway for quite a bit of time but in the 1950s people
began to ask questions that actually could have been asked earlier.
You know we can experience a whole lot more on the skin than warm and cold and hot and
pressure and what have you.
Where is the specific receptor for itch?
That's certainly a skin sense.
Where is this specific receptor for wet?
By the way the experience of wetness is clear and obvious.
You can even put a rubber glove on your hand so that you're not actually touching the water
directly and put your hand in water and you can still experience the sensation of wetness.
Where is the specific receptor for tickle?
Now people who are highly ticklish know very well that that is an experience that accompanies
stimulation on the surface of the body of the skin.
So the very fact that there were no encapsulated end organs for things like itch, tickle and
wetness caused people to take a second look at this specific receptor view.
Another damaging piece of evidence for the specific receptor view had to do with experiments
that were done on the cornea of the eye.
Now the cornea is essentially transparent.
The reason it's transparent is because it doesn't have encapsulated end organs in it
because they would cause the pattern vision, the clarity of the cornea to be compromised.
Well if it has no encapsulated end organs, it does have some wispy free nerve endings
which are thought to be the pain receptors, but it has no encapsulated end organs.
The cornea should not be able to experience touch or temperature.
Well it turns out that if you work with the cornea very carefully you can demonstrate
that it is sensitive to light touch and it is sensitive to temperature.
That should be impossible.
Another piece of evidence suggesting that the specific receptor view needed to be rethought
had to do with the fact that when you're doing a punctate sensitivity experiment and you
find a touch spot and then you do the follow-up anatomical investigation there may not be an
encapsulated end organ under that particular spot.
So people had to rethink the whole notion of how the skin senses worked.
I'm going to give you a short overview of some of the current thinking.
It turns out that the free nerve endings were inappropriately categorized as pain receptors
and only pain receptors.
The free nerve endings are actually non-specific receptors that can respond to all sensory
events but it's like the rods and the cones.
The rods tell us in the visual system something is out there but we're not sure where it
is and the cones say oh yes it's a chair or whatever.
Well the free nerve endings are learning us that something is going on but it's a very
general kind of alerting.
The free nerve endings send their information by way of a primitive pathway, thin diameter
myelin, virtually unmyelinated axons that go to the midbrain.
The free nerve endings use a pathway called the spinothalamic tract and they send messages
to the midbrain.
In other words they have an alerting function because remember one of the functions of the
midbrain is to maintain our level of sleep, wakefulness and arousal.
So the free nerve ending system is telling us in general what's going on on the surface
of the body but it's serving more of an alerting function, arousing us and causing us then to
use the encapsulated end organs to get the specifics of what's going on on the surface
of the body.
The fact of the matter is that in many areas of life things are hardly ever as simple as
you hoped they would be and that is certainly the case in the cutaneous system because the
free nerve endings must be taken into account in cutaneous perceptions.
The free nerve endings send this general information by way of the spinothalamic tract
meanwhile the encapsulated end organs are sending more specific information by way of
what is called the lamniscal system, the medial lamniscus which goes to the frontal part of
the parietal lobe where touch information and cutaneous information is analyzed.
Remember the brain is the organ of perception and that also holds for perceptions on the
skin not just visual and auditory perceptions.
What the brain is apparently doing is organizing and analyzing patterns of input both from
the lamniscal system and from the spinothalamic system both from the free nerve endings and
from the encapsulated end organs and creating a perceptual experience for us.
An example that I hope will make this point.
Take the case of tickle.
There are no receptors for tickle so tickle clearly represents some kind of a complex
interaction of the existing receptors.
People who are highly ticklish can't stand for somebody else to touch them in a ticklish
area like the ribs or whatever your ticklish area is.
Some people are so ticklish they cannot even permit themselves to be examined by a doctor
and yet these very same people can touch that same body part themselves and not experience
tickle.
So that for instance if you're ticklish and somebody else rubs your ribs you can't stand
it but you can rub your ribs and it's no big deal.
It's the same physical stimulus in both cases but in one case you can stand it and in one
case you can't.
Okay the plot thickens.
You can go to the doctor, you a ticklish person and the doctor reaches to palpate your ribs
because the doctor suspects maybe a cracked rib or one of the muscles having a problem
and you say no I can't stand that but if the doctor tells you to do this look you take
my hand so you take the doctor's hand and the doctor says my hand will remain passive.
You use your hand to palpate your ribs with my hand then you can do it.
So does that sound like something simple and uncomplicated?
No.
The cutaneous system still has some mysteries to unfold and that's an example of one.
Let me tell you an incidental finding that occurred because of some research into temperature
perception.
This study was done in England, I hope I have time to finish it, it's kind of cute.
They were measuring Englishman's sensitivity, English subject's sensitivity to warm and
cold and hot and so they had glued thin walled aluminum thermos to the roofs of the subject's
mouths and they would have them sip different liquids at different temperatures and say
what they felt as cold, what they felt as warm, what they felt as hot and what they felt
as painfully hot.
The subjects would sip and then they would give a verbal response and the thin walled
aluminum thermos would be read by a machine across the room so that while the subjects
were giving a verbal report, the experimenters could see what the temperature of the liquid
actually was and what would happen is these people would sip a liquid and then they would
say cold or warm or what have you and the point where they begin to say hot was at 46.6
degrees centigrade.
So the researchers noted this and then being a civilized country the experimenter said
would you subjects care for a tea break and the subjects said yes.
The experimenter said would you mind leaving the temperature measuring devices in your
mouths over the tea break because it's so much trouble to pull them down and then reattach
them and the subjects said no that's no problem.
So they go over to the tea serving area and they begin sipping hot tea and one of the
technicians looks at the recording instrument they were sipping hot tea at about 84 degrees
centigrade which is not that far from the boiling point.
Now the deal is these people were saying hot at 46.6 degrees centigrade here they are drinking
hot tea at 84 how are they doing it?
Well this experiment discovered the secret of sipping hot liquids.
Typically people think that when you're going to sip a hot liquid the thing to do is blow
on it and then drink it no that'll scald you.
What these people were doing was before they would drink this hot liquid they would take
a sharp sip of air and what that would do is it promotes evaporative cooling.
The temperature recording instrument noticed that when they take a sharp sip of air
they lower the temperature of the oral cavity to 23 degrees centigrade and then they quickly
take a sip of this stuff and get it to the back of the throat which is also relatively
devoid of pain receptors and swallow it.
Now this is an important piece of practical information so that you won't do what I did.
Many years ago I took my three kids skiing and after we had skied we wanted to get some
hot chocolate and so we all got our hot chocolate and unthinkingly I used the trick.
I took a breath of air and I lowered the temperature in my mouth.
I took a slug of a hot chocolate and swallowed it.
The kids saw me drink this stuff and they thought it was safe to drink and they all
took a drink and they burned themselves and they were all crying and I felt like a really bad person.
I still feel guilty about this even though it was 30 something years ago that it happened.
So this is something that I wish somebody had told me when my children were young enough
that I didn't cause them that aggravation.
Okay let me let me wrap this up.
We were talking about some of the basics of the skin senses.
We were talking about the punctate sensitivity experiments and the levels of the skin and the
encapsulated end organs and then we found out that specific receptor theory can't really
explain all there is to explain about the sense of the skin senses because of things like itch
and tickle and we talked about the fact that there are actually two skin senses,
one that provides more general information and one that provides more specific information
and we found out that our free nerve endings which are pervasive in the skin
are more than just pain receptors.
We're going to have a lot more to say about the free nerve endings when we talk about pain
but the fact of the matter is that they are capable of responding to virtually any sensory input
on the skin.
In our next lecture we're actually going to change the focus a little bit and talk not so much about
anatomical and physiological aspects of the cutaneous system but we're going to talk about
some of the psychological aspects of cutaneous stimulation.
I hope you will find it interesting.
Thank you.
you
