Lecture 11, The Cutaneous System, Early Development
Hi, welcome to Lecture 11. In this lecture we're going to talk about the importance of
cutaneous stimulation for early development, not only early childhood development but early
development of any young animal, apparently. Just to review, in lecture 10 we talked about
some of the basics of the cutaneous system, the existence of punctate sensitivity, encapsulated
end organs. We talked about the problems of specific receptor theory with explaining complicated
perceptions like itch and tickle and wetness, and we indicated that we would talk at a later
time in more depth about the free nerve endings. Today, this lecture represents a bit of a
departure from the usual format we have followed in that it's going to be more psychological
and less concerned with anatomical and physiological data. I make this deviation from the usual
format because I think that some of the information I will share with you is interesting enough,
informative enough, and important enough that I would like to have you hear it. My interest in
cutaneous stimulation and early development actually harks back to my first year in graduate
school. Now, I was a biopsychologist and I was training to learn how to destroy parts of animals'
brains and record electrically from other parts of animals' brains, but I also had a pregnant wife
at the time. All three of my children were born while I was in graduate school, so I was very
interested in things that related to child development and how to facilitate child development. In the
summer of 1961, I needed some extra money. My graduate student, Sleipend, wasn't quite doing it, so I
went to the department and I asked for a summer job. The only thing that had available was a
position taking care of the rats that were going to be used later in the fall for the course that
we affectionately called rat lab, the formal name being experimental analysis of behavior. My job
would have been to feed the rats, to keep them healthy, to weigh them, and to gentle them so that
none of the undergraduates who would be working with them got bit. The rats were young rats because
the life expectancy of a laboratory rat is very short anyway, so we get these young rats and it
was my job every day to handle them, to get them being used to being touched by humans so that
they would not bite anybody. Of course, at first, they were nervous and I would have to use leather
gloves because they would try to bite me, but every day I would pick the rats up and I would put
them on my forearm and walk them around and pat them and pick them up and put them down over and
over, and eventually they calmed down to the point where I could handle them without gloves, and then
they seemed to look forward to the fact that I would scratch them behind their little ears and put
them on my shoulder while I walked over to get food or what have you. I began to take a fatherly
interest in the well-being of these rats. Now, my rats were against one wall of the animal colony,
the ones that were going to be used in rat lab. The other wall of the animal colony had rats that
were going to be used in acute experiments, so they were going to be anesthetized and have their
brains recorded from and probably they would be sacrificed after that, so nobody bothered to
handle or gentle them. So I began to notice, coming into the laboratory day after day, that my rats
were starting to look better than the rats over here, so I would weigh my rats, as was part of my
duties, and make sure they were coming along and developing nicely, and one day, just out of
curiosity, I weighed one of the ignored rats. It was a very simple procedure because you weigh
the rat in the home cage and subtract the weight of the cage. My rat was significantly bigger than
this rat, even though they were the same age, so I weighed more of the ignored rats, and sure
enough, my rats were bigger than their rats. I also noticed that my rats were bolder. They showed
less timidity than these rats. Now, you may wonder, how did I measure whether a rat is timid or not?
Well, I can tell you, when you take the rat out of the cage, in his cage, over to weigh them,
I would open the door, and my rats, when you open the door of their cage, they would hop right out
and start exploring the table. I tried it with one of the ignored rats. I opened the door of
his cage, and he cowered in the back of the cage. So, in my definition of timidity, this rat was
showing timidity, and the other rats were not. My rats also showed less of a startle response.
Now, you may ask, how did I measure the startle response? Well, it turns out that the door to
the animal colony had a distinctive squeak, especially if you pushed it abruptly. So, I was in the
colony room one day, and somebody came in that wanted one of the acute experiment rats, and he
bangs into the door and it squeaks, and all the rats on the ignored side of the room jumped up
and alerted and looked toward the squeaky door. My rats kind of looked over, hey, what's going on?
Wow! The startle pattern exhibited by these animals was way out of line with what the handled and
gentle rats showed, and I began to think that handling and gentling was having an effect on
these rats during this developmental stage of their lives. And again, having this concern with
development of children, which transferred into development of rats while I was taking care of
these animals, I went in my spare time to the literature, and I began to look for studies that
showed the consequences of handling rats, and I found such studies. One study indicated that rats
that were handled and gentled developed smaller adrenal glands. Now, the adrenal gland does many
things. One of the things it does is it secretes adrenaline, which makes you all jumpy and nervous
and hyperactive if you have a lot of adrenaline going. So, I thought, gee, that could account for
why my rats showed a diminished startle response when the door squeaks. I found another study.
Handled and gentled rats were compared with litter mates who were ignored in their ability to survive
a major surgical procedure. All of these rats had their parathyroid glands removed. Now, that's
major surgery. In the rats that were given daily handling and gentling before the surgery, 13% of
them died, did not survive the operation. But in the ignored group, 79% of the rats that got no
handling and gentling died following parathyroidectomy. I found another study. Now, this is kind of
brutal, but the dependent variable, the thing that they were looking at was how long a rat could
survive a lethal stress. So, what they did was, again, they had one group of rats that got daily
handling and gentling, and another group of rats that was ignored. They were all fed the same food
and housed in the same conditions. One group was given daily tactile stimulation, handling, stroking,
what have you. The lethal stressor involved wrapping these rats up in a surgical towel,
essentially putting them in a straight jacket. Now, immobilizing an animal is highly stressful.
So, these rats were immobilized by wrapping them up in a towel, and then they were put in the
refrigerator and left there until they died. The lethal stressor. It turns out that the rats that
were handled and gentled lasted 22 hours longer. They survived a lethal stressor for 22 hours longer
on the average than the rats that were not handled and gentled. So, I found another study.
Handled and gentled rats learn mazes faster. Handled and gentled rats are less timid. I already knew
that from my own incidental observations in the animal colony. Handled and gentled rats show
more exploratory behavior than rats that are ignored. How do they quantify exploratory behavior?
Put the rat in a big room with a checkerboard pattern on the floor, and in a given period of
time, see how many checkerboard squares the rat passes through. An exploratory rat will cover the
whole room, and a kind of a boring rat will just stay in one or two squares. So, the literature
dealing with rats suggested very strongly to me that tactile stimulation during early development
is a highly, highly positive thing. I began to expand my literature search to other species,
and I found a study by a psychologist named Ronald Melzak. Now, you may not know that name now,
but you will when we talk about pain, because Ronald Melzak is thought by, he's referred to
by some as the father of modern pain research, but back then he wasn't so well known. I read a study
that Melzak did where he took puppies and he separated these litter mates from their parents.
The puppies were raised in isolation, isolated from their siblings and isolated from their parents.
Now, after they had grown under these conditions, Melzak tested their responses to different pain
stimuli, and they were highly abnormal. They did not show normal responses to pain. They also
showed other behavioral abnormalities, and so I thought, well, being ignored is not so great for
rats, and it's not so good for puppies either. And I started looking for some research on tactile
stimulation in primates. And there was a psychologist at the University of Wisconsin by the name of
Harry Harlow, who became famous for what are now called studies of mother love. Back in the 60s
that I'm talking about, he wasn't so well known and he was just getting this research underway,
but Harry Harlow did some research that it's classic stuff. Let me share with you just two or
three of the studies that he has remembered for. He's deceased now, but his research is so well
known that even though it's decades old, it's still cited in developmental psychology textbooks.
First, you need to know that female monkeys are really good mothers. They cuddle their babies,
they stroke their babies, they groom their babies, they let the babies cling to them when they get
scared and so on. Father monkeys are not so hot, but mother monkeys are terrific. So this becomes
relevant shortly. Harlow would take baby monkeys and raise them in isolation away from the mother,
away from the father, away from siblings. What he discovered was if you leave a monkey there
for a few months, its behavior begins to take on very abnormal characteristics. In fact,
if you leave a baby monkey in isolation, now they're not abused, they're fed, they're housed,
they're not subjected to extremes of temperature or anything like this, but they begin showing
behaviors reminiscent of the behaviors of autistic children. A monkey raised in isolation may sit in
the back of the cage and rock and bang its head off the wall. A baby monkey raised in isolation
for a few months may bite itself deep enough to draw blood or pull its fur out or hit itself,
or sit there and pull its feet up to its chest and just show behaviors that are typically seen in
autistic children. And if you keep the monkey in this isolated state, they never recover. Even if
at a later time you return them to the monkey colony, they never fit in. They never assume an
appropriate place in the monkey social dominance hierarchy. So total isolation is horrible for
baby monkeys. Then Harlow tried it with the with the father monkey, who as I said in the natural
setting doesn't have a whole lot to do with raising the babies. But in the laboratory,
you know, here's the father monkey in a cage and Harlow takes the baby and opens the door and throws
the baby monkey in. The father can't get away from it. So the father will kind of reluctantly,
you know, pat the baby and let it cling to him and maybe groom the baby a little bit.
That's good enough for this baby to turn out within the limits of normal. So it doesn't have
to be the mother and it doesn't even have to be heartfelt care, but it needs some
contact, some contact along this dimension of tender loving care, so on.
Another famous experiment of Harry Harlow's that many people have heard of was his mother
surrogate experiment. In this experiment, he takes baby monkeys away from their biological mothers
and he puts them in a cage with two dummy mother monkeys. One is called the terry cloth mother.
It's a little model of a female monkey and it's covered in terry cloth and it has
two little buttons for eyes and a button for a nose and a terry cloth mother just
sits there. And right beside the terry cloth mother is the chicken wire mother. This is a
model of a female monkey made out of chicken wire, you know, hardware cloth or whatever people
will call it. It has little buttons for an eyes and nose too, but it's chicken wire.
The baby monkey goes in, it looks at the chicken wire mother and the terry cloth mother and it
runs over and clings to the terry cloth mother. The baby prefers the touch of terry cloth to the
touch of chicken wire. No big surprise. Harlow wonders though, can he change the baby's preference
from the terry cloth mother to the chicken wire mother by making the chicken wire mother the one
that feeds the baby. So he gets a baby bottle with a nipple and he puts it in the chest cavity
of the chicken wire mother with the nipple sticking out. And when the baby gets hungry enough,
it releases its grip on the terry cloth mother and it goes over and it nurses from the chicken
wire mother. But as soon as it is finished, it goes back and clings again to the terry cloth
mother. In fact, as the baby monkey grew physically, Harlow had to move the terry cloth
mother and the chicken wire mother farther apart because the monkeys would try and cling
to the terry cloth mother with their little fingers and toes and lean over and nurse from the
chicken wire mother without ever losing contact. So he came to the conclusion that there is
something very important about this warm, touchy, terry cloth feeling that you can't get from a
chicken wire mother even if she is the one who feeds you. Now I was thinking, gosh, in every
species that I've done research on so far, tactile stimulation, cutaneous stimulation during
early development seems to be really important. It's not just nice if you get it. It's tragic
if you don't. I wonder if there is any data that extrapolates to humans. Well, of course,
there are no experiments of this type in the literature. It would be incredibly cruel. You
don't do experiments that have the possibility of messing up some poor kid's life. But behavioral
scientists did have the opportunity to make observations that would answer some of these
questions about what happens to children that don't get this. Because at any time on planet earth,
there are some regions where there are wars, pestilence, famine, natural disasters, where there
are orphans that are in orphanages. And so some behavioral scientists would go to orphanages
around the world and they would look for orphanages that had distinctly different philosophies
of how to handle these kids. For instance, in one orphanage, the director might say,
listen, we want to keep this place as clean as possible so that kids don't get sick. If you
have any free time, put the babies up in their cribs out of the way and clean the windowsills
and clean the corners and clean the floor, blah, blah, blah. In another orphanage, the philosophy
might be diametrically opposed. The director might say, you know, the world is basically a dirty
place, kids are going to be exposed to dirt. If you have any free time, let the windowsills stay
dirty, pick the babies up, touch them, love them, stroke them, etc. Well, the results were incredible.
I saw a video of some of these findings at an Eastern Psychological Association conference
that I attended years ago and the title of the video is going to tell you what I saw. The title
was Human Rex. They had videotapes of children raised in orphanages where nobody paid any attention
to them and they compared this with videos of children raised in orphanages where they got
tender loving care. Night and day, my friends, night and day. The babies that were ignored
showed developmental delays on virtually every dimension. Plus, they were fearful. If a stranger
came into the room, the babies would crawl to the back of their cribs and cower. Not that they were
beaten or abused, but they just showed this highly timid behavior. The babies who got plenty of
tender loving care, if a stranger came into the room, they would run through the front of their
kids and hold their cribs and hold their arms out to be picked up. Now, this wide disparity
in how orphanages are run, it's not just something from decades ago. I will just mention briefly that
during the reign of the Romanian communist dictator, Nicholas Ceausescu, he was opposed to
coddling orphans and he didn't like touchy-feely things. He forbid the orphanages in Romania
from acting in that manner and the kids suffered. Later, after it was possible for this to happen,
American families, American couples would go over to adopt the Romanian
orphan raised in these orphanages and the kids would be beautiful little kids,
but they had deep-seated psychological problems, some of which may never be resolved.
The point of all this is that being raised in an orphanage per se is not bad. If you get your
cutaneous stimulation needs and your tender loving care needs and your warm loving interactions with
some caregiver, it doesn't have to be the biological parent, you're going to be okay,
but if you're raised in an orphanage where this stuff is lacking or in a home where this
stuff is lacking, then you are at risk in terms of your social development, your intellectual
development, your physical development across the board. Now developmental psychologists then
ask the question, when is it too late? When is a baby's early exposure to neglect and denial of
cutaneous stimulation so far gone that they can never recover? There was no good answer,
but developmental psychologists toyed with the idea that there might be something in the early
child development period analogous to the phenomenon of imprinting seen in some lower animals.
Imprinting is defined as the formation of a strong attachment to a mother object during
a critical period. So it looks like intelligent behavior, but it's actually programmed into the
animal. Imprinting was studied intensively by an ethologist named Conrad Lorenz that you may
have heard of, and he discovered that if a baby duck is not exposed to its mother during the period
13 and a half to 16 hours after hatching, it will never bond to the mother duck and it will never
behave like a normal duck. So they wondered if there was something analogous in human children,
some experience they must have during a critical period if their developmental
progress was going to continue normally. The consensus today is that there is not
an exact analog of imprinting in humans, but it's also the case that many developmental
psychologists think that it's critically important for a baby to have a warm loving relationship
with a caregiver during the first year of life if that baby is ever going to grow up to be a
person who develops the ability to trust. So tender loving care is not just good, it's necessary.
Now even today knowing all this, up until recently, well it's still the case, there is one category of
baby who people intentionally deny tender loving care to, and this is premature babies called
preemies. You see, preemies qualify as a category of high-risk infant. High-risk infancy includes,
as one of its criteria, low birth weight, and of course preemies have low birth weight. So the
typical treatment for premature babies is put them in an incubator and keep them germ-free so
they don't get sick. Nobody touches them unless they have some good reason to touch them, and people
who do touch the preemies have to be wearing cap and gown and gloves and be germ-free. The air
they breathe in the incubator is filtered and purified and so on and so on. Well that's probably
going to keep them from catching colds or getting some illnesses, but is it really helpful for them
in terms of the overall developmental picture? A developmental psychologist by the name of Dr.
Tiffany Field felt that this was not in the baby's best interest. I'm going to share with you now
a summary of some of Dr. Tiffany Field's research. Tiffany Field is the founder and director of the
Touch Research Institute at the University of Miami. Based on her research and her knowledge of the
literature, she went to Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami with a proposal. She said, look let me do
an experiment. Let me do an experiment with the premature babies. We will have two groups of babies.
One will get the traditional treatment that premature babies have historically gotten,
and the other will get what I'm going to propose to you. What Dr. Tiffany Field proposed was that
she get senior citizen volunteers, people at least 60 years old, and she would have these
people trained by massage therapists so that they learned the techniques of massage, and I knew what
they were doing, and these senior citizen volunteers would practice giving each other
massages, and when they were well versed in what they were doing, each senior citizen volunteer
was given a premature baby, was assigned a premature baby, and so these volunteer senior
citizens would go in every day, and they would give these babies little back rubs, and they would
rub their little arms and legs, and they just love doing it, and the babies seem to love getting
these back rubs. Now, I learned about this project in the year 2000 because I spent some
time with one of the women who had served as a volunteer in Tiffany Field's project, and she
spoke about how obvious the differences were between the preemies that got daily tactile
stimulation, back rubs and little arm and leg rubs, and they would rub their little heads, and
it was, I'm sure, a very positive experience both for the caregivers and the care receivers.
The hospital, of course, was doing an independent assessment of how these babies were responding,
and their objective conclusion was the babies that got daily tactile stimulation
were more alert and responsive than the traditional preemies. In fact, now this was,
I learned about this in the year 2000, and it happened in the late 90s, this project was going
on. The babies that got daily massages and back rubs were able to be released from the hospital
six days earlier than the traditional preemies at a savings of $15,000 a day. Now, if it was $15,000
a day back in the 1990s, I can't imagine how much a day cost in the hospital now. These babies who
got the daily massages and back rubs were followed for the next eight months, and again,
the differences were dramatic. The eight months follow-up indicated that these babies had fewer
illnesses. They had fewer hospitalizations. They had fewer episodes of sleep apnea, which is, of
course, a risk factor for SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome. They gained weight 47 percent
faster than the non-massaged babies, and, and this is really quite significant, they showed
faster development of the myelin sheath. Now, we've mentioned the myelin sheath in passing
in previous lectures. It's the layer of fatty insulation that keeps nerve fibers from short
circuiting. Now, the myelin sheath has begun to develop prenatally. In other words, a newborn
baby has some myelinization of some of the major nerves in the body, but the myelin sheath continues
to develop for the next dozen years. The human body and all of the various nerves and so on
are not fully myelinated until you're about 13, well, 12, 13 years of age. It's going to be a little
sooner in some, a little later in others, but these babies were showing faster development of the
myelin sheath. Incredible, just from massages and back rubs. Now, how do you measure formation of the
myelin sheath in a baby? You certainly don't do any invasive procedure. It's not a big deal.
You can measure conduction speed. That's how they diagnose carpal tunnel syndrome. They see if the
nerve is, is being impinged on or if it's conduction, conducting at normal speed. So you can measure
conduction speed on the surface of the skin, and these babies' conduction speeds were faster
than babies with less development of the myelin sheath. So the project turned out to be, in my
opinion, a remarkable success. Now, why is this not sweeping the country? Why are all hospitals
not arranging for the babies to get massages and back rubs and premature babies to get this kind
of thing? Well, I can think of some reasons. There's the issue of parental consent. What,
maybe some parents don't want strangers in there massaging their babies. There's also the issue
of liability. You know, these people are not employees of the hospital. They were volunteer
senior citizens. I can understand why there might be some reluctance. My sense is that when the benefits
to premature babies of receiving this kind of treatment are made more public, that more hospitals
will find ways to incorporate this kind of thing. We had a similar issue with kids with
seizure disorder some years ago. Kids with seizure disorder who were in day school or preschool or
whatever were treated differently. They were discouraged from taking part in group activities
and from playground activities and things of that nature. And then people came to the realization
that that was probably causing more psychological harm than it was giving them physical protection
from having a seizure. So there is a much greater move toward inclusiveness for kids with seizure
disorders. As a whole, it appears that our society has grown much less accepting of
appropriate touch in daycare situations and preschools and what have you because of the
fear of inappropriate touch. So that we have a situation where caring and good people who
really care about children are afraid to extend affection, which means a child can fall on the
playground and skin his or her knee and a caregiver, a well-meaning caregiver, cannot go over and give
that child a hug. This terrible state of affairs suggests that child molesters who are of course
the reason for this sensitivity to being physical with children. Child molesters are hurting kids
in two ways. One, directly by the awful things that they do and two, indirectly by creating an
attitude in society where caring and loving and good people are afraid to touch a child.
I don't know of any answer to this. I'm just telling you that this is an issue. Children
who, because their parents have to work or are not at home, are actually not getting the TLC
that might be best for them and there's no obvious easy way to change this situation. It's just a
shame. Okay, in summary, let me say I have attempted to share with you some of the literature
suggesting that cutaneous stimulation during the early developmental phase is not just
nice if you get it and no big deal if you don't. It's a need. It is a need and it doesn't have to
be from the biological parents, but it can be from well-meaning caregivers and children who do not
get this are suffering a big loss, suffering a big loss. See, it's not just kids in daycare or
what have you. There are parents who are drug addicted or pre-psychotic or too depressed or
what have you. There are lots of kids who are living with their biological parents who are also
suffering because they are not getting their need for cutaneous stimulation met. I don't know of any
fix for that either. In any event, in lecture 12, we will continue our discussion of the cutaneous
system, getting a little bit less psychological, but not entirely, and we will talk about age-related
changes in the cutaneous system next time. Thank you.
