These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled, Sensation, Perception, and the Aging Process, Part 2.
Hi, in our last lecture, lecture 12, we talked about some of the aspects of the aging process and changes in cutaneous sensitivity.
We talked about the concerns of some cultural anthropologists that Americans are a non-tactile society.
We talked about the distinction between active touch and passive touch, and we are now ready to begin our discussion of the sense of pain.
In this lecture, I will be talking about some of the historical aspects of research into pain, and we will continue into more modern findings in a lecture to come.
First of all, let me warn you that there are subjective elements involved in talking about pain or studying pain.
In other words, you cannot feel somebody else's pain, and it's not the kind of thing that we can have group consensus on.
Like, if I hold up a red square and I say, what color is that? Everybody says red, or we can all agree on a thousand cycle per second tone.
But how can we agree on pain when each person's pain is unique and individual to them?
I remember once, I was single at the time, having a romantic relationship with this woman that involved a candlelight dinner.
And as she was reaching across the table to take my hand, she jogged the candle and some candle wax.
Melting candle wax fell on her hand, and she started screaming and moaning, and she ran to the ladies room to wash her hand off, and I felt very bad.
And I wanted to be able to empathize with her, so I reached over and I took a candle, and I dripped some hot candle wax on my hand, and I hardly felt it.
Now, I came to the conclusion that we cannot judge another person's pain. She was serious and she was sincere in feeling that that was very painful.
So we need to keep that in mind. When we talk about pain, it may mean different things to different people.
Different people may have different pain thresholds or different definitions of pain or different tolerance for pain.
Okay, with that caveat, let's begin talking about pain.
The first thing I will share with you is that up until about a hundred years ago, people weren't even sure that there was such a thing as pain.
Now, that may sound bizarre, but what I mean by that is researchers were not convinced that there was a separate pain sense.
They thought that possibly pain represented overstimulation of one of the other sensory systems, so that when light gets too bright, it becomes painful.
When sound gets too loud, it becomes painful. When touch gets too intense, it becomes painful. When heat gets too hot, it becomes painful.
This was proposed as an alternative to pain being a separate sense with its own receptors and pathways.
More recently, we have discovered that indeed pain does represent an entity unto itself, that it's not simply overstimulation of the existing sensory systems.
What caused this confusion? The confusion came about because pain receptors are the most primitive receptors in the body.
People couldn't conceive of a receptor that could respond equally to bee venom and a knife cut and hot water and being stuck with a pin and having acetic acid spilled on your head,
because no other receptors in any other sensory system are so broad-spectrum in the things they will respond to.
The visual receptors respond to 400 to 700 nanometers of electromagnetic radiation.
The auditory receptors to 20 to 20,000 vibrations smell to gaseous, odorous molecules taste to things that go into solution and saliva,
but pain receptors will respond to virtually anything.
It took a while for people to realize that these primitive receptors were in fact involved in a separate sense modality, the modality of pain.
Okay, so yes, pain is a separate sense and it does have its own receptors, primitive though they may be,
and actually the nerve fibers that carry pain messages to the brain are also primitive, and we'll talk more about that in a bit.
Let's talk about some of the characteristics of pain.
Another difference between pain and the other sense modalities is that pain has both sensory qualities and drive-like qualities.
In other words, if you have a toothache, you can point exactly to which toothaches you can localize where these sensory sensations are coming from,
or if you have a blister that's hurting, you can point right to the blister, you can localize it,
but pain also has the property of being able to distract us from doing anything else until we deal with the pain.
If you have a migraine headache, it's silly to try and get some work done.
If you have kidney stones, you can't even conceive of getting on with daily life,
and if you have a toothache, it's pretty hard to concentrate on the daily tasks at hand.
This drive-like quality of pain propels you to focus on the pain and get it dealt with.
Now, why does pain have this drive-like quality?
It's because pain pathways go to the midbrain, which is concerned with, remember, level of arousal.
So pain has direct pathways to the centers of the brain that cause us to be aroused,
and pain pathways also go to the limbic system, which has motivational significance.
None of the other senses are able to as efficiently arouse us and motivate us.
You can't feel that way over a red color or a tone or a smell or a taste.
Pain has special connections with, I guess you would call, the more primitive parts of the brain
that can just activate us and cause us grief until we deal with the pain.
Now, it has been demonstrated.
In fact, well, let me share with you a story I heard from a clinical colleague of mine
who is now deceased, he was about 25 years older than I was.
As a young clinician, part of his training involved interviewing cancer patients
who had developed such a tolerance to morphine that they were in chronic pain,
and they had opted to undergo a lobotomy because it seemed that people who underwent a lobotomy stopped feeling pain.
So sometimes a patient in desperation would agree to undergo a frontal lobotomy.
And my clinical colleague used to go around and interview these people and collect what data he could get from them.
And he shared with me the story about talking to a terminal cancer patient
who had been in intense pain and developed a tolerance to morphine
and in desperation agreed to undergo a frontal lobotomy.
And my clinical friend said, it must be better for you now that the pain has gone away.
And the patient said, what are you talking about?
And my clinical friend said, well, the pain, the pain that you used to have and now it's gone.
And the patient said, the pain isn't gone.
My clinical friend was puzzled and he said, well, you used to moan and groan all the time
and now you seem to be perfectly relaxed and content.
And the guy said, the pain is still there as bad as ever.
I just don't care anymore.
Somehow the lobotomy had taken away that drive light quality of the pain,
but the sensory aspects were still intact.
Some drugs, some pain medications operate not on the pain directly,
but on the motivational aspects of pain.
Okay, now, people typically think of pain as being simple and direct and necessary.
Now, what do they mean by simple and direct?
Well, by simple and direct, they mean that pain is usually the result of tissue damage
and the amount of pain is directly proportional to the amount of tissue damage.
We'll deal with that belief about pain shortly.
Let me deal with the other belief that pain is necessary
and we can answer that one in the affirmative.
Yes, pain is necessary.
On what basis do we say that?
That pain is necessary.
Pain seems to cause so much misery.
How can we say it's necessary?
Well, for one thing, we have had the opportunity to investigate and to study
and follow the life of people who are born with a congenital indifference to pain.
There are people who feel no pain.
Is that a blessing?
Not necessarily.
For one thing, people born with no ability to perceive pain tend to die young.
Why is this?
Well, there are probably several different reasons for this.
For one thing, these people tend to develop a kind of personality
that increases the likelihood that they will take dares and challenges
and do crazy things that you really shouldn't do
because if they mess up, it doesn't hurt them.
So they develop a personality where they actually view other people
as being kind of sysified and not very bold and daring.
That probably contributes to the fact that people with no pain sensitivity die young.
It's also the case that pain, whether we like it or not,
is providing us with information, important information,
and they are lacking that information.
And as a result of lacking pain information,
these people put themselves in harm's way in a number of different circumstances.
For instance, there was a woman who actually died of a spinal infection.
She had no pain sensitivity.
And it turns out that she was unable to feel the muscle and joint aches
that propel most of us to change our posture when we're asleep at night.
We shift our position in bed over the course of the night many times.
Timelapse photography has documented this.
This woman never changed her position,
and so these internal issues that should have signaled to her that something was wrong
never became conscious to her, and she actually died from this.
There are instances of children born with no sense of pain
who have chewed their tongues off because they felt no pain,
who have chewed their fingers off because they felt no pain.
This seems too bizarre to be true, but it is indeed true.
There was another case of a fellow who had serious gangrene
that was threatening to require amputation of his leg.
What happened was he was wearing ill-fitting shoes,
and he had developed blisters on his feet,
and because he couldn't feel the pain from the blisters,
he never bothered getting shoes that fit properly,
and these blisters got infected and in fact turned into a gangrenous condition.
Just a couple of other examples that involve situations
where people might be walking barefoot at the beach, for example.
People with a congenital indifference to pain have been known to,
now they wouldn't do this on purpose, of course,
but they're not paying attention, walk through broken glass and badly cut their feet,
or end up with an incredibly severe sunburn and feel no discomfort,
so they don't take any action to protect themselves.
And in one case, a young man actually walked barefoot through the live embers
of a little campfire that somebody had built on the beach,
and severely burned his feet, and never even noticed it.
Somebody said, hey, what's that cooking?
And it turns out it was his feet that were cooking
from walking through these burning embers.
So is pain necessary?
It certainly appears to be necessary.
Now the problem is, pain, as I said, has a signaling function.
Where we run into problems is sometimes, even after you've gotten the message,
the pain continues.
This is what we might call bad pain.
I mean, how often do you need to be reminded by pain that,
yes, I've severely burned my arm, and yet the pain keeps coming,
or yes, I have cancer and it hurts, and yet the pain keeps coming,
or yes, I have shingles or whatever.
So when we're dealing with a situation where the message has been delivered
and we know we have a problem, it would be nice if we could turn the pain off
and it would go away.
It doesn't work that way, however.
And in those cases, people need to seek medical help,
either drugs or meditational techniques or whatever works for them,
because yes, we need pain, but we don't need that much pain
after the message has gotten through.
On the other hand, some pain might actually be labeled as good pain.
Good pain is pain that we actively seek
because it's providing us important information.
Let me give you just a few examples.
Weight lifters and body builders use the expression,
no pain, no gain.
They are actually seeking a level of pain.
They are attempting to use that level of pain to tell them
that they have worked out sufficiently hard
that they have broken down the individual muscle fibers
and when those muscle fibers reconstitute,
they will be bigger and thicker and bulkier,
which is what the weight lifters are looking for.
Endurance athletes, marathon runners,
long-distance swimmers and bicyclists,
seek, they actively seek a level of pain
that's telling them they are performing at an optimal level.
So, you know, when you're doing it right, it hurts
if you're running a marathon or biking or swimming
or even mountain climbing.
So, what they do is they attempt to maintain that level
of physical discomfort, which would probably be perceived
as very, very painful by most of us
because it's providing them important information
about their level of performance.
Okay, so I'm going to summarize the above by saying,
yes, pain seems to be necessary
but it's also the case that if you choose to do so,
you can label some pain good pain and some pain bad pain.
Now, let's deal with the other belief
that people have about pain, that it is simple and direct.
Here, I share with you an unequivocal,
no, it is far from simple and direct.
Pain is highly complicated
and we're still beginning to unravel
what some people call the puzzle of pain.
How can something be simple if it can be modified
by the degree of attention you're paying to a stimulus?
And in fact, that's very true.
If you're not attending to something,
it doesn't hurt anywhere near as much as if you're looking at it.
Why should that be the case if it is the degree of tissue damage
that determines pain rather than whether you're paying attention to it or not?
Let me give you some examples.
Basketball players have been known to badly sprain an ankle
and not even be aware of it until the first time out is called
and that, hey, that really hurts.
When they're not attending to it, they're not aware of it.
I'll share another childhood story with you.
I wasn't really that bad of a kid.
I did sneak under the Hoochie-Coochie tent
and I did go on a pineapple-stealing foray with a friend of mine.
We lived close to a pineapple farm
and one day we thought it would be fun to go steal a pineapple,
so we sneak over and we don't see the farmer
and we grab a pineapple and off we run.
And the farmer spotted us and began chasing us
and we ran and we ran and we ran
and we were beginning to outrun the farmer
and we jumped off a little hill
and my friend landed on a big metal stake in the ground
that gashed his calf to the muscle.
But we didn't know it at the time because we're running
and when we finally outrun the farmer,
we are elated and we're going to sit down and eat our pineapples
and the kid looks at his leg and he falls down in pain,
but he wasn't even aware of this massive gash
while we were evading the farmer.
So the degree of attention that you pay through a stimulus
is an obvious factor in whether you'll perceive that pain or not.
One more example.
In my laboratory in my early days as an animal researcher,
we would perform surgery on these experimental animals
and then we didn't want them to get infected
so we would treat them with antibiotics
and I used to use penicillin in an oil base.
It's thicker than in a water base,
but it is absorbed more slowly
so you can give the animal one shot every few days
instead of a shot a day.
I used to take three of us to give a cat an injection
because, of course, they don't like injections.
So one would hold the cat by the back of the neck
and one would pull its feet down
and the other one would find the right quadrant
in the flank and administer the injection.
I was in the laboratory one day
when the university vet came to check on the sanitary conditions
and the care of the animals and he said,
what's going on?
I said, well, I'm waiting for two people to come in
so we can give this cat an injection.
He says, it takes three of you to give a cat an injection.
I said, yes, it does.
He said, watch this.
He gets the syringe with the oil-based penicillin in it.
He says, which cat?
And I say that one.
He goes over and he grabs the cat by the scruff of the neck.
He eyeballs the flank to see where he wants to administer this shot
and he gets right in the cat's face
and he gets the needle all set and he blows in the cat's face.
And while the cat's doing this,
he gives the cat the shot, pulls the needle out
and after the fact the cat looks around like, hey, what's going on?
But while he was getting his face blown into
and his attention was directed there,
the cat didn't seem to pay any attention to the shot.
So yes, attention is a factor.
Does that sound like a system that is simple and direct?
The meaning that we attribute to a painful stimulation,
painful stimulus, will determine how painful.
For instance, an anesthesiologist by the name of Beecher
wrote a book about his experiences on the battlefield in World War II
and he reported that sometimes a soldier would be shot in the arm
or the leg or the foot or something like that
and when he went to administer an anesthetic,
the soldier would actually be elated
and actually complain that the needle hurt
when he had a big hole in his leg.
They viewed this wound, which was a non-life-threatening wound,
as a ticket out of the war.
The meaning of that wound for them was,
hey, I'm probably not going to get killed
because I'm getting out of here now.
So the meaning we attribute to a stimulus
will determine significantly the degree to which
we perceive it as painful or not painful
or even notice it at all.
The fact is that Ivan Pavlov knew that
a hundred and something years ago.
Pavlov is well known for conditioning dogs
to salivate when they heard a tone
but he also conditioned them to salivate
and wag their tails when they were touched on the flank.
So Pavlov would touch the dog and give it meat powder.
Touch the dog, give it meat powder.
Pretty soon it was salivating when he touched it on the flank.
Then Pavlov would up the ante.
He would poke the dog with his finger
and give it meat powder, poke meat powder.
Then he would poke it with a dull pencil,
poke meat powder, poke meat.
Eventually Pavlov got through this slow process
of successive approximations
where he could poke the dog with a hat pin
deep enough to draw blood
and the dog would salivate and wag his tail.
Through classical conditioning he had changed
the meaning of that poke from ouch, pain, hurt
to hey, meat powder is about to be given to me
and the dogs wagged their tails and salivated.
Your expectation in a situation
will also determine whether you perceive it as painful or not.
Dentists know this.
When they're about to give you a
novocaine shot or whatever,
dentists now say you're going to feel a little pinch.
Now they're putting the thought in your mind
that you're going to feel a little pinch,
not a massive pain when they poke you with this big needle.
And in fact, the dentist who tells you
you're going to feel a little pinch
is less likely to get a major startle reaction
than somebody who has told nothing
because then you are free to interpret this
as a painful stimulus.
Another piece of evidence
suggesting that pain is neither simple nor direct
is the phenomenon known as the placebo effect.
Most people have heard of this,
but let me give you a quick and simple definition.
The placebo effect is demonstrated
when an inner substance seems to have the ability
to reduce pain.
The first historical documented instance
of the placebo effect on a large scale
took place back in 1941 in Boston
when a nightclub fire broke out,
the very well-known coconut grove fire.
This was a big wooden building that was overcrowded
and some of the exits were blocked
and the building went up and many people were burned
and some died and the ones who didn't die
were suffering from painful burns
and all of the available medical personnel
in the city converged on the coconut grove scene
and they started diminishing morphine to the burn victims.
Some of these health professionals ran out of morphine
and they leveled with the patient
and they said, listen, I'm sorry we're out of morphine
but more is on the way,
just try and take it easy and take deep breaths.
Others of them deceived the burn victims
and gave them injections of distilled water
and told them it was morphine.
35% of the people who got shots of distilled water
had their pain alleviated.
Ah, thank you, that feels much better.
Okay, that's an example of the placebo effect.
Now, the thing about the placebo effect
is that it only works if you believe it's going to work.
Let me share with you an example
of what turned out to be the placebo effect that didn't work.
In the late 1950s, a belief had somehow sprung up
in the dental profession
that if you have a patient listen to white noise over earphones,
you can do dental procedures without needing an anesthetic.
You can drill, you can do extractions and minor oral surgery
and what you do is you put these headphones on
and you give the patient access to a knob
and you say to the patient, this is going to prevent pain.
If you start feeling anything, simply make the noise louder
and some people who avoided the dentist
because of a fear of injections
thought this was wonderful and they tried it
and it seemed to work.
Then people that weren't so sure tried it and it didn't work
and pretty soon it stopped working for anybody.
Now, I know about audio analgesia
because when I was starting my laboratory,
I needed electronic equipment
and I bought it from a company called Novosonics Corporation
which built consoles for dentists
with microphones and with earphones
and a white noise generator and what have you.
They went out of business when audio analgesia
stopped working for anybody
and I was able to buy some very nice equipment
to stock my laboratory.
Yes, the placebo effect works if you believe it's going to work.
One more quick thing about the placebo effect,
it was a point of controversy in the medical profession
at an APA conference some time ago.
Doctors apparently disagreed significantly
about whether the placebo effect should be used in medicine or not
with some doctors saying,
you know, my job is to make my patient feel better.
If I know this person is a hypochondriac,
what's the harm in saying here's a pill
that's going to make you feel better and they feel better?
And other doctors would say that's unethical
because it's deceiving the patient.
The fact is that this issue was never resolved
and there are still situations where a doctor
might resort to a little deception
if he or she knows the patient very well
and knows that this is likely to improve their quality of life.
That's an issue that I guess is still unresolved.
All right, back to this notion of pain not being simple and direct.
Let me share with you some data provided by cultural anthropologists
about different responses to pain in different societies
that different cultures would appear to have different levels of tolerance for pain.
By the way, that's not true.
If you take people from any culture in the world into a laboratory
and measure their pain sensitivity, it's the same.
So there's something else going on here.
I was first made aware of cultural differences in other reactions to pain
when I was a graduate student
and I met a graduate student, a foreign graduate student from Africa
who I got to know well enough to ask him about his tribal scars.
And I made some inane remark about how many people did it take to hold you down while they...
and he was puzzled because those tribal scars didn't mean pain to him at all.
To him it meant full acceptance and responsibility in the society
and manhood and things of that nature.
He didn't think of it as pain at all.
In some cultures, there is absolutely no connotation of pain regarding childbirth.
In some societies, such as our own, we think of childbirth
in the context of being some really painful thing.
In other societies, they would shake their heads.
They would be puzzled by this attitude.
Perhaps the most dramatic cultural difference in pain sensitivity
or reactions to what should be a painful stimulus
was something I heard about in a visit to India in the year 2000.
I heard about this ceremony which takes place in rural farming villages,
not all over India, but where one man in the society is chosen
and apparently it's somewhat of an honor to be chosen
to be the representative of the gods.
And so what they will do is with no anesthetic, they take big sharp steel hooks
and they embed them in this fellow's back under the skin and under the back muscles
such that when these hooks are tied to ropes,
he can actually be lifted off the ground by these hooks embedded in his back.
Then the top of the ropes are tied to a frame over a horse-drawn cart
and this fellow is taken from village to village,
suspended by these hooks in his back.
And when he gets to a village, he blesses the children and he blesses the crops
and then he is taken on to another village and this goes on all day.
At the end of the day, the hooks are taken out
with apparently no ill effects on the part of the poor guy
the gentleman who was suspended that way all day.
The wounds are treated with wood ash and they apparently heal quickly
with very little on the way of scarring.
The business of cultural differences in sensitivity to pain and what have you,
it sort of has an analog with a subculture in our own country
and that is professional boxers.
These people, and I've seen hundreds of interviews with boxers,
they never refer to pain, they never talk about it.
You get the impression that the idea of associating pain with what they do for a living
is foreign to them and what it seems to be in all the cases,
the man with the hooks or the tribal scars or the boxers
or whatever is attitude and acceptance.
They, in all cases, these people have agreed to put themselves in this situation
so they have a positive attitude toward it
and they are accepting of the fact that things are going to happen to them
that might be the most pleasant but not be the most pleasant
You never hear them talk about boxing or this hook ceremony
or the tribal scars in the context of it being a painful stimulus.
I will mention one more phenomenon that again demonstrates
that pain is not simple and direct but indeed incredibly puzzling
and that phenomenon is acupuncture.
Acupuncture anesthesia.
Now, most people have several predictable questions about acupuncture.
Does acupuncture really work to reduce pain?
If it does reduce pain, how does it do this?
Does acupuncture work for animals?
If acupuncture has actually been around for 5,000 years,
why have we only recently heard about it in the United States?
Another question that might be asked is,
does acupuncture only work in treating pain or will it cure diseases?
Now, I will tell you right there that my discussion with you of acupuncture
is going to be restricted to the anesthetic properties of acupuncture
because at the present time, western science and western medicine
are willing to acknowledge, although it took quite a while for them to do that,
acupuncture does have merit as an anesthetic agent,
western science at the present time has no official opinion
on whether or not acupuncture has curative properties
because some of the claims of acupuncture practitioners
are that it can cure impotence and blindness
and it can cure memory ailments and these kinds of things.
Western science is unwilling to express an opinion on those claims.
So in our next lecture, I will answer some of those questions.
Why does acupuncture work? Why do we think it works?
Does it work in animals?
And why have we just begun to hear about acupuncture
when it's been around for over five centuries?
Thank you.
