Lecture 14 Pain, Acupuncture, Endorphins, and Aging
Welcome to Lecture 14. In Lecture 13 we talked about what might be generally referred to
as the puzzle of pain, ending up with some questions about acupuncture. In Lecture 14
we will deal with some of those questions and extend them a bit farther.
Acupuncture is one of the main tools of a health delivery system called Traditional Chinese
Medicine, abbreviated TCM. TCM is an example of a holistic health system. It has been in
use in China in virtually the same form for over 5,000 years. TCM was a little slow in
being recognized and adopted in the West because in the West we tend to compartmentalize our
illnesses. In other words, if you have a medical illness you go see a doctor. If you have an
emotional illness you go see a clinical psychologist. If you have a spiritual illness you go see
a clergy person. If you have a mental illness you go see a psychiatrist. In the holistic
system you would go see the same person for all of those ills because their belief is
that all illness, spiritual, mental, emotional, whatever, comes from imbalances of vital life
forces. Acupuncture was developed to rebalance those vital life forces. You can see why it
would take a while for Americans, especially those with a scientific bent, to warm up to
acupuncture. In fact, most of us had never even heard of acupuncture until the 1970s
and then it was brought to our attention in such a way that we couldn't ignore it.
I guess the story starts with President Richard Nixon's visit to China in 1972. This was the
first visit to China by a sitting American president and it, of course, was very newsworthy.
One of the journalists who was in China as part of the group to chronicle Nixon's visit
was a gentleman by the name of James Reston. While in China Reston experienced an acute
attack of appendicitis and he had to be medically treated by the Chinese health facilities and
he was treated with acupuncture to relieve his pain. He underwent surgery with acupuncture
anesthesia. It was played up in the press and everybody read about it, some of us with
varying degrees of disbelief and what have you, but then a team of journalists, scientists
and physicians from Western Europe were invited to China to actually witness surgical procedures
done under acupuncture anesthesia and they made movies of these things. In one operation
a patient had a thyroid ectomy with the anesthetic being a needle in the back of the wrist and
a needle in the back of the neck. In another surgical procedure the patient had a partial
lung resection and the anesthetic was four needles in each ear hooked up together by
wires and attached to a DC battery. Then in a third operation a patient had surgery for
a bleeding ulcer and in that case the acupuncture anesthetic was a two inch needle in the right
biceps muscle. This was documented on film. You could see that the patients were not in
a trance. They were not unconscious. They appeared to be awake and alert. They were able to converse
with the surgeon and they experienced no apparent discomfort. The general public through magazine
articles and newspaper articles became aware of the existence of acupuncture. The medical
community and the scientific community had no alternative but to continue to ignore it.
You couldn't even say acupuncture if you were a teaching professor in a medical school
for example. Why is this? It's because of the theory underlying acupuncture. The only
theory was the Chinese theory and that was that there is this universal life force known
as Qi. It's pronounced Qi but it's spelled QI and that this universal life force flows
through 12 meridians in the body. Western science could find no evidence for the existence
of Qi or for the existence of these 12 meridians in the body. I remember Western science feels
that we can only deal with things that are public, repeatable and measurable and neither
Qi nor the meridians fit those criteria so scientists and teachers had no alternative
but to ignore it. But we were desperate for a Western theory that would permit us to recognize
and study and talk about acupuncture. This theory appeared in the late 60s with the publication
of the so-called gate control theory of pain by doctors Ronald Melzak and Patrick Wall.
The name Melzak you may remember from an earlier lecture. He's the gentleman who raised puppies
in isolation and found that their responses to pain were very weird when they grew up.
Anyway, Melzak and Wall had a theory of pain that was based on known anatomical facts. Now
let me try and give you a quick overview of the gate control theory of pain. Recall that
we have two populations of receptors in the skin. We have the encapsulated end organs
and we have the free nerve endings. Also recall that these two populations of receptors have
different nerve fibers and they take different pathways through the brain with the free nerve
endings having thinner, more primitive nerve fibers and they go to the midbrain and then
to the limbic system. On the other hand, the encapsulated end organs travel to the brain
by way of the medial lemniscus rapidly conducting thick diameter fibers and they end up in the
somatosensory cortex in the anterior portion of the parietal lobe.
Okay well, on their way to their respective projection sites in the brain, these two categories
of nerve fibers make a detour. Now first let me give you some vocabulary. The larger diameter
fibers that carry information from the encapsulated end organs are called adelta fibers. The smaller
diameter, more primitive fibers that carry information from free nerve endings are known
as C fibers. Both adelta and C fibers go into the spinal cord in order to ascend up
to the brain. What they do according to the gait control theory and anatomical evidence
suggests that it's in fact what happens is they send off branches or collaterals to an
interesting area of the spinal cord known as the substantia gelatinosa. Now the substantia
gelatinosa is the gait in the gait control theory of pain. Anything that increases excitation
in the substantia gelatinosa closes the door on pain. Anything that inhibits electrical
activity in the substantia gelatinosa permits the gait to stay open and pain impulses to
get up to the brain. I will tell you, even though in their original proposal of the theory
Melzak and Wal didn't mention this, the gait, the substantia gelatinosa opens and closes
has to do with whether it permits fiber messages to ascend in the spinal phylamic tract or
not. Now C fibers, when they send off collaterals to the substantia gelatinosa, produce an inhibitory
effect in it, whereas A delta fibers produce an excitatory effect in it. Now we probably
know enough to understand some of what I'm going to share with you. Suppose that you're
minding your own business and a B stings you and now you have B venom in your skin and
it hurts. Now what receptors could possibly be responding to B venom, certainly not the
encapsulated end organs, they are too specialized. They respond to warmth and cold and touch and
pressure but certainly not B venom. The receptors that are responding to B venom would be those
old primitive free nerve endings that will respond to anything. So the free nerve endings
are signaling the C fibers and the C fibers are sending inhibitory messages to the substantia
gelatinosa, opening the gait and permitting pain messages to ascend to the brain. Now
according to the gait control theory, the way to reduce the feelings of pain would be to
increase some activity in A delta fibers. The gait control theory of pain proposes that
what determines whether a stimulus will be perceived as touch or warmth or cold or pressure
or pain is the ratio of A delta fibers to C fibers that are stimulating the substantia
gelatinosa. If the ratio favors the A delta fibers, the gait is closed and you don't experience
pain. If the ratio favors the C fibers, the gait is open and we experience pain.
Let's get back to our hypothetical situation. You've got all this B venom and the C fibers
are just having a ball and they're opening the gait for pain. How do we change that?
We do something that will increase activity in the encapsulated end organs and increase
activity in the A delta fibers to increase stimulation in the substantia gelatinosa and
shut the gait on pain. So what do we do? We rub it. We put ice on it. We massage it. Now
rubbing, ice, massage and things of that nature do in fact stimulate encapsulated end
organs. The pressure receptors and the vibration receptors and the temperature receptors were
increasing activity in the A delta fibers and we're experiencing pain relief. As a matter
of fact, the gait control theory of pain explains why the counter irritants work. Now what are
the counter irritants? For hundreds of years, medical people have known that if you have
a pain, if you have an ache, put a heating pad on it. Put an ice pack on it. Massage it.
Put it in a whirlpool bath. Give it an alcohol rub. All of those counter irritants have the
function of increasing activity in encapsulated end organs or thereby increasing activity
in the A delta fibers. So the counter irritants, which medicine has used for hundreds of years
even though they didn't have a clue why they worked, now make sense in the context of the
Melzack and Ball Gait Control Theory. Now how does this theory give the West an excuse,
if you will, to start paying attention to acupuncture? What you need to assume that somehow
insertion of those needles is increasing activity in A delta fibers and it's possible to make
such an assumption. What I haven't told you yet is that practitioners don't just stick
the needles in and forget about them and this was demonstrated in those three surgeries
that were witnessed and filmed by Western scientists and journalists. You stick the
needles in and you rotate them 15 seconds every minute or two. You tap on the end of
them periodically at regular intervals or the way the so-called barefoot doctors, these
are the practitioners out in the rural areas of China, they're called the barefoot doctors.
When they stick acupuncture needles in a patient, they will burn an herb at the end of the needle.
So it's got this smoking incense coming off it. Now what's probably happening is heat
is traveling down the barrel of the needle and perhaps stimulating Ruffini cylinders.
Or sometimes they will hook these needles up with a common wire and hook it up to a DC
battery which may in fact somehow be electrically short circuiting the encapsulated end organs
and causing them to activate adelta fibers. In other words, it is possible to make a case
that somehow these needles that are being tapped or twisted or vibrated or heated or
having current past them are stimulating adelta fibers. At least they gave the West an opportunity
to acknowledge the existence of acupuncture. Now then another problem arises. How can you
do a thyroid operation and stick a needle in somebody's wrist? I mean if you're going
to increase activity in the adelta fibers, shouldn't it be in the vicinity of where the
damage is being done? Or how can you operate on the stomach and put needles in the ear?
It didn't make sense. Now the way the West attempted to deal with that, and I admit this
is stretching things a bit, is to suggest that maybe there have been neurological links
between different parts of the body all along and we just never bothered to look for them.
And as evidence for this, people would point to the existence of so-called trigger zones.
For example, when you are experiencing cardiac disease, where do you feel the pain? In your
heart? No, you feel it in your shoulder and upper arm. And as a matter of fact, massaging
the shoulder and upper arm can actually reduce the severity of cardiac pain. So the West
started looking around for neurological links between parts of the body that nobody had
ever thought to look for before. And they found some interesting things. For example,
applying ice to the shin of the leg reduces the sensitivity of the tooth pulp to pain
stimulation. Who would have ever thought to try that? In any event, it was stretching
things. Luckily, another discovery was made that helped make the case for why acupuncture
could in fact be explainable even when you stick the needle in a site remote from where
the pain actually is. In 1972, one of the NIH laboratories in Bethesda discovered the
endorphins. Now, that's over 30 years ago, so most people have heard of them. The word
endorphin is a composite of endogenous endorphine. And the endogenous opiates, the endorphins,
the body's own morphines, were discovered in the mouse, the brain of the mouse, in 1972.
Endorphins. It was really a remarkable discovery. This caused the researchers to begin to look
in the brains of other animals. Is this just some weird thing that only happens in the mouse?
No. Endorphins were found in the brains of every animal that was investigated,
and it was also found in human cerebrospinal fluid. We have endorphins, too. We produce
endorphins, too. Now, if you could show that somehow certain acupuncture sites lead to the
release of endorphins, then you could make a case that wouldn't require looking for
neurological links between widely disparate parts of the body. So, in fact, there does appear to
be evidence that certain acupuncture sites do lead to the release of endorphins. Now, let me tell
you a couple of things about endorphins. There are actually two categories of endorphins. One
are true endorphins, and true endorphins are actually pituitary hormones. The other category
of endorphins are actually called enkephalins, and these are peptide neurotransmitters that
probably function in a specific region of the brain. But hormones, when they are released,
they enter the bloodstream, and they can circulate all through the body. So, if certain acupuncture
sites are actually able to stimulate the release of these true endorphins, the pituitary hormones,
which are dumped into the blood, then it could cause a general anesthetic effect all over the
body. There is some evidence that this is indeed the case. Acupuncture has been used in animal
surgery, and what this tells you, among other things, is that it's not suggestibility, because
animals don't believe in the placebo effect or know about things like suggestibility. So,
here's some animal, and it's been needled, and then it can have surgery and apparently not feel
any pain. What researchers did was they inserted the needles in one animal, and then they gave
another animal a transfusion of the first animal's blood and operated on the second animal. The
implication here is that needling the first animal brought about some chemical change in its blood
that had an anesthetic effect, and then you give the second animal a transfusion, and it can undergo
the surgery with apparently no appearance of experiencing pain. Another piece of evidence
suggesting a connection between certain acupuncture sites and the release of the endorphins was seen
in the following. If you pre-treat an animal with naloxone, now naloxone is an opiate antagonist.
Now, an antagonist is a drug that blocks all the receptor sites so that when you then put the drug
of interest in, it doesn't work. It doesn't have any effect because the receptor sites are already
taken up with the antagonist. So, if you pre-treat an animal with naloxone, it should get no benefit
even from real morphine. Well, when you pre-treat animals with naloxone and then use acupuncture
anesthesia, it doesn't seem to work, suggesting that at least part of the efficacy of acupuncture
anesthesia is due to the fact that it causes the release of endorphins. So, now we have two
ways that needling could in fact bring about an anesthetic effect that are acceptable to the West.
One, sticking in those needles and tapping, twisting, and heating and so on could directly
stimulate encapsulated end organs and increase activity in adelta fibers along the gait control
theory. Or two, it could lead to the release of endorphins and produce a chemically mediated
desensitization to pain. Actually, the endorphins are interesting enough that I'd like to elaborate
on them just a little bit. It turns out that there are three different situations that we might
find ourselves in that could lead to the release of endorphins. One, of course, is pain. Pain leads
to the release of endorphins and we should feel the pain diminish in intensity. It may never
be totally abolished, but when you hurt yourself, the initial hurt is always worse than the hurt
gets in the immediately following period. So, pain leads to the release of endorphins. You can
demonstrate this in an animal experiment quite easily. You give an animal a mild painful stimulus
and then give it a severe painful stimulus. And in this case, the response to the severe stimulus
is much muted compared to if you just gave the animal the painful stimulus to begin with. So,
the mild pain apparently causes the release of endorphins, so the animal is desensitized when you
give it the extreme pain. Another situation that has been shown to lead to the release of endorphins
is effort. Apparently, engaging in effortful behavior, at least some aspects of effortful
behavior, can lead to the release of endorphins. Some people point to the so-called runners high
as an example of how effort can lead to the release of endorphins because when endorphins are released,
it does give us sort of a heady feeling. So, some people report having experienced the runners high,
other people who've been running all their lives have never experienced the runners high. And I
don't know what else to do except share with you that some people believe that the runners high
in people for whom it has made itself apparent is due to the release of endorphins. Another
stimulus that has been shown to release endorphins is what the researchers called
thrilling music. Now, how do you define thrilling music? Well, they define thrilling music as
music that gives you a tingling in your spine. And it turns out that from this initial statement
about thrilling music that other situations that give you a tingling in your spine may also be
causing a release of the endorphins. For example, well, I can remember the first time I saw one
of my daughters in a high school play and I'm sitting there and all of a sudden I get this
tingling in my spine and I was just so thrilled to see her up there doing a good job. The chances are
I was experiencing the result of the release of endorphins. Let me tell you about an experiment
that was done in October of 2005, not that long ago by physicians at the Yale New Haven Hospital.
These physicians had 90 patients scheduled for elective outpatient surgery. This is where they
would do the surgery. The patients would recover in a recovery area and then probably that same
day they would be permitted to go home. Okay, now 90 patients, they decided they could divide them
into three groups and give each of them a different postoperative treatment. All of the patients
underwent their surgery and then they were put in the recovery area. They were given
access to an IV drip of a sedative and they could control the amount of sedative that they were
given. They were in control of the IV drip and if the pain got too bad they were to increase the
drip and increase the sedation effect. One group of 30 people listened to thrilling music. One group
of 30 people listened to white noise. Now white noise is sort of the auditory equivalent of white
light. It's random contributions of all of the audible frequencies and it sounds like what you
get when you have your radio tuned between stations. The third group got to hear standard
operating room sounds. The results were clear and unequivocal. The group that listened to the
thrilling music, first of all 79% of them didn't use the drip at all. They needed no medication.
Of the remaining people in the music group, they used approximately one half the dosage of
medication that the people in the white noise group and the operating room noise group used. Now
the thing is you can't point to that as a consequence of distraction because white noise is
a distractor and so is all this operating room noise. So the conclusion that these physicians
reached was that the music group was in fact experiencing the benefit of endorphin release.
While we are talking about some of the chemistry of pain, let me share with you another discovery.
This one was made in 1981. Researchers discovered a substance called substance P and of course P
and substance P stands for pain. This was a neurotransmitter that was known to be involved
in conduction of activity of information from one part of the brain to another in areas of the
brain where pain messages were received, substance P. And it turns out that in parts of the brain
where substance P is the neurotransmitter, it is in those parts of the brain where we find the
enkephalins. Enkephalins are the peptide neurotransmitters that work in specific parts of the brain
rather than all over the way hormones do. And so we have here a situation where the endorphins,
well actually the enkephalins are in a position to block or inhibit the activity of substance P.
The discovery of substance P as a pain neurotransmitter also gave us insight into another
interesting aspect of pain. There is a substance called capsaicin that is a component of jalapeno
peppers and other hot spicy peppers and what have you. And many local application products for
arthritis actually contain capsaicin and some people report getting great relief by rubbing
capsaicin on their aching joints when bouts of arthritis kick up. What does capsaicin do?
Well it turns out that capsaicin has the ability to release substance P from the synaptic vesicles
in the neurons where it is stored. Now you would think that releasing substance P would cause pain,
not alleviate pain, but it's a paradoxical effect. You see capsaicin causes a slow gradual
release of substance P so that what you get instead of pain is a sensation of warmth. So you rub
this stuff on your aching joints and you experience warmth because substance P is being released in
a controlled fashion. The other thing that capsaicin does is it prevents the regeneration of substance
P so that in fact you can rub that stuff on and you may remain pain free for hours or in some
fortunate cases for days because it stops the rebuild up of substance P after it causes this
slow release of the stuff. So we are learning more and more about the chemistry of pain year by
year and it makes sense of things that were previously puzzling to us. In the time remaining
let me say a few things about the aging process and what it does to pain. Now historically there
have been two points of view. I remember being in a tennis league where after we played tennis
we would sit around and drink beer together and some of the guys were complaining bitterly about
their aging parents and relatives about how much they complained about their aches and pains and
one guy said you know I hate to ask my mother or whatever how she's feeling because she says oh my
shoulder hurts and my ankle hurts and my hip hurts and this and that hurts. I don't even want to
ask anymore and other people are saying yeah you're right they must really increase their pain
sensitivity when they get old. On the other hand I have talked to physicians who have exactly the
opposite perspective. They say you know older people can sure stand pain better than younger
people. I say why do you say that? He says well when you give them an injection they don't complain.
If you do a needle biopsy they don't show any discomfort. You can actually do minor incisions
with either very little or no anesthetic and they don't seem to complain at all.
So we have here two opposing points of view. One saying old people feel pain more and the other
saying old people feel pain less. Which is true? Well I did a little research and I discovered that
both are true. It comes about this confusion comes about because we fail to recognize that there are
two categories of pain. There is bright superficial pain and there is dull deep pain.
Now I came across one experiment in the literature that not only looked at pain sensitivity across
a broad range of ages but also made the distinction between bright pain and dull pain or superficial
pain and deep pain. Here is what this experiment did. By the way the subjects in this experiment
ranged in age from something like 18 to 90 or something like oh well 18 to 80 I guess it was.
Okay so they produced the sensation of bright pain by using a condensing lens and a light bulb
and they would focus the beam of light at a precise point on the subject's forehead and they would
increase the intensity of the light make it brighter and brighter and hotter and hotter.
The sensation that it produced was like being poked in the head with a needle until the subject
said ouch that hurts. In the case of this this is producing what you might call superficial
or surface pain like being stuck in the forehead with a needle. In this case the young people said
ouch that hurts first. The other pain it was a little more complicated. What they did was they
got two wooden rods and they put them on either side of the Achilles tendon and then they would
exert pressure on the Achilles tendon. Now if you can demonstrate for yourself by squeezing your
Achilles tendon then it produces a dull but painful sensory experience. When you squeeze the
Achilles tendon and they would increase the pressure on these two wooden rods until the
subjects said ouch that hurts. Now the older people said ouch that hurts first. So what this
experiment demonstrated was that whether young people feel more pain or old people feel more
pain or vice versa depends upon whether you're talking about bright superficial pain or deep dull
pain. Apparently the superficial pain is less of a problem for the elderly because maybe they have
lost more skin receptors and maybe the internal pain receptors the internal free nerve endings
are more protected from age-related loss. In any event the elderly seem to be more sensitive to
deep pain which is why they would feel pain in their joints and muscles and what have you
and they are less sensitive to surface pain and it's just the opposite for young people.
This lecture ends our treatment of the sense of pain. In our next lecture we will begin talking
about the first of our two chemical senses the chemical senses being taste and smell and our
next lecture we will talk about taste and we will start out by describing the stimuli that we can
taste and talking about the supporting structures and the receptors in the sense of taste. Thank you.
