Lecture 15 Taste, Stimulus, Structures, and Receptors
Hello and welcome to lecture 15.
For continuity let me remind you that in lecture 14 we talked about various aspects
of pain, including acupuncture, the endorphins, and the aging process.
Lecture 15 represents our introduction to a new sensory system.
Actually it represents an introduction to the sense of taste, which is one of our two
chemical senses.
We will have a total of four lectures on the chemical senses, taste and smell.
I'd just like to mention that phylogenetically speaking, taste and smell are far more important
than hearing and seeing.
That is if you're a lower animal you're bound to have some chemical sensitivity, but not
necessarily to have auditory or visual sensitivity.
First let's start with some definitional issues.
What do we mean when we use the word taste?
Well, most people in their everyday usage of the term taste are actually referring to
far more than taste.
They're also referring to the aroma of the substance they're talking about, the texture
of the substance they're talking about, the temperature of the substance they're talking
about, and even whether or not that substance has pain components associated with it.
Color also plays a role in the broad definition of taste.
Let me give you some examples.
If you can't smell your food you say, gosh I can't taste it.
Well, actually you really can.
And holding your nose.
Take a lick of some salt and a lick of some sugar and tell me you can't tell the difference.
So smell is not technically a part of taste.
How about texture?
People say lumpy mashed potatoes don't taste as good as smooth mashed potatoes.
Well, they really do.
It's just the texture.
People say cold soup doesn't taste as good as hot soup.
The taste is the same.
It is the temperature that's different.
People say, well let me give you an experiment that was done at a smorgasbord, a roast beef
place some years ago in Pittsburgh.
When you go to these places where they carve the roast beef right in front of you, it's
always under a nice red lamp and it gives it this red rosy appearance.
Some researchers paid the establishment to substitute a green bulb for the red bulb.
And very few people chose the green roast beef and those who did choose it reported that
it didn't taste as good as it usually does.
Now they changed the taste by simply taking out the green bulb and putting the red one
back in and then it tasted good again.
Now how about pain components?
Well, it turns out that flat Coca-Cola, people say it doesn't taste as good as fresh Coca-Cola
and the only difference is those bubbles of carbonation that are producing mild pain
sensations on the back of the throat.
So when we use the word taste in our everyday colloquial usage, we're talking about all
of those components.
When a taste researcher talks about taste, he or she is referring to the four taste primaries,
sweet, sour, salty, and bitter.
Now those can in fact be distinguished even when you totally disregard things like temperature
and texture and color and things of that nature.
So the word taste has different meanings to different people.
To a taste researcher, sweet, sour, salty, and bitter.
That's what they mean by using the word taste.
Recently it has been found that in certain textbooks and in certain discussions of taste,
a fifth taste primary has been alluded to.
This is a taste primary that has been proposed by the Japanese researchers.
It's called umami and I just reviewed a sensation and perception textbook where in fact they
talked about the five taste primaries, sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and umami.
Now umami has been known about for approximately 20 years but it is only in the mid 1980s that
the Japanese researchers felt that they had demonstrated conclusively through research
that umami does represent a separate taste and that it's not just an aggregate of some
combination of sweet, sour, salty, and bitter or something of that nature.
So they claim they now have convincing experimental evidence that umami is a separate taste.
The translation of the word umami into English would be savory.
So now some people are claiming that we have five taste primaries, sweet, sour, salty,
bitter, and savory or umami.
Let me give you exemplars of the taste primaries.
The exemplar for sweet would be a sugar.
If you want to know what sweet tastes like, taste sugar.
For salty, you would taste sodium chloride, although there are plenty of things that taste
salty that have neither sodium nor chloride in them.
For sour, dilute acetic acid or unsweetened lemonade would give you a typical taste of
sour substance and for bitter, try quinine.
The alkaloids are typically bitter in taste and quinine is a good example of a bitter
taste.
For umami, I guess the exemplar would be monosodium glutamate, the flavor enhancer that is found
in some Asian cooking.
Unfortunately, some people have a reaction to monosodium glutamate and it gives them
headaches and not everybody can handle it, but most of us can, I guess.
Now, we're going to talk about the organization of the taste system on the human tongue.
I would just like to mention in passing that the way humans have their taste system organized
is not necessarily the way it works in other members of the animal kingdom.
For example, flies, these pesky things that invite themselves into our houses without
our permission, flies have their taste receptors on their legs so that when you see a fly walking
across some disgusting item with a big smile on its face, it's actually tasting that item
with the taste receptors on its legs.
Fish have their taste receptors on the surface of their bodies so that as they swim through
the water, they're actually sampling what there is to sample with these taste receptors
on the surface of the body.
In humans, it's arranged a little bit differently and before we actually get into the mechanism
of taste, again, let me share some vocabulary with you.
I want to share with you the distinction between taste papillae, taste buds, and taste receptors
because they are actually referring to quite different things and some people actually confuse
them.
In fact, I recall once seeing a full-page ad in a quite prestigious magazine for a particular
brand of coffee and it showed a steaming cup of coffee and it showed a mouth open with
the tongue exposed and it said give your taste buds a treat and what you could see were those
pink spots on the model's tongue.
The pink spots on the tongue are not taste buds at all, they are actually taste papillae.
You cannot see the taste buds on the tongue and you cannot see the taste receptors on
the tongue, all you can see are the taste papillae.
Now what are taste papillae?
Well taste papillae are bumps on the tongue that tell you that there is a taste moat in
that region, it's like the papilla is actually a castle surrounded by a moat and these moats
are there to trap molecules of the substance to be tasted, so the papilla just tells you
that there is a moat there and in that moat are two to four taste buds.
Now taste buds are goblet shaped affairs which are on their sides lining the walls of this
taste moat around the taste papillae and these goblet shaped affairs contain 20 to 24 cells,
these are supporting cells and in the middle, in the very middle of the taste bud is the
actual taste receptor cell and you can identify the taste receptor cell because it is the only
cell in a taste bud that has little hair like tufts sticking out of it and these little
hair like projections actually help the taste receptor to come into physical contact with
the molecules of the substance to be tasted.
You see the substances that we can taste are only substances that go into solution in saliva,
you can't taste just anything, for example if you have a marble and you clean all the
grease off it and you clean all the dirt and anything else off it and you put that marble
in your mouth you will feel its weight, you will feel its temperature because of course
we have temperature receptors in the mouth but it will be tasteless to you because we
can only taste things that dissolve in saliva that go into solution in saliva so that their
molecules can find their way into this taste moat where they are likely to come into physical
contact with a taste bud and be entrapped by the little hair like tufts on the end of
the taste receptor.
A healthy young adult human tongue contains about 10,000 taste buds, thus it contains
about 10,000 taste receptors because typically there is one taste receptor per bud.
Now why am I hedging my bets?
Why am I saying that a healthy young adult human has 10,000 taste buds therefore 10,000
taste receptors?
Because that number is different in children and it's different in the elderly and it'll
take a bit of explaining to get that across so let's save that for a little bit later.
So we have these papillae on the surface of the tongue.
Now the papillae in different locations on the tongue have different names.
The papillae on the tip of the tongue, the ones that perhaps you are more likely to look
at when you brush your teeth or stick your tongue out in the mirror, these are called
fungiform papillae.
The papillae along the edge of the tongue are known as foliate papillae and we also
have some papillae at the back of the tongue called circumvalent papillae.
Ok, so I've said we have papillae on the tip of the tongue, the edges of the tongue and
the back of the tongue.
What about the middle of the tongue?
It turns out that the middle of the human tongue is taste blind.
It contains no papillae, it contains no taste buds and it contains no taste receptors.
Why have we been able to go through so many decades of life and not be aware that the
middle of the tongue is taste blind?
Well, it's very simple.
When you put something in your mouth, you chew it up and the saliva carries it all over
the tongue and so we assume that the whole tongue is involved in the taste process.
That's not true.
In taste experiments done in a laboratory, they restrict the portion of the tongue that
the stimulus is delivered to.
There are a couple of ways you can do this.
You can dip little pieces of filter paper in different tasting solutions and then you
can place that filter paper on a specific population of taste papillae.
If you take one of these little pieces of filter paper dipped in taste substances and
put it in the middle of the tongue, you can't taste it at all.
The other way that taste stimuli are delivered to subjects in the laboratory is they have
a thin, either a rubber tube or a glass tube or a glass pipette of some sort and they run
the liquid stimulus onto some specific part of the tongue but not the entire tongue.
In this case, you can easily demonstrate that the middle of the tongue is taste blind.
It doesn't taste anything.
Now let me tell you something about taste receptors.
They have a relatively short lifespan.
Taste receptors only live for between 7 and 10 days and then they die.
When a taste receptor dies, what happens is the most mature of the supporting cells, the
24 remaining cells that fill out the taste bud, the most mature, the one, the taste supporting
cell with the most seniority, if you will, moves into the middle of the bud, grows hair-like
tufts on it and becomes the new taste receptor cell.
But every 7 to 10 days, taste receptors die and are replaced by a new taste receptor cell.
One of the implications of this is even if you've been smoking for 20, 30, 40, 50 years
and you give up smoking, your taste sensitivity will return to normal within two weeks.
Former smokers are amazed to find what things really taste like after they give up smoking.
Something else about taste receptors is they undergo rapid adaptation.
Really when we put something in our mouths, we chew it and we swallow it in a relatively
short period of time.
If we were to just let that substance linger in the mouth, we would find that in from one
and a half to three minutes, that taste experience would fade to nothingness.
We would just feel a lump in our mouths.
Taste receptors show relatively quick adaptation.
One and a half to three minutes is the amount of time it would take for most stimuli that
we would ever taste to adapt.
If something is incredibly strong, it might last a little longer than that.
Now, let me tell you about a taste-related phenomenon that has been of more than passing
interest to psychologists since the 1950s, the sweet tooth phenomenon.
The reason psychologists first got interested in the sweet tooth phenomenon, that is the
preference that most people have for the taste of sweet, is because a learning theorist by
the name of Clark Hull back in the 40s and 50s had what he called his drive reduction
theory of learning.
He said animals would only learn certain behaviors, or learn any behaviors, for a reward that
would reduce some primary drive, hunger or thirst or something of that nature.
Along came another psychologist who said, Professor Hull, look at this, I have here
rats that are just, they've just been fed, they've just been watered, but watch this,
and he showed that those rats would work for the taste of saccharin.
Saccharin is non-nutritive, it has no caloric value, it doesn't satisfy any basic need.
So the Hullians were amazed, why would a rat learn to work for saccharin if it wasn't
hungry or thirsty?
Because it had an appetitive feeling for the taste of sweet, the sweet tooth phenomenon.
So psychologists got to wondering, why do animals have a preference for sweet?
And one theory was, well maybe the first thing animals taste is mother's milk, and mother's
milk is sweet, so animals associate the sweet taste with satisfaction of hunger needs and
survival and so on.
So an example of one of the experiments that was done back then is as follows, they took
some pregnant rats, and they adulterated their diet with quinine, and they put quinine in
the mother-to-be rat's water, and they would periodically give her subcutaneous injections
of quinine liquid, so all of her body fluids tasted bitter, and when she was, when she
gave birth, her milk tasted bitter, so here were these baby rats drinking bitter tasting
mother's milk, and they wondered if now when these rats grew up, they would prefer bitter
over sweet.
So here was the test, they gave the rats a choice of a bowl of sweet tasting liquid and
a bowl of bitter tasting liquid, and the rats overwhelmingly went for the sweet.
So it appears that the sweet tooth is something that we are born with.
Now is it something that just occurs in rats?
Certainly not, you all know perfectly well that the sweet tooth is prevalent in humans,
in fact the sweet tooth seems to be an almost universal phenomenon.
Horses have a sweet tooth, dogs have a sweet tooth, monkeys have a sweet tooth, rats, mice,
humans, we all have a sweet tooth.
One notable exception is the cat.
Cats do not have a sweet tooth, and this in fact has been a source of curiosity to scientists
for some decades, and there were different theories, maybe the cat's tongue has receptors
for sweet, but there's some kind of a disconnect between the receptors in the tongue and the
parts of the brain that analyze this, or maybe the cat doesn't have receptors for sweet,
or maybe the cat is just too snooty to admit that it has a craving for something as common
as sweets, like the rest of us.
Well in 2005, last year, researchers finally discovered why cats don't show this sweet
tooth phenomenon that most of the rest of us do.
As a result of a genetic mutation, the receptor sites on the cat's sweet receptors cannot
respond to sweet.
Sweet does not bind to the receptors the way it should.
This is the result of a genetic mutation, and it's not only house cats, it turns out
that it's also tigers, and ocelots, and cheetahs, and other cats.
They just have a genetic insensitivity.
It's not that they don't like sweet, it's that they can't taste it.
If you give a cat a choice between sweetened water and regular water, it's 50-50 what the
cat will drink from and how much it will drink.
So does this influence in a negative way the cat's ability to satisfy its nutritional needs?
Not really, because cats, house cats, and the other cats that we mentioned are, for the
most part, carnivores, and so they manage okay without being aware of the sense of taste.
They're having their eating habits guided by the sense of taste.
So we appear to be born with this sweet tooth, and as a survival characteristic, it's pretty
good, because in nature, if animals don't have any guide to tell them what's good or
bad to eat, in nature, if an animal is programmed to approach sweet, it's likely to eat things
that are good sources of energy, because sweet things generally have sugar in them.
You could also program an animal to avoid bitter tasting things, because in nature, bitter
tasting things can be poisonous.
Not all bitter tasting things are poisonous, but poisonous things tend to be bitter tasting.
So if you were designing a rat or any animal and you wanted it to survive on its own, program
it to approach sweet and to avoid bitter, and that animal has a better chance of survival.
You might also want to program that animal to have an appetitive feeling toward salt,
because sodium chloride is necessary, and it turns out that while animals have a strong
sweet tooth, they also have a positive reaction to salt.
We have a less well-developed preference for salt.
We prefer sweet, a great deal, and we prefer salt a little bit.
Baby rats have an aversion to sour and bitter, and so do baby humans.
So it appears that these preferences are not random, they seem to be built into us.
Another taste-related phenomenon that I want to mention is sometimes referred to as the
wisdom of the body phenomenon.
This refers to an animal's ability to know when it is suffering from some kind of nutritional
lack, when something is missing in its diet, and to actively seek out that particular substance.
Let me use the example of salt.
Farmers know, and game wardens, and forest rangers know, that if you put salt blocks
out in the woods, that the deer will travel large distances to come and lick those blocks
of salt.
Farmers know that if they put salt blocks out in the pastures, that their cows will
travel large distances to come and lick those blocks of salt.
Now, do the animals make a conscious decision?
They say, boy, I may be getting low on sodium chloride, I better go lick this block of salt.
I doubt that very much.
As a matter of fact, this craving for salt, and that's what it must be, because it causes
deer who are usually very, very wary animals to expose themselves and come out of the woods
to go over and lick a block of salt.
This appetitive feature of salt for deer is so great that there are laws against private
hunters putting out salt blocks just before hunting season to get the deer used to coming
to this particular part of the forest, and then the hunters, when hunting season starts,
they sit there with their guns, and it's easy picking, so you cannot do that.
You can't put blocks of salt up.
How do the animals know they need this?
What would possibly possess a cow that would make it get up out of its nice warm barn and
go out through the snow, perhaps, to lick a block of salt out in the pasture?
If you were to ask the cow, why did you do that?
Why did you get up out of the warm barn and go out to the cold pasture to lick a block
of salt?
Do you know what that cow would say?
Moo.
Sorry, I couldn't resist that.
But the cow doesn't know.
It doesn't know why it's doing that.
It's some kind of innate feeling that this would be a good thing to do.
Rats do it too.
If you treat a rat with a drug known as materipone, which produces an adrenal insufficiency,
that rat will increase its sodium chloride intake.
See now, the adrenal gland, in addition to secreting adrenaline, also secretes hormones
that aid in normal sodium chloride metabolism.
So if you have adrenal insufficiency, your health, and even your survival, is at risk
if you don't take in larger quantities of salt.
So a rat with adrenal insufficiency somehow knows to eat more salt.
This wisdom of the body phenomenon has also been demonstrated in humans.
There is a tragic case of a young boy whose parents were very concerned because he took
in large quantities of salt.
He started, for instance, taking the top off the salt shaker and dumping a quantity of
salt in his hands and eating it, and he took to licking the salt off saltine crackers.
They were aware that something was amiss here.
So they took this young boy for an examination, and when the doctor heard the symptoms, he
had the boy hospitalized.
While in the hospital, this young boy died.
The autopsy determined that he had had a tumor of the adrenal gland, and that in fact he
was taking in these large quantities of salt, and if he had not been taking in these large
quantities of salt, he would have died at home.
See what happened was in the hospital, he was put on the hospital diet, and the hospital
diet, while it's adequate for people without any special nutritional issues, was insufficient
to maintain this young boy's life, and he died of a deficit of sodium chloride.
There is a disease called Addison's disease that has a number of different symptoms, but
one of the characteristics of Addison's disease is adrenal insufficiency, and people who have
Addison's disease find that they have a craving for salt also.
Now, so far we've been talking about this wisdom of the body phenomenon as if it only
involves salt.
That's not really true.
In laboratory studies, rats have been deprived of necessary vitamins.
Now, then the rat is given access in a cafeteria-style feeding situation to different foods, one of
which is very high in the vitamin that the rat has been deprived of.
What the rats do is they seek out the food that is high in the nutrient that they are
lacking in.
How do they know this?
What is the mechanism?
Because you can demonstrate this for a variety of nutrients.
Well, first of all, somebody said, well, maybe when the rat or the human or whatever eats
the substance that they are deficient in, they quickly feel better.
Maybe it has absolutely nothing to do with taste.
So this was tested experimentally.
A group of different groups of rats were deprived of different nutrients, and then their taste
nerves were cut.
The tongue is different from the other senses in that to totally desensitize the tongue,
you have to cut three nerves.
The tongue has three nerves.
The main taste nerve is the one that goes to the front of the tongue.
It's called the cortotempany nerve.
Now, you may remember tympany from tympanic membrane and what have you, and the reason
it's called the cortotempany nerve is because in the course of going from the tongue to
the brain, it passes right behind the eardrum.
In fact, some humans who are undergoing medical treatment for a ruptured eardrum or something
like that have actually agreed, because they have this opening in their eardrum, to have
researchers record from their cortotempany nerve while they pour different taste substances
on their tongue.
So the human taste nerve has in fact been recorded from, and if I remember, I'll share
with you some of those results, but let me get back on track here.
To desensitize the tongue, you cut the cortotempany nerve, you cut the glossopharyngeal nerve,
and you cut a branch of the vagus nerve.
Now the animal can taste nothing.
Now you deprive the animal of a nutrient, and you again give it access in a kephacteria
style feeding situation, and if the animal eats something and feels better even without
tasting it, it should come to prefer that substance.
In the absence of taste sensitivity, they never catch on as to which substance they
should eat, and the animal will die of its nutritional deficit.
So the wisdom of the body phenomenon is not simply an example of eating something, feeling
better, and continuing to eat that substance.
You must be able to taste it.
Okay, now what could the possible mechanism be?
Well, let me again go back to the example of sodium chloride, because that's the substance
that has had the most research done on it in connection with this wisdom of the body phenomenon.
Our tongues are constantly bathed in saliva, and saliva contains as one of its components
sodium chloride, so that if you hang your tongue out of your mouth for three minutes
or so and let the receptors that are sensitive to salt regenerate back to their full sensitivity,
you might be surprised to discover that your tongue is actually 1,000 times more sensitive
to salt than you thought.
In this state of heightened sensitivity to salt, you can now seek out and find foods
with much lower concentrations of salt than you could be aware of when your tongue is
covered in sodium chloride.
Some people suggest that when we are deficient in some nutrient, that it actually changes
the state of adaptation to the tongue, and it makes us more sensitive to that substance,
and it actually creates a craving for that substance, and that is probably the best explanation
that exists at the present time for why an animal would actively seek out a substance
that it seems to need.
It probably changes the reaction of the tongue to it by authoring some of the adaptation
process that is usually going on in the tongue.
Okay, let me get back to this business of recording from the court of timpani nerve
of a human subject.
Now what we're in a position to do is pour things on the subject's tongue, and the subject
can tell you what he or she tastes and to what extent.
For instance, we know that the tip of the tongue is maximally sensitive to sweet.
The whole, the sides and the back of the tongue can also discriminate sweet, but the front
of the tongue is the part of the tongue that is best at discriminating sweet.
It turns out that the sides of the tongue can tell sweet too, but they are better at
sour and bitter, and it turns out that the back of the tongue plays more of a role in
foods for which hot, spicy, mild pain components are an important aspect, because as I mentioned
when we were doing our definitional issues of taste in the colloquial sense, pain components
do play a role in the characteristic taste of some substances, like the mild pain sensations
from carbonated beverages, for example.
So spicy cuisine, like General So's chicken, for example, is best appreciated if the pain
components from the hot peppers or whatever are permitted to come into contact with the
back of the tongue from the circumvalent papillae, if you will, because the circumvalent papillae
are actually innervated by the vagus nerve, whereas the front is the court of timpani and
the sides are the glasopharyngeal, and that is the nerve that is more likely to be sensitive
to pain components.
So it's an interesting intermix of sensitivities and different nerve fibers that give us our
characteristic ability to enjoy different tastes.
Okay, so we've talked a bit about the structures on the tongue and the nature of the stimuli
for taste and some interesting phenomena like wisdom of the body, and in our next lecture
we will continue our discussion of the taste system, extending our discussion to some of
the factors that influence individual differences in taste preferences.
Thank you.
