Lecture 23, The Visual Agnosias
Hello and welcome to Lecture 23.
In Lecture 22 we talked about language perception, which is of course a critically important perceptual
ability for humans.
In Lecture 23 we're going to talk about some aspects of visual perception, which also
turn out to be very critical for the normal functioning of the human being.
Sometimes we learn about the way that the brain constructs a perception, in this case
a visual perception, by being permitted to study through their kindness and altruism
people who have experienced brain damage and then allow us to try and learn from their
misfortune.
That's going to be the case for most of the examples of visual perceptual dysfunction
that I'm going to talk about in this lecture.
To give us a hypothetical point of departure, I'm about to create a visual perception for
myself.
I'm going to look out the window and, lucky me, I just saw, passing across the parking
lot, a red convertible and I looked a little closer and I saw that it was a Ford Mustang
and because I have a special affection for Ford Mustang convertibles, I noticed that
it was a 1967.
So I saw a red 1967 Ford Mustang convertible crossing the parking lot at, I would estimate,
a speed of around 10 miles per hour and the perception made me smile, indicating that
it also had an emotional component and I happened to know why it made me smile.
Because it reminded me of a trip I took from Pittsburgh to Philadelphia in a red Ford Mustang
convertible.
In 1968, the car was a 67, we took the trip in 68, I was attending the Eastern Psychological
Association meeting in Philly and I went with my best friend and we had a wonderful time
on the trip there at the convention on the way back.
Now that perception that I just had, which included color and size, I knew about the
size because of monocular and binocular depth cues, I knew it was a real car 70 yards away
rather than a toy car one foot behind the window.
So the perception that I just had included color and size and movement and shape and
form which allowed me to identify what this structure was and it had that emotional component
and I also could tell in what part of my visual field this car was located, upper left, lower
right, whatever.
Yeah, so all of those individual sub-components formed what the Gestaltists would have called
a Gestalt, a unified whole perception.
In fact, it would be unthinkable, unimaginable to think of that same perception with one
or more of its components taken away.
It just doesn't seem like that could happen and yes, in fact, it could happen unthinkable
but not impossible because it turns out that each and every component of that complex visual
perception that I just had depends upon the functioning of a specific part of what we
call visual association cortex.
Different aspects of that visual perception are analyzed by neural circuits in different
parts of association cortex which then compare notes and interact with each other through
those lateral connections that we mentioned in an earlier lecture and create that entire
unified Gestalt, the unified perception.
And remember the cortical regions also have connections with the emotional circuits in
the limbic system of the brain giving it the ability to make me smile when I saw it
because of remembering that trip I took from Pittsburgh to Philly.
Okay, now it is possible to have that same perception but in black and white.
It is possible to have that same perception but not be able to discriminate the shape
of the object I'm looking at so I would see a red blob moving across the parking lot.
It's possible to see that same perception but not be able to perceive movement.
It's possible to have that same perception but not be aware of where in my visual field
the target object that I was looking at was located.
Each of those instances of faulty perception have in fact occurred as a result of focal
damage to a different part of some individual's visual association cortex.
Now when we say focal damage we're talking about concentrated damage in a specific region
of the brain as opposed to diffuse damage which is spread over a larger area of the
brain.
What I have just described to you are examples of what are called the visual agnosias.
Now the word agnosia means a failure to know.
I'm sure you've encountered the word or for instance an agnostic is somebody who doesn't
know whether God exists or not.
So the visual agnosias refer to our failure to know something about a perceptual scene
that we're looking at.
The agnosias are not traditional blindness which usually involves either the receptors
or the optic nerve.
The visual agnosias represent failures of a specific aspect of visual perception but
it is certainly not the same thing as blindness.
We're going to talk about in this lecture six different categories of visual agnosia
each associated with focal damage to a different part of visual association cortex.
The first of the visual agnosias that I want to share with you is called achromatopsia.
Now that's the technical term what it really means is color agnosia.
It is possible for someone to look at that same scene that I looked at and with perfect
visual acuity discriminate that they're looking at a Ford Mustang and that it's moving across
the parking lot and that it is a convertible and that it's going about 10 miles per hour
but they couldn't, their perception would have no color.
It would be like watching a black and white movie.
Now you might think oh that's just color blindness but no it is not traditional color
blindness because traditional color blindness well it involves the cones, the visual receptors
that mediate color vision and it can be demonstrated in people with achromatopsia that the cones
are functioning normally.
So how do we do that?
How can we demonstrate that the cones are functioning normally?
Well one way is with an ophthalmoscopic examination you can look in and you can see that the cones
are of normal appearance.
Well does that guarantee that they're functioning normally?
No but there's another way to guarantee that.
We talked about the EEG the electroencephalogram where you record the brain waves from the
brain and it can tell you things about the formation of a phonemic perceptual map.
Well there is also an electrical wave form that we can record from the cornea of the
eye it's called the ERG electroretinogram that tells us about the functioning of the
different components in the eye.
Now how can we record from the cornea of a human without causing a great discomfort?
Well you use what is called a wick electrode.
You have a wick, a cloth wick soaked in saline and you take a contact lens with a little
hole drilled in it and you stick this wick electrode in it and then you insert the contact
lens such that this cloth wick soaked in saline is gently touching the cornea, no pain involved
and you take the other end of this electrode and you amplify it and display it on an electronic
instrument that displays wave forms.
You make the hole in the contact lens off-center so you can shine a beam of light into the
eye and you send a flash of light into the eye and what you get from your wick electrode
is the electroretinogram, a very complex wave form.
The electroretinogram is used for diagnostic purposes say in babies who are too young to
tell you what they see or what the problem is or in people in a state such that they
will not or cannot cooperate with somebody examining their eyes.
What you see in people with achromatopsia is that the electroretinogram is normal.
The electroretinogram tells you about the state of functioning of the rods and the cones
and the ganglion cells and the pigment epithelium and all of this is normal in these people
but they cannot perceive color and it's due to damage to a particular part of the visual
association area.
In this case it turns out to be in the posterior parietal lobe.
You'll see that a number of instances of visual agnosias involve different parts of
the posterior parietal lobe, not all of them but some of them.
Okay now what does life hold for people with color agnosia?
Well the first thing to say is of course their quality of life is diminished somewhat.
They can no longer appreciate the full beauty of a sunset.
They can no longer appreciate the beauty of a peacock opening its tail feathers.
They can no longer appreciate the beauty of a floral garden in the spring or what have
you but you know they can still get by.
There are some more practical deficits that people with achromatopsia experience.
For instance they have to learn a new way to obey traffic signals instead of obeying
the signals by the color red, green and amber they now have to remember the location of
the lights on a traffic signal.
The other thing is they are going to need help coordinating the color of their wardrobes.
Other than that their visual acuity as I said is still as good as it ever was.
Let's move on to another category of visual agnosia of a failure to know something about
the visual stimulus.
There are actually two categories of what is called visual shape agnosia and in both
cases the inferior temporal cortex which is another visual association area the inferior
temporal cortex is involved.
Remember the temporal lobe is sort of like a hot dog bun and the top half is the superior
temporal which is auditory and especially speech perception and the bottom half the
inferior temporal temporal is a visual association area well.
Visual shape agnosia seems to involve the inferior temporal cortex.
The first category of visual shape agnosia is called aperceptive agnosia.
In this case the individual is unable to discriminate shape or form so somebody with aperceptive
visual agnosia would look out that window and they would see a red blob moving across
the parking lot.
So they could perceive movement, they could perceive color, they could perceive where
in the visual field this thing was located but they couldn't tell you what its shape
or form was which means they couldn't tell you what its identity was or what it was used
for.
Now I know this seems too bizarre to be true but there are documented instances and some
of these people have permitted themselves to be studied in laboratories.
The thing is if you sit such a person at a table and they have aperceptive visual agnosia
and you say there are three objects in front of you do you see their location?
Yes.
Can you point to them?
Yes.
Can you tell the color?
Yes.
I can tell the color.
Do you know what these things are?
No.
All they see is blur.
So they can't identify people.
They can't identify things.
Now if you let them reach out and touch the object and they say oh yes this is a lamp
shade and this is a telephone and this is a water pitcher.
So they still know what things are but they have to use touch.
The way they identify people is either by the sound of the voice or if its somebody they're
very familiar with possibly by the smell.
These individuals are functionally blind.
So aperceptive visual agnosia means these people cannot drive but all they're seeing
is shapes.
In fact the way to conceptualize aperceptive visual agnosia is to imagine looking at the
world through milk glass which is what severe cataracts are like actually.
You can see shades.
You can see movement but you cannot discriminate form or identity of the things that you're
looking at.
The thing is actually aperceptive visual agnosia is not as debilitating as severe cataracts
because these people do have normal color discrimination.
They just can't tell what they're looking at.
So it's not traditional blindness.
You can guarantee this again by doing an examination of the retina using ophthalmoscopic techniques
and also using the electroretina grant.
You can see that the retina is functioning and that this functional blindness is in fact
due to a disorder of one of the visual association areas.
The second category of visual form agnosia is called associative visual agnosia.
This is pretty unusual too.
In associative visual agnosia the individual can in fact perceive the shape and form of
the object but they can't tell you what it is and they can't name it.
Now in this case it still appears to involve the inferior temporal cortex but it appears
to be a disconnect like a fiber bundle is either atrophied or cut or something so that
the inferior temporal cortex cannot communicate with the language centers of the brain for
naming of objects.
The fact of the matter is if you can't name an object you're at a great disadvantage
in retrieving that name which tells you what the object does, what its identity is.
Now how do we know these people can discriminate the form and the shape?
Because in experiments with people showing this category of visual agnosia let me tell
you rather than make up an example tell you an actual event that happened.
The individual was shown a picture of an anchor and the individual was asked do you know the
name of this thing?
No.
Do you know what its function is?
No.
Can you draw it and the individual drew an anchor?
So clearly this individual was able to identify the shape by vision but they were unable to
name it or tell its function.
Now if you give the person the name if you say well that's called an anchor then the
person says oh yes an anchor that's what you use to hold a boat fast so that it won't
drift in the water that's what you use to keep a boat in one place.
So when you give them the name then they can retrieve the function.
This disconnect between the inferior temporal cortex and the language centers for naming
is suggestive of another phenomenon that developmental psychologists have long been interested in
the so-called childhood amnesia phenomenon.
If you think back to your earliest memories you really can't remember a whole lot before
you have acquired enough language to code things into words because words are how we
store things for the easiest memory retrieval so that for the first couple of years of life
you're having events that are having an impact on you and some of these events are perhaps
coded in primitive emotional circuits but because you don't have language to name these
things you can't retrieve these events even if they're still affecting your behavior.
An example suppose at the age of a year and a half you are bitten by a dog and you're
scared and you're hurt but because you're too young to have language to code into words
the this event that happened you may not have any conscious memory of it but for the rest
of your life you may have a feeling of unease and fear around dogs especially barking dogs.
So the summary statement about this is that we use words to code memories and we use the
name of the object to retrieve that memory and these people with this particular category
of visual form amnesia can't access the word and if they can't access the word and name
the object they can't retrieve the memory. It's pretty fascinating. Another category
of visual amnesia is called spatial location amnesia. This particular visual perceptual
deficit involves the right posterior parietal area of the brain. Now what is the consequence
of right parietal posterior parietal dysfunction? The individual can say yes I see a red Mustang
convertible crossing the parking lot and it seems to be going about 10 miles an hour and
if you say to them well where in your visual field is that? They can't tell you. They don't
know if it's in the upper right hand quadrant or the lower left or the upper left or the
lower right. It's pretty hard to conceive of what this must seem like to somebody. We've
known for some time that the posterior parietal lobe is involved in various aspects of nonverbal
visual spatial relations. For example, the best known of the adult intelligence tests
is called the Wase, Wexler adult intelligence scale and it has a series of subtests that
test different categories of adult memory and I have on occasion used the Wase in the
diagnosis of people who come to see me because of head injuries and wondering what the consequences
of this head injury are. In general, if somebody has damage to the posterior parietal region
of the brain, especially the right hemisphere, they are going to do very poorly on one of
the subtests of the Wase called the Block Design Subtest. Some of you may have seen this
or what happens is you show the person a diagram. Let me see, there's a better way to put that.
A design made out of colored blocks and then you give them a set of colored blocks and
you say, produce that design. Now, even people of low average intelligence can take these
colored blocks and look at the design and look at the colored blocks and make the design.
The designs of course get more and more complicated until you're unable to accurately match the
pattern of the colored blocks. But I have in fact tested gifted people with IQ's two
standard deviations above the average who have right posterior parietal damage and they can't
even do the simplest of the block design tests. So it's been known for some time that the posterior
parietal is importantly concerned with nonverbal visual spatial relations, the ability to apprehend
temporal sequences of visual events, spatial sequences of visual events. Here is this poor
person with apparently enough destruction to the posterior parietal lobe that they're not even
able to tell where in the visual field something is located. You'd have to I guess see it to
believe it but it is true. Another highly unusual visual agnosia is called motion agnosia. In motion
agnosia the individual is incapable of detecting movement. Their perception of the world is as
if it were taken with a time-lapse camera. They see objects appear and disappear and they don't see
them move from one place to another. This is another example of damage to a visual association area,
perhaps the best way to explain what this is like is to share with you the verbal reports,
I will summarize them, of a woman who has this motion agnosia. After she was treated and released
from the hospital the first thing she noticed that was problematic was when she went to cross a
street she would look and the car that she saw would seem very far away and it seemed perfectly
safe and she would start crossing the street and the next thing she knew the car was virtually on
top of her and she would have to leap out of the way. She was unable to detect movement of the car
from one location to a closer location. What she ended up doing was even if there were no cars in
sight she would only cross the street at a traffic light when the light turned red for the traffic
and green for her. After she became more aware of and used to the limitations of her motion
agnosia she was able to use sound to assess the rate of approach of a vehicle but she could no
longer do it with her visual system because she was incapable of detecting movement. Another area
where this woman reported a problem was in the filling of a container with a liquid like pouring
a cup of tea or a cup of coffee. We use the rate of filling of the cup that the level of the liquid
as a cue went to stop pouring so she would look in the cup and it would be empty and she would
start pouring and the next thing she knew the cup is overflowing because she was unable to see the
movement of the level of the liquid rise in the cup. She had a similar problem for instance filling
a measuring cup at the kitchen sink if she was trying to use a recipe or something that called
for two cups of water she would take the pitcher over there and the level would start out empty and
the next thing she knows her measuring cup is overflowing. Here again she learned to use auditory
cues because recall that a closed column of air has a resonance frequency and if she started
listening to the change in pitch of the sound made by that water she could tell when the measuring
cup was was nearing its its appropriate level. Motion agnosia. Another difficulty that this
woman encountered was in following the conversation of people that she was looking at directly because
their lips didn't seem to move except they would change shape periodically so she's getting a steady
stream of sounds that don't seem to be correlating at all with the lip movements of the speaker.
It became so disconcerting to her that she found that the the best way to listen to people talking
was not look at their lips. Now you can perhaps begin to to understand what how how disruptive
this was to her. I've had this experience maybe you have too. You're at a movie and the soundtrack
is just a little bit out of sync with the visual so that the person's lip movements are either a
little bit too soon or a little bit too late to correlate appropriately with the sound they're
making. That's trivial compared to what this woman was dealing with. Just the other night I was
watching a movie in a foreign language where the English was dubbed in and I just keep focusing on
the fact that the lip movements don't correspond to the audio. Well that's just a small taste of
what this woman learned to live with with her motion agnosia. The last example of how this
impacted on her life had to do with her reaction to being in a room with a good number of other
people in it such as a cocktail party or something of that nature. In this case people appeared to
appear and disappear as they moved around the room. Somebody that she was looking at would
suddenly disappear and they would reappear over here. This was so disconcerting to her that
she found it more comfortable to stay out of situations like that where people are moving about
because of this almost magical appearance and disappearance without any in between movement.
Okay that's an example then of motion agnosia. The last example of visual agnosia that I want to
talk about is called prosopagnosia. This is the disorder of human face recognition that I alluded
to in lecture 22 as being such an important perceptual ability for people that it has a
dedicated part of the brain reserved for it. In other words there is a face recognition
area in the brain and this face recognition area is in the posterior portion of the right
inferior temporal lobe. Now as I alluded to in the earlier lecture human face recognition
is a remarkable perceptual ability on our parts. When you think about the hundreds of human faces
that you can keep separate and identify individually friends, acquaintances, celebrities, movie stars,
sporting figures and what have you when you consider the similarities between human faces
we all have two eyes two ears a nose a mouth some of us have hair some of us don't but
human faces have so much in common that the ability to do this fine-tuned discrimination is
actually it's remarkable and as I said no other animal can do it even a hawk that can read the
advertisement on a book of matches flying over draw my face and win a scholarship to the art
institute they can't tell human faces the way we can it's a remarkable ability and it does have a
special part of the brain devoted to it. What happens when somebody experiences prosopagnosia
is that they can still identify the individual features of a face yes those are the eyes and
that's the nose and that's the mouth and that's the ears and what have you but they can't identify
individual human faces they cannot identify their loved ones they cannot identify their
they cannot identify their own human face. The one gentleman suffering from prosopagnosia as a
result of focal brain damage reported that every morning he would get up and he would go into the
bathroom to shave and he would be shaving the face of a stranger he didn't recognize his own
face in the mirror. Another individual talked about being at a restaurant and being highly
annoyed by the rude staring of some stranger from the adjoining room that kept looking at him
and the more he looked and the more angry he got he finally realized he was looking not
into an adjoining room but into a mirror and he was upset by his mirror image staring back at him
because he didn't recognize it as himself. The experience of prosopagnosia can be at a very
minor level experienced by all of us in the following way get yourself a series of 8x10
photographs of celebrities sports stars your friends your family yourself and turn them upside
down and then try and identify these different individuals. I've done this it's very very
difficult when you turn a human face upside down it's still got its basic features the two eyes
and two ears and a nose and a mouth and so on but it loses some of its human face quality and you
will be hard pressed to accurately identify people that you've known all your life or celebrities
that you've known of all your life if you turn the faces upside down. As a matter of fact when
you compare the ability of people with prosopagnosia to recognize upside down pictures they are no
worse than we are and it's not that they suddenly got better it's that we suddenly got worse because
when you turn the face upside down it just takes away the human face quality aspect of it. The
study of prosopagnosia is still leading to unexpected and surprising results let me just
share one with you there was a gentleman who suffered damage to the posterior portion of the
inferior temporal cortex in the right cerebral hemisphere he had been a dairy farmer. Now dairy
farmers keep their cows long enough to get to know them as opposed to beef farmers who fatten them
up and sell them to market so he knew his cows and he could recognize individual cows by their
faces after he suffered his brain dysfunction he could no longer recognize the cows by face either
so there are still things to learn about prosopagnosia. What do the visual agnosias
have to tell us in the way of age related changes is the aging process going to produce these kinds
of weird visual perceptual aberrations in us the answer is again in the case of normal aging
no they are not because once again i will remind you that normal aging is accompanied by diffuse
brain damage rather than focal brain damage in some specific part of the brain so we need
not worry about this kind of thing happening happening to us as a consequence simply of
normal aging the visual agnosias are indeed tragic but they are also serving the function of
providing us with some insight into the way that different areas of association cortex
cooperate to form our overall visual perceptions in our next lecture lecture 24 which is also our
last lecture i will attempt to achieve two instructional goals i'll talk about another
important perceptual ability our perception of other people and then i will provide an overall
course summary and mention some current trends in research on sensation and perception thank you
