Lecture 24, Perception of Other People, Course Summary
Hello and welcome to Lecture 24.
Lecture 24 is different from the previous lectures in two ways.
First of all, it is our last lecture, metaphorically speaking, the end of the trail.
Another way that it differs in is that I have two rather different instructional goals for Lecture 24.
One of these is to share with you some information about another important human perceptual ability,
our ability to perceive other people, which turns out to be perhaps more complicated than you might expect.
The other instructional goal for Lecture 24 is to provide you with a brief overview of the entire course,
and then in the time remaining, I will share with you some examples of current research in the field of sensation and perception.
As you may recall, last lecture, Lecture 23, we talked about the visual agnosias,
these tragic but fascinating examples of visual dysfunction that come about following focal damage to different regions of visual association cortex.
And as I just mentioned, we're about to discuss people perception.
Let me tell you that people perception is an active process.
Our perception of other people is in no way similar to us serving as a photographic paper that somebody prints their image on.
We are actively involved making inferences.
We make inferences about the intentions of people, their motives, their personality, their emotional state,
what their goal is in this interaction with us.
And these inferences can actually color our perception of what these people do.
In other words, sometimes our inferences lead to a self-fulfilling prophecy.
We perceive this person as being arrogant, and we treat them as if they were arrogant,
and they in turn act arrogant actually as a result of the way we are treating them.
Sometimes these inferences that we form about other people are from previous information or previous knowledge that we have about them.
For instance, this is hypothetical, of course.
If you were to read in the newspaper that Jane Fonda has just adopted a Rwandan orphan, a baby from Rwanda,
and you are perhaps a Vietnam veteran that remembers the Hanoi Jane years and has negative feelings toward Jane Fonda,
you're going to make the inference, there she is, using a kid to get her name in the paper.
How terrible.
On the other hand, if you have positive previous feelings toward Jane Fonda,
because she comes from an illustrious acting family and maybe you think that she's a humanitarian,
then you're going to say, what a wonderful thing she's doing.
So in neither case do you know for sure what her motives are,
but your intentions actually create emotions in you if you have the belief that she has negative goals here,
using the child for her own betterment, you'll feel one way.
If you think she's acting in a humanitarian fashion, you'll feel the other way.
In neither case do you know for sure.
Another example of us forming intentions, impressions and intentions about somebody's motives that we really can't know anything about.
You're in the hallway at work and you see two men walking in front of you,
and one leans over and says something to the other, and then the first one begins to laugh uproariously,
and you look closer and you see that one is the boss and the other is just a worker,
and you think to yourself, there's old so-and-so sucking up to the boss by laughing at his bad jokes.
You don't know that that's what happened at all.
If you were to look and see that these men were coworkers, you might say,
so-and-so must have just told a funny story, I wish I would have heard it.
So our inferences are coloring our perceptions in the absence of any firm data.
Okay, now, if you have not had previous experience with somebody,
so you don't know anything about these two men or you don't know anything about Jane Fonda,
if we're meeting somebody for the first time, where do these inferences come from?
We make inferences based on our first impression of the individual.
This is one of the reasons why they say first impressions are so important,
because somebody is forming inferences about you based on their first impression of you.
Now, sometimes these first impressions come about because of some faulty belief that we may have.
For instance, suppose that somewhere in your past, you developed the belief that people who have a mustache are egotistical.
Well, then the first time you meet somebody with a mustache, they are at a disadvantage,
because you've already formed the impression that this is an egotistical person.
Your ego involvement in your first impressions then can actually color your interpretation of what people do.
Our perceptions can be altered by our first impressions and by these inferences that we make.
And once we make an inference about somebody, it's hard for them to overcome it.
And it's hard for us to acknowledge we made a mistake.
I think in this instance, I will share a true story with you.
When I was 25 years old, somewhere I had picked up the belief that if somebody speaks slowly,
they probably think slowly.
And if somebody speaks rapidly, they probably think rapidly.
So the upshot is that I thought people who spoke rapidly were smarter than people who spoke slowly.
Now, after I earned my PhD, I spent a two-year postdoctoral fellowship in a very well-equipped laboratory.
In fact, this laboratory provided the postdoctoral fellows with two technicians,
and we would use these technicians if we ran into an instrumentation problem or an electronics problem
or some kind of an experimental design problem or what have you.
And it turns out that one of these technicians spoke rather slowly and the other one spoke rapidly.
So whenever I encountered a problem, I would seek out the technician who spoke rapidly.
And I would tell him my problem and he'd say, yeah, I can fix that and he would get to work on it.
And it turns out that on a couple of occasions, he didn't understand the nature of the problem as well as I had hoped he would.
And I said, gee, I must not have explained that properly. I took the blame on myself.
And there were also times when his solution to the problem didn't work out as effectively as I hoped that it would.
And I would say to myself, gosh, I guess this problem is a trickier problem that I had anticipated.
I was so reluctant to change my initial inference that this guy was smarter than the other technician that I was making excuses for him.
I didn't explain it well enough. The problem was too difficult.
Well, there came a time when I needed technical help and this gentleman was out sick or I don't remember why he wasn't there.
So I went to the slow talking technician and he seemed to catch on rather rapidly.
He repeated back to me what he heard me say as to the nature of the problem.
He said, let me think about it. He went off. He came back later and he says, I think this is the solution that will work for you.
It worked beautifully. And I realized that I had been hurting myself by this faulty impression I had about people's intelligence being related in any way to the speed with which they spoke.
This gentleman apparently spoke slowly because he was very thoughtful.
So sometimes those first impressions can be detrimental to us.
Let me make two points about first impressions.
One, don't be wedded to your first impression because it may be wrong and the easier it is for you to accept this, the better it'll be for you.
Two, if you were the person having a first impression made about you, do your best to make a good first impression because there were some situations where you don't get to make a second impression.
For example, you only get one first date.
So make a good first impression.
You only get one job interview, one first job interview with a company.
So make that job interview good.
You only get one first interview with a condo board or a co-op board if you're applying to buy a condo or a co-op and there's a screening committee.
I tell all of my students, undergraduate and graduate, when they complete their degree work and go off on the job market,
I gently give them advice about the importance of making a good first impression.
Some of them are remarkably stubborn and they say, no way, I'm not getting a haircut and new clothes.
If they can't see how wonderful I am as I am, then they don't deserve me.
And I know one guy that didn't get deserved for a number of years till he finally got a haircut and some good clothes.
All right, now, in addition to the problem of making a first impression that turns out to be incorrect,
there are some other common perceptual errors that we make in our judgments of other people.
These perceptual errors are so common that they have their own names.
Let me talk about some of these perceptual errors.
The first one is called the halo effect.
This is our tendency to form an overall positive impression of somebody because we know one positive thing about them.
For example, if we know somebody is a good actor, is this any reason to vote for him or her for president or for governor?
And yet that sometimes seems to happen.
Let me share with you some other instances of people apparently forming overall positive impressions of somebody from a single positive trait
and then being shocked and startled and perhaps even outraged when the person turns out not to be as perfect across the board
as they were in the trait that originally attracted you to them.
Take the case of Pete Rose, Charlie Hussle in baseball.
He'll never be in the Hall of Fame now because he gambled.
He gambled on sports. He gambled on baseball.
Now, that's not necessarily good, but the fact that he was such a superb athlete raised people's expectations.
They had higher standards for him across the board.
That's an example of the halo effect.
And more recently, we have Lance Armstrong, perhaps the greatest bicyclist or one of the greatest bicyclists that has ever participated in the sport.
And he left his wife and child for Cheryl Crowe and some people were outraged.
Outraged.
Well, Hollywood movie stars do that kind of thing weekly and nobody says or does anything too much about it.
But we have these high expectations of Lance Armstrong because he was such a superb athlete.
Let me share another one more example.
This one took place about 30 years ago at a well-known university that shall be nameless.
The selection committee for commencement speakers got the idea that it would be good to invite Roy Rogers, the king of the cowboys, the singing cowboy with the white hat.
And Roy Rogers graciously accepted.
And so he comes to commencement and I'm sure he acquitted himself.
Well, I don't remember exactly what he said, but you could summarize it very quickly.
Howdy, folks.
I really don't know what I'm doing here, but I wish you will.
Just because somebody is the king of the cowboys doesn't necessarily mean that that's the right person for all situations.
Another perceptual error that occurs quite frequently is called the logical error.
This is where we make the mistake of assuming that certain personality traits necessarily go together.
Let me give you a true example.
Social psychologists have studied this and they find that many people believe if an individual is polite, that also means that individual is friendly, honest, and intelligent.
Now, the fact of the matter is that some people who are polite are friendly, intelligent, and honest, but some people who are polite aren't.
In fact, some con men will use their politeness to lull you into a false sense of security.
They will use this logical error to pull a fast one on you.
So we need to be careful about assuming that certain personality traits necessarily go together.
The last common perceptual error in the perception of other people is called the central tendency error.
This is the tendency we have to overlook the variability in people's behaviors and see them as more consistent than they really are.
I will share another personal example.
In 1982, I realized that the income tax forms had become too complicated for me and I started going to a tax preparer.
This young man that I hooked up with was about my age and he seemed very friendly and he was congenial.
He seemed a really honest, straight shooter.
If he was unsure about a deduction or office at home deductions or employee business expense deductions, whatever, he would look it up because he didn't want to go afoul of the letter of the law.
I was impressed with his straightforwardness and his honesty and over the years we became friendly enough that we discussed things besides income tax and it turns out we were both tennis players and we agreed to meet and play tennis.
The guy made bad line calls.
I was appalled.
At first I thought it was an accident or maybe he had a visual impairment and so once I even said well meaningly, I said, you know, if the ball hits the line, it's good.
He said that ball didn't hit the line.
Well, it did.
So where I was setting myself up for a big disappointment was in thinking that since this guy was scrupulously honest in preparing income taxes that he might well be scrupulously honest in making line calls in tennis.
Another instance of misperceiving the variability in a person's behavior occurred when I was a young married and I lived in a neighborhood with other young married couples and we would have backyard barbecues and what have you.
And one of the neighbors was a policeman but it took a while to find this out because he was very quiet and he didn't call attention to himself.
His young wife who weighed about half what he weighed would boss him around, go get the chair, do this.
We didn't have a clue what he did for a living until and we were quite surprised if I had, he was a policeman.
I was even more surprised to see him in action in the city one day in a police episode where I heard him being loud and aggressive and dominant and I couldn't believe it was the same guy.
So we need to be aware that people are perhaps not as consistent as we think they are and not to expect too much consistency and be shocked when we don't get it.
This inconsistency actually tends to make people a little more interesting than they really are or than you think they are.
Another dimension that can cause us to err in our perception of other people, believe it or not, is their degree of physical attractiveness.
Now you see we have all kinds of expressions.
We say beauty is only skin deep or don't judge a book by its cover.
But the fact of the matter is, and there is a wealth of data to support this, that we do judge people, their behavior and their competence by their physical attractiveness.
And this tendency to judge people by their physical attractiveness starts pretty young.
Observers in kindergarten classes have seen that even at that relatively young age, children behave toward and respond toward each other on the basis of physical attractiveness.
And elementary school teachers do the same thing.
If a physically attractive child and a physically unattractive child engage in the same inappropriate behavior, the physically unattractive child is much more likely to be labeled as a problem child by the teacher.
Whereas the attractive child, the teacher is likely to say, this behavior is an aberration and this is atypical of this child.
And this tendency to judge people by their physical attractiveness seems to continue for the rest of our lives.
In a fairly recent study at a university with a well-known MBA program, some researchers got a hold of the yearbooks.
And they got all the pictures of MBA graduates over a rather long period of time.
And they had an independent panel of judges go through these yearbooks and rate the yearbook pictures on the basis of physical attractiveness.
And so they had now a rating, a ranking from very physically attractive to average to relatively unattractive.
Then they sent out a survey to all these MBA graduates finding out where they were working and what their title was.
And one of the pieces of information that this survey requested was, what's your salary?
And then they did a correlation of the ratings of physical attractiveness and the salary.
And what they found was that the physically attractive MBAs were on the average making $12,000 a year more than the less physically attractive MBAs.
So, well, no further discussion of that is needed.
Another factor that can contribute to our perception of other people is cultural differences.
Cultures inculcate their members with certain beliefs and attitudes and opinions.
What's an appropriate thing to eat? What's an appropriate thing to say? What's an appropriate thing to wear?
And cultural conditioning starts so young and it's so pervasive that you think you were born that way.
And you think the way your culture does it is the only way to do it.
We've talked already about one example of cultural differences that can lead to misperceptions.
Let me just review it briefly.
Direct eye contact.
In our culture, we tell people, if you want to make a good impression, look this person right in the eye,
because that will tell them that you're not hiding anything, that you're honest and forthright and direct and truthful.
In the Japanese culture, of course, they are taught not to make direct eye contact because that is rude and intrusive
and overly aggressive.
So these two cultures with their different cultural conditioning can come away with misperceptions of each other.
Another cultural factor that can contribute to our perception of other people is the dimension of personal space.
Different cultures teach their members that there are different appropriate personal spaces to keep away from other people.
When you're talking to a casual acquaintance or a stranger, how far away from this person must you be to feel comfortable?
Or when you get on an elevator and there is room, how far do you stand from the other people?
It seems like everybody has an idea of how far they should stand because in an elevator everybody sorts themselves out
so that they're equidistant from everybody else.
Well, this personal space turns out to have a cultural basis.
We are taught what the appropriate personal space is to keep from other people.
For example, in the United States, personal space from either a stranger or a very, very casual acquaintance for having a conversation is about three feet.
In Sweden, researchers report that the appropriate personal space distance for a stranger or casual conversation with somebody that you barely know is four feet.
In the Arab countries, the preferred personal space is less than an arm's length away.
In fact, there is an expression in Arabic that you really can't have a meaningful conversation with somebody unless you can feel the breath of the other person on your face.
Now imagine a conversation between a Swede and an Arab.
So here they are conversing and the Swede is backing up because his personal space is four feet
and the Arab is coming forward because his preferred personal space is less than an arm's length away.
What are their perceptions of each other?
Well, the Arab is thinking, what a cold, aloof, unfriendly person this is.
And of course, the Swede is thinking, what a rude, pushy, intrusive person this is.
And what they are both doing is acting according to their cultural conditioning.
There's another aspect of cultural conditioning that can lead to misperceptions and misunderstandings that can be quite serious.
I'm talking now about the difference between coming from a high-context culture and a low-context culture.
This has to do with the importance of body language and nonverbals in a spoken conversation.
In a high-context culture, the body language and nonverbals is every bit as important as the spoken words
in correctly perceiving the intent of this message.
In low-context cultures, the words stand on their own and nonverbals and body language are relatively unimportant.
The Mediterranean region and the Middle East have a lot of high-context societies.
Examples of low-context societies would be England and the United States.
Italy is a high-context society and I've heard people say that, for instance, an Italian can't talk if he has his hands in his pockets.
We can test that right now.
Well, that turns out to be true.
But let's talk about a more serious example of high-context and low-context cultures misperceiving each other.
Let's go back to January 9, 1991.
The government of Iraq sent a delegation to meet with Secretary of State James Baker.
The delegation from Iraq included Saddam Hussein's one of his half-brothers and Tariq Aziz, the Deputy Prime Minister for Iraq.
Now, we don't know, of course, what was said, but the United States is a low-context culture
and American diplomats are the lowest of the low-context.
So we can imagine that Secretary of State Baker invited the people to be seated
and offered them coffee or tea and made sure they were comfortable.
And when he got around to business, the message that he delivered was,
please tell Mr. Hussein that if he does not withdraw his troops from Kuwait,
we will launch a military attack against him.
And the meeting broke up and the delegation goes back to Iraq and Saddam's half-brother said,
it was just words. He wasn't angry. He didn't stomp. He didn't pound the table.
He didn't point. They won't do anything.
And in fact, that was a tragic misperception that led, at least in part, to the Persian Gulf War
that resulted in the loss of 100,000 lives.
There are other examples of cultural differences in perception,
but I think I need to get on with some of my other instructional objectives for the course.
So let's let that suffice. I promised you a course overview.
I had three instructional goals for this course.
One, I wanted to expose you to enough sensory physiology
that you could understand how our receptors take various forms of physical energy from the world around us,
light or sound or chemical senses or touch or whatever,
and translate it into a language that the brain understands to send to the brain.
That was one of my instructional goals.
Another instructional goal was to give you some insight into how the brain takes this sense data
provided by our sensory systems and integrates it with memories from our previous experiences
with the same or with similar sense experiences and creates our perceptions.
And it is our perceptions that form our reality.
We behave in the world not according to what is really, really physically out there,
but what our perceptions tell us is out there.
My third instructional goal was to share with you ways in which the aging process
can actually change our sensory world and our perceptual world.
The aging process can change our sensory world because it brings about actual physical changes
in the sensory receptors and in their ability to respond accurately to physical stimuli
and to the same range of physical stimuli that these receptors responded to when we were younger.
The aging process can change our perceptions in that as we age,
there is a tendency to show personality changes and personality influences perception.
We have a new set of life experiences that can also influence our perception.
It's possible that on the way through aging we have acquired some wisdom and wisdom, for example,
also changes our perception.
Let me just interject here.
We were talking earlier about how physical attractiveness can influence our perception
of other people's behaviors and competence and what have you.
The elderly are somewhat less prone to make that error.
The older we get, the more likely we are to behave as though beauty really was skin deep.
This is what I mean by the possibility of acquiring wisdom as we age.
Another age-related change that can influence perception is that our nervous systems
are going to undergo certain changes that prevent them from carrying information
as rapidly as they did when we were younger and so we're getting less precise information
from our sensory systems and we take that into account in our approach to the world.
We become more conservative in our approach to the world.
I also had a fourth instructional goal that I never really verbalized.
I'll tell you now.
I wanted us to have some fun during these 24 lectures
because my personal belief is that teaching and learning are not incompatible with having fun.
I know I've had some fun and I hope that you have too.
Now, in the time remaining, let me talk a bit about some current trends in research
in the area of sensation and perception.
First, a general statement.
Over my years in the field, I have seen a trend where research is becoming more and more practical
and useful and applied.
There were periods not too long ago when the more esoteric and theoretical your research was,
the more prestige you had in the field.
But research in sensation and perception is now showing a very practical, applied, useful orientation
and I think that's really a good thing because discoveries in sensation and perception
have the potential to be very useful to people.
Actually, current research on smell is a good example of this applied trend.
Several laboratories are continuing to study the relationship between changes in smell sensitivity
and memory loss, especially as it accompanies the senile dementias such as Alzheimer's.
Remember at the present time, there is a scratch and sniff test that is 80% accurate
at detecting people who are about to start showing memory loss associated with Alzheimer's disease.
Researchers think they can do better.
So they are trying to devise tests that measure various aspects of smell sensitivity
and will give a better accuracy rate than 80%, predicting cognitive declines.
The relatively new field of evolutionary psychology is also pursuing studies of the sense of smell.
They are interested in the role of smell and the mother-child bonding process.
They are interested in smell as it relates to mate selection.
They are interested in smell as it relates to other areas of human interaction.
Again, personal and useful and important information.
The mainstream scientific community is also beginning to recognize that aromatherapy isn't going to go away
and people are going to maintain their interest in it and it would be a public service
to provide people with objectively obtained research data about what aromatherapy can do and cannot do.
In a different area, sensory and perceptual research on prosthetic devices for deaf and blind people
is making great strides.
For instance, the current generation of cochlear implants for the deaf are, by the use of miniaturized speech synthesizers,
they are providing the real opportunity for the perception of words.
Previous cochlear implants simply gave people wearing them some information about the rhythm and cadence of a speaker's voice,
which aided in lip reading, but now there is actually the possibility of perceiving words by virtue of the new technology.
Research is currently going on in retinal chip implants to provide visual experiences to totally blind people.
This is very exciting. They're soliciting for subjects across the country now for a project that is going to be underway very quickly.
The interdisciplinary field of cognitive neuroscience is making use of advances in some of these high-tech brain imaging techniques
to study online phenomena such as automaticity that we talked about earlier
and to study complex visual perceptions without waiting for some poor soul to suffer a visual agnosia and permit himself or herself to be studied.
Regarding cultural differences in perception, as we move more toward a global economy,
people are much more interested in cultural differences in perception to try and head off misunderstandings
or behaviors that rub somebody else the wrong way because of their cultural background.
Well, I guess I've about run out of time. I want to tell you that I've enjoyed sharing these 24 lectures with you,
and I hope that you have enjoyed them too. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
