These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Those are catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled The Enlightenment Invention of the Modern Self, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Leo Damrosch.
Dr. Damrosch is the Ernest Birnbaum Professor of Literature at Harvard University, where
he has been teaching since 1989.
He received a BA from Yale University, an MA from Cambridge University, where he was
a Marshall Scholar, and a PhD from Princeton University.
At Harvard, Professor Damrosch has served as the Chairman of the Department of English
and was named a Harvard College Professor in Recognition of Distinguished Teaching.
He has held National Endowment for the Humanities and Guggenheim Research Fellowships and is
also directed National Endowment for the Humanities Summer Seminars for college teachers.
Dr. Damrosch is the author of numerous books, including Fictions of Reality in the Age of
Hume and Johnson and The Sorrows of the Quaker Jesus, James Naylor and the Puritan Crackdown
on the Free Spirit.
Professor Damrosch prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical
notes, and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 Changing Ideas of the Self
My name is Leo Damrosch.
I teach literature and the history of ideas at Harvard University, with an emphasis on
the 18th century in Britain and France.
This course focuses on some engrossing questions that began to take on their modern shape during
the period we'll be exploring.
The problem of the self is absolutely central in our culture.
It's something everyone of us thinks about.
Who am I?
How do I relate to other people?
How is my sense of self determined by other people?
Nowadays, we have a wide range of highly developed disciplines that interpret human behavior
in various ways, philosophy, psychology, anthropology, sociology, and so forth.
In this course, however, we go back to the time when these modern intellectual systems
were just being invented because the need for them was increasingly apparent.
The works we'll be looking at is a compelling sense of tentativeness, inquiry that's open-ended,
not so much finding the right answers as learning to ask important questions.
We'll be studying a wide range of works from the 1670s to the 1790s by writers in France
and Britain who struggled to understand the self at a time when traditional religious
and philosophical formulas were starting to lose their authority.
It will be a complex story with plenty of cross-fertilization between different points
of view, but as a roadmap at the outset, we can say that thinking about the self tended
to fall into two major groupings.
One way of thinking affirmed an inner core of authentic selfhood, and it sought to gain
access to that true self and be faithful to it.
The other group claimed that the self is socially conditioned.
It's nothing more than a series of roles that we learn to play, and it may be that everything
we do is deterministically controlled.
Ever since then, all modern thinkers about psychology and society have had to recognize
the tension between these two modes of thinking.
On the one hand, we do have a strong intuition of our individuality and self-sufficiency,
but on the other hand, we have an equally strong intuition that the self is largely
shaped by exterior forces.
And whenever we address these issues, either in our personal reflection or in the framework
of an intellectual discipline, such as philosophy or psychology, we are using concepts and terms
that we've inherited from the 18th century Enlightenment.
The approach in this course is essentially literary, which means we pay as much attention
to how things are said as to what is said, and that's because the most imaginative and
creative thinking wasn't academic at all.
It appeared in narrative modes of interpreting life, autobiographies, which try to make sense
of individual lives, novels, stories about made-up people, which have turned out to be
one of our culture's most important ways of understanding itself.
Even the philosophers we'll look at, such as John Locke and David Hume, never held
any kind of academic position.
They didn't use technical language, they were writing for a general audience, and they
took their illustrations from everyday experience.
Still looking forward to the course as a whole.
It has a historical storyline, which can be broken down into three parts.
First, we'll review the traditional religious mode of explaining life.
Most people went on accepting it, but it became gradually weakened as an adequate explanation
and so it got increasingly marginalized, including its insistence that the most important thing
the individual can do is orient his or her soul beyond this world toward the afterlife.
What this implies is a growing secularization that greatly altered the way people thought
about themselves and their world.
The second part of our story will be the emergence of a pragmatic and behaviorist psychology,
which is one aspect of the philosophical method known as empiricism.
Well, I have much more to say about that later on, but in brief, its basic premise was all
knowledge comes from sense experience.
There's nothing in our heads except the sum total of the little bits of data that our
eyes and ears and sense of touch report, plus the ways our minds recombine the data, but
we're always limited to those basic building blocks.
This means we do not have what used to be called innate ideas, that is, inborn, in us,
before the bits of data started pouring in.
There's also a subversive corollary.
Some people began to think that revelation was unnecessary for religious belief, that
is, we should be able to understand everything we need to know from the physical world we
live in, not from the extra information contained in the Bible.
The logic of all this is that objectivity became the norm, not individual, subjective
insights, but facts and theories that can be objectively tested and demonstrated.
It's the way of thinking that underlies the huge collective project of modern science.
This became the mainstream view during the 18th century.
It was popularized very widely throughout the whole culture.
We'll see it theorized by philosophers and also taken over into everyday life by such
writers as Denis Diderot and Adam Smith and Benjamin Franklin.
We'll also see in Jean-Jacques Rousseau, a great thinker, who mounted a major critique
of the empiricist view but remained, to some extent, inside it because it was so much the
standard way of thinking that everybody in the 18th century grew up with.
So those are the two stages in the storyline of this course, the growth of secularization
and the triumph of empiricism.
And then briefly the third stage will be the reaction against this by then received philosophy.
Toward the end of the 18th century, they developed a new emphasis on imagination and subjectivity
in the great movement known as Romanticism.
For the most part, that belongs to a later story, but we'll look at a particularly powerful
version of it that directly critiques enlightenment thinking in the pictures and poems of William
Blake.
I've been giving you a roadmap of the course, but at this point I have to warn you earnestly.
Cultural development is never simple.
Individual people see the world very differently even when they're exact contemporaries.
For example, Rousseau and Benjamin Franklin were contemporaries.
In fact, Franklin was a few years older, but a system of explanation that didn't work
anymore for Rousseau went on working just fine for Franklin.
Moreover, it would be wrong to assume that the traditional religious model was simply
replaced by the secular empiricist one.
Most people continue to be religious believers and they tend to adopt an uneasy compromise
between the two kinds of explanation.
Although there isn't a single line of argument, the way there would be in a science course
or an economics course, the texts we read radiate outward in multiple directions.
At this point I need to define the term enlightenment, which is the organizing principle of the course.
The term enlightenment is generally associated with France, but the word, as we use it, actually
comes from Germany, the Aufklärung.
In French it's a much more modest term, le lumière, which literally means lights, as
when you turn on the lights in a room.
So by analogy, it's the process of shedding light on something.
It's an activity, not a fixed body of doctrine.
The basic commitment of the enlightenment was practical, not abstract.
Its thinkers called themselves philosophes, but that meant something very different from
abstract thinkers.
Their program was to free the human race from inherited dogma, religious or social or political
or any other kind.
The goal was to inspire us to deliberately remake our world instead of just accepting
it as given.
The enlightenment is often called the age of reason, and it's accurate in this sense.
The ideal was to think rationally and skeptically and pragmatically about everything in order
to make this world a better place.
Since the enlightenment was a movement that gradually gained in strength and self-awareness,
it can't be dated precisely.
One of Voltaire's most important books, his Philosophical Letters, was published in 1733.
That might be a convenient starting point, but it makes better sense to say that as a
movement it really got established around 1750, when Diderot and others began to publish
a great multi-volume work called the Encyclopedia of Sciences, Arts and Trades.
This was a tremendously influential collection of practical knowledge.
It included illustrated diagrams of technology of all kinds, but it also embodied covert
criticism of established political and religious views, so much so that the official censors
in France kept each succeeding volume under very close surveillance.
What made the Encyclopedias a revolutionary was the way it embodied this new empiricist
idea of knowledge, in deliberate contrast with the way knowledge had been treated in
the religious tradition.
In the religious tradition, knowledge was not necessarily good in itself.
In fact, much of it was dangerous, even evil.
Eating the forbidden fruit of the tree of knowledge was literally the original sin committed
by the very first human beings Adam and Eve.
Phrased by St. Paul, the first theologian of Christianity in his Epistles of the Romans,
in the Vulgate version that was standard for many centuries, that is the Latin translation
of the Bible into what was then the everyday vulgar tongue, noli altum sapere sed timi,
which was interpreted to mean, don't try to know things that are too high, but fear.
In the Enlightenment, writers began to quote a text by the pagan Roman poet Horace that
happened to contain the same verb, sapere aude in kippe, which means, dare to know, begin.
For the Enlightenment thinkers, this became a slogan for growing up, leaving intellectual
immaturity behind.
But, here's a new problem that disturbingly appeared.
If you've cast away the old inherited beliefs, what do you put in their place?
We're still trying to figure that one out.
The modern writer Samuel Beckett has a line in his play, Endgame, ah, the old questions,
the old answers, there's nothing like them.
So, that's a brief description of the Enlightenment.
It was a program for technological and social change, based on a new idea of free thought,
and it implied a new role for the independent individual, thinking for him or herself, freed
from authoritarian beliefs.
This leads us to the other part of the title of this course, the modern self.
It's a term we've got used to, the self, but when you think about it, it's a strange notion
that your self is something you have, rather than just being you.
It implies detachment from yourself, standing apart from yourself, perceiving the self as
an it, and that creates problems we'll be coming back to repeatedly.
Students tell us that this changing view of the self came about in response to major
cultural developments, in what we nowadays call pre-modern times, during the Middle Ages,
more or less into the 15th century.
People tended to understand themselves quite securely in terms of social placement.
You belong to a specific locality, since there was very little mobility for most people.
You would spend your whole life in the same place, you might never see a city.
Social dialects would vary over quite small distances, so you'd have no trouble recognizing
members of your own group.
Likewise for family, you would know a large extended family, with relationships that told
you who you were and how you fitted in.
And likewise for social status, the huge majority of people in Europe were farm workers, doing
exactly the same work their grandparents did, using exactly the same methods.
A minority would practice a trade or profession, generally handed down from father to son.
At the very top was a minuscule group of aristocrats, who enjoyed exceptional privilege, and at
the start of this course, we'll look at some works that reflect the aristocratic ethos,
at the time in history when it was breaking down, and giving way to the middle class world
view that we still inhabit today.
Here's another feature of the traditional world view.
With what you were automatically born into, until the 16th century there was only one
religion in Europe, the Roman Catholic Church, which was also a dominant profession, a vast
hierarchical organization with influence everywhere.
Some people were deeply pious, some were not, but for everyone it was a single unchallenged
system of explanation.
It accounted for everything, astronomy, politics, love and sex, everything.
In the modern world, things began to change.
It became apparent that everyone of those stable categories was becoming optional.
During the transitional period known as the Renaissance, social mobility allowed increasing
numbers to change their status and redefine who they were.
It was increasingly possible to change locality and job, create a new identity for yourself,
break with your family, found a new nuclear family, or have no family at all.
You also had to decide on your religion, because the Reformation in the 16th century
had a centrifugal effect, not just Catholic against Protestant, but more and more competing
Protestant sects, each one claiming to be the only true one.
You could even be a skeptic, in effect an agnostic.
Atheism was extremely rare because nearly everyone believed some kind of God must have
made the world, but not necessarily a God you would worship and obey.
There was an inevitable corollary.
There was a breakdown of the classical model of psychology, which had been basically unchallenged
since ancient Greece.
There were two main features of that older psychology that are especially important for
this course, and both of them were effective for many, many centuries because they offered
a comprehensive, satisfyingly complete account of human behavior.
The first was a hierarchical picture of the self, with reason on top and the passions
down below.
The second was an explanation of the passions that depended on the ancient medical theory
of the four humors.
Let's start with the hierarchical picture.
The ancient philosopher said, man is the rational animal, so we're most fully ourselves when
we're behaving rationally.
Down below are the passions, which were thought of as energies that jerk us around if we don't
control them.
The word passion is related to passive.
In the old psychology, a passionate person was victimized by forces that ought to be
kept under control by reason.
Even the Victorians much later would speak of somebody flying into a passion of rage.
In between reason and passion was the will.
That was the executive power that transmits the decisions of reason down to the engine
room of passion.
But, of course, if the chain of command gets reversed so the passions control reason, then
the person is in big trouble.
Here's where the theory of the humors comes in.
Everything in the entire universe was supposedly made up of four fundamental elements.
They were earth, air, fire, and water.
Of course, none of those are thought of as elements anymore.
When everything was working right, the four would be in perfect harmony and balance.
Now, the great strength of that theory was it extended all the way from the realm of
astronomy and physics right into individual human beings.
A humor was a bodily fluid.
Ophthalmologists still talk about the vitreous humor in our eyes.
And if you were in good physical health, then you had a balance of the four bodily fluids
that embody these primal elements.
They were blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile.
When all four were in balance, they were tempered well, and then you had a good temperament.
That's where our temperament comes from.
According to this theory, most people, however, have an imbalance of one humor or another.
So what single one of those four elements dominates?
If you have too much blood, you have a sanguine disposition.
It's not too bad.
You're hot tempered, but also energetic and optimistic.
Contrary wise, a phlegmatic person is slow and torpid.
That's the words we still use, sanguine and phlegmatic.
If you had too much yellow bile, you were choleric, easily enraged.
But the worst thing to have was an imbalance of black bile, melancholy, in its Greek form.
The melancholy didn't just mean being sad, as we use the word today.
It meant you were a victim of what we would call clinical depression.
Shakespeare's Hamlet is a medically accurate picture of a melancholic.
So here's the situation.
When the humors get out of balance, one of the passions tends to dominate, and that leads
to distorted behavior that's literally sick.
You see how comprehensive the theory was?
Mind and body are two aspects of the same thing.
Physical disorder is inseparable from physiological disorder.
What the ancient thinkers who invented this system had trouble explaining was that when
imbalance happens, a person is likely to feel dissociated from his or her own behavior,
to feel divided and conflicted with a kind of civil war going on within the self.
This all too familiar experience was something that classical psychology's rather mechanical
theory couldn't really address.
And here's where Christianity offered a new and powerful explanation.
It's the story of original sin that I touched on a few minutes ago.
Thanks to that primal disobedience of Adam and Eve, the entire human race is subjected
to a kind of slavery, bondage to the force of evil that's personified in Satan.
That's why we're out of balance.
That's why we may feel helpless to change our unhappy, conflicted, psychic state.
This traditional psychology was coherent and in many ways intellectually satisfying.
It explained how our mental and physical experience were two aspects of the same thing and were
integrated into the functioning of the entire universe.
And with the addition of Christian doctrine, it explained why so many people feel mentally
distressed, troubled by inner conflicts, often haunted by guilt.
But there's no way the reformist program of enlightenment could accept this traditional
picture and it promoted a decisive break with the old psychology.
The hierarchical model would give way to a dynamic picture of how parts of the self
interact in a much more positive way than the old picture of reason dominating the passions.
In fact, the passions instead of being seen as symptoms of a dangerous imbalance of humors
came to be seen as the energy that makes possible everything positive in human life.
This was turning the traditional psychology deliberately upside down and it created as
many new problems as it answered, which is what we'll be looking at throughout this course.
At this point, let's return to the competing pictures of the self that developed during
the Enlightenment.
One was the idea that deep down, each of us has a core of authenticity, a true self that
we should be faithful to at all costs.
The other was that it's nearly a fiction to think we have an authentic self.
We're simply the roles we play.
According to that first view, if our behavior shows contradictions, that's because we're
being untrue to our real self.
According to the second view, the reason there are contradictions is we're role playing
creatures.
We've just changed roles.
No role is more true or authentic than any other.
It's a waste of time to look for a deeper self that doesn't exist.
A metaphor for these two views of the self might be this.
The first one sees a person like an artichoke with layers of tough prickly scales that have
to be peeled away before you get to the sweet core within.
Second sees a person as like an onion.
There's no core at all.
You peel away layer upon layer, so there's no onion left.
To conclude this introduction, I'd like to give you some memorable quotations from two
writers toward the end of the Renaissance in the years just after 1600.
That is, a generation or two earlier than the writers we'll be talking about in the
next lecture.
These quotations will illustrate how for thoughtful people, the old coherent worldview was beginning
quite alarmingly to break down.
And the need for new ways of understanding was making itself felt.
First here's John Dunn.
He's best known today as a love poet, but he became Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral in
London and the most famous preacher of his time.
This is a passage from one of his meditations included in a book called Devotions Upon Emergent
Occasions written in 1623 when he was seriously ill.
No man is an island, entire of itself.
Every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main, the mainland.
If a clod be washed away by the sea, Europe is the less, as well as if a promontory were.
Any man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind, and therefore never
sin to know for whom the bell tolls.
It tolls for thee.
That's where Hemingway got his title, of course, for whom the bell tolls.
It's an eloquent expression of the belief that none of us are isolated individuals.
We're all connected at a deep level the way islands are rooted in the same bedrock under
the sea.
But a few years earlier, this same John Dunn wrote a poem, it's called The First Anniversary,
that expresses a much more pessimistic sense of the shared coherence of our world.
The new philosophy calls all in doubt.
The element of fire is quite put out.
The sun is lost, and the earth, and no man's wit can well direct him where to look for
it.
But the new philosophy, Dunn means what we today call science.
Now that the earth is no longer at the center of the universe, with the region of fire up
above, and the sun and the planets and the fixed stars above that, now all the old certainties
are giving way to doubt.
We're confronted by an empty universe.
It just goes on forever, and we're certainly not at the center of it anymore.
Dunn goes on in this poem to draw some conclusions for the way human beings see themselves.
Prince, subject, father, son, are things forgot.
For every man alone thinks he has got to be a phoenix, and that then can be none of that
kind of which he is but he.
By implication, the breakdown of the old intellectual order is connected to a breakdown of the social
order.
Kings no longer command automatic respect and loyalty as the rightful heads of the social
hierarchy.
Fathers no longer have unchallenged authority in the family.
Each person is conscious of his own individuality.
He wants to be like the phoenix, the fabled bird that there was literally only one of
at a time.
When it was ready to die, it would lay an egg, build itself a funeral pyre, and burn
itself up, and from that egg later on, the one and only phoenix would be reborn.
In Dunn's lines, we hear the voice of an immensely intelligent man, and also a committed
believer in Christianity, who understands that the traditional worldview is under serious
threat.
He can't dismiss the threat by just invoking the old certainties, because they're not
certain anymore.
And even if he does believe that no man is an island, modern individualism is turning
everyone into a separate phoenix.
A central theme of this course will be how thinkers found ways to make that individualism
a positive condition rather than a negative one.
And finally, I'll close with two quotes from Shakespeare's Hamlet.
In the first of these, Hamlet is talking to Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, his college
buddies who unexpectedly show up in Denmark.
He immediately suspects rightly that they're there as spies to watch him.
He invites them to play on a recorder, a little flute, and when they say they don't know how,
he exclaims bitterly, you would play upon me, you would seem to know my stops, you would
pluck out the heart of my mystery.
One might say Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are following a behaviorist notion of human
nature.
They think they can manipulate Hamlet like a musical instrument.
We might say today, press the right buttons.
Hamlet says he has hidden depths, a mystery that can never be penetrated from the outside.
As he says to his mother at the very beginning of the play, I have that within which passes
show.
This sounds like an early version of the psychology that leads to Rousseau, affirming
an inner core which is crucially important but also mysterious to the person himself
as well as to others.
And here's another quote from Hamlet from the scene where he's giving advice to the
traveling players about acting styles.
I'll abridge the speech a little bit to make it easier to follow.
Hamlet says suit the action to the word, the word to the action, with this special observance
that you overstep not the modesty of nature.
The purpose of playing is to hold as twer the mirror up to nature.
Hamlet is referring to the mimetic theory of art that prevailed ever since ancient times.
Mimesis is the Greek word for imitation.
The idea is nature has an objective reality, so the job of the artist is simply to hold
up the mirror and give us a faithful reflection of it.
But a very different idea of art was beginning to creep in, and this too was connected with
modern individualism.
This new theory of art was expressive.
It saw the work of art as expressing, forcing out from deep within a highly personal vision
of life.
Hamlet wants to believe in the shared coherent world of the mimetic view, but he himself
is an unforgettable example of a painfully isolated individual.
He sees life from his own unique perspective.
He strikes many of the people around him as unstable, if not actually crazy.
It's really very poignant when he says to the players suit the action to the word, the
word to the action, an actor can do that because he's rehearsed the role till everything
seems effortless and inevitable, but Hamlet himself is continually frustrated by his own
inability to make his words and his actions fit together.
One last thought.
There's not much sense in the play, Hamlet, of consolations to be drawn from religion.
At the beginning he sees a ghost, but his famous to be or not to be soliloquy is full
of doubts and skepticism about what happens after we die.
Later on he calls death memorably the undiscovered country from whose born no traveler returns.
In the next lecture we'll look more closely at what happened to the traditional religious
worldview during the 17th century as it struggled to defend itself against these profound new
threats.
And after that in the third lecture we'll begin looking at secular writers who are finding
new ways of restating the old questions and also asking new ones.
