Lecture 2, 17th Century Religious Versions of the Self
In the first lecture, I suggested that the traditional religious picture of the self
with the benchmark from which later thinking developed.
In fact, until well into the 17th century, philosophy and psychology, which didn't even
have a name, were confined within religious thought.
Institutionally, religion pervaded every aspect of life in Western Europe, particularly
education, which is why Enlightenment thinkers campaigned strongly against it.
They weren't much concerned with people's private beliefs, but with the social and political
power that the Church has exercised.
It was very real power when Rousseau put an imaginary Catholic priest in his education
treatise, Emile, and made him expound a very tolerant kind of faith.
That book was publicly burned in Paris and other cities.
For the purposes of this course, however, it's not the institutional churches that concern
us.
It's the system of belief that we need to think about, and I should stress right now
that most people weren't much concerned about it.
They took it for granted.
If you asked them, they would have said, sure, they were faithful believers.
But as David Hume tellingly remarked toward the middle of the 18th century, he noticed
that although almost everyone called themselves believers, very few seemed to shape their
actions and behavior accordingly.
Their faith no longer seemed to have much real importance in their lives.
And what Hume was observing was the drift toward secularization that I talked about
last time, the compartmentalizing of religion, as something one did on Sunday but didn't
think much about the rest of the time.
That said, what we need to look at in this course is the experience and thinking of people
for whom religion mattered very much indeed, in particular, at writers who gave expression
to the tensions in the belief system as it found itself under increasing pressure from
secularization.
I need to stress also that many schools and sects within the Catholic Church and the Protestant
denominations, many taught a comforting doctrine concerning the value of each soul and the
promise of salvation.
But it was the much more troubled and questioning ones who have the most to tell us for the
purposes of this course.
We'll start by outlining some central features of the rigorous faith known as Augustinian,
because it went all the way back to the great theologian Saint Augustine in the 5th century
AD.
After that, we'll look more closely at a Protestant version of Augustinian thought
in the 17th century English writer, John Bunyan, and then at a Catholic version in the French
writer, Blaise Pascal.
It was writers like these who were deeply spiritual and also deeply troubled, who defined
most clearly the psychological issues that underlay the problem of the self.
Saint Augustine wrote the first great autobiography, which he called The Confessions.
Rousseau, 14 centuries later, deliberately borrowed his title.
It's a powerful account of how he struggled for years to find meaning in life, working
his way through various different philosophies, until one day, unexpectedly, he had a decisive
conversion experience, and then he returned to the Catholic Church, which he'd been raised
in as a boy.
Augustine went on to be a bishop, a great practical administrator, as well as a prolific
writer.
But his central message was this, we don't belong in this world.
His masterpiece, called The City of God, argues that a spiritual world coexists with the profane
city of man.
It's our window into eternity, and the place where our real life has to take place.
A central feature of Augustinian thought, deriving from Saint Paul and other earlier
writers, was a radical dualism of soul versus flesh.
This is not the same thing as the mind-body problem.
We'll meet that in secular philosophers.
Remember the theory of the Four Humors.
Our minds are intimately connected with our bodies.
The same forces govern our whole self.
This older dualism is not between mind and body, but between the flesh, which means our
fallen sinful self in all its aspects, and the immortal soul that's trapped in this veil
of tears and hopes to escape to heaven after death.
The 17th century poet Andrew Marvel wrote a poem called A Dialogue Between the Soul
and Body, which begins with the soul saying bitterly, Oh, who shall from this dungeon raise
a soul enslaved so many ways?
And the body replies that the soul can't escape responsibility.
The body says, What but a soul could have the wit to build me up for sin so fit?
This is the central anxiety of the Augustinian tradition.
The fear that our enslavement to sin will end in eternal damnation.
And it's worth remarking Andrew Marvel, who wrote those lines, was no religious extremist.
You may be familiar with his most famous poem, To His Coimistris, which is a witty ploy to
get a reluctant lady to go to bed with him.
The heart of Augustine's message was that human beings are powerless to save themselves
from that prison of sin, so they need to open their hearts to the free gift of God's grace.
He only can rescue human beings from dividedness and guilt.
But if the self is the enemy, if it's under control of Satan, the personification of the
supreme enemy, it can lead to a deep sense of helplessness and failure.
This version of Christianity that emphasized sin and God's grace as the only means of
rescue is known as the Augustinian tradition.
Protestant Calvinism was a variant of it.
The conviction was that good works are useless, we're hopeless prisoners of sin.
Now more confident, optimistic personalities always tended to minimize this, whether they
were Catholic or Protestant.
The Augustinian kind of faith worked well for people who felt very deeply they were divided,
driven by compulsions and obsessions that they knew they couldn't control.
It also turned out to generate as much anxiety as it relieved, especially in the most thoughtful
and sensitive people.
The whole point of grace was to free us from punishment for our sins.
The idea is we can never live up adequately to the demands of God's law, so as an act
of love he gave his son Jesus Christ to die in our place and take the burden on himself.
But for some sensitive individuals, the consciousness of their own failings became all the more painful.
If Christ died to set them free and they still felt unfree, did this mean they were not among
those who were chosen to be saved?
A particularly alarming version of this dilemma was given special urgency in the version of
Protestantism known as Calvinism, it derives from the 16th century Reformation leader John
Calvin.
Calvin held that Christ saved only a very tiny minority known as the elect from that
penalty of original sin, but the huge majority were damned before they were even born.
That's what predestination means.
They were predestined to damnation, and no actions of theirs in this life could possibly
alter that irreversible fate.
For some of the most sensitive persons, the burden of guilt became intolerable, the internalizing
of their own remorseless self-criticism, the self-torture of the conscience.
Once again, most people didn't trouble themselves much about conscience.
Preachers were always complaining they didn't.
They would have agreed with the American humorist H. L. Minkin who said conscience is that little
voice that tells you somebody may be watching.
But for the serious Calvinist, that's precisely the point.
God is always watching.
Now to see how this psychology of self-division works in practice, let's turn to John Bunyan
whose narrative called The Pilgrim's Progress was for a couple of centuries the all-time
bestseller in the English-speaking world.
Bunyan was a member of the loosely organized movement known as Puritans, not their own name
originally it was the term of abuse, like Quaker or later on like Methodist.
The idea was they were trying to be pure.
They were rejecting the things of this world as corrupt and to some extent they were.
The Amish today and the Mennonites in Pennsylvania are direct descendants of the Ana Baptists
which is the sect Bunyan belonged to.
They later on merged with the larger movement and became known simply as Baptists.
Bunyan was a largely uneducated man, a tinker who mended pots and kettles.
He got his ideas directly from the Bible, not theology.
He fought on the Puritan side in the army of Oliver Cromwell in the great rebellion
of the 1640s and like quite a few other former soldiers who turned into militants in that
great historical event, he became a preacher and he turned out to be highly gifted at it.
Now after the Puritan regime was overthrown in 1660 in what's known as the restoration
of King Charles II, Bunyan went to jail because it now was illegal for anyone to preach who
wasn't an ordained minister of the Church of England.
That was Protestant too but much more middle of the road in its beliefs.
The authorities were embarrassed about locking up this otherwise harmless person and they
urged him to go free if he would just promise to never preach again but he refused to give
up his calling and Bunyan spent 12 years in jail.
The pilgrim's progress which became incredibly popular was written in prison when he says
at the beginning of that book that he lay down to sleep in a den and dream the dream
while the jail was that den.
Now Bunyan was a person who had no interest whatsoever in fitting into the social order
which is what the Church of England was all about.
His book expresses the radical individualism that was at the heart of the Protestant
Reformation and it's often been seen as a crucial element in the development of modern ideas of the self.
But Bunyan's book is also very old fashioned in important ways.
It's not a novel, it's not a story about realistic people and their everyday relationships.
On the contrary, it's an allegory.
It breaks down elements of the self into separate characters.
Modern literature embodies our sense of the value and uniqueness of each individual and
the move from allegory to novel is traced along that roadway by the pilgrim's progress.
Bunyan's book is also totally controlled by what he regarded as the only story worth paying
any attention to, the Bible.
Right down the margin of every single page are references to specific verses in the Bible.
In the first lecture I said the Enlightenment, coming later, would dismiss revelation as irrelevant.
We know everything we need to know about the meaning of life from studying the phenomena of nature.
Well Bunyan is exactly the opposite.
The only things we need to know are the ones God has revealed to us in the Bible.
That's what revelation means, that which has been revealed.
I came upon a wonderful picture once in Martin Luther's great German edition of the Bible.
It's a woodcut that shows a lovely peaceful little German town with a traveler sitting
under a tree and a couple of others crossing a bridge into the city gate.
But up above there's an angel blowing a trumpet in the heavens with the sun and the moon and the stars.
Of course in daylight we can't see the stars, but that doesn't mean they're not there.
And right at the dead center of the picture, another angel is crying out,
Ve, ve, ve, which is German for woe.
It's a line from the book of Revelation at the very end of the Bible,
woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth.
What this means is that while the complacent townspeople are going about their business,
they're tragically blind to the vertical dimension.
What really matters isn't our world down here.
It's that invisible drama up in the sky, and that is literally the last judgment
in which the entire universe is going to be burned up and thrown away.
It's fair to say a major goal of the Enlightenment would be to abolish that vertical dimension
and make this world down here the only thing that matters.
There's a deliberately challenging moment at the very beginning of the pilgrim's progress.
By reading the Bible, his character, who's called Christian,
realizes he's carrying a great burden of sin on his back, and he doesn't know how to get it off.
And then this is what Bunyan describes.
I saw that the man began to run.
Now he had not run far from his own door, but his wife and children perceiving it
began to cry after him to return.
But the man put his fingers in his ears and ran on, crying, life, life, eternal life.
So he looked not behind him, but fled toward the middle of the plane.
A character called Mr. Worldly Wiseman tries to talk Christian into going home,
arguing it's wrong to abandon his wife and children.
But Christian is steadfast.
And one of Bunyan's marginal references tells us why.
All it says is Luke 1426.
But if you look it up, which he expected you to do, this is what you find.
Jesus says, if any man come to me and hate not his father and mother and wife and children
and brethren and sisters, yea, in his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.
As you see, this is a truly radical individualism.
But it's an individualism not of this world.
One thing that's crucial is to save one's immortal soul.
And though merely human feelings and obligations should get in the way.
Bunyan wrote an autobiography, which he called Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners.
And there's a deeply poignant passage in it that shows what this could mean in real life.
He's talking about the suffering his family has to endure because he's choosing to stay in prison.
And this is what he says.
Parting with my wife and my poor children have often been to me in this place, that is in the jail,
as the pulling the flesh from my bones.
I have often brought to mind the many hardships, miseries and wants that my poor family was like to meet with.
Especially my poor blind child, who lay nearer my heart than all I had besides.
Oh, the thoughts of the hardship my blind one might go under would break my heart to pieces.
I was like a man who was pulling down his house upon the head of his wife and children.
Yet, thought I, I must do it, I must do it.
This heart-rending statement shows there is nothing complacent about the individualism Bunyan believed in.
Rather, it was a commitment that could lead to a terrible aloneness.
The pilgrim's progress has a happy ending.
Christian wins through to the heavenly city.
In the end, his family joins him there, as Bunyan hoped his own family would join him in heaven.
But along the way are endless trials and threats, like the Valley of the Shadow of Death,
which literalizes a famous verse in the 23rd Psalm.
It makes life seem like a continual threat,
groping your way in darkness, past all sorts of perils, one false step in your doomed.
But here's what's really central to Bunyan's faith, at least as it seems to me.
By his own account, in grace abounding, the autobiography,
he was troubled by feelings of guilt from very early childhood,
and especially he had rebellious impulses that scared him, but he didn't know how to suppress them.
Now listen to the crucial conversion experience that he describes.
When he was a young man haunted by his doubts and fears,
he happened to overhear the conversation of some women sitting in a doorway in the sun.
They discourse, he says, of their own wretchedness of heart, of their unbelief,
and did condemn slight and abhor their own righteousness as filthy and insufficient to do them any good.
And he thought, they speak as if joy did make them speak, as if they'd found a new world,
as if they were people that dwelt alone and were not to be reckoned among their neighbors.
So there's the key.
For a painfully divided self, such as Bunyan experienced,
it was a great consolation to be told you should despise yourself,
because that was your fallen, sinful self, which had to be left behind
if you were to escape this wicked world and win through to salvation.
But it's a consolation that comes with a big price.
If it's really right that you should reject your sinful self,
then much in your psychic experience is really not you at all.
And if the unwanted feelings keep coming back,
they feel like a terrifying threat from outside.
In Grace Abounding, Bunyan describes a lifelong temptation to blaspheme.
This saintly preacher is aware of an almost irresistible desire to cry out wicked words.
So much so, he says, sometimes he would clap his hand over his mouth to keep from saying them.
Now, in the pilgrim's progress, he dramatizes the same thing, and this is how he does it.
I took notice that poor Christian was so confounded that he did not know his own voice,
and thus I perceived it.
Just when he was come over against the mouth of the burning pit,
one of the wicked ones got behind him and stepped softly up to him
and whisperingly suggested many grievous blasphemies to him,
which he verily thought had proceeded from his own mind.
It's worth emphasizing that Grace Abounding, the record of Bunyan's personal spiritual journey,
is very different from the tone of pilgrim's progress.
The great allegory is optimistic, written to encourage others.
The spiritual autobiography is a harrowing record of an endless cycle of hope and self-doubt.
There in a nutshell is the fundamental challenge for the new secular psychology that was soon to be born.
In Bunyan's faith, aspects of your own behavior that you don't like,
in this instance, it's what we would call obsessions or compulsions,
they're not really you at all.
So it would be a relief to say it's not me, it's a wicked devil speaking through me.
But obviously, it could be pretty disturbing.
You could feel like the helpless puppet of forces beyond your control.
And here, I'm reminded of another picture, a very different one from the one in Luther's Bible,
William Blake, whom we'll be studying at the very end of this course,
was a deeply committed Christian in his own way, a highly unorthodox way.
He greatly admired Bunyan, but he thought Bunyan was the prisoner of a repressive belief system
that could not accept conflictedness as normal for human beings.
So Bunyan had to externalize his conflicts as temptations from outside.
Blake did a series of pictures to illustrate the pilgrim's progress,
and one of them shows Christian with the burden of sin on his back,
like some overloaded backpack weighing him down painfully.
He's bent over with it reading the Bible.
And Blake's point clearly, if that's how Bunyan read the Bible, it made him feel that burden.
But in the picture, we see the burden is really a kind of horrible organic growth
that's rooted in Christian's body.
It's not an invasion from outside, it's a projection of his own inner conflicts.
And Blake, as we'll see, believes the way to deal with our conflicts
is to make them constructive, not deny them.
Denial, as Bunyan tries to do, just leads to worse mental anguish.
Blake could well say the suffering described in Grace Abounding proves the point.
And moreover, we'll leave Bunyan with this, it's a tremendously challenging faith.
Because remember, for Calvinists, the vast majority of human beings are irrevocably damned,
so if you're tormented by sinful impulses, you may well wonder whether you have any chance of being saved.
The only solution for Bunyan is just throw himself on God's will
without presuming to make any demands at all.
As he describes it in Grace Abounding, it's very like what a modern thinker might call
an existential leap of faith.
It's a leap, because you have no way of knowing where you'll land.
And it's existential, because it's a total commitment of the self with no guarantees
and no certainty that what you're doing makes sense.
This is what Bunyan says.
I thought that God might choose whether He would give me comfort,
but I might not therefore choose.
I was bound, but He was free.
Wherefore thought I, I will leap off the ladder, even blindfold into eternity,
sink or swim, come heaven, come hell.
Lord Jesus, if Thou wilt catch me, if not, I will venture for Thy name.
Well, there's one memorable version of the Augustinian faith showing its psychological strength,
but also its weakness, the way it could feed the very anxieties it was supposed to cure.
I want to turn now to a very different figure in many ways, French rather than English,
a Catholic scientist and intellectual, whereas Bunyan was a self-taught Protestant preacher,
but like Bunyan, thinking and living inside the Augustinian tradition
and helping us to extend our understanding of the same issues.
This is Blaise Pascal, a world-class mathematician and scientist
who was closely associated with the Jansenists,
the extreme Augustinian wing of the French Catholic Church.
The more moderate schools within Catholicism, such as the Jesuits,
argue that the Jansenists might as well be Calvinists in disguise.
After a life of constant ill health, Pascal died at the early age of 39 in 1662.
Two years after Bunyan went to jail for preaching over in England,
he left behind notes for an unfinished work in defensive religion,
which resembled, after his death, as the pensée sur la religion, thoughts on religion.
Pascal was well acquainted with the competitive, prestige-obsessed world of the French court.
He wrote for very educated and skeptical readers.
The pensée are full of eloquent observations about the emptiness and vanity and hypocrisy of human life.
We'll see other versions of that next time in secular writers who were his contemporaries.
There was nothing of that in Bunyan. Pascal is addressing worldly people
and talking about the unacknowledged misery of their lives.
His answer for them is literally a gamble.
They're accustomed to gambling all the time on trivial things.
Why not the biggest gamble of all?
Try believing religion has the explanation for human unhappiness.
Here's a characteristic passage from the pensée.
On we, nothing is so intolerable to man as to be completely at rest
without passions, without business, without diversion, without work.
He then feels his nothingness, his insufficiency, his dependence, his weakness, his emptiness.
Immediately, from the depth of his heart, will emerge on we, gloom, sadness, distress, vexation, despair.
What Pascal means by on we isn't just boredom.
It's something much deeper and more pervasive.
It's the feeling of emptiness and meaninglessness that comes from being at rest instead of busy.
Pascal sees this as proof of the inauthenticity of life as we know it,
which drives us into social interaction to escape the truth about ourselves.
We'll see Enlightenment thinkers drawing the opposite conclusion.
We are social animals.
We've been created by nature to be at our best in social interaction.
That's why solitude makes us unhappy.
But Pascal was an Augustinian and he believed all human beings were fatally infected with original sin.
So his view of social life is very disillusioned.
It's an endless competition.
Listen to this bleak description.
Human life is nothing but a perpetual illusion.
All we do is deceive each other and flatter each other.
Nobody speaks of us in our presence as he does in our absence.
The unity that exists among men is founded only on mutual deception.
Few friendships would survive if everyone knew what his friend says about him when he's not there.
Man then is nothing but disguise, lying, and hypocrisy.
He doesn't want to be told the truth.
He avoids telling it to others.
And all these dispositions so remote from justice and reason have a natural root in his heart.
Notice how nature is invoked.
Ever since the primal fall, our nature has been corrupted.
So what's natural for us is selfishness and jealousy and treachery.
But if so, then how can we like ourselves so much?
Well, we shouldn't.
And Pascal is ready to say so in the most uncompromising way.
He says, le moi et esable.
The me is hateful.
Notice, by the way, in French, you can't say the self.
That strange abstraction we use in English.
In French, it has to be le moi, which means the me, myself as I relate to other people.
So having declared the self or the me is hateful, this is how Pascal develops the idea.
In a word, the me has two qualities.
It's unjust in itself, since it makes itself the center of everything, and it's uncomfortable
to others, since it wants to enslave them.
For each me is the enemy of the others and would like to be their tyrant.
So the upshot of this line of thinking is, any philosophy or religion that makes us feel
good about ourselves is dreadfully mistaken.
And that's how Pascal amounts his defense of Christianity in an increasingly secular
age.
No other religion has proposed to men that they hate themselves.
No other religion then can please those who do hate themselves and who seek a truly lovable
being.
And these, even if they'd never heard of a religion of a humiliated God, would embrace
it immediately.
It's the crucifixion he's talking about, a God who's willing to be tortured and murdered
on the cross, a fearful humiliation.
So Pascal's diagnosis is, first we have to recognize our own hatefulness and then turn
to the only religion that explains why we're hateful.
But this is a big gamble, writing in a skeptical age, Pascal can't claim that his readers will
expect a direct intuition of truth in their hearts.
On the contrary, he's talking about a God who seems very far away.
He says it explicitly, men are in darkness and remote from God who is hidden from their
knowledge.
This is the very name which he gives himself in the scriptures, deus absconditus.
The Latin term again from the Vulgate, it's from the prophet Isaiah, means the hidden
God, absconditus, a God who's absconded.
In the Garden of Eden Adam and Eve walked and talked with God, now he's far away.
And prayers as an English poet said long afterwards can seem like dead letters that
never get delivered.
Here again is the radical aloneness of the believer that we saw in Bunyan, trapped in
his own divided nature, yearning for contact with a God who seems very far away.
The old medieval universe was filled with signs of God's goodness, like the famous
music of the spheres.
Each planet gave off a musical note and altogether a kind of lovely chord which our human ears
are too weak to perceive with the angels hear it.
It's a reminder that divine providence controls everything and makes it work for the best.
Pascal was a modern scientist.
He knew the old earth-centered universe had given way to the modern infinite one, going
on endlessly forever.
And he has a famous statement which suggests the disappearance of the music of the spheres.
He says, if you know French I'll quote it in the original because he's a master of French
prose, le silence éternel de ses espaces anthony mefle, the eternal silence of these
infinite spaces terrifies me.
And that's the existential dread of this extremely intelligent modern writer pursuing the logic
of his beliefs.
Pascal's solution is a gamble, a leap of faith, like the one Bunyan made when he jumped off
the ladder into eternity and based on a penetrating analysis of human unhappiness, but the cure
it offers might seem almost worse than the disease.
It's diametrically opposed to everything the Enlightenment would believe as its writers
very well knew.
Voltaire wrote a long critique of Pascal as a brilliant but deeply disturbing writer.
And as we go forward in the next lectures, we'll be moving toward a philosophy that sees
positive value in this world and in the human self.
