Lecture 3, 17th Century Secular Versions of the Self
In the last lecture I talked about the drift during the 17th century from a securely religious
worldview to an increasingly secular one, with a growing insistence on the primary value
of this world for its own sake.
I need to stress I'm not going to try to summarize all the complex cross-currents of thought
in a period of more than a hundred years.
As we did with Bunyan and Pascal, we'll focus on certain writers who were particularly significant.
And we'll look at specific passages in their writings, because that's the best way of understanding
what they were trying to do.
You'll be listening to them, as well as to me.
In this lecture we begin with a philosopher, Rene Descartes, whose influence on Western
thought has been absolutely enormous.
Then we'll look at Thomas Hobbes, who drew a challenging connection between philosophy
and political theory.
And finally, two biographical writers to think about how particular individuals were understood
by people who knew them.
That then with Descartes, a figure of massive importance.
Philosophers still debate the fine points of his arguments, but what I want to talk about
is his cultural significance.
He's right at the center of the move that philosophy made from wisdom, phylo-sophia
philosophy means love of wisdom, to the much narrower problem of knowledge.
This goes along with the decline, the slow decline of religious authority, which had
allowed people to take truth for granted.
Also, it's fundamental to the rise of science as the dominant mode in Western culture, our
commitment to an ideal of objectivity rather than intuitive belief.
As science has developed, truth has become a matter of probability, a matter for evidence
and demonstration.
It's always open to new explanations, either because you found new evidence that alder is
what you thought you knew, or because a major paradigm shift changes the whole structure
of understanding.
And above all, science no longer claims to answer the ultimate questions.
It's about how, not why.
The great 18th century physicist, Isaac Newton, said he had no idea what gravity is, but he
could write formulas that describe what it does.
Now, Descartes was only partway along that road.
He was a thinker in the earlier age of reason, demanding certainty, not just probability.
In fact, he said, even physics can't be the model for thinking, since it can never be
absolutely certain.
The model has to be geometry and mathematics, and those were the fields in which Descartes
excelled.
We still study Cartesian geometry, that's his name.
Descartes moved from France to Holland to get greater intellectual freedom there.
He shut himself up to ponder the great philosophical questions, and this is what he decided.
He would deliberately and systematically doubt everything he didn't know for certain.
And it turned out this was practically everything.
Maybe it's just an illusion that we have a body.
Maybe it's an illusion there are other beings in the universe besides ourselves.
But he decided he reached a secure rock bottom when he arrived at the famous insight, I think,
therefore I am.
Let's say there are no other people out there, no universe even.
Still, somebody has to be doing the thinking.
In the original Latin, cogito ergo sum, or in his French, je pense dont je suis.
And the logic of this is, the only part of ourselves that ultimately counts is the act
of thinking.
Descartes defined a human being as race cogitons, a thing that thinks.
And indeed, this new method, as he called it in his discourse on method, was strangely
disembodied and detached from ordinary life.
Descartes claimed to be free from passions, the sole guide is reason, which he followed
with rigorous logic, of course he was a mathematician.
And it follows other people are fundamentally irrelevant.
In his discourse he says that in Holland, which was a bustling commercial nation, he
says I can live as solitary and retired as in the most remote desert.
But you see how radical this deconstructing of the world is.
Our physical body, instead of being the most inescapable fact of our existence, becomes
a hypothesis.
And right here is the famous mind-body problem of modern philosophy.
Instead of just saying, myself, these hands and eyes are me, the eye becomes a disembodied
essence somehow inside with an altogether mysterious connection to the physical body.
This is a new kind of dualism, not the immortal spirit against the sinful flesh, but the thinking
mind detached from the body in which it somehow rides around.
As a modern philosopher once put it, our mind becomes the ghost in the machine.
Descartes himself didn't acknowledge the skepticism to which his method might lead.
He was a believing Christian.
He thought he was able to reason back upward from, I think therefore I am, all the way up
to the certainty of Catholic theology, but it's not Pascal's existential leap of faith.
It's getting from axioms like straight lines and angles to the Pythagorean theorem.
And this new strategy of doubt were turned out to be a very dangerous resource, which
the older religious writers knew very well.
They warned people against doubt.
For them it was a threat, if not actually a sin.
Because once you get the machine of doubt started, it's very hard to turn it off.
It's been well said that although Descartes personally was a believer, Cartesianism is
atheistic.
That is, he may believe in God, but his intellectual system doesn't need to.
So Descartes' philosophy is potentially secular, even if he himself didn't think so.
It's also extremely rational, as I say.
It's about what you can deduce by rigorous logic inside your own mind.
Now from Descartes' rationalism, which for a long time had great influence in France,
will turn to the philosophy that gradually replaced it first in Britain, finally in the
Enlightenment in France and the rest of Europe, and this is British empiricism, which came
to dominate 18th century thought.
Remember the fundamental premises of empiricism.
First, all knowledge is derived from sense experience, not from reason, let alone the
Bible.
Second, it's shown to be true by observation and experiment, which means it's always provisional.
You can make a good case for your hypotheses, but you have to be ready to change them.
And the name for this is probabilism.
We have to settle for probabilities, not certainty.
So we turn to the Englishman, Thomas Hobbes, one of the founders of empiricism, and his
chief interest, very different from Descartes, was society and especially politics.
After graduating from Oxford, Hobbes worked as a tutor to the sons of aristocratic families,
and when the civil wars flared up in England, he retreated to Paris.
After the young Prince of Wales, who ended the exile in Paris in 1646, Hobbes became
his math tutor.
In 1651, he published his masterpiece, it's called Leviathan, or the Matter, Form, and
Power of a Commonwealth.
In this book, he argued that human beings are by nature restless and unsatisfied, and
their fundamental motive is the desire for power.
He completely dismissed the traditional idea that we want tranquility and relief from effort
and struggle, and in Leviathan he says, there is no such thing as perpetual tranquility
of mind while we live here, because life itself is but motion and can never be without desire
nor without fear.
This sounds very modern.
Our way of putting it would be, the human race is an evolutionary success because it's
restless, it never leaves well enough alone, it goes on adapting and striving.
However, Hobbes, alarmed by the catastrophe of the English Civil War, drew a further conclusion.
He held that the struggle for power is so destructive that the original state of nature
must have been terrifyingly dangerous.
It was what he called the war of all against all, and you've probably heard a famous quote
that comes at the end of his description of that almost suicidal state.
In such a condition, there's no place for industry because the fruit thereof is uncertain,
consequently no culture of the earth, no navigation or use of the commodities that might be imported
by sea, no commodious building, no instruments of moving, such things as require much force,
no knowledge of the face of the earth, no account of time, no arts, no letters, no society,
and which is worst of all, continual fear and danger of violent death, and the life
of man, solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short.
Without a catalog of deprivation, know this, know that, and to save themselves from that
precarious condition, the human race, according to Hobbes, long ago agreed upon a social contract
by which they surrendered all power to an absolute sovereign.
In effect, the king would take charge of total power and would keep everyone else from cutting
each other's throats.
You might think that conservative interests would have approved of Hobbes because he was
certainly on the side of monarchy.
The Leviathan of his title was the monarch in whose giant person the entire population
was contained.
The metaphor is made explicit in the title page of his first edition.
It shows the king as a giant, whose body is made up of hundreds of tiny little people.
But actually, Hobbes' theory was potentially explosive because it abandoned any claim for
the divine right of kings.
Real authority rests solely on power, so a weak sovereign can expect to be overthrown
by someone who's better able to seize power.
And in fact, soon after publishing the Leviathan, Hobbes returned to England and reconciled himself
with the Puritan regime of Oliver Cromwell.
This wasn't opportunism, it was recognizing that power makes the rules, and Cromwell now
had the power.
Although Hobbes did go on to enjoy the patronage of his former pupil, who became King Charles
II in 1660, his writings were under constant attack for apparent indifference to morality,
for in effect a might-makes-right philosophy.
I want to look at some especially interesting passages in the Leviathan.
But first, here are two main points we need to focus on.
First, what is natural to human beings is not sociability or cooperation or generosity
or even obedience, we're totally selfish individuals.
And it follows that society and government are artificial inventions that exist to protect
us from each other rather than positive goods.
Now, of course, religious thinkers like Pascal said something very similar about human selfishness,
but they believed in ultimate laws of morality.
When Hobbes is thinking, society isn't natural, government isn't natural, but beyond that
moral laws of good and evil aren't natural.
They're all open to analysis in a new, hard-headed, skeptical way.
Second point, everything for Hobbes rests on a totally mechanistic philosophy of existence.
The only thing that really exists in the entire universe is matter in motion, the endless clash
and recombination of atoms.
All our human values are just mental inventions that we artificially make up.
So this is a radical materialism that always had a subversive potential and empiricist thought.
We'll meet it again in Diderot.
Hobbes' Leviathan contains a fully worked out theory of psychology, and it fits in perfectly
with the basic premise purely material causes that drive an endless competition for power.
So in this psychology, we build up experience through memory, and memory is nothing but
traces left in our minds by sense data that impacted us in the past.
And when these took the form of visual memories, then they're images.
And for empiricist thought, that's all imagination is, imaging, not a creative power, not a source
of intuitive understanding, just a memory bank of old-sense impressions.
Hobbes says it very clearly, he says, imagination is nothing but decaying sense.
It follows that when our imaginations are at work, they're simply recycling and recombining
old-sense impressions.
That's a theme we'll return to in the next lecture when we consider the philosophy of
John Locke.
The bottom line for Hobbes is that everything, absolutely everything, centers on the self.
Even if the social contract has forced us to cooperate, we remain utterly separate from
each other and we would go right on exploiting each other if we thought we could get away
with it.
I want to read two striking passages, each of which reveals a major problem that later
empiricist thought is going to have to deal with.
Here's the first passage in which Hobbes explains why human beings feel compassion for each other,
which he doesn't deny that they do.
Grease, he says, for the calamity of another is pity, and pity arises from the imagination
that the light calamity may befall oneself, and therefore it is called calm passion, feeling
with, or as he says in the phrase of the present time, a fellow feeling.
Implication is we don't have any instinctive need to care for each other.
And simply if we see somebody suffering, we compare their situation with our own and
we think, oh, that could happen to me.
This self-regard of empiricism is something we'll return to often, until finally a hundred
years after Hobbes, we'll see it fully worked out by Adam Smith.
Now here's my second quote from Leviathan, in which Hobbes tries to account for the
existence of cruelty, and he says, contempt, or little sense of the calamity of others,
is that which men call cruelty, proceeding from security of their own fortune.
For that any man should take pleasure in other men's great harms without other end of his
own, I do not conceive it possible.
What an amazing formulation.
This is a person who just lived through a destructive civil war, and who has a grimly negative
view of human nature, and yet, Hobbes seems unable to imagine the possibility of sadism,
but there could be people who actually get off on cruelty for its own sake, not because
they have some specific advantage to gain.
Now the old religious view knew all about sadism, though it didn't have that name yet.
The devil likes to torment human beings, and because we're in the grip of the devil, we're
all tempted to be cruel.
What we see in Hobbes is one way in which the new secular theories, even when they seem
uncompromising in their realism, actually leave a great deal out.
As for Hobbes' political theory, which was his main purpose for writing, what we get
is the sense of a powerful mind, absolutely free of sentimental preconceptions, telling
it like it is, in the way that readers found quite chilling.
The idea of the monarch as all powerful universal man was a product of those civil wars.
It was an antidote to individualism that might lead to anarchy.
As the trauma of those events faded, the logic of this new materialist philosophy would be
reshaped to empower a very different kind of individualism, a middle class ethos of competition
that's held within bounds by precisely that fellow feeling that Hobbes dismissed as just
egotism and disguise.
And the crux is that although Hobbes, unlike Descartes, is concerned with human beings and
their social existence, they remain for him utterly separate individuals, self-enclosed
monads in ruthless rivalry and competition.
And the challenge for Enlightenment thinkers would be to make competition seem constructive
rather than destructive, and to find a way of regarding sociability and fellow feeling
as natural and instinctual rather than merely artificial as Hobbes claimed they were.
Not only would that be the fundamental issue for the Enlightenment, it's remained the perennial
dilemma of modern individualism ever since.
We're all deeply committed to the integrity and rights of the individual, but then we're
also constantly threatened by the potential selfishness and isolation of the individual.
Again and again, this dilemma is going to resurface in the books that we'll read in this course.
With Descartes and Hobbes, I've put forward two versions of philosophical thought that
point forward to new kinds of psychological thinking.
But how did people understand human life in the concrete rather than the abstract?
Since we've been talking about Hobbes, let's look at some notes on his character that were
assembled by a lawyer named John Aubrey, kind of pack-rat of gossip.
He left behind when he died in 1697 a voluminous mass of notes from which he hoped to distill
a biographical dictionary of famous Englishmen.
Aubrey had been a personal friend of Hobbes, so he was able to record all sorts of details,
many of which are charmingly circumstantial.
I'll just read you three or four.
In his youth, Hobbes was unhealthy of an ill-yellowish complexion, wet in his feet, and trod both
his shoes the same way.
I've often wondered, what on earth can that mean?
How else would you tread your shoes?
His mind was witty, and he had two kinds of looks.
When he laughed and in a merry humor one could scarce see his eyes.
By and by, when he was serious, he opened his eyes round.
At night, when he was a bed and the doors made fast and was sure nobody heard him, he
sang aloud, not that he had a very good voice, for his health's sake.
He believed it did his lungs good and conduced much to prolong his life.
When he did drink, he would drink to excess to have the benefit of vomiting, which he
did easily, by which benefit neither his wit was disturbed longer than he was spewing,
nor his stomach oppressed.
Well, we're a long way here from Descartes' disembodied intellect.
Hobbes with his damp feet and his therapeutic singing and his therapeutic vomiting is like
a character from a novel, but what Aubrey doesn't have is any way to pull it all together.
He knows a lot about the kind of person Hobbes was, but it's just a collection of details.
You could even say novelistic details waiting for a novelist.
And it's no accident, it did indeed turn out to be the novelists who took the next big
step, which was to explore human motivation through the medium of temporal narrative.
And that would turn out to reveal much more about human behavior than conventional philosophy
was able to do.
Aubrey is stuck also with the old humor psychology.
He calls Hobbes sanguineo melancholicus.
And despite all those specific details, he sees Hobbes as a type.
In fact, we learn more about Hobbes' values from his own theory of human nature, which
Aubrey's anecdotes sometimes corroborate.
Listen to this remarkable incident that Aubrey describes.
He was very charitable to those that were true objects of his bounty.
One time I remember a poor and infirm old man craved his alms.
Hobbes, beholding him with eyes of pity and compassion, put his hand in his pocket and
gave him sixpence.
Says a clergyman that stood by, would you have done this if it had not been Christ's
command?
Yes, said he.
Why?
Quote the other.
Because, said he, I was in pain to consider the miserable condition of the old man, and
now my alms, giving him some relief, doth also ease me.
It's remarkable what Aubrey heard Hobbes say was precisely the theory of pity and compassion
that he presented in Leviathan.
He didn't give the money to the old man out of religious duty, as the clergyman assumed.
But neither did he do it out of deep feeling for the guy.
He did it so he wouldn't feel bad at not having done it.
He says, my alms giving him some relief, doth also ease me.
This was a man who practiced what he preached, but I kind of doubt whether Aubrey really
understood what he was saying.
Here's one more example.
Aubrey tells us Hobbes was a witty person and liked to laugh, as I, as you remember,
crinkled Omo shut when he was in a merry mood.
But listen to Hobbes' own explanation of laughter in Leviathan.
Sudden glory is the passion which makes those grimaces called laughter, and is caused either
by some sudden act of their own that pleases them, or by the apprehension of some deformed
thing in another, by comparison, wherever they suddenly applaud themselves.
And it's incident most of those who are conscious of the fewest abilities in themselves who
are forced to keep themselves in their own favor by observing the imperfections of other
men.
Just like compassion, then, laughter is entirely self-regarding for Hobbes, but whereas compassion
at least recognized someday you might be the one in pain, laughter happens when you glory
in superiority to someone else.
And it's not just that.
Hobbes sees it as compensatory.
It's people who are insecure, who have to be constantly putting other people down.
Well, we all recognize what he's talking about, but it's a terribly limiting concept of laughter,
isn't it?
Probably Hobbes himself, when he was having a drink and telling jokes with his friends,
wasn't really obsessing about his own superiority, especially not when he excused himself to
spew.
But my point is, his theory of human nature has to zero in on the most selfish aspects.
It gives him a laser-like clarity in exposing wishful thinking and a lot of well-meaning
social and political theory, but it turns human beings into behaviorist mechanisms for
self-promotion.
And this has its own kinds of willful blindness to other aspects of living.
Finally, here's a different kind of biographical writer, not so well known, George Savill,
Earl of Halifax.
He wrote, but didn't publish, a brilliant character sketch of King Charles II, right
after the king's death in 1685.
I've already mentioned Charles II, the prince whom Hobbes tutored in math during the exile
in Paris, and then who was restored to his throne when the Puritan government was expelled
in 1660.
Charles's first move was to proclaim a general amnesty for his former enemies, and then he
pursued a life of pleasure that gained him a reputation as the playboy Mary Monarch.
Whether that was deliberate policy to allay fears that he might be power hungry the way
his father had been, or just reflecting a frivolous temperament, that was much debated
at the time.
Now, one of the king's own intimates, the Earl of Rochester, summarized his paradoxical
nature in a widely quoted mock epitaph, here lies my sovereign lord the king, whose word
no man relies on.
He never said a foolish thing, nor ever did a wise one.
The Earl of Halifax was a close associate of the king.
He was one of the highest ranking members of the privy council that advised him politically,
so he knew the man, as well as anyone could.
But all the same, Halifax never claims to truly understand him.
He tells us up front, this is a character that is an outline sketch.
It's full of analysis, sustained intelligence throughout, makes Aubrey seem like a garrulous
old busybody, but it adds up to opacity.
It's a man with a mask.
Everyone tries to see through it, but they can never be sure what's under there.
And we're definitely not exploring the king's inner personality.
That's not a concept Halifax is working with at all.
With Aubrey, we were taken behind the scenes to listen to Hobbes singing in bed after he
shut the door.
With Halifax we're on the outside, studying the king for hints and clues, along with the
rest of the court.
You get a sense of an almost paranoid alertness in the world that Halifax describes.
Princes dissemble with too many not to have it discovered.
No wonder, then, that he carried it so far it was discovered.
Men compared notes and got evidence so that those whose morality would give them leave
took it for an excuse for serving him ill.
Those who knew his face fixed their eyes there and thought it of more importance to see than
to hear what he said.
His face was as little a blab as most men's, yet although it could not be called a prattling
face, it would sometimes tell tales to a good observer.
This is a hermetically enclosed court society.
Everyone is watching everyone else, looking for clues, trying to peer under the mask.
I mentioned that King Charles was a notorious playboy.
He had a series of highly publicized mistresses, including the famous actress Nell Gwynne.
Different kind of writer would give us a lot of erotic gossip.
This is all Halifax has to say about those mistresses.
To have the secrets of a king who happens to have too many is to have a king in chains.
He must not only not part with her, but he must, in his own defense, dissemble his dislike.
The less kindness he hath, the more he must show.
There's a great difference between being muffled and being tied.
A very condensed, concise expression says a great deal in a few words.
You might think a king's relation to his mistress is the one way he can be himself, enjoying
pleasure for its own sake, maybe even being in love.
But no, since the mistress is bound to worm her way into his secrets, and Halifax says
crisply this is a king who had too many secrets, now he's in a trap of his own making.
If he gets tired of her, he can't just break with her because then she'll betray him.
So he has to pretend to be more in love than he really is in order to retain any freedom
at all.
And this way he's muffled, Halifax says.
He has to be constantly dissembling and covering up, but the alternative would be worse.
Then he would be really tied to the whims of a vindictive ex-lover.
Well, this isn't about sex at all, it's about power.
And remember, every one of the 17th century writers we've been considering agreed that
power was always the bottom line, whatever euphemisms we might want to cover it up with.
In the next lecture, we'll return to France and study an extraordinary novel by someone
who knew the French court well, La Planceste de Cleves by Madame de Lafayette.
So to conclude for today, to really interpret individual personality, what's going to
be needed is a new union of technique, something like Aubrey's specific details, including
ones that might seem arbitrary and not immediately significant.
We want to know about the singing in the damp feet, but also Halifax is generalizing insights
into constants in human behavior, which every system of psychology has to have.
We aren't really John Dunn's phoenix, we're not utterly unique.
And beyond this, we need something no 17th century biographer had, a way of representing
a person from the inside, to give the sense of inner life that we talked about in Hamlet.
Shakespeare was in this, as in so many things, a genius far ahead of his time.
These things are what the novel, even more than the drama, is able to do, which is an
important reason why for 250 years now, the novel has been the central literary form of
our culture.
And so that's where we'll go next time with La Planceste de Cleves, one of the very first
novels, and it's still a very great work of imagination.
