In this lecture in the next, we'll take up a pioneering novel, La Princesse de Cleve,
which was written when realistic narratives about people in their everyday lives were
just beginning to appear.
As it happens, it was published in 1678, the very same year as that very otherworldly
book Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress.
First though, it's important to understand the worldview of the French court culture
that this novel describes.
And for that, we have a wonderful guide in the maxims of the Duke de La Rochefoucault.
The 17th century was a time of unrest all over Europe.
England had its civil war, France too had the threat of one, though it was successfully
put down.
La Rochefoucault was no armchair observer of life.
He had an impressive military career and was seriously wounded on three separate occasions.
In the middle of the 17th century, France was torn by a series of revolts known as La
Fronde, which means the slingshot.
The nobility were trying, unsuccessfully as it turned out, to resist the centralized power
being established by the government under Cardinal Mazaram, who was chief minister of
the van Boijking Louis XIV, while Rochefoucault took an active role in these revolts and he
paid for it with very insecure standing at court later on.
But in 1660, nevertheless, he settled in Paris and began to write his maxims, which were first
published in 1664 and then afterwards in a series of progressively enlarged editions.
Among his close friends was Madame de Lafayette, who may also have been his lover, and he contributed
advice on the manuscript of La Princesse de Cleve, so we can be sure there's a close
affinity between her novel and his maxims.
These maxims are a loosely organized collection of hundreds of condensed aphorisms on life.
They express the unsentimental view of a realist who, like Hobbes and Halifax, sees selfishness
and duplicity as the normal characteristics of human beings.
Like many others who live through that period of scary political unrest, La Rochefoucault
and his contemporaries were displacing aggressive energies into stylized forms.
Louis XIV built his gargantuan palace at Versailles to get the nobility out of their
provincial power centers and let them compete for empty honors at court.
Unlike in England, by the way, French aristocrats had a code of not making money and he controlled
them by encouraging a spin-thrift lifestyle and then tying them up with huge loans.
So what we get is intense competition for prestige at court and in the coterie world
of witty salon which were presided over by talented women, including Madame de Lafayette.
This is an extremely worldly culture.
In fact, the name for it is Mondanité, worldliness.
And in this exclusive world, La Rochefoucault was admired as an example of the ideal of
the honnette homme, loosely translated gentleman, highly skilled in the art of living, social
graces and tact, good taste, intelligence, skill at conversation, those were the ideal.
In this intellectual world, it was the age of the great French moralists and what that
meant was not morality in a narrow sense, but human behavior in all its aspects.
It was an important stage in the evolution of what we now call psychology.
By the way, psychology was originally a religious term.
In Greek, the word psyche means soul.
It was the science of the soul.
The word doesn't appear in its modern sense, meaning studying the mind and emotions until
about 1750.
Well, the characteristic shape of a maxim by La Rochefoucault is to say X is really
Y or even X is only Y.
As in a very well-known example, hypocrisy is the homage that vice pays to virtue.
It might seem like cynical debunking, but it's really more than that.
It's a question of accurate analysis that breaks down over simplifications.
But the aphorism says it's not, virtue doesn't exist.
But virtue is complicated and it overlaps with other things and much of what passes for
virtue is really hypocrisy covering its tracks.
Despite their brilliance, these maxims end up seeming strangely repetitive.
The great modern critic Roland Barthes said, when you read a few of them, you think how
amazingly true, how modern this guy is.
But if you read a lot of them in bulk, they develop a wearying sameness.
It's a blinkered vision of a highly privileged milieu that produced them.
One scholar is called the maxims of La Rochefoucault, the autopsy of a dying class.
And for all their intellectual clarity, they have certain built-in limitations from the
point of view of contributing to the development of psychology.
And I'd like to stress three of these limitations as a prelude to the impressive advance that
Madame de Lafayette made in the Princess de Cleves.
The first point is their non-narrative.
They use present tense verbs, usually is, to crystallize what is always the case in human
behavior without, of course, recognizing how much it's bound to a particular class in
a particular time and place.
Secondly, they don't add up to a connected picture.
They're fragmentary, sometimes they're contradictory, and because they don't lead anywhere, each
maxim is like a short circuit trapped in itself.
Thirdly, there's no overt author.
They're like proverbs, the distillation of universal truths.
There's no sense of personality with an individual history, no indication of the subjectivity
of the person who's telling you all this.
The whole point is to make the maxims so general they can be universal, and everyone can say,
yes, it's true.
That's what it's always like.
That's why La Rochefoucault says in one of the maxims, it's easier to know man in general
than to know a particular man.
The basic premise of these maxims, just like Pascal's pensée, is that self-love in French
amour propre is the single key to everything we do.
Whereas Pascal diagnosed this blindness to our own selves as the sin of pride, La Rochefoucault
is an entirely secular writer.
For him, pride isn't a sin, it's just a fact.
Because he doesn't have the answer the way Pascal did, La Rochefoucault is remarkably
open to a kind of insight that was very rare in his time, and much later for that matter,
he sometimes does talk about the inner life of the self in ways that almost anticipate
modern theories of the unconscious.
Listen to what he says in this maxim, it's actually not one of the brief aphorisms, it's
more like a little essay.
It's a long quote, but it's well worth reading in full.
Amour propre is love of oneself and of all things for oneself.
It makes men idolaters of themselves and makes them tyrants over others if fortune gives
them the means to be.
Pascal, you know, said exactly the same thing about being tyrants over others, but La Rochefoucault
goes on to talk about self-love in a really new way.
One cannot sound the depths or pierce the shadows of its abysses.
There, it's often invisible to itself.
It conceives, nourishes, and rears affections and hatreds without knowing it.
It forms one so monstrous that after it's brought them to light, it doesn't recognize
them, or can't bring itself to acknowledge them.
You see what I mean?
That sounds a lot like Freud's theory of the unconscious, a dark interior that our conscious
ego can never penetrate.
And that's because, Freud would say, it generates repressed desires that the ego can't afford
to know about.
Rochefoucault isn't done.
He goes on.
It is that his self-love is, in every stage of life, in all conditions of life, it lives
everywhere, it lives on everything, it lives on nothing.
It even enters into alliance with people who make war against it.
It hates itself with them.
It even works toward its own ruin.
In the end, it cares only that it exists, and provided that it does exist, it's quite willing
to be its own enemy.
You may well be thinking about Pascal here.
Pascal tells us to hate ourselves, but even in saying that, he's asserting himself.
In one of the Ponce, Pascal admits he can't help feeling proud of the eloquence with
which he denounces pride.
And so now, at the end of this very searching maxim, comes the most remarkable statement
of all.
The sea is a tangible image of it.
Amour prop refines in the ebb and flow of its continual waves a faithful expression of
the turbulent succession of its thoughts and of their eternal motion.
Remember that the classical model of the self, which was taken over by Christianity, postulated
a stable hierarchy, reason on top, the passions below, the will carrying out the commands
of reason.
What La Roche-Foucault is proposing is an image of the self as endless change and flux, the
very opposite of something stable and controlled.
To put it differently, the outward social self can be shaped to a great extent, producing
the cultivated onnit um, like La Roche-Foucault himself, but deep down, the real energies
of the self are not controllable or even knowable at all.
Now as we'll see later on, 18th century writers like Hume and Diderot, half a century later
than La Roche-Foucault, will arrive at quite similar ideas about the self in endless flux,
but they will do it from a very different perspective.
They will be extremely reluctant to adopt the pessimistic view of human nature that La Roche-Foucault's
generation accepted.
In the 17th century, a lot of people got interested in the ancient philosophy of stoicism, the
doctrine that willpower can subdue the passions.
People who lived through political unrest were tempted to seek stability and peace in an
inner retreat, but La Roche-Foucault and his circle were deeply skeptical about that.
Like Pascal and the Jansenists, they believed the passions were far more powerful in the
mind, which invents rationalizations to make itself feel better.
The maxims of La Roche-Foucault had a frontispiece with a bust of the ancient stoic philosopher
Seneca with an impassive expression, but the picture also shows that a cherub has stripped
away his mask and his real face is tortured with suffering.
Now if we turn from these maxims to La Princesse de Cleves, we see at least one huge difference
right away.
It's a connected narrative.
It follows characters in temporal experience, which is something the maxims refuse to do.
It's even a sort of historical novel because it's set in the much earlier court of Henri
II, a full century before the novel was written, partly probably to avoid suspicion that the
characters were based on real people in the court of Louis XIV, which they may have been.
So in any case, La Fayette published the book anonymously and she concealed her authorship
from everyone except her very closest friends.
By the way, until quite recently, she was always referred to by her title, the Conteste
de La Fayette.
Recent editions give her name as Marie Madeleine Pioche de La Verne.
That's in keeping with our ideas of political correctness.
She would have been appalled at our familiar use of her name.
As for the historical setting that she uses, there was a good novelistic reason.
She was looking back to a time a hundred years before when the aristocracy still had plenty
of real power before they dwindled into the basically decorative role they had when she
wrote the novel.
She was intimately familiar with the court.
She spent most of her life in Paris.
She had a nobleman husband who was away most of the time.
She conducted a leading salon along with her friend Madame de Savignier, whose letters later
on became a classic of French literature.
She wrote several other novels in addition to La Panceste de Cleve and to memoirs of
the court, but this is unquestionably her masterpiece.
Her novel is set at a crucial historical moment, which French readers of the time would have
recognized.
Just as her story ends, Henri II has died after an accident in a tournament in which
he took part.
And we can know in historical hindsight that it was all going to come unstuck.
His queen, Catherine de Medici, would then make an alliance with the Guise family, which
was out of power in the time the novel is talking about.
And that would lead to terrible civil wars, culminating in the famous Saint Bartholomew's
Day massacre of 1572, when out-of-control mobs roamed the streets of French towns shooting
down Protestants and the leaders of Protestantism were murdered.
In a way, this was a common theme in the old romances of chivalry that preceded modern
novels, that is, the breakdown of community, as in the Arthurian stories.
The fellowship of the round table gets destroyed by jealousy and betrayals among the knights.
But this novel was a sensation because it was not a romance in that old sense.
No fairyland, no legends, no magicians and enchanters.
It's interesting that Lafayette based her novel on extensive historical research.
Most of her characters were real people 100 years before, except for the heroine.
She's totally made up.
So what we have is an unreal person inserted in a real world.
But not.
The all-embracing real world of the later novels, say, of Dickens and Tolstoy.
It's an extremely circumscribed world of privilege, with people who seem to have everything, but
one thing they don't have is anonymity and privacy.
It's a world of tireless gossip.
Everyone tried to find out everyone else's secrets and is a feeling of stifling claustrophobia.
Here's a striking description of that court culture by a friend of Lafayette, her name
was Madame de Motville.
She says, we're going to see the climate of this country called the court.
The air here is never serene for anyone.
Some of those who seem to enjoy complete happiness and are adored like gods are the ones who
are most threatened by storms.
Those whom the others envy are always sick with the contagious malady of ambition, which
destroys their peace of mind, corrodes their hearts, and gives them vapors in the head
that often deprive them of their reason.
The enclosed world of that court is like a microclimate, like a biosphere.
In this novel, we see nothing of the rest of the world outside.
There are no common people, we barely even see any servants, it is as if the court was
the only reality there is, and in this society, ambition and being admired are the driving
forces, just as La Roche-Coucault said.
But because prestige depends on other people's responses, no one can ever be at peace.
It's the most admired people who are most tormented by fears that maybe their prestige
might be weaning.
So this is the novel into which the heroine arrives as a teenager.
Her mother brings her to this court from the country because it's time to select a husband.
And at this point at the beginning of the novel, her name is Menzel Descharts.
We're never told her first name.
And because she's woundingly beautiful, every man who sees her wants her.
But meanwhile, she's very naive and earnest, and she doesn't even begin to understand the
seduction games of the court.
Now a noble man named the Pasta Cleve, he's not the king's son, in those days the term
prince was used more widely.
The Pasta Cleve happens to see her in a shop, falls head over heels in love, goes to her
mother and persuades her to accept the match and make this girl his wife.
So as the wife of a prince, she now has this title princess.
She likes this husband, she respects him, but she doesn't conceal the fact she doesn't
desire him passionately.
Meanwhile, the most glamorous male in the entire court, his name is the Duke de Nemours.
He was a real person at the time.
He also falls for the young beauty.
And the rest of the story is her realization that the attraction is mutual, but also her
firm resistance to giving in to Nemours, even after her husband is dead.
To understand the psychology of this novel, and it is a psychological novel, we have to
unlearn our normal response to stories about falling in love.
I think you can generalize about the way love has been treated in Western culture.
And you could say there's always been a tension between two ways of understanding it.
On the one hand, love can be the fullest experience of authenticity, fully sharing with another
person, holding nothing back.
So then it's an ideal of mutuality that's an antidote to the isolated individualism
of the modern world.
Millions of love stories, novels, and movies, and TV series have followed that right up
to the present day.
But on the other hand, love can be felt as loss of freedom, enslavement to another person.
In fact, the most painful kind of slavery, because it's voluntarily chosen, and yet
it can still seem entrapping or even destructive.
Now from ancient times, right up into the 17th century, that was pretty much the standard
way of thinking about falling in love.
That is the sudden overwhelming chemical response that connects you to another person.
And in classical mythology, quite subtly, Venus is the goddess of sexual desire, but
individual choices are controlled by her bratty son Cupid, in Greek his name was Eras, who
fires his arrows at random.
And here's one of La Roche Foucault's maxims.
The most accurate comparison one can make of love is with a fever.
We have no more power over one than the other, whether for its violence or its duration.
It's as if your friend were to say, I've fallen in love and your appropriate response
would be, I'm really sorry.
Moreover, in the old aristocratic culture, marriage was a dynastic arrangement between
two families.
You would hope to respect your mate, but there was no question of the violent falling in
love experience leading to lifelong union with Mr. or Ms. Wright.
Another writer at the time, Jean de la Bruyère, wondered whether it might be possible for
a husband to be in love with his wife.
He doesn't rule it out, but clearly it's something he's never encountered.
So what does love amount to in this courtly biosphere?
It's a code of seduction.
Love is a form of power.
All the more attractive for a class that's losing real power, so now it's fighting its
wars in the bedroom instead of the battlefield.
It follows, then, that love as mutual relationship, our modern ideal, would be a big threat to
these people.
Because if you're in love, you are the other person's thrall.
That's an old English word meaning a slave.
It's the root of our word, enthralling, you've been enslaved.
And you're going to be devastated when they drop you, as they certainly will.
Because once the thrill of conquest is over, it'll be time to move on.
So in that tradition, desire is defined as lack.
You want what you don't have.
If you get it, you'll immediately want something else.
And it follows that in this ethos, love couldn't be giving of the self because then you would
lose your power advantage.
So it's a game of flirtation and seduction in which the successful lover remains uninvolved
with holding the self.
The role of the plastic glove, the princess's husband, is particularly interesting here.
Since he's desperately in love with her, whereas she honestly admits she doesn't feel that
way, he feels like he still doesn't have her.
He goes on passionately desiring his wife just because she doesn't desire him.
But even if she doesn't feel passionate about her husband, she does resolve to remain faithful
to him.
Although Nemour, this attractive other man, keeps dropping hints, she refuses to acknowledge
any feelings for him.
By the same principle, this drives Nemour wild.
He could have practically any woman in that court, but because this one resists him, he's
tormented by her.
Now, it's important to understand another thing, although the princess and Nemour are
powerfully attracted to each other, they hardly know each other at all.
Which each one is attracted to, and the novelist makes that very clear, is the image.
His social and athletic performance, her beauty and grace.
And the French tradition has tended to see it this way, much more, I think, than the
Anglo-American one.
The modern French writer, Paul Valérie, has a remark, that which is real can't be desired
because it's real, you desire what you've invented in your head.
And here's another point.
If we want what we haven't got, we're more likely to want it, if someone else has it.
And that's the tradition of triangular desire, which has always played a very important role
in French fiction, again, more so than the English tradition, which is more optimistic
about mutual happiness.
Now Nemour is jealous of the princess's husband, because he has her, and Nemour doesn't.
The husband is jealous, so he doesn't even know who to be jealous of, because he suspects
that since she's not in love with him, she must be in love with somebody else.
As for the princess, she finally realizes how strong her feelings for Nemour are at
the exact moment of an attack of jealousy, when someone remarks to her that they think
he may be in love with still another woman.
Now on this subject, LaRache Foucault has a particularly unsparing maxim.
He says, in jealousy, there is more of self-love than love.
More of Amour-propre than Amour.
And the reason jealousy is so painful, then, is it self-regarding.
You're wounded in your own self-love.
How can she or he do this to me?
Well, we're in a good position now to start thinking about the implications of this novel
for psychology, in which the aphoristic, this always happens, style of LaRache Foucault
has been translated into temporal narrative, relationships between individuals.
And the subject we need to focus on is the problem of sincerity.
If you look up the word sincere in a modern dictionary, you'll get a list of attributes
like honest, truthful, without hypocrisy, in reality what it appears to be.
Now there could hardly be a more central topic for this entire course.
Remember, the Augustinian tradition held we are literally incapable of knowing the truth
about our own motives, because the sin of pride constantly rationalizes what we're doing.
And the secular psychology of Hobbes and LaRache Foucault says the same thing, except it drops
the idea of sin and just decides we'd better take people as they are.
Right through the 18th century, there will continue to be versions of this same thing
in writers who do stress the artificial role-playing quality of human life, but will also be thinking
about a powerful counter-tradition.
And it's one that's had an immense influence on the culture we still live in.
And that's the tradition that calls for us to be true to our deepest self, get past the
layers of rationalization, find out who we authentically are.
In fact, we take this ideal so much for granted, we tend to read it back anachronistically
into earlier times.
We happen to know the motto of the ancient Greek oracle at Delphi was, no thyself.
And we assume it means deep self-awareness.
Scholars tell us it meant something much more like, know your place in the world, don't
get above your station.
Likewise, you'll hear people say, as Shakespeare says, to thine own self be true.
They forget the person who says that is the old windbag Polonius, who's telling his son
Liarty's to have a good public image, even if it's not the same thing as his real behavior.
We also have plenty of voices today, suggesting maybe the role-playing story is the right
one.
A modern sociologist said, sincerity is the illusion of somebody who's taken in by his
own act.
Now this opposition between the unknowable inner self and the ideal of sincerity and
the exterior social self is built into the very heart of La Princesse de Cleve.
Quite early in the story, the Princesse de Cleve tells his wife about a friend of his
who grieved deeply when his mistress died.
And then he was horrified to find out all along she'd been unfaithful to him, so this
then he was torn between two contradictory feelings, grief and jealousy, and he says
he feels like he's losing his mind.
The prince tells his wife, he knows you can't control who you fall in love with, but he
implores her at least tell me the truth.
If you do fall for somebody else, even if you don't sleep with them, if you're actually,
you know, bonded with them in some way, that way he won't be under the humiliating delusion
about what her true feelings are.
He's been quite idealistic in saying this, tell me the truth, I can stand it.
And throughout this novel, he's presented as an outstandingly honorable good person,
as the Princesse always acknowledges, so she agrees to do it, but her real reason is she
wants to block her own temptation to respond to no more.
If her husband knows she's got these feelings, then she's that much less likely to give
in.
Well, why doesn't she want to give in?
Partly it is, loyalty to the idea of marriage, though of course she sees it betrayed on every
side every day, more directly it's an unwillingness to get hurt.
Everything she sees confirms the account of love I've been just describing.
You fall for someone, then they drop you, then you're miserable, they've proved they
had the power and you don't.
But of course, in the plot of this story, her attempt to be sincere backfires.
Once she admits she is attracted to someone else, it drives her husband crazy with jealousy.
He starts obsessively watching for clues for an affair that in fact isn't happening at
all.
As for Nemours, the other guy, he isn't sure of her feelings and he wants to find out.
Now one day, he knows the Princess is supposed to be having her portrait painted, he finds
a way to be present, she's at her levee, she's in bed, but you know, fully clothed and visible
to the public, and a friend who's with her asks to compare this new portrait with a miniature
version that was painted earlier and when they put the miniature back on a table and
the two women are chatting, Nemours sees a chance to back up to the table and slip it
in his pocket.
Now listen to the very subtle way the narrator describes what happens next.
Through the partly closed curtains of her bed, Madame de Cleve noticed Monsieur de Nemours,
who was at the foot of the bed, with his back to the table, and she saw that without turning
his head, he deftly picked something up.
She had no trouble guessing, it was her portrait.
And she was so disturbed that her friend noticed she wasn't listening and asked what she was
looking at.
At these words, Monsieur de Nemours turned, he encountered Madame de Cleve's eyes which
were still fixed on him and he thought it not impossible that she had seen what he just
did.
This is a perfect illustration of the claustrophobic world of the court.
The meeting of eyes when Nemours takes the portrait is very powerful, they can't speak,
there's a third party there who mustn't be allowed to know what's going on.
And indeed neither one of them is quite sure what has just happened.
But the princess is pretty sure he must have taken her portrait and he's pretty sure her
fixed gaze means she knows he took it and isn't stopping him.
It's a symbolic appropriation of her person and she tacitly permits it.
Among other things in the story, this is evidence of Nemours' high-handed erotic style that's
dangerous and selfish of him to take that portrait.
It's a reminder she would do well not to give in to this man, but it's also a dramatic
enactment of their interest in each other and it's all the more intense for being covert
and secretive.
Now in the next lecture we'll follow the plot as it puts increasing pressure on these characters
until the princess unexpectedly chooses the one solution that can spring her from this
trap of desire leading to its own frustration and the trap of jealousy as the inevitable
consequence of love.
