Lecture 5 La Princesse de Cleve, Part II
I talked last time about the intolerable burden that the promise of sincerity places
on the princess to Cleve and her husband.
As soon as she keeps her promise and admits to him that she does feel attracted to somebody
else, his jealousy ignites.
And what's even worse, when she makes her a vow, she and her husband are in a pavilion
on their country estate.
And none other than Noamur, her secret admirer, has managed to sneak into that place.
He overhears everything they say without their suspecting for a moment that they aren't completely
alone.
As soon as Cleve asked his wife to be sincere, to tell him the whole truth, but to his own
surprise, he finds himself frantic with jealousy, in effect confirming La Rochefoucault's insight.
The jealousy is more about self-love than love.
So even while the married couple are having this private conversation, the one person
who shouldn't be there is listening to every word.
But since she refuses to tell her husband who the other man is, she just says she does
have an interest in someone else, Noamur, hearing this, can't be sure it is him.
So now he gets tortured by jealousy too.
Back at the court, he tells a version of what he saw, though he doesn't name any names,
to some friends of his, and the story immediately gets around because everyone thinks it's amazing
that a wife should love another man and tell her own husband about it.
So now the plot starts to pick up momentum.
When the princess and her husband hear this story that's making the rounds, they each
assume it has to be about them.
But since as far as they know, it was an entirely private conversation, each one thinks the
other must have blabbed, which would be an outrageous betrayal of confidence.
Monsieur de Cleve, of course, by now is absolutely poisoned by jealousy.
He thinks not only is his wife in love with somebody else, but she's boasted that she
told him the truth about it and then told other people.
As for her, she's tortured in a different way.
She thinks her husband must have told the story, so that means he despises her so much
he's been telling other people about it.
Worst of all, she thinks Noamur must now know it and he's going around boasting.
So she reproaches herself in the most bitter terms, referring to Noamur.
She says, it was for this man, whom I believed so different from the rest, that I find myself
just like other women, even though I'm so far from resembling them.
I've lost the heart and esteem of a husband who should have given me happiness.
I'll soon be regarded by everyone as a person with a mad and violent passion.
As I remarked before, in classical psychology, passion was regarded as threatening.
Falling in love was like catching a dangerous illness.
The princess had prided herself on being unique.
She was different from other women.
She could make wise choices for herself.
She's appalled now to find that she's reduced to the standard dilemmas of conventional psychology.
Her husband is even worse off.
He hears that the princess has been at some social event where Noamur was going to be,
so she may well have seen him.
So he asks her and she truthfully says she avoided Noamur, but of course her husband
can't believe it.
Now he really regrets that practice sincerity, and in English, he tells her what his feelings
are like.
How could you hope, he says, that I should remain reasonable, had you forgotten I loved
you frantically, and I was your husband?
Either one of the two would drive me to extremes, so what will they do together?
I adore you, I hate you, I offend you, I beseech your pardon, I admire you, and I'm ashamed
of admiring you.
What they're both talking about is a kind of crisis that the old psychology saw as typical.
Reason ought to be in control of the passions, but in both the princess and her husband,
passion is taken over, and even worse, each of them is the helpless battleground of competing
passions.
It's an old truism that love and hate are closely related.
Indifference is the opposite of love, not hate.
Odee et Ammo, said the Roman poet Catullus, I love and I hate, and he goes on to say,
it's excruciating.
Now Monsieur De Cleve is saying for him it's even worse, because an ordinary lover might
both love and hate, but he is a jealous husband and a jealous lover, and remember the reason
in this strange code that he is still a lover is he can't get her to feel desire for him.
Now comes a public event, a tournament, long-awaited where the men of the court are going to show
off their skill.
And Namour sends a secret private message in effect to the princess by wearing special
colors that she will know refer to her, even though nobody else can tell, and she does
realize it.
After the tournament, which has a tragic outcome, because completely by accident the
king, who is one of the competitors, gets killed.
After the tournament, the prince De Cleve has to conduct necessary business at court,
and the princess goes off to her country estate to be by herself.
His suspicions immediately flare up.
What did she want to do that for?
Then he finds out, in fact it's only coincidental, that Namour has asked permission at court
to leave for a while.
So of course he certainly knows why, and he tells a trusted servant to go to his country
place and keep an eye on things.
The servant goes there, night falls, and what the servant sees is Namour sneaking into
the estate.
So he reports that to his master, and of course, Monsieur De Cleve draws the obvious conclusion.
In fact, it's wrong, Namour and the princess never meet.
De Cleve is readers or privileged to go behind the scenes.
Thanks to an omniscient narrator, she knows everything.
She can tell us even what they're thinking.
And this is the psychologically powerful account that the narrator gives.
Namour saw that she was alone, this is when he's looking in the window of her country
pavilion, but he saw such beauty that he could hardly control the transport he felt.
She was warm, and she had nothing on her neck and breast except her loosely fastened hair.
She was on a couch with a table in front of her, where there were several baskets full
of ribbons.
She selected several of them, and Monsieur de Namour noticed that they were the same
color as he wore in the tournament.
He saw her knot them around a very unusual Indian cane, which he had carried at one time,
and then given it to his sister, from whom Namde Cleve got it, without revealing that
she knew it was his.
So Namour, who cannot get this woman to acknowledge his power, has been reduced to voyeurism.
And what he gets is certainly the voyeurist's dream.
Looking extremely sexy, the princess is all alone, so there's no question that she could
be putting on some kind of an act.
And what she's doing is tying his ribbons around his cane.
Madame de Lafayette didn't need Freud to tell her the symbolic implications of that
cane, just to make his triumph complete.
She gets up and holds a candle to a painting of a recent battle, which actually includes
a portrait of himself.
So now at last he has what he really wants, not so much possession of her person.
Her husband has that, and it's not enough.
But Namour has what he could never be sure he had until now, her deep and real passion
for him.
It doesn't matter that by this time she hates herself for her passion, but she can't help
indulging it.
She's equipped herself with a whole set of props in order to fantasize about Namour,
and the narrator tells us he's experiencing what no other lover has ever enjoyed.
In this novel, where people constantly misinterpret what other people are thinking, Namour has
been able to get inside her head.
He's absolutely certain of what she's feeling.
However, it's another old truism.
Voyeurism is self-destructive.
The ancients symbolized it in the myth of Actaeon.
He was out hunting and saw the naked goddess Diana bathing with her maidens in a stream.
And to punish him, he was turned into a stag and torn to pieces by his own hounds, in effect
by his own passions.
Well, I've been presenting La Princesse de Cleve as a psychological novel, which it
certainly is.
And these episodes help us to see it that way.
Was it realistic?
Could it be likely or plausible that Namour should be able to spy on the princess and
her husband at the exact moment they're having their heart-to-heart talk about sincerity?
Or even more, can it be realistic that Namour should come back and repeat his spying at
the exact moment the princess is gazing at his picture and tying ribbons around his cane?
Well, of course not, if by realistic we mean more likely to happen than not.
But what this kind of novel gives us is something else, psychological realism.
These two people are obsessing about each other, and it makes psychological sense that
they should have an uncanny awareness of each other.
The scene with the ribbons and the cane is a way of making visible, but Namour is intuiting
about the feelings the princess tries so hard to conceal.
The literary critics of those days had a word for this.
They called it veille sans blanche, or in English, vera similitude.
Veritas is truth in Latin, levée in French.
What thereafter is something similar to truth, not circumstantial realism, the kind the novel
would specialize in later on, but psychological realism, similar to truth because it finds
a fictional equivalent for a recurring constants in human nature.
That's the view of art that we know as classical, or sometimes referring to the French 17th
century, neoclassical.
It wants art to be philosophical, the way Aristotle said it should be, way back in
the 4th century BC, it should show us the meaning of what happens.
This view presupposes there are indeed predictable constants in human behavior, and as we've seen,
that's exactly what La Roche Foucault and the others in that circle did believe.
But just to anticipate, at the very heart of this course, we'll see the move in the
18th century to a much greater emphasis on particulars, not what's constant and predictable
in human life, but what's individual and unique.
In La Princess de Cleves, another plot twist follows.
After the servant reports that he saw Namour go into the estate at night, Monsieur de Cleves
falls into a violent fever.
He tells his wife his suspicions.
He refuses to believe her protestations of innocence.
Her denials are just twisting the knife.
And shortly afterward, he dies, in effect of a broken heart.
Well, we may not believe anymore in dying of a broken heart, but this is psychological
verisimilitude.
Jealousy is the sickness of self-love.
Monsieur de Cleves' unappeasable anxiety has worn him down, until his life just isn't
worth living anymore.
On his deathbed, he says, go ahead, marry Namour, since you want him so much.
What will it matter once I'm gone?
Of course, that's what Namour expects is going to happen, but it doesn't.
The novel ends with the sustained refusal of the princess to accept Namour, or even,
except on one occasion, to see him.
He's reduced to renting a room across from her house, where he hangs about all day in
the hope that he might catch a glimpse of her at her window.
That's what I mean about voyeurism becoming self-destructive.
This guy, who used to be the charismatic hero of the whole court, has turned into a kind
of stalker, though not with any malicious intent.
Remember the concept of love as an illness.
Today, we tend to think of a grand passion as ennobling, or at least a sign of strong
romantic feelings.
Back then, it was something to avoid, if you possibly could.
LaRache Foucault said he had never experienced a grand passion, and it's pretty clear he
hoped he never would.
So, is it arbitrary and unrealistic that Monsieur De Clef dies?
Not at all.
His wife has symbolically murdered him in his amour propra.
Even though we know she's telling the truth she never did sleep with Namour, it's also
true she desires Namour, and that's the real issue.
Once Monsieur De Clef is dead, we have the further question, why does the princess continue
to refuse Namour?
It's a complex question, and one that can have more than one answer.
In fact, this novel gives us at least three answers.
One of them is related to the traditional plot of 17th century tragedy.
Another one reflects a hard-headed realism about human behavior, such as we saw in the
maxims of LaRache Foucault.
One is never explicit, but it's potential at the very end of the book, and that's a
religious solution that makes one think of Pascal.
To start, then, with the tragedies of the time, notably Racine's Fadre.
It's still widely regarded as the greatest work of France's greatest playwright.
It was produced in 1677, as just one year before LaRache Foucault was published.
Racine was rewriting an ancient Greek play by Euripides, it's called Hippolytus.
In that older play, two goddesses, Artemis and Aphrodite, get into a quarrel, and they
destroy some innocent human beings as mere pawns in their battle.
And because the young prince Hippolytus believes in chastity and resists the attractions of
sex, Aphrodite makes his stepmother, Fadre, fall passionately in love with him, which
in Greek terms was regarded as incestuous, and although she does her very best to hide
her feelings, they end up coming out, and in the end both she and Hippolytus die.
In 17th century French drama, the most common plot was a conflict between love and duty,
or desire and self-control.
But in tragedy, desire is always too strong to be controlled, and disaster follows.
Besides this, we know that Racine was very sympathetic to the Jansenist movement.
He probably intended his reshaping of Euripides' story to suggest the teat of original sin.
But that's never explicit in his play, so I'll postpone that angle for a little while.
Racine's characters in all his plays are terribly lucid in analyzing their dilemma,
they know what's happening to them, they understand it, but they're powerless to stop it.
Now, during the later part of La Princesse de Cleve, the heroine definitely sees herself
in just this way.
She talks about her conflict, between desire for no more and loyalty to her husband, and
she also talks about a fatal destiny that seems to be dragging her onward.
A major purpose of tragedy has always been to give some kind of meaningful shape to human
suffering.
And you could say by casting her own story as a tragedy, Madame de Lafayette is presenting
a classic way of making sense of it.
But this is the really interesting thing, the princess refuses to follow out the pattern.
She sees that she could be a tragic heroine, and she chooses not to be.
So there's the first answer, why she refuses no more.
If he had killed her husband in a duel, she certainly wouldn't marry him, and he might
as well have done that.
It was a symbolic duel, it really did kill her husband.
So to become Nemours' lover would confirm the tragic destructiveness of passion, and
instead she opts out of the tragedy.
Her second reason is more immediately psychological.
This was not a culture, remember, that believed in the union of Mr. and Ms. Wright, or I suppose
the Duke and Duchess of Wright.
The princess tells herself, very clearly, Nemours is an extremely attractive guy who
practically every woman wants to sleep with.
She's already experienced what jealousy is like.
If she does agree to go with Nemours, there's a 100% chance of setting herself up for the
same thing.
So when Nemours comes to beg her to accept him, when they do finally meet face to face,
this is what she says.
I admit, the passions may lead me, but they cannot make me blind.
You've already had many affairs, and you will have more.
I would no longer bring you happiness, and I would see you become for someone else what
you used to be for me.
I would be in mortal pain, I wouldn't be at all sure of avoiding the evil of jealousy.
And what happens next?
Is there a special comment?
Is it so different from the way people think today?
Mr. de Nemours threw himself at her feet and abandoned himself to all the feelings that
agitated him.
He made her see, both by his tears and his words, the liveliest and most tender passion
that ever touched a heart.
Her eyes, too, fill with tears, but that's simply not decisive.
In later times, in fact, we'll see this at the middle of the 18th century, tears become
a sign of true, spontaneous emotion, and they may be taken as a guide to what you ought
to do.
Here, the tears are real enough.
The grief both of these people feel at losing each other is real, but that's no reason to
act accordingly.
In fact, this novel is supplied with many cautionary stories, which its original readers
would have known how to interpret.
At one point, we're given an account of the relationship between Henry VIII of England
and Anne Bolane.
She wound up losing her head, literally, as a result of an impulse of jealousy in Henry.
Another example, and another real historical character, the princess's best friend has
a premonition of a terrible end, and the princess tries to reassure her, but we know, through
historical hindsight, that in fact, later on, this same woman will become the famous Mary
Queen of Scots and will be executed by her own sister, Queen Elizabeth.
So it's yet another well-known example of someone for whom sexual infatuation will
cause tragic suffering, and that's exactly what the princess is determined to resist.
So there are two good reasons to turn the more down, to avoid the fatal plot of tragedy
and to avoid the self-destructive jealousy that's bound to come when he gets tired of
her, as he certainly will.
The third reason is suggested more tacitly, but it's the most important of all.
The princess is determined to extricate herself from this no-win situation in order to preserve
her peace of mind.
The word in the original French is repos, related to our word repose, but it has a much deeper
meaning.
According to the psychological understanding of the time, pleasure and happiness are not
two versions of the same thing, they're opposites.
Pleasure is intense and exciting, but also inevitably brief, and it may well leave a
bitter aftertaste.
Happiness is calmer and more peaceful and can become a lasting state, but only if it
excludes pleasure.
We'll see Rousseau, a century later, making exactly the same distinction, choosing happiness
over pleasure.
Conversely, in the novel Les liaisons d'enjoureuse, the formidable Marquis de Mertoy makes the
same distinction, but she chooses pleasure instead of happiness.
What the princess de Cleves does is drop out of the court altogether.
She leaves for a distant estate in the Pyrenees.
She survives an illness there that I suppose purges her of the pain of her decision, and
from then on she spends part of every year in a convent.
She doesn't actually become a nun, but she does enter the spiritual shelter of an institution
that can sustain her choice of repose through renunciation.
That conclusion is very briefly described in the novel, just a couple of pages at the
end, and with almost no commentary from the narrator, in effect we are still enclosed
in the world of the court, but the princess has left us and gone away.
She's broken free from mondanité, that cynical worldliness of the court, that stagnant biosphere
where the air is actually poisonous.
It happens we know of a very relevant instance from real life.
Madame de Lafayette's own sister-in-law, Louise de Lafayette, when she was 21, attracted
the interest of the king when she was lady-in-waiting to his queen, but rather than become as mistress
as everyone expected she would, a big promotion many women would have given their eye-teeth
for it, she left the court and entered a convent.
Eventually she became the first superior of a new order of nuns, it was called the order
of the visitation.
But even if this novel does have a religious dimension of that kind, it's entirely tacit,
it's never spelled out.
We know that Madame de Lafayette, like Racine, like Pascal, was close to the Jansenists.
And one way of interpreting her novel would be to say, the religious alternative is a
potential option, even if the characters in the story never allude to it or even show
any interest in it.
Somebody once did a word count of La Princesse de Clef, and found these frequencies in French,
of course, passion about 100 times, beauty about 50 times, love 50 times, God 3 times.
But in Pascal's terms, that could be the deus absconditus, the hidden God.
Human beings have forgotten how to reach him, but he's still there for those who know.
So maybe you could choose to escape the limits that the psychology of Amor Propra seems to
place on human behavior, and maybe you can also choose to escape tragedy of the kind
that Racine had just dramatized in Federer.
In Racine's play, God is certainly hidden, but the Christian God who's implied by Racine
is very different from those vengeful goddesses, Artemis and Aphrodite, that he was adapting
from the old Greek play.
Given that, I would suggest this novel has a deliberate refusal of plot in general, not
just tragedy, but plot as such.
To quote Aristotle again, talking about tragedy, he said, plot is the soul of the drama.
That is, even though we probably pay attention mostly to what the characters are saying,
it's what they do and how their actions are linked together that makes the play a work
of art.
Now, by the time she rejects Nemours, the princess has already been entangled in plenty
of plot.
We've seen the jealous husband and the jealous lover, there was the stolen portrait, there
were other incidents I haven't had time to describe, but just as this novel refuses to
be a tragedy, it likewise refuses to be a romance, which right down to our own time
represents the choice of a spouse or lover as the goal of the plot.
The choice of a spouse in this society is obviously not a romantic one, it's an alliance
between families, though in this case one party at least feels passionate love, which
is too bad for poor Mercedes-Claire, but there could also be an alternative kind of plot
that focuses on romance outside marriage, countless 19th and 20th century novels send
her on adultery, the princess refuses adultery, and then when her husband dies, she refuses
love, which is more interesting.
So she doesn't take the road of modern individualism, in which finding the right soulmate is the
key to happiness.
She turns back to the older individualism of the religious tradition, it's the kind
we saw when Bunyan's Christian covered his ears to keep from hearing his family's pleas,
and that kind of individualism, one gives up the dream of earthly happiness in order
to save one's soul.
The goal is not to choose the right lover, but to accept life with no lover.
So what about the strange, minor key ending of this novel with the retreat from the court
and the visits to the convent?
It raises a big problem for knowing the self, which we'll encounter all through this course.
We not only like plenty of plot in our works of fiction, we like to understand our own
lies as if they were acting out a meaningful plot.
So of course we welcome literary works that reinforce our sense that life does have a plot.
In this novel, the heroine decisively refuses to live a plot, and her self-understanding
at the end is fundamentally negative.
She chooses not to succumb to passion, not to encourage no more.
But is the final retreat into the convent a positive alternative, or is it just more
complete self-denial?
That's a question for each reader to answer.
The narrator doesn't tell us, in any way our values 300 years later aren't likely to
be the same as hers.
But it's certainly possible to see leaving the court, not in Pascalean terms, but in
Rosh Foucauldian terms.
You could see it as the ultimate move in the power game.
She has checkmated no more, there's no move left that he can make, so I suppose from her
point of view what she did was end the game by overturning the chessboard.
So where does this novel leave us, from the point of view of psychology?
It gives us an extremely subtle analysis of what love as passion feels like, and what
it does to people's lives.
It does that so brilliantly it's still full of power for readers today.
But there's some very important things, as our culture later came to understand them,
that it does not do, in fact it can't even imagine doing.
I'll mention two of them, these are ideas we'll be returning to in later lectures.
There's no hint of the possibility of companionate love, that is genuine friendship as well as
romantic feeling between two people who choose each other as mates.
Together with the possibility of sexual enjoyment that's not just a power play, the ethos of
la precess de cleve is the older one, marriage and romance are always opposites.
Another more serious absence perhaps, any sense of the complexity of an individual person,
or to translate it into modern terms, an emphasis on evolving personality rather than static
character.
There's plenty of complexity in this novel, but as in the maxims of La Roche Foucault,
it's the kind that occurs everywhere in all people.
Rousseau and his confessions will explore his own various love relationships in order
to understand what is unique to his own particular way of responding to emotional experience,
which he traces all the way back to childhood.
In the precess de cleve, love is like a laboratory experiment, you put pressure on human nature
to get it to break down and show the fundamental structure it always has in everybody.
Well these are topics for future lectures, and as we move forward from La Roche Foucault
and Madame de Lafayette, we'll also be saying goodbye to the culture of the aristocracy.
Aristocrats of course continue to play an important social role, they continue to have
lots of power, but the center of gravity of literature will shift permanently to the
middle class, the bourgeoisie.
And there's another absence that needs to be mentioned.
From now on we won't be reading any women writers.
Of course there were women who wrote, and in the 18th century an increasing number of
them, some of them were novelists, especially in England, and by the beginning of the 19th
century you could actually put together a history of British fiction that could center
on women writers.
It could go from Jane Austen through George Elliot, and then in the 20th century on to
Virginia Woolf, but whereas in the 17th century a well educated aristocratic woman had a chance
of doing serious writing, although remember Madame de Lafayette was careful to do it
anonymously, during the 18th century women writers were relatively marginalized.
They were never at the center of the enlightenment inquiry that forms the subject of this course,
and why that should have been is a subject of course that we'll want to think about as
we go along.
