In this lecture, we make the big move into the 18th century.
Up until now, we've been concerned with writers in the left part of the 17th century.
And that was for two reasons, first, because everything the thinkers of the Enlightenment
tried to do was built upon what went before, and indeed often in reaction to, what went
before.
Second, because those earlier writers had some very powerful insights into perennial
problems of psychology that tended to be minimized or even ignored by the optimistic Enlightenment.
One of our principal themes will be to see how sooner or later those questions would
need to be raised again, and of course answered in new ways.
This lecture will present the philosophy of empiricism, which would provide the context
in which nearly all thinking about the self took place during the 18th century.
It was replacing the disillusioned worldview of 17th century aristocratic culture with what
became the empowering ideology of a middle class culture that believed in self-interest
as a positive good.
What it couldn't do very well, as contrasted with 17th century thought, was to explain feelings
of conflictedness, dividedness, cruelty, and it had no way at all of thinking about the
unconscious.
The empiricist self is fundamentally intelligible at all times.
Just to briefly recall the story up to now, in the religious model, especially in its
rigorous form, Protestant Calvinism, Catholic Janssenism, the self was the enemy.
The emphasis was on restraint and control, what we would call repression.
It urged retreat from the world, either literally or in spirit.
This is why La Panceste Cleve, after exposing the dead end painfulness of the worldly ethic,
opts for preserving the self by denying its desires.
The secular model of the 17th century likewise, located self-love and desire for power at
the center, it was the philosophy of a disillusioned aristocratic culture that saw people as profoundly
manipulative, concerned all the time with prestige and dominance.
The British thinker Hobbes, as we saw, was an important founder of the new empiricist
philosophy, but he too got his values from reaction against a frightening civil war,
and from living with the exiled English king in the French court.
Hobbes too saw power as the main spring of human behavior and as a threat that has to
be rigidly controlled.
Empiricism turned out to be very much the wave of the future.
It would dominate right through the whole 18th century, but in order for it to be taken
over by the emerging middle class culture, competitive individualism had to be redefined
as beneficial, therefore desirable.
And to make that possible, the separate fortress self, as in the Hobbesian war of all against
all, had to be replaced by the social self, really the sociable self.
The 17th century moralists had a psychology that made sense in a time of civil wars.
The 18th century empiricists had one for an age of consensus.
To introduce the assumptions of empiricism, I'll concentrate on the philosophy of John
Locke, as expounded in a book that was enormously influential, called An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding, which he published in 1690.
Locke was no armchair philosopher, he was a political thinker, very much in touch with
important events in his time, and professionally he was a physician, directly concerned with
bodies as well as minds.
His father had fought on the Puritan side in the civil wars, and Locke grew up with
great respect for the power of parliament against royal abuses, but also a strong commitment
to social consensus as the foundation for peace.
Locke was educated at Oxford, where he had little use for the traditional curriculum.
He concentrated on the new experimental science, which was just beginning to be taught in the
universities.
In 1668, he was elected a fellow of the newly founded Royal Society, and he conversed there
with leading scientists, such as the pioneer chemist Robert Boyle, we still speak of Boyle's
law.
These were researchers.
They rejected the abstract theorizing of Descartes, the mathematician.
They sought to test hypotheses by experiments.
They were developing the scientific method, as it's still practiced today.
In addition, Locke became the personal physician for a leading spokesman for moderate political
reform.
His name was the Earl of Shaftesbury.
And in 1690, the same year as the work on the human understanding, Locke published another
book called Two Treatises on Government.
It was a major statement of constitutional liberalism.
It was a justification for the so-called Glorious Revolution of 1688, glorious because parliament
managed without shedding any blood to depose an undesirable king and put in its own choice
the team of William and Mary.
Remember the social contract of Hobbes was a last-ditch defense against human viciousness.
Locke sees the social contract as a sensible agreement among independent individuals that
will establish rules that will make society run a little more smoothly.
In contrast to pretty much all of those old 17th century writers, empiricism was committed
to putting sociability at the heart of life.
Our emotions are natural.
They're good.
They're not the enemy to be repressed.
On the contrary, they're the source of positive, instinctual behavior.
That's the social philosophy that empiricism was developed to undergird.
And you can see how the commitment to scientific method played a part.
The idea was to get rid of introspection and subjectivity, stop trying to answer unanswerable
questions about the meaning of life, focus on collective research projects that could
make a difference in people's actual lives.
So this was a philosophy that enabled the objective, non-judgmental pursuit of knowledge
as technological power.
Here's a good example.
For over 2,000 years, physicians slavishly followed the medical theory of ancient Greece.
Now, finally, new kinds of questions were being asked, and amazing new advances became
possible.
William Harvey, who was a contemporary of Hobbes, proved the circulation of the blood.
And long afterward, David Hume made a very interesting remark about this.
He said he'd been told that when Harvey published his theory, no physician older than the age
of 40 ever accepted it.
So this new way of thinking called for a new kind of open mind.
And as I've observed, it's no accident Locke was a physician.
Well, that was the social and political aspect of empiricism.
And I emphasize it as the main driving force behind the theory.
But it did carry with it significant implications for thinking about the self, which is what
we're concerned with in this course.
Now a philosophy that exalted objectivity was bound to demote subjectivity.
And that's something that still persists in all kinds of ways, even in our own time.
We hear so much about our inner selves that America has been called the therapeutic society.
But it's a telling symptom that you'll hear an idea or an argument dismissed as merely
subjective.
You never hear anyone complaining that something is merely objective.
And in fact, this empiricist version of psychology isn't really psychology at all, as we understand
the term today, or even I would say as Pascal and LaRache Foucault conceived it.
What it is really is a theory of knowledge.
It takes a certain view of the human mind as its starting point.
So what we need to do now is sketch the main outlines of this empiricist theory of knowledge,
which becomes the entry into thinking about psychology for over 100 years.
And the best way to do it is to describe some contrasts between French rationalism and British
empiricism, which eventually with the rise of the Enlightenment became dominant in France
as well as Britain.
Now Descartes thought that his method of systematic doubt, which he pursued in the privacy of
his own head, not in the laboratory, he thought it would winnow away everything that was confused
and unclear until it arrived at a bedrock of clear and distinct ideas.
That's what he called them, clear and distinct ideas.
He had the mathematician's passion for perfect clarity.
It's not surprising to find out Descartes hated cities with irregular crooked streets,
the kinds that tourists find charming today.
He would have totally approved of what eventually happened in Paris when they drew those great
avenues across the old medieval city plan.
Perhaps you know in France today they often refer to their country as the hexagon.
It's a bit tongue-in-cheek, but not entirely.
They wanted to think if you look on the map, France actually is kind of a hexagon.
So French rationalism tried to attain clear and distinct ideas and it was pursuing a quest
for certainty.
From the British point of view, French rationalism was in fact altogether too private.
It depended on introspective insights, not shared consensus with other people.
As far as the British were concerned, it was really subjectivity pretending to be objective.
I think therefore I am.
Let me give you an example from theoretical physics that highlights the profound difference
between the two methods.
The Cartesians, that is followers of Descartes, who were the leading scientists way into the
18th century, they said that the theory of gravity of Isaac Newton made no sense because
it does postulate that the force of gravity operates almost like magic across empty space.
So the Cartesians instead had a theory of big cosmic whirlpools, tourbillon, or vortices,
perhaps in English.
The planets are whirled around by this mysterious stuff.
The Newtonian said, we don't have any evidence of these whirlpools of yours.
And the Cartesians said, that's not important.
We know they have to be there.
So you see the point.
As I mentioned in an earlier lecture, Newton and his followers were perfectly willing to
say they had no idea whatsoever how gravity worked.
What they did know is they could write mathematical formulas to describe what it does.
They were concerned with the how and not the why.
And they were right.
Those vortices of Descartes were totally imaginary.
It was a mythology masquerading as science.
Also whereas Descartes and his followers aimed for perfect certainty, the British empiricists
accepted that's impossible.
They were willing to settle for probability.
They would reconsider their theories whenever new evidence came along.
So now let's turn to Locke's greatest and most influential work, published as I say
in the same year, 1790, as his treatises on government, his massive essay concerning
human understanding.
The very title is significant.
It's not a comprehensive theory.
It's an essay, a preliminary inquiry.
In those days, the word essay still had connotations of experiment.
In modern English, we spell it with an A when we mean that, a chemist, essay is a sample
of gold.
Locke deliberately wrote an everyday language with as few technicalities as possible.
His book was an effort at popularization and it succeeded brilliantly in that aim.
His style is easygoing, has a matter of fact calmness, but what it conceals is a polemic
against the whole intellectual and political world of the past and it's intended to justify
a new one as envisioned intellectually by the Royal Society, politically by the Whigs,
they were the party of commerce and pragmatic change as opposed to the Tories who were defending
the old aristocratic system.
Well, at this point, let's recall the key premise of empiricism.
That was that all knowledge comes in through the senses.
Locke famously said, each of us is born a tabula rasa, a blank slate, and we're then
exposed to a continual reign of sense data and these bits of data are what Locke calls
ideas.
When we get older and more experienced, we start putting ideas together in various combinations
so it's more like what we mean today when we say ideas, but all the same, those separate
bits of data that came in from outside are absolutely all we can know.
In Lockean empiricism, there's no room for imaginative intuition of deeper truths than
our sensory inputs can give us.
Moreover, all we can ever really know is separate individual items that each began as direct
sense experience.
So when we use general terms like tree or sulfuric acid, what we're really doing is
using linguistic counters to play the game of language, which works pretty well as long
as everybody learns the same rules of the game, but it's totally artificial.
We think we know what tree means, but how do you distinguish it from a bush or a shrub?
And how come a banana plant is a plant and not a tree?
Well, the point is there's no such thing in nature as tree.
There's just an endless variety of organisms and we've agreed for convenience to group
some of them under the single name tree.
And if that's true for something as physically real as trees, what about abstractions like
justice and beauty and truth?
Empiricism raises the serious possibility that those are totally artificial, much more
than words like tree and sulfuric acid.
They depend not on the ultimate nature of things, but on socially accepted conventions
about what we're willing to call beautiful or true.
It's as if when we look at a globe, we assume the Earth actually has right-angled lines
inscribed all over it.
We need to remember Lewis Carroll's verses in The Hunting of the Snark.
The use of mercators, North Pole and Equator, tropic zones and meridian lines so the Bellman
would cry and the crew would reply, they are only conventional signs.
So each of us necessarily is a separate individual communicating with others only by conventional
signs limited to what we really know to our own personal sense experience.
So the way we cope with living is to band together with others and society is the collective
experience of mankind.
In a way, this is a conservative position.
We learn and survive by going along with our tribe, not striking out on our own.
But it's also progressive because collectively, we can figure out better ways of doing things
just as Harvey's discovery of the circulation of the blood made possible major advances
in clinical medicine.
Now if every baby is more in a tabula rasa, just waiting to have data installed, there's
no longer any question of original sin.
Each of us begins morally neutral.
And the logic of empiricism was that people are malleable, capable of being guided and
shaped in appropriate directions.
So empiricism pushes for broad public education.
It becomes possible to create suitable citizens for the modern world.
You can see now how the assumptions of the older psychology needed to be turned upside
down.
Amor propra becomes a good thing.
The mechanism that drives collective progress.
We need pride.
We need to feel good about ourselves.
Whereas for Bunyan and Pascale, the important thing literally was to feel terrible about
yourself.
All of this seemed to many people like simple common sense, but it created a nest of unintended
paradoxes, especially in its stripped down simplified picture of the self, which is what
we need to look at more closely.
And now you'll see why it is that a theory of knowledge turns out to be fundamental
to a theory of psychology, remembering the very word psychology didn't exist except as
a technical term in theology, the study of the soul.
If a person is the sum total of all those bits of data stored up in his or her head,
then according to Locke, it follows, if any bits of data are missing or not retrievable,
they simply aren't relevant to saying who that person is.
To Locke, this is simple common sense, but listen to the kind of paradox it leads him
to.
Since most of what goes on in our heads when we're sleeping disappears when we wake up,
Locke is willing to draw a drastic conclusion, and this is what he says.
It is certain that Socrates' sleep and Socrates' awake is not the same person, but two persons.
Waking Socrates has no knowledge of the happiness or misery of his soul, which he enjoys while
he sleeps, without perceiving anything of it, any more than he has for the happiness of
a man in the Indies whom he knows not.
So, Socrates, when he's asleep, is somebody else altogether.
To invoke Lewis Carroll again, it's like Alice in Wonderland.
She's wondering who she is and decides that she's not Alice anymore.
She must be some other kid called Mabel who has too much homework and lives in a pokey
little house.
Notice the way Locke uses the word soul.
It used to mean the truest, most permanent part of ourselves, the immortal part that
survives physical death.
It's what Bunyan's Christian leaves everything behind, even his dear family, in order to
save.
For Locke, the soul is just a way of talking about the mind when it's not consciously thinking.
It's shedding its religious connotations.
And since the sleeping person is just not the same person as the waking one, you see
there's no room at all for anything like a sense of the unconscious, which I argued
La Roche Foucault was trying to describe with his ever-changing inner sea.
And beyond that, there's no notion even of a stable core of self, something that would
underlie everything we do, even if we're not conscious of it.
So who are we then?
Here's Locke's definition of personal identity.
That is, whatever makes Alice, Alice, and not Mabel.
It's kind of complicated, but it's important to listen to his own words, because it has
so many hidden booby traps in it, as I'll try to explain.
To find where in personal identity consists, we must consider what person stands for, which
I think is a thinking intelligent being that has reason and reflection, and can consider
itself as itself, the same thinking thing in different times and places.
And as far as this consciousness can be extended backward to any past action or thought, so
far reaches the identity of that person.
One of the paradoxes hidden here is the strange doubling of the self that empiricism entails.
When Locke says consider itself as itself, he's in effect implying we have a miniature
interior spectator who looks at its own actions, as if from outside, as if our retinas were
movie screens, and a little tiny person were sitting inside our skulls watching the film.
It's one problem with the empiricist's self.
It splits into the part that acts and the part that watches the other part.
It also reflects the notorious mind-body problem that has haunted philosophy ever since, something
it shares with Descartes.
What exactly is the disembodied mind that we believe rides around in the physical body,
and how do the two communicate with each other?
Here's another point, as soon as you think about it, what a huge burden Locke places
on memory.
You are you, only insofar as you can connect the dots all the way back through all the
events of your life.
And if parts of your life has slipped out of your memory, Locke is willing to say those
parts aren't you anymore.
Believe it or not, Locke actually says, if I believe I saw Noah's flood, just as firmly
as what I did yesterday, then I have no reason for doubting that I did see Noah's flood.
How can he possibly say that?
The answer is in those bits of sense data, those impressions, impressions, that he imagines
literally pressing into our minds.
He takes it for granted that real impressions always leave a deeper imprint than imaginary
ones.
So we can always tell the difference, I didn't really see Noah's flood unless we're impaired
in some way, drunk or hallucinating in a high fever or insane.
This brings us to a very important topic for our course, the empiricist denigration of
imagination.
Well that's a word we use today in positive ways, she's a very imaginative child, took
a lot of imagination to solve that problem.
For the empiricist's imagination was trouble, you wanted to suppress it as much as you could.
Underlying this is a distinction they like to make between what they called wit and judgment.
Judgment was the ability to analyze things and recognize differences between them, obviously
a very important part of scientific method.
The word wit has had a very different history, originally it meant intelligence in general.
In the middle ages people talked about having five wits, just like they had five senses,
imagination and judgment were two of the five.
We still say somebody's out of his wits, it's a survival of that old term, but gradually
the term wit got limited to mean the opposite of judgment.
It was the ability to put things together that might not have any obvious connection
at all.
If it turns out the connection is really there, that's great, but more often than not wit
is just having fun making plausible connections that don't really exist.
The literary critic Samuel Johnson said of the so-called poetry of wit, of writers like
John Dunn, he said the most heterogeneous ideas are yoked by violence together.
In fact our modern usage of wit comes from this, nowadays it just means a clever play
of ideas or words that can raise a laugh.
As for imagination, that was the faculty of combining images, it was literally image
ing.
Just remember those bits of sense data are the only things our minds have to work with.
If we combine things that really exist, well and good, but what imagination tends to do
is run wild and invent unreal combinations.
So the empiricists would give the example of pegasus and they would say we've all seen
horses, we've all seen creatures with wings, so our imagination can invent a winged horse.
With its commitment to objectivity, empiricism was deeply suspicious of imagination and of
wit.
And even metaphor, the royal society actually mounted a campaign to get metaphors eliminated
from the English language, or at least when it's used for serious purposes, you could
keep them in poetry, but only for recreational use.
Since I mentioned insanity as an instance of imagination out of control in this theory,
it's interesting to hear what Locke has to say about that.
Mad men do not appear to me to have lost the faculty of reasoning, but having joined together
some ideas very wrongly, they mistake them for truths.
They are, as men do, that argue rightly from wrong principles.
For by the violence of their imaginations, having taken their fancies for realities,
they make a right deduction from them.
So everything that happens in our minds is thus reduced to correct or incorrect management
of the bits of data, just as there's no unconscious hidden from rational view.
There's no possibility of anxieties or traumatic reactions that could cause mental disturbance,
mental illness.
In this theory, either a person is 100% sane, meaning they add up all the bits correctly,
or else they're making mistakes in their addition and therefore they're crazy.
So putting it another way, if insanity is a simple matter of misarranging the ideas,
then there must be a normative sanity from which only a few unlucky individuals fall
short.
Not what most people today would believe, that everyone experiences disturbances and
varying degrees, even the most harmonious personalities can repeat behaviors because
of unconscious causes they're not aware of.
To illustrate the shortcomings of empiricist psychology, for someone who did indeed feel
painful contradictions, I'd like to read you a passage from a fable by Samuel Johnson.
A person I just quoted, fable is called Rassilis, which was published in 1759, almost 70 years
after Locke's essay came out, and still taking Locke's system for granted as the correct
picture of how the mind works.
Now Johnson, as we know from the biography by his friend James Boswell and other sources,
was a deeply troubled person.
He was tortured by feelings of unworthiness, and also, he was deeply religious by fears
of damnation.
Today we might diagnose his trouble as neurosis, or more recently, you could add obsessive
compulsive disorder, which he unquestionably suffered from.
Johnson had to make do with that Lockean picture of a mind that's adding up the data incorrectly.
At one point in Rassilis, he sets his fable in Ethiopia and Egypt, he tells the story
of an astronomer who falls under the delusion that his thoughts control world weather.
So he's in agonies of anxiety that he might bring a ruinous drought to one region or floods
to another.
Eventually, he gets cured, but entirely through the friendship of people who make him forget
his obsessions by just recovering healthy sociability, and that's very much the standard
empiricist solution to any kind of mental or emotional disturbance.
Now, this is what Johnson's mouthpiece in the fable, a philosopher he calls Imlak, has
to say about the astronomer, and it's really a self-portrait of Johnson himself.
Disorders of intellect happen much more often than superficial observers will easily believe.
Perhaps if we speak with rigorous exactness, no human mind is in its right state.
There is no man whose imagination does not sometimes predominate over his reason, who
can regulate his attention wholly by his will, and whose ideas will come and go at his command.
From his own experience, Johnson is willing to contradict the Lockean notion of normative
sanity.
He says no mind is ever totally in its right state.
But instead of concluding that we need a more adequate concept of sanity, what Johnson concludes
is we're all to some extent damaged and defective.
And of course he's proposing an impossibly rigorous idea of what our right state should
be.
Never for one minute should we allow imagination to overpower reason.
We should never have an idea that our willpower didn't deliberately choose.
Since everybody has daydreams or thoughts that aren't wanted sometimes, it follows
that everybody must be at least a little bit crazy.
Johnson has them a lot, so he's scared that he's pretty nearly insane.
He goes on in that passage to talk about fancy in a way that makes it a synonym for imagination.
The modern equivalent is the word fantasy.
We'll say somebody fantasizes too much losing a fantasy world.
Here's Johnson again.
No man will be found in whose mind airy notions do not sometimes tyrannize and force him to
hope or fear beyond the limits of sober probability.
All power of fancy over reason is a degree of insanity.
The mind dances from scene to scene, unites all pleasures and all combinations, and riots
and delights which nature and fortune cannot bestow.
In Johnson's heartfelt words we see very vividly some of the issues that empiricism
dealt with by pretending they didn't exist.
But to highlight these, as I'm doing now, is to use a lot of historical hindsight.
In its own time, empiricism was felt to be tremendously optimistic and empowering.
In the next lecture, we'll look at a great thinker, David Hume, a much more original
philosopher than Locke, who worked out a way of understanding the self in social contexts
that was meant to provide answers to these questions that I've been raising.
