Lecture 7 British Empiricism and the Self Part 2
In this lecture, we'll explore further the implications of empiricist philosophy as they
were pushed forward by the great Scottish thinker David Hume, who used a radical skepticism
to undermine the claims of reason.
He argued we have no way at all of understanding the self, and he followed that up with a highly
optimistic account of how nature has fitted us for healthy social interaction.
There's much that's deeply interesting in what Hume has to say, but also as with Locke,
much that he leaves out or can't deal with, and as an example of that, we'll look at
his treatment toward the end of religion, which had been so central to the understanding
of the self in an earlier age.
And finally, at the end of this lecture, we'll look at an account of the self by Alexander
Pope, a poet who gives us an interesting perspective on empiricist psychology and its limitations
for self-understanding.
As a young man, Hume studied law at the University of Edinburgh, but he had ambitions as a writer,
and he moved to France to learn the language and immerse himself in private study.
In 1739, when he was still only 28, he published what is still regarded as one of the central
texts of modern philosophy.
It was called a treatise of human nature, and it was divided into three parts.
The first was called of the understanding, that was Locke's subject too, of course.
The second part was called of the passions, and attempted to give a comprehensive account
of human behavior.
The final part was of morals, which meant really rules by which social life operates.
The book sold very few copies and wasn't immediately influential, but Hume persisted.
He rewrote his argument in more essayistic forms to reach a larger audience, and he also
published a multi-volume History of England that remains standard for many years.
On the last lecture, we observed that empiricist psychology, as Locke presented it, split the
self into the part that acts and the part that observes.
It also limited the self to whatever can be known through conscious memory, and although
it held that all knowledge comes from the senses, it had no way of explaining how mind
and body interact.
Hume saw very clearly that these and other dilemmas were a real challenge for the new
philosophy, and the move he made was to push them all the way.
He was willing to flatly declare we know absolutely nothing about what the self is, and there's
no way we ever could know.
So here's the fundamental premise in Hume's thinking.
Our self, independent of the perception of every other object, is in reality nothing,
for which reason we must turn our view to external objects.
What Hume is doing is accepting at face value the empiricist claim that all we know is those
bits of sense data from outside, and what we have inside our heads is a memory bank of
those data bits and some kind of mechanism for assembling and analyzing them.
So his point is we're formed in such a way as to have to look outward at the real objects
that generate those data, and he calls them impressions in a very literal sense.
Samuel Johnson in 1755 published a dictionary of the English language, which really defines
the usage of that moment, and Johnson defines the word impression like this.
One, the act of pressing one body upon another.
Two, mark made by pressure, a stamp.
Three, image fixed in the mind.
So as Johnson defines it, even a mental impression keeps its direct connection with something
that physically presses in from outside.
But if we try to inspect our own minds, it's like looking at the back of a mirror from
the front.
We're continually aware of the stream of impressions, and we've got to be content with that.
I want to read you now from Hume's most important statement about what happens if we do try
to know the self through introspection.
It's in Book One of the Treatise of Human Nature.
For my part, he says, when I enter most intimately into what I call myself, I always stumble
on some particular perception or other, heat, cold, love, hatred, pain, or pleasure.
I can never catch myself at any time without a perception, and I can never observe anything
but the perception.
While Hume says maybe there's some people who have a more complete picture of their
inner selves, but he's sure he doesn't.
And as far as he can tell, this is what human beings amount to, a famous sentence.
They are nothing but a bundle or collection of different perceptions, which succeed each
other with an inconceivable rapidity and are in a perpetual flux and movement.
You see the power of this argument, Hume is telling us to stop tormenting ourselves with
a hopeless effort to see what can't be seen.
As long as we look outward, we're comfortably in touch with that stream of perceptions, just
like any other animal would be.
But because we also have the power of rational thought, and because we can use language,
we fool ourselves into believing we have some disembodied entity inside that we call the
self, and then we tie ourselves into knots to make sense of this abstraction that we
invented.
Hume is fully prepared to say the self is a fiction.
He does use that word.
It's a story we make up, and we have no way of knowing how true it is.
So this is how he ends the discussion.
The mind is a kind of theater where several perceptions successively make their appearance.
They pass, repass, glide away, and mingle in an infinite variety of situations.
That sounds like the Lockean interior spectator, doesn't it, watching the movie screen of his
on-sense impressions, but no sooner does Hume give us that metaphor than he turns around
and reminds us it's only a metaphor.
The comparison of the theater must not mislead us.
It's the successive perceptions only that constitute the mind, nor have we the most
distant notion of the place where these scenes are represented or the materials of which
it is composed.
Now what does Hume have to gain by debunking traditional assumptions about the self?
Well, for one thing, he has rendered irrelevant all the traditional teachings that urged people
to meditate and look inward and concern themselves with the state of their souls.
It's a very relevant biographical fact that Hume was brought up by strict Calvinist parents,
the tradition of Scottish Presbyterianism, and when he was in his teens he had an alarming
nervous breakdown that apparently centered on religious anxieties.
The philosophy he later developed pretty much allows him to dismiss religion as irrelevant,
and that's a theme we'll return to a bit later.
But we need to recognize how threatening his philosophy was for many people who read
his book.
They saw his skepticism as dangerously corrosive, it might leave life with no meaning at all.
Samuel Johnson made a famous remark in conversation, Boswell wrote it down,
Hume and other skeptical innovators are vain men and will gratify themselves at any expense.
Truth will not afford sufficient food for their vanity, so they've bestowed but taken
themselves to error.
Truth, sir, is a cow that will yield such men no more milk, and so they are gone to milk
the bull.
While Hume was a thinker in the Enlightenment tradition, he formed his intellectual values
in France, and Scottish intellectuals, by the way, were much more sympathetic to the
Enlightenment than English ones like Johnson.
Johnson's criticism, implying that we know what truth is and that Hume must be just showing
off when he invents skeptical paradoxes, Johnson's criticism misses the real point
of Hume's analysis.
What Hume wants to do is use reason against itself to challenge the whole basis of understanding
life.
Instead of trying to explain our inner selves and then trying to relate those to other people,
we should drop the whole idea of explaining our inner selves and realize nature intends
us to look outward.
If you introspect too much, Hume says, you drive yourself to despair.
It does seem that skepticism has no limit.
You no longer know what to believe.
But he thinks the answer should be obvious.
Don't introspect.
He didn't actually say, in that sentence I read, we are nothing but a bundle of impressions
and constant flux.
What he said was, if you try to look within, you won't see anything there except a bundle
of impressions.
So now, listen to the way Hume cures himself of skeptical despair.
Where am I or what?
From what causes do I derive my existence and to what condition shall I return?
I'm confounded with these questions and begin to fancy myself in the most deplorable condition
imaginable environment with the deepest darkness.
Most fortunately it happens that since reason is incapable of dispelling these clouds, nature
herself suffices to that purpose and cures me of this philosophical melancholy and delirium.
I dine.
I play a game of backgammon with my friends.
I converse.
And after three or four hours' amusement I would return to these speculations.
They appear so cold and strained and ridiculous that I can't find in my heart to enter into
them any farther.
Here then I find myself absolutely and necessarily determined to live and talk and act like other
people in the common affairs of life.
In this very rich statement there are many points of interest to notice.
First of all, we see Hume rejecting the ultimate questions that earlier philosophers saw as
the only important ones.
He rejects them because he thinks they're unanswerable but also he is trying to answer
them makes us miserable.
At another point in the treatise he clearly has Pascal in mind when he says, Those who
take pleasure in declaiming against human nature have observed that man is altogether
insufficient to support himself and when you loosen all the holds which he has of external
objects he drops down into the deepest melancholy and despair.
That's exactly what Pascal says but for Pascal the fact that we're unhappy when cut off from
external objects only proves how sinful and weak we are.
For Hume what it proves is external objects are what we should be concerned with.
It's only when we introspect that as Hume says we fancy ourselves in frightening darkness.
Notice that word fancy again which for empiricism goes along with imagination as something to
avoid letting your imagination go, scaring yourself by fantasizing and of all the external
objects we ought to connect with the most important is other people.
We're social beings.
We thrive in company.
After a game of backgammon all those philosophical doubts seem like a ridiculous waste of time.
Hume says I converse and am merry with my friends.
One of his critics thought he was scoring a clever point by complaining that according
to Hume a bundle of perceptions can eat, drink and be merry.
Well that's what he does say.
It works.
It makes us happy.
We don't know why it makes us happy.
Any more than Newtonian physics has to tell us why gravity works and in fact Hume expressly
said he hoped his philosophy would do for the human mind what Newton had done for physics.
So what does ensure that we know how to live our lives?
The answer is nature.
Did you notice the way Hume personified nature in that passage I just read?
Nature herself suffices he says to Curus of Armel and Collie.
Of course he doesn't really believe nature is some kind of goddess.
What he's driving at is that we're naturally adapted to our lives.
In modern terms we would say we've been evolved as social animals.
We cooperate as well as compete.
For the Enlightenment in general nature becomes what a modern philosopher would call a god
term.
That is it replaces the traditional god as the ultimate source of meaning and value.
And that's a theme we'll return to repeatedly in later lectures but we'll also see that
nature would mean very different things to different people.
This new emphasis on nature as the guide goes along with a total reversal in the way life
should be lived.
The ancients said man is the rational animal.
They didn't mean he acts rationally all the time.
Of course not but the reason defines man at his best.
So ancient psychology which was adapted by Christian theology placed reason at the top
and tried to make sure the passions never got out of control.
But if nature can be trusted to guide us well if following our instincts the way other creatures
do makes more sense than trying to figure everything out through reasoning then suddenly
the passions belong on top.
It's when we act instinctively that we're healthiest and happiest.
And this is why Hume actually says he knew he was being extremely provocative he says
reason is and ought to be the slaves of the passions.
You can see why Johnson thought Hume was trying to milk the bull.
For Johnson reason is our only defense against a chaos of disturbing feelings and painful
compulsions.
In addition putting the passions on top of course flouts the moral doctrine of traditional
religion.
Here's still another important point.
Hume like many Enlightenment thinkers was a determinist that is he believed everything
we do is the necessary consequence of preceding causes.
Why would he find determinism attractive?
Why wouldn't it make him feel helpless and unfree?
I have two answers for this.
One is a philosophical one which is how Hume himself saw it as did another determinist
we'll be studying later on, Denis Diderot.
The other answer is more conjectural but I've come to actually really believe this.
Certain temperaments, certain personality types are drawn to determinism.
Other personality types have an urgent need to believe in free will.
But going back to Hume's philosophical explanation it goes like this.
If reason is the slave of the passions well we have to remember passions were thought
of as passive.
There were reactions to stimuli that's why falling in love was threatening you were
out of control.
There's a throw away line in Locke's essay concerning human understanding that brings
out this passiveness.
Locke is giving an example along the way from playing billiards and he says when the ball
obeys the motion of the billiards stick it's not any action of the ball but bare passion.
Well a passionate billiard ball is a very odd idea today but that's what passion meant
involuntary reaction to external stimulus.
And what Hume's advancing is what we would call a behaviorist account of human life.
He thinks we're programmed by nature to obey our instincts and that our instinctual emotions
are triggered by outside stimuli and so our mental lives are just as much part of the
causality of nature as anything else, the weather and the tides or anything else that
science studies which is why he hoped to be the Newton of psychology.
Of course he knows we feel like we have free will but according to a determinist like Hume
that's neither here nor there.
We feel like we have an inner self too but he regards that as a delusion.
Hobbes back in the 17th century was a determinist of this kind.
Hobbes got into a debate with a bishop who was defending free will.
The bishop demanded don't you have to admit you're free to do something when you want
to.
I could choose to scratch my finger or not scratch my finger.
Hobbes replied that's missing the point.
Of course I'm free to do what I want but I'm not free to want what I want and that's
the heart of determinism.
Well this is where my observation about happy well adjusted personalities come in.
Someone like Johnson knew all too well he was driven by forces he couldn't understand
and certainly couldn't keep under control.
The last thing Johnson wanted to hear was he was helpless.
For him the passions were a constant threat he was always on the alert to combat them.
His biographer Boswell who knew him extremely well has a wonderful analogy for what it felt
like to be Johnson.
This is in the life of Johnson written long afterwards in the 1790s.
His mind Boswell says resembled the vast amphitheater the Colosseum at Rome.
In the center stood his judgment which like a mighty gladiator combated those apprehensions
that like the wild beasts of the arena were all around in cells ready to be let out upon him.
After a conflict he drove them back into their dens but not killing them they were still assailing him.
Hume on the other hand felt comfortable with himself.
He was a cheerful gregarious person whom everybody liked.
He was good at relaxed conversation whereas Johnson though he was brilliantly witty was
a bully in conversation he said himself he talked for victory.
For Johnson life was a combat against other people and against his own emotions.
For Hume life was a feast of sociability he didn't mind at all thinking he was simply
doing what nature made him do.
At one point Hume became a diplomat in Paris and he was very much loved there favorite
guest at the various salons their nickname for him was Le Bon David the good David and
after one of these social occasions it was a mask ball where you were supposed to not know
who the people were behind the masks that were talking about you.
He wrote to a friend of his back in Scotland it's difficult to imagine the caresses and
civilities which poured on me from all sides I could observe the ladies were the most liberal
on this occasion but what gave me chief pleasure was to find the eulogies turned on my personal
character my naivete and simplicity of manners the candor and mildness of my disposition it's
important to notice the implications of that word character if each of us enters the world at
tabula rasa we're totally characterless at that point as we grow older and acquire experience
we develop a way of being that gets more and more definite more in focus and the goal is to build
up a character for oneself that's stable and coherent and attractive to other people
and for someone who did in fact feel stable and coherent this empiricist model of self-fashioning
could work very well indeed as it did for Hume and later in the course we'll look at a superbly
successful example of it Benjamin Franklin who very deliberately set out to shape and construct
his character in this way the other kind of temperament wasn't so happy with this idea of character
that kind of person felt tension from contradictory impulses and also felt unable
or even unwilling to suppress various aspects of the self as the character model expected you to
do so what people like that needed was a new concept that didn't exist yet what they needed is what
we call today personality and later on we'll have a lot to say about new ways of understanding
personality particularly in the diary of Boswell and then in the autobiography of Rousseau it was
people like that for whom the enlightenment failed quite badly to make sense of their lives
they were people who couldn't accept the advice to stop introspecting and turn their attention to
outward things another way of assessing what Hume is doing as i mentioned at the beginning
is to think about his treatment of religion after his death a short book of his was published
posthumously not in his lifetime because it was so controversial it was called dialogues concerning
natural religion now natural religion as we'll see again and again is one of the central enlightenment
themes if the enlightenment thinkers wanted to get rid of the god of the bible with his forbidden
fruit and ten commandments and his crucifixion to save us from our sins if nature was now their god
term and if the only knowledge we have is what comes in through the senses then any deity they
were willing to recognize had to be deducible from the phenomena of nature not spiritual inspiration
certainly not reading the bible but most of them did accept was that the universe seems to be too
well organized to have come about at random so it must have had a creator that's a deity of some kind
and the very watered down religious position they took was called deism or alternatively
natural religion since it was religion deduced from nature what it did not postulate was a god who
cared about human beings or wanted them to worship him or rewarded and punished them for their actions
the deist god was simply a great watchmaker who constructed the machine of the universe
and then set it going and for this reason deism was constantly under attack by orthodox preachers
now hume sets up his dialogues concerning natural religion as a debate between three
characters and each of them has a strong emotional stake in his position because hume knew very well
people's beliefs aren't just a result of rational argument they believe what they need to believe
and the guy in the middle of this debate is a believer in natural religion
so he is sure that everything we need to know about god can be inferred from the phenomena of
nature arguing against him or two characters who have opposite views which nevertheless make them
allies and since we know extremes need one of them is an orthodox believer who says that due to
original sin the universe is actually a complete mess just look at it we get killed by earthquakes
we die of cancer we get murdered by criminals that's not a problem for orthodox belief because
we know adam and eve made the big original mistake and we're all paying the price the guy at the other
extreme is a total skeptic who clearly speaks for human self and as a consistent skeptic he can't
claim he knows anything for certain but it sure looks to him like the universe is a mess but he
doesn't share the orthodox guy's belief in biblical revelation so the skeptic's conclusion is
nature is fundamentally amoral of course there's a lot of pain and suffering in the world but not
because it serves some kind of ultimate purpose it's just the wastefulness of nature so hume's
skeptic in these dialogues has fun imagining the kind of god we should really think of if we're
honestly describing what we see in nature maybe the universe was made by an apprentice god who
didn't know how to do it yet or maybe a committee of gods who couldn't agree on a plan that made
any sense well hume's point is nature generates living things all right you can call nature she
but she's not a goddess who cares about them and so his skeptic in the dialogue concludes very
chillingly look around this universe what an immense profusion of beings but inspect them a
little more narrowly how hostile and destructive to each other how insufficient all of them for their
own happiness the whole presents nothing but the idea of a blind nature impregnated by a great
visifying principle pouring from her lap without discernment or parental care her maimed and abortive
children so underlying this is the fundamental enlightenment idea it's up to us to make ourselves
nature has given us instincts we do better if we trust them instead of trying to suppress them
but nature doesn't love us nature doesn't even know we exist and there's a whole lot of waste
and damage in the world but instead of trying to drop out of the world the way pascal recommended
the enlightenment solution is make the best of it improve whatever we can accept what we can't
what hume is unable to do however is to understand the feelings that religious doctrine was meant
to explain and resolve in his history of england when he discusses the puritans he tries to show
they were unbalanced fanatics in the grip of a dangerous delusion and the deep psychological
needs that produced works like bunions grace abounding and pilgrim's progress those are
absolutely invisible to hume well there's a view of a major thinker addressing the problems of
this self and in his own view solving them but by ruling out much that used to be considered
essential i'll conclude this lecture by glancing at a much less theoretical writer the poet
alexander pope who tried to use empiricist concepts to understand his own inner conflicts
that he found really they weren't much help reason to do this is certainly not to act superior to a
great intellect like hume that would be presumptuous it's to highlight the problems that really did
need to be addressed and that the writers will go on to study will be grappling with
pope was the most important english poet of the entire 18th century he's best known today for his
satires on current personalities but he also thought of himself as a man of ideas he was trying
hard to explain human motivation in general terms as in his poem an essay on man but i think his
truest insight as a poet was that people are amazingly complicated and mysterious so his desire
to philosophize is constantly undercut by the recognition that the tools are really lacking
to explain the puzzles of human behavior i want to read you some lines from a poem
called of the knowledge and characters of man in a group called the moral epistles
and this is what he says a little bit after the poem begins
our depths who fathoms or our shallows finds quick whirls and shifting eddies of our minds
on human actions reason though you can it may be reason but it is not man
pope invariably used the form known as the heroic couplet two five beat lines locked together by a
rhyme it's a characteristic 18th century maneuver life may be confusing we can use language to shape
and structure the way we see it so the couplet for pope is a kind of packaging even when he's
talking about what's unintelligible he does so in the most intelligible language what he's saying
here is our minds are like eddies in a stream constantly changing this that flux humus writing
about it almost exactly the same time and pope goes on often the passions wide rotation tossed
our spring of action to ourselves is lost by spring by the way he means main spring the force
that makes our individual mechanism tick tired not determined to the last we yield and what comes
then is master of the field as the last image of that troubled heap when sense subsides and fancy
sports in sleep though past the recollection of the thought becomes the stuff of which our dream is
wrought something is dim to our internal view is thus perhaps the cause of most we do it's all
there the standard empiricist picture when we go to sleep real sense impressions stop coming in from
outside at that point our fancy takes over recycling in dreams the images we receive during the day
and for pope this becomes a metaphor for the unknowableness of our inner life the whirlpools
are too turbulent we can never make sense of what's going on down there for hume the bone David
content to play backgammon and lap up compliments at the mast wall there's nothing to worry about
but pope was a person who felt seriously threatened by conflicting feelings
and this passage helps us to get a sense of what many people needed and that empiricism just wasn't
interested in providing
