As we saw in the last two lectures, empiricism was resolutely outward directed.
It developed a theory of the self that was intended to discourage introspection and
get people to focus on the world around them.
It was an optimistic way of thinking, intended to make people feel comfortable with themselves
and empowered to improve their lives.
But I've also begun to describe some of the ways that this theory of the self might
seem limited and inadequate, and our main concern for the rest of this course will be
the attempts to deepen it or even replace it.
Before we go there, we do need to take account, though, of the more militant side of the
Enlightenment program, that is, the reformist effort that worked to expose abuses and injustice.
It achieved a great many positive results.
It marshalled public opinion in a way that had never been done before, and it still seems
modern today.
But when abuses and injustice seem too well entrenched to change, it could also lead to
deep pessimism.
To give you an impression of this public side of the Enlightenment, but I'll talk in this
lecture about Voltaire's Candide, the greatest of his short satiric fables.
It's a fable, not a novel.
It doesn't pretend to have realistic characters and events.
When you read Candide, you might well ask, what is it doing in this course?
There's nothing in here about the self at all.
Well, that's exactly my point.
Before we go on to writers for whom the problems of the self are indeed central, it's a good
idea to look at the great Enlightenment writer who treats these problems as beside the point.
And I'll concentrate on two aspects of that brilliant work.
One is its bitter vision of the ways the human race is accustomed to torment itself, and
the other is its dismissal of psychology, or an inner self, as any kind of solution to
our problems.
Beyond that, it implies that philosophy, more generally, is a mere game of words that isn't
much help in dealing with the real issues of life.
Voltaire was the most famous writer of the 18th century.
He was a generation older than Diderot and Rousseau, whom we'll meet at the center of
the course.
He gave himself his own name.
Voltaire is a pen name.
He was christened Francois-Marie R.O.A., but he hated his family and broke with them.
He started out as a playwright and poet.
He became a historian.
And as the Enlightenment developed, he established himself as its leading propagandist and popularizer.
He became very much a hero to younger writers.
He was almost unbelievably prolific.
He produced an endless stream of little pamphlets of controversy that were always enlivened
by wit, brisk and punchy.
He wrote a voluminous correspondence with people all over Europe.
He was also admirably committed to involvement in real causes, such as the khalas affair.
A man was falsely accused of murder because of religious prejudice, and Voltaire intervened
and made the case notorious.
He thought of himself as a philosopher, but he wasn't one really, not in the sense that
Descartes or Hume were.
Voltaire was what we would today call a public intellectual.
That's really what the French word philissof meant in the 18th century.
He was more of a brilliant stylist than an original thinker.
A modern writer says his mind was a chaos of clear ideas.
He published Khandid in 1759 when he was in his mid-60s.
He thought of it as a minor piece, but it turned out to be his most lasting work, maybe
his one undoubted classic.
Like most of his writings, it was published anonymously, attributed to an imaginary Dr.
Ralph.
Everyone immediately knew who really wrote it.
And it was immediately banned for its attack on Orthodox religion.
Copies of it were seized in Catholic Paris and Calvinist Geneva, but it remained a clandestine
bestseller.
It was reprinted 17 times in the first year alone.
Why did the Enlightenment criticize religion?
What they were mainly targeting was institutional religion, which pervaded every aspect of society
and especially education.
They saw it as a form of thought control.
Voltaire himself got a great education in Jesuit schools, and all his life he retained
the sharpness and argument that the Jesuits taught him, but the Jesuits come in for withering
satire and Khandid.
Voltaire had a favorite slogan that he often repeated, a cause l'enfam, crush the infamous
thing by which he met the Catholic Church.
Well, just as with Hume, there's no interest in religion as a basis for inner experience,
or even, you could say, with inner experience at all.
The Enlightenment view would be that dwelling on psychic conflicts is a cop-out from the
things we should really be worrying about.
Let's start with one of the main concerns of Khandid, the historical situation of the
time, that is the present moment when it was published.
It's important to realize most of the other works we'll be reading are ahistorical, or
anyway they're not much interested in history.
As soon as we begin Khandid, we find its naive hero making improper advances to Cunigand,
the daughter of the baron on whose estate he lives in Westphalia in Germany, so he gets
kicked out of the estate, literally with powerful kicks on his rear end, and he finds himself
in the midst of a vicious war between two nations called the Bulgars and the Abars,
who are thinly disguised versions of the Prussians and the French.
Voltaire had a personal grudge against the King Frederick of Prussia, you like to be
known as Frederick the Great.
Frederick had invited Voltaire to his court as a resident philosopher, and for a while
Voltaire shared the dream of enlightened despotism.
Most Enlightenment thinkers actually were very suspicious of democracy, of course they
were in a population whose huge majority was illiterate, and they put their hopes in philosopher
kings who might be influenced to bring about reforms.
Well anyway Voltaire and Frederick quarreled, but it wasn't just personal, it was a century
of wars, and the war in Khandid was the Seven Years War.
It began three years earlier in 1756.
Well the Seven Years War, we do remember, it was the first true world war, it was fought
over empire, in our provincial way we call it the French and Indian War, fought over
a few acres of snow in Canada, as Voltaire says contemptuously.
It turned out to be the start of the decline of French power, hard for the French to accept
even to this day, and the beginning of the growth of what would become Germany.
But until then it was just a fragmented bunch of little states.
Voltaire hated the Prussians, that doesn't mean he wanted France to rule supreme.
The ideal of the philosophers, not philosophers, it was the opposite of nationalism, they thought
of themselves as citizens of the world.
Britain meanwhile, that tiny island on the map, was establishing itself as the center
of the dominant worldwide empire on which the sun never set, and it was built explicitly
on exploitation and slavery, and Spain and Portugal at that time were still hanging on
grimly to their old spoils.
Well in Candide, we get the spectacle of carnage not just among soldiers, but atrocities among
civilian populations, and we don't hear anything about war aims justified or not.
On either side, it's just mindless slaughter, followed by pious prayers of thanksgiving.
And we soon get accustomed to Voltaire's magnificently dead pan irony.
When Candide enters a village full of dying civilians, it's just been burned to the ground,
he says, in full accordance with the rules of international law.
This also references to very specific events, like a shameful show trial that the English
put on, they needed a scapegoat after a naval defeat, and they did actually execute one
of their admirals for alleged dereliction of duty, which seems to have been totally unjust,
or as Voltaire put it with his gift for the memorable phrase, he said, in that country,
it's good from time to time to kill an admiral pour encourager les autres, to encourage the
others.
Well, some years before, Voltaire had published a major historical work, which he called an
essay on the manners and spirit of nations.
It was a huge body of research, but its conclusion is incredibly depressing.
He says, almost the whole of history is a sum total of useless atrocities.
So, there's the historical and political emphasis of Candide, which has no patience at all with
self-absorbed introspection.
In addition, there's a powerful philosophical theme, or rather an anti-philosophical theme.
In the last lecture, I talked about the deist belief that the world of nature supplied sufficient
evidence to believe in a good God.
Most secular philosophers were deists.
They did believe in this remote, impersonal God of natural religion, and they needed to
believe that he was a kind and a good God.
But how then would you explain disasters and disease?
Whatever is painful and horrible can't be ascribed any more to disobedience and original
sin.
So, here's the argument they came up with.
Just as a picture needs to have shade in it as well as light, so the great clockmaker,
as they thought of him, arranged that the parts of the universe would interact with
maximum efficiency.
But of course, in any complex system, some parts will be favored at the expense of others.
Just as human beings take advantage of other creatures, we eat animals and so on, so surely
human suffering is part of some larger harmony, even if we can't understand why it's important
for the whole universe that we should get cancer or die in an earthquake.
The German philosopher Leibniz, who was no fool, a brilliant writer, published a carefully
worked out version of this theory of optimism, as it was called, meaning by optimism not
everything is the way I wish it was, but everything is ultimately for the best.
Or as Pope summarized it in a famous line, one truth is clear, whatever is, is right.
Now this belief implies not only that the universe shows structure and organization,
but also that it's morally admirable.
This deist God may not have any personal relationship with human beings, but he can be trusted to
be benevolent.
Now it happened that in 1755, a disaster occurred relatively close to home in Portugal in Lisbon.
It was a catastrophic earthquake that killed tens of thousands of people.
Voltaire had been quite well disposed of the theory of optimism, and he was so shocked
by the magnitude of that disaster that he started to rethink his position.
In fact, he sat down and wrote a poem called On the Earthquake in Lisbon, and it describes
groaning people dying under heaps of rubble and asked what could they have possibly done
to deserve this, and then he rises to a vision of cosmic emptiness.
Where am I?
What am I?
Where am I going?
And from whence was I brought?
Voltaire was tormented on this heap of mud, whom death swallows up, with whom fate sports.
And Voltaire ended that poem with a very modest assertion of faith, one day all will be well,
that is our hope.
And he thought better of that, and he changed the line so it read, one day all will be well,
what a frail hope.
Well, what Voltaire certainly did not want to do was go back to the religious explanation
that he was brought up in and that was still widely asserted, God must be punishing the
wicked people of Lisbon for being exceptionally sinful.
And in Candide, right after escaping from the Bulgar war, Candide visits Lisbon, and
the church is holding an autodafé, that is an act of faith in which some heretics have
been rounded up and are going to be publicly burned to death.
In accordance, as Voltaire puts it with this reasoning, the University of Coimbra decided
that the spectacle of burning some people over a low fire is an infallible secret for
preventing earthquakes.
But the doctrine of live nets, as Voltaire saw it, is no better.
As we gather at the very beginning of Candide, when he listens to a disquisition by his tutor
Panglas, which means all tongue, it is demonstrable, Panglas would say, that things could not be
otherwise.
For everything being made for a certain end, everything is necessarily for the best end.
Notice how noses were made to wear spectacles, and therefore we have spectacles.
Legs were obviously formed to wear trousers, and we have trousers.
Well, Panglas claims to be finding the sufficient reason why everything has to be exactly as
it is.
But as Voltaire's reductio ad absurdum brings out, the so-called philosophy of optimism
is very far from cheering.
Somebody once said what it amounts to is, this is the best of all possible worlds, and
everything in it is a necessary evil.
Or as Candide, in fact, himself says in Lisbon, if this is the best of all possible worlds,
what are the other ones like?
Later on in the book, Panglas comes down with syphilis, incurable, of course, in those days.
And he traces it back from carrier to carrier, including a monk and a Jesuit priest, back
to Columbus's crew, bringing it back as they then believed it happened from the New World.
So the virus, as we would call it today, doesn't care who it infects, it's just using human
beings as its vehicles.
But as always, Panglas has a justification.
It was a necessary consequence of discovering the New World, because if we didn't have
this disease that destroys the very power of procreation, we wouldn't have chocolate.
Well, you could still try to find a religious solution that would be different from the
usual Christian one.
Many 18th century writers, including both you, Manvoltaire, quoted a telling critique
by an ancient philosopher Epicurus, gave his name to Epicureanism.
Epicurus says, look, if God is able to remove evil from the world, but somehow he doesn't
want to, then why isn't God evil himself?
There was an ancient philosophy, widespread in the ancient world, but suppressed long
ago by Christianity as a heresy, and it was called Manichaeism, and in that view, the
universe is divided between two equal forces, one good and one evil.
And it's not God's fault.
He does want to get rid of evil, but he's not strong enough to.
Of course, then he's not omnipotent, and that's why Christianity had to stamp out Manichaeism.
Well, in Candide, one of the characters claims to actually be a Manichae.
He believes in Manichaeism.
His name is Martin, or Martin.
Voltaire clearly believes that's no answer either, though.
That's just another philosophical system.
Martin is just as imprisoned in Manichaeism as Panglossism and his Leibniz belief, because
Martin can't recognize goodness even when it does exist.
From time to time, Candide encounters genuinely kind people, but Martin always thinks the
worst of everything.
So his philosophy is like Woody Allen's graduation speech that begins more than any time in
history.
Man faces a crossroads.
One path leads to despair and hopelessness.
The other leads to total extinction.
Well, here's the crux, then.
Just as Hume used reason against itself, Voltaire uses philosophy against itself.
His point is the problem of evil stops being a problem if you don't accept the religious
explanation in which it used to make sense.
Disease and cancer are horrible, but they're not moral issues that have to be justified,
which is what that philosophical optimism was trying to do, and which, in effect, was
a kind of watered-down religious belief in disguise.
So if you call bad things by neutral names, just suffering and pain, then that's just
how the world works.
It's not for the best.
Waste and damage are inseparable from the way things are.
Remember, Hume said that, too.
There isn't any moral reason.
But in the 18th century, most people just weren't ready to say there isn't any moral
explanation.
And in the French language, the word for evil is especially ambiguous, because the same
word, mal, can mean bad in a perfectly ordinary sense, or even just pain.
If you have a headache, you say, j'ai mal à la tête, which certainly doesn't mean
I have evil inside my head.
Well, thus far, as I've been describing the conceptual basis of Khandeid, you can see
it as a representative enlightenment work.
It rejects all attempts to explain the meaning of life, philosophical or religious, though
it's more suspicious of religion and philosophy, because at least philosophy doesn't respond
to earthquakes by burning people at the stake.
Now back to the question I started with.
What about the self in Khandeid?
Is there one?
Insofar as psychology is relevant here at all, it's pure behaviorism.
That is, the mechanistic view of modern science, in which everything we do is stimulated by
physical causes, which we may choose to dignify with metaphorical language about love and
fidelity and so on.
And here's a particularly brilliant paragraph from the beginning of the book, right after
Pangloss has expounded his theory about noses and spectacles.
One day when Cunigand was walking near the castle, she saw among the bushes Dr. Pangloss
giving a lesson in experimental physics to her mother's chambermaid, a very pretty and
docile little brunette.
Since Manzal Cunigand was much interested in science, she observed, breathlessly, the
repeated experiments of which she was witness.
She saw clearly the doctor's sufficient reason, the causes and effects.
She returned home agitated, thoughtful, and filled with a desire to be a scientist, imagining
that she could well be a sufficient reason for young Kandid, and he could be for her.
What happens next is pure behaviorism.
Their behavior is as completely predictable as a pair of hamsters in the laboratory.
She met Kandid as she returned to the castle, and she blushed.
Kandid blushed too.
She said, hello, in a choked voice, and Kandid answered without knowing what he was saying.
The next day after dinner, Cunigand let her handkerchief drop, and Kandid picked it up.
She innocently took his hand, and the young man innocently kissed the hand of the young
lady with exceptional vivacity, sensibility, and grace.
Their mouths met, their knees trembled, their hands wandered.
So much for the mind-body problem.
Their hands and mouths act automatically.
They have no inner life.
They don't need one, any more than the hamsters do.
This is true science and sufficient reason.
Cunigand, by the way, was a real German name, but in French it sounds kind of obscene.
So all the dilemmas of love and passion and jealousy, everything we focused on with La
Roche Foucault and Madame de Lafayette, are reduced to the behaviorist ways in which the
human animal responds to stimuli.
And unfortunately, those ways include territorialism and aggression and a willingness to hurt
other people.
The naked ape, as some modern anthropologists have said, at one point in Kandid, the young
hero gets to South America, and he thinks he's saving a lady in distress by shooting
an ape that's pursuing her, only to find out it was her lover.
And in Kandid, just as in Swiss satire Gulliver's Travels, a few years earlier, apes and humans
are pretty much the same thing.
So this is not a novel about the mind, let alone the soul.
It's a fable about the body, which, as the story goes on, is increasingly vulnerable.
Rape, burned, amputated, disemboweled, it would be an appalling book to read if it were told
realistically, but it's not.
Everything is transformed by style.
The power of intelligence and ironic wit that turns suffering into humor, even though it
has to be black humor.
If you were to retell Kandid without the humor, without the wit, it would evaporate completely.
It's the power of farce to highlight things that would otherwise be upsetting and insulate
us from them by making them funny.
We can't avoid them, we can't explain them, but at least we can laugh at them.
There's a great American cartoonist said some years ago, it only hurts when I exist.
On the other hand, it looks like humor was right, I think Voltaire would agree.
We have been adapted by nature to go on living, no matter how grim the prospect might look.
And people manage to be actually proud of their suffering.
There's a wonderful exchange when Cuny Gond, after many adventures, is arguing with an
old woman about which of them has had it worse.
Alas, my good woman, she said, unless you've been raped by two Bulgars, been stabbed twice
in the stomach, had two of your castles demolished, seen two mothers and two fathers where their
throats cut, and had two of your lovers flogged in an autodaffé, I don't see how you can
possibly get the better of me.
Mam Zell replied the old woman, you do not know who I am by birth, and if I were to show
you my rear end, you wouldn't talk like that.
Well, it turns out the old woman is the daughter of a pope, needless to say, popes aren't supposed
to have daughters.
And some starving sailors once survived after a shipwreck by cutting off and eating one
of her buttocks.
Went in a different kind of book, would be a nightmare horror, but here it's like some
Monty Python routine, she's proud of it.
And a bit later in another deftly funny passage, this old woman ponders the way that human
beings really do cling to life.
She says, I grew old in poverty and disgrace with only half a rear end, but remembering
always I was the daughter of a pope, a hundred times I wanted to kill myself, but I went
on loving life.
This ridiculous weakness is perhaps one of our most fatal tendencies, for is there anything
stupider than to carry forever a burden one always wants to throw on the ground?
In countries where fate has taken me, I've seen a prodigious number of people who held
their existence in abhorrence, but I've only seen a dozen who voluntarily put an end to
their misery, three Negroes, four Englishmen, four Genevans, and a German professor named
Robek.
In fact, a certain Johann Robek wrote a book about suicide and then killed himself.
But for nearly everyone, the life force is the deepest instinct of all.
You see the same thing in Beckett's Waiting for Godot, two stripped down human beings
hanging around pointlessly in a meaningless universe, and they can't bring themselves
to quit.
And that's finally Voltaire's real point.
We don't have to know the answers, we don't have to know ourselves, we just need to
hang in there and do what we can.
Khandid is an extremely episodic book.
It has no plot, not even any structure, but there is one underlying pattern, and that
is three gardens.
At the beginning, there's the Baron's estate in Westphalia.
It's like a parodic garden of Eden on a very tiny scale.
We're told the castle is so magnificent it even has a door and some windows.
He gets expelled from that Eden because he gets his hands on forbidden knowledge, sexual
knowledge in this case, and the Baron, whose name is Thunder Ten Tronk, Voltaire despised
the German language, the Baron plays the part of a cartoon Jehovah.
He expels Khandid with thunder and lightning in the form of powerful kicks on the rear
end.
The very next minute, Khandid is entangled in the Seven Years War.
So it's like a fall from once upon a time that mythical Eden down into history, very
recent, current history, is that Winston Churchill once said, the Balkans produce more history
than they can consume, and that's exactly true of Europe in the 18th century, that supposed
age of reason.
They were exporting a lot of history to the rest of the world.
Eventually, Khandid gets to a second garden when he's in South America.
He stays for a while in a sort of Shangri-La Valley called El Dorado, meaning the golden.
They've got so much gold lying around they don't even bother to pick it up.
They live in a life of happy simplicity.
Well, so it's a dream of a world where gold, and after all its value is totally arbitrary,
where it would be meaningless, abundance is real for everyone, but the message in stories
about utopias, which comes from a Greek word meaning nowhere, the message is we wouldn't
be happy in a utopia, we're too restless.
It's only a temporary stopping place, it's a life without challenge.
Khandid gets bored there, so he loads up some sacks of gold onto a bunch of yamas and heads
back to Europe.
At the very end, we get a third garden.
Khandid and some fellow travelers settle down in Turkey in a kind of a commune.
They've escaped from politics, as far as possible they've escaped from history.
Their role model now is an old man they meet, who pays no attention whatever to rumors and
gossip from Constantinople, he just sends his garden produce there to be sold.
And this gives rise to the final words of the book.
Khandid has an exchange with Pangloss, and Pangloss of course is still saying everything
turns out for the best, because look, if Khandid hadn't been tortured by the Inquisition and
had all his other adventures, he wouldn't be here eating pistachio nuts.
And Khandid replies, that's well said, mais il faut cultiver notre jardin, we must cultivate
our garden.
It's not the Garden of Eden anymore, it's not El Dorado either, it's honest labor to
produce something useful, and that's the one thing everyone can make up their minds to
do.
Pangloss still wants to claim everything is meaningfully interconnected like a traditional
plot, but he's wrong.
Khandid now has sense enough to stop having hopes and expectations and stress work for
its own sake.
And as Pangloss reminds us, in fact it was required in the Garden of Eden, it says in
the book of Genesis, the Lord God took the man and put him in the garden to dress it
and to keep it.
Of course this new Turkish Eden is a very unglamorous one, but it's the only kind we
can get.
There's a very motley group of people now in this Volterian commune, it includes Martin,
the Manichean, he came along, and a cheerful half-breed that they found in the Americas,
and the Pope's daughter is still there.
One person they will not allow in the place, and that's Kunigan's brother, he's not only
a snobbish baron, but he's also become an intolerant Jesuit.
So there are two things there's no room for, the hereditary aristocracy and institutional
religion.
It's not a love story, although it pretends to be one, Khandid has spent the whole book
trying to get reunited with his beloved Kunigan, now that he has, she's turned out to be ugly
and bitchy and horrible, but she does have one saving grace, she's become an excellent
pastry cook.
So she has her contribution to the commune, and again you see true love isn't presented
as the solution to anything, the way it would be in so many novels with a psychological
approach.
We just end up with a simple lesson, we must cultivate our garden.
Each of us in his or her own way, Voltaire with his great gift, did it on a grand scale,
it's been well said Europe was Voltaire's garden.
So there's a glimpse of the public face of the Enlightenment, with its dismissal of
problems of psychology as just not very important, and I've tried to do justice to some of the
reasons why they would have felt that way.
In the next lecture we'll consider some works of biography that do try, still within the
confines of the empiricist system, to interpret psychological behavior in some actual human
lives.
