Lecture 10, Boswell, The London Journal, Part 1
With this lecture, we turn to a piece of writing that was never intended for publication, a
diary kept by James Boswell, a 22-year-old Scotsman living in London for a year in 1762
and 1763 as a sort of interlude before going on to law school.
Boswell's diary, known as his London Journal, gives us a remarkably deep and interesting
view of a real person trying to find himself and figure out what he should be.
To some extent, we'll be thinking about Boswell as a case because his own self-understanding
is generally simple and predictable, but he's wonderfully honest about the puzzling contradictions
he perceives in his feelings and actions, and the problems he raises are very important
symptoms.
They expose issues that the culture as a whole is going to have to acknowledge and try to
deal with.
A word first about the existence of these diaries of Boswell's.
He kept them faithfully all his life, and when he came to write his classic Life of Samuel
Johnson 30 years after the London Journal will be discussing here, he quarried his diaries
for material, but the diaries themselves disappeared because Boswell's descendants found them embarrassing.
And they were only rediscovered in the 1920s when boxes stuffed with them were located
in a castle in Ireland.
This particular diary, as it happens, wasn't among those.
It emerged from an equally forgotten attic in Scotland and was first opened in red in
1948.
It was acquired then by Yale University and printed in 1950 in a magnificently annotated
edition by Frederick Pottle, which is still in print.
This was nearly 200 years after Boswell wrote it out in his evenings in 18th century London.
One of the first things to say about the London Journal is this.
It shows there's no such thing as unmediated experience.
That is, experience that isn't colored and reshaped through mental preconceptions.
Everything Boswell describes is interpreted through the lenses of available models.
As we've already seen, the available models in the middle of the 18th century left a good
deal to be desired.
Often one can even say his life has lived according to literary categories.
Boswell likes to think of himself as a character in a play or a novel, but the available literary
models, just as much as the philosophical ones, tended to be static and old fashioned.
What we meet in Boswell as an intelligent person is not trying to theorize about anything,
but he's earnestly groping for new and more flexible ways to make sense of his life.
Even an autobiography, which unlike a novel is committed to veracity about real people
and real incidents, still it's a post facto reconstruction that can't help looking for
a coherent storyline.
Boswell's London Journal isn't an autobiography.
Its author is just setting out in the world.
The possibilities are still very wide open.
What it is is a kind of serial autobiography.
It's about the experience of becoming who you are.
Now Boswell was brought up, just as Hume had been a generation earlier, in a strictly Calvinist
Presbyterian Scottish household.
And near the start of this journal, he declares a conventional religious purpose of self-improvement,
but it quickly turns out to be in conflict with his own deepest impulses.
A Calvinist diary, and there were hundreds of them, was intended to search for signs
of election and salvation to find out what God is telling you in your life.
That's not Boswell's goal.
He's trying to find out who he is, not whether he's saved.
By the way, Boswell sent this particular journal in occasional packets back to a trusted friend
in Edinburgh, a man of his own age named John Johnston, not to be confused with Samuel
John's son, his eminent friend whom he meets during the course of the journal.
This is worth mentioning, because it gives him an incentive to narrate his experiences
interestingly, instead of just jotting down bits of stuff like most diarists would do.
In this lecture, I'm going to focus on two interrelated aspects of Boswell's experience,
and they'll both give real-life depth to concepts we've been thinking about previously.
The first is his strong commitment to emotions, or feeling, as they like to call it then,
as the proper guide to conduct.
The second is his struggle to live up to an ideal of sincerity, though today we would
say what he's really striving for is authenticity.
So we'll start with feeling.
I'd like to read two passages dated November 15th, the day Boswell eagerly leaves Edinburgh
and sets out for a year of pleasure, as he hopes, in London, far to the south.
Here's the first passage.
I had a long, serious conversation with my father and mother.
They were very kind to me.
I felt parental affection was very strong towards me, and I felt a warm, filial regard towards
them.
The scene of being a son, setting out from home for the wide world, and the idea of
being my own master, pleased me much.
Brief as it is, this passage suggests several different things.
One, obviously, is Boswell can't wait to get away.
He's more than ready to be his own master.
He wants to experience the wide world.
But secondly, he's uneasy about his family relationships, as we'll see in more detail
later on.
His father wasn't just sternly judgemental.
He was literally a judge, the equivalent of a Supreme Court justice in Scotland at the
time.
And he always made James feel weak and inadequate.
So what Boswell is using here is tritely generic language.
His parents extend parental affection.
He in turn feels warm, filial regard.
Now I'm not saying the account is false, far from it.
I'm saying these are the feelings he wants to feel.
And that brings up another point.
He calls it the scene of a setting out.
The scene in those days pretty much always meant what appears on stage in the theatre.
And right from the start, we see Boswell role playing, and there'll be a lot more of that
as we go along.
Now for the second passage, which comes right after that one in the same diary entry.
I walk to the abbey of Holyrood House and bowed thrice, once to the palace itself, once
to the crown of Scotland above the gate in front, and once to the venerable old chapel.
I next bowed thrice to Arthur's seat, that lofty romantic mountain on which I have so
often strayed in my days of youth.
I indulged meditation, and I felt the raptures of a soul filled with ideas of the magnificence
of God and His creation.
Here we have Boswell acting out the role of a sensitive soul, full of adoration for the
God who created this beautiful universe.
There's nothing here about self-doubt and anxiety.
And when he uses the word soul, he doesn't mean what Bunyan and Pascal used to mean.
For Boswell, it's all mixed up together with patriotic fervor for his native land, with
its venerable palace and its romantic mountain.
This is a person who enjoys his feelings, and he goes on to comment on that.
He says, having thus gratified my agreeable whim and superstitious humor, I felt a warm
glow of satisfaction.
Indeed, I have a strong turn to what the cool part of mankind have named superstition.
But this proceeds from my genius for poetry, which ascribes many fanciful properties to
everything.
This I have great pleasure from, as I have now by experience and reflection gained command
of it, so far I can keep it within just bounds by the power of reason, without losing the
agreeable feeling and play to the imagination which it bestows.
Pascal's telling us a lot, and those somewhat confused comments.
Empiricism, remember, was very suspicious of fancy or imagination.
Boswell uses both words, they were really the same thing, for fear of distorting the
true data of experience and living in a fantasy world.
And that's why empiricist writers, Hobbes and Hume, greatly disliked superstition, which
they saw as the out-of-control imagination believing in non-existent things, ghosts and
fairies, for example.
Boswell was very interested in ghosts, by the way.
And many empiricist writers would hint privately that all religious belief may be amounts to
the same thing.
In the passage I just read, however, Boswell defiantly says he loves superstition.
He loves to let his imagination run free.
The palace and the mountain in Edinburgh are real enough, but his imagination is what
gives them an emotional coloring and he knows it.
And with all that solemn bowing, he's deliberately provoking these feelings in himself.
But having said that, he's afraid he's probably going too far, so he adds he's made reasons
stay in command of the feeling, so as he puts it, he's letting imagination play without
doing any real harm.
Well, what's fundamentally at issue here is the extent to which feeling really does
deserve to have free reign.
Hume did say, I quoted his remark, reason is and ought to be the slave of the passions,
but Hume was being deliberately provocative when he said that, and in fact, he was a pretty
rational kind of a guy.
Boswell has a very different temperament.
He's impulsive, self-indulgent.
He's groping toward an ethic of feeling that will allow him to feel good about who he is.
I've mentioned before that there's a great dictionary published by Samuel Johnson in
1755, just a few years before this journal, and that it's an invaluable resource for gauging
the evolution of thought, and that's because new ideas tend to evolve before the vocabulary
can catch up with them.
So we can see in the mutation of our language the ways in which a culture is readjusting
how it understands the world.
Now, right around the middle of the 18th century, two related words started to take on drastically
new meanings, and they were sentimental and sensibility.
If you would try to look up sentimental in Johnson's dictionary, an enormous book that
tries to contain the whole English language, you'll find it's not even there.
It does define the word sentiment, though, and it's like this.
One, thought, notion, opinion, two, a striking sentence in a composition.
Well, that's a very narrow sense of the word sentiment, in fact, a meaning that's more
or less died out today, except maybe an occasional old-fashioned expression like, I appreciate
your kind sentiments.
What was starting to happen in the culture at large was that the meaning of sentiment
was changing, to fill a newly perceived need.
Sentimentaries were beginning to use expressions like tender sentiments, and what they meant
by sentiment now was emotions.
A sentimental person was somebody who had elevated feelings and not just thoughts when
they were having an experience, exactly like Boswell saying farewell to Edinburgh.
So a brand new adjective, sentimental, was born, and it, too, isn't in Johnson's dictionary,
and that's not surprising because it's first recorded use that modern scholars have ever
been able to find was only a very few years earlier in 1749, and that was in a private
letter in which the writer asks, what, in your opinion, is the meaning of the word sentimental
so much in vogue today?
I am frequently astonished to hear such a one as a sentimental man.
We were a sentimental party.
I've been taking a sentimental walk.
So right from the start, there's something self-conscious and I think self-flattering
about what became a cult of feeling, to which the name sensibility was very soon given.
And indeed, it wasn't long before it started to seem exaggerated and phony and to take
on a negative connotation, and ever since then we've been suspicious of sentimentality
as false or affected.
A modern writer put it very well once, he said, sentimentality is unfelt emotion powerfully
unfelt.
Well, with Boswell, we have a person who likes to feel his feelings and who can't help believing
they reflect his own true nature at its best.
So despite anything he can say about obedience to reason, he's strongly drawn to the cult
of sensibility, and if his feelings and his reason conflict as they constantly do, he
finds himself in an impasse, he doesn't know what to give up.
Now for another concept that can help us to open up Boswell's situation.
In the old days of the 17th century, sincerity was understood to be pretty well impossible
for human beings.
We have too big a stake in deceiving ourselves, and even if we could know our true motives,
we would still conceal them from everyone else.
And you remember in La Planceste de Cleves, it was the attempt to be honorably sincere
that triggered the disastrous rupture in the heroine's marriage.
I'm sure the ministers who taught Boswell back in Scotland would have told him much
the same thing, but Boswell keeps appealing in his journal to the idea of sincerity, and
the reason is he has something very important to say, although he doesn't have adequate
concepts available to help him say it.
To show you what I mean, here's what he writes a few days after arriving in London when he
goes to church and he happens to hear a sermon on the very appropriate text by what means
shall a young man learn to order his ways, and these are his reflections on it afterwards.
What a curious, inconsistent thing is the mind of man.
In the midst of divine service, I was laying plans for having women, and yet I had the
most sincere feelings of religion.
I imagine my want of belief is the occasion of this so that I can have all the feelings.
Well, he's right enough about the feelings, but what he has trouble understanding is that
both kinds are sincere.
He really does have vivid ideas about seducing women, which was and would remain a very important
part of his life, but in addition he really does feel emotionally uplifted in church,
but in a way that has nothing to do with formal beliefs, like forbidding fornication
that he knows he's supposed to be guided by.
So to put it another way, he feels good about religion.
He also feels good about sleeping with women.
His conscience and reason are telling him he's got to choose between them, but his feelings
are telling him something very different.
And really, the term sincerity is too vague to handle this dilemma.
But what it means is, telling the truth about what you really feel, then Boswell is definitely
being sincere.
If what it means is being true to your own deepest nature, then his attempt to be a good
boy and have dutiful thoughts, although it's sincere enough, is ultimately artificial and
unreal.
A new term would eventually, long afterwards, be created to fill this need.
None of our 18th century writers have it.
That's the modern concept of authenticity, in which we should be true to our core of
deepest self, rather than trying to accommodate ourselves to other people's values and expectations.
I believe we see Boswell struggling to envision some such ideal, even while he's trying earnestly
to live up to a conventional set of standards.
And when we come to Rousseau, we'll see a very great genius carving out the path by which
the modern concept of authenticity could be developed.
Here's another way of thinking about what Boswell is trying to do.
He's been brought up with the ideal of establishing a stable character.
But what he's really responding to is the more complex set of individual qualities that
today we call personality.
Looking back on his various efforts to become the right kind of person already in these
early years of his life, Boswell lists a series of what we would today call role models.
He says he would like to have Mr. Addison's character and sentiment mixed with the gaiety
of Sir Richard Steele and the manners of Mr. Diggs.
Well, once I tell you who these names refer to, you'll see how artificial that list is.
Joseph Addison and Richard Steele were a couple of guys who collaborated on a popular series
of periodical essays, reprinted throughout the century but written 40 years before Boswell's
time, called The Spectator.
The title gives you the idea, Mr. Spectator would stroll through London observing everything
that went on, and he would distill his thoughts into little entertaining daily essays on fashion
and politics and new plays and so on.
But although the authors of The Spectator, Addison and Steele, were real people, hardly
anything was known about them, what Boswell's responding to is a persona, an idealized self-image.
When he says here, Mr. Addison, he really means Mr. Spectator, a fictive self, which
was the joint creation of two journalists that only existed in writing, and it could
have been expressed in writing while remaining hidden from people around.
You never knew if the mysterious Mr. Spectator might be at the next table overhearing your
conversation, and the persona is a whimsical looker on at human life, amused, tolerant,
uninvolved.
Well, that explains the enthusiasm with which Boswell invokes The Spectator and does his
best to replicate it, even visiting coffee houses that are mentioned in it and writing
down his observations afterwards as if he were Addison writing The Spectator.
But he also mentions another person, he wanted the manners of Mr. Diggs, well that's something
else again, Wes Diggs, totally obscure today, was an actor whom Boswell had known in Edinburgh,
dashing, handsome, something of a playboy.
He particularly captivated Boswell in the role of Captain Mack Heath, the romantic highwayman
in the beggar's opera, in the next lecture I'll say more about Boswell's personal identification
with Mack Heath.
So these are two incompatible personas jumbled together and both of them artificial, a detached
spectator of life and a theatrical leading man who plays lovable rogues up on stage who
get all the women they could possibly want.
Well return, as I say, to Boswell's role playing in the next lecture and also to his quest for
a role model because in Samuel Johnson he's finally going to find one.
Right now I want to suggest a different angle on Boswell's experience and it's when he
had no way of formulating for himself but because he truly was a gifted writer there
are many points in his diary where he succeeds in evoking it.
This comes when he stops trying to construct a character for himself and just lets himself
go.
When he follows the mood of the moment and then he can feel fully alive.
He can hit that mute button on the voice in his head that keeps telling him, make your
father proud of you, be Mr. Addison.
All his life Boswell drank a lot, in fact by middle age he was a seriously impaired alcoholic
and it's very easy to see the attraction for him.
His inner conflicts don't feel so painful.
The split between who he is and who he thinks he ought to be get blurred.
Oscar Wilde once said, I drink to keep body and soul apart.
It's when Boswell can feel he's fully there, just being himself, it's then that his writing
gets most eloquent.
It's very different from his attempts to generate warm filial feelings toward his cold parents.
Here's a quite casual description, just along the way, in the London Journal that wonderfully
captures the feeling of happiness in the present moment, not regretting the past, not
worrying about the future.
He's found an apartment that he likes, for the very first time in his life he's free
to live on his own and he says, it is inconceivable with what attention and spirit I manage all
my concerns.
I sat in all this evening calm and indulgent, I had a fire in both my rooms above stairs,
I drank tea by myself for a long time, I had my feet washed with milk warm water, I went
to bed contented and my bed was warmed.
London's very chilly in December when this was written, but Boswell has a nice fire in
both of his rooms, that's very luxurious.
His bed would have been chilly and clammy, but he's had it warmed for him.
And some unnamed servant, not even mentioned, Boswell had the status of a gentleman, has
been washing his feet with that wonderful phrase, milk warm water.
And the modern editor of the London Journal tells us in a footnote, having that done was
one of Boswell's keen essential pleasures.
So this is Boswell, contentedly by himself, just existing in the moment.
For most of the time he was out and about and he couldn't pretend to be Mr. Spectator
all the time, yet his heart said I'm getting a commission in the guards, that was a glamorous
company of officers, it would have given him a pleasing status, he didn't have the slightest
wish to fight, the Seven Years War was just ending or he wouldn't have considered it.
What he never figured out was his father back in Scotland was dead set against his doing
such a thing, and his father made it clear to well-placed people in London who might
have helped James that they would greatly offend him if they did it.
So it never happens, law school is in his future all right, and meanwhile he has to
bear the increasing outrage of his father at reports of his time-wasting frivolity.
The pothole reprints the long letter that his father sent him toward the end of the
time in London, complaining about all sorts of things such as that he's a gifted mimic
which Boswell wasn't fond of imitating various friends of his father in public places, and
at the end of this the father actually threatens to disinherit him, which would have been a
catastrophe because Boswell's father, in addition to being a judge, was the lair of
a large estate, lair of a spelled aukinleck that apparently pronounced afleck, and James
would inherit the estate and the title. So toward the end of this long, very bitter letter,
his father says, by your strange conduct I had come to the resolution of selling all
off from the principle that it's better to snuff a candle out than leave it to sink,
stink in a socket. When he's free to be himself, Boswell is all there living in authentic
existence, but most of the time he can't. The voice of conscience is whispering in his ear,
and he knows that at any moment his father could cut off his allowance, or even his inheritance.
Well, one way of defining inauthenticity, what the old existentialist used to call
mauve's foie, bad faith, is to say it's acting according to values you've taken on from other
people, dutifully simulating a way of life that you haven't truly chosen for yourself.
Boswell couldn't have formulated it like that, but he certainly felt it, and in a very impressive
piece of self-analysis in this diary he has this to say, I am rather passive than active in life.
It's difficult to make my feeling clearly understood. That is, not with my whole heart,
but because so-and-so things are established. I couldn't ask for a better description of
inauthenticity. Boswell feels passive even when he's acting, because he's trying to do what he's
supposed to do, and it's not what he really wants to do. He's well able to understand that, as he says,
he's not doing it with his whole heart. This man is not a professional philosopher, but he's talking
about issues that the philosophers at that time tended to ignore. That empiricist picture of the
data-collecting brain isn't much help for a person like Boswell. To fight against this pressure to
be inauthentic, what defense does he have? That's where the emphasis on sensibility comes in. If his
feelings are urgent and real to him, maybe he has a right to follow them. One day he takes a walk,
and he hears the drums of a company of guards, the very group he wants to join, and he gets
totally turned on. He says, I was quite in an ecstasy. Oh, how I admired all the objects around me.
The sight of the splendid guards brought back my love to that profession. I was convinced that it
was indeed the genuine object of my inclinations, and now I swear this is the true language of my
heart. Oh, why can I not always preserve my inclinations as constant and as warm? It would be
easy to say he's kidding himself. He wouldn't make much of an army officer at all, but that's not
the point. The point is his fantasy of becoming a dashing romantic officer feels much more real to
him than the obligation to become a lawyer. And even if the military dream was unrealistic,
it's also true. Boswell felt no great attraction to the law and never did very well at all at it.
What he means by the true language of my heart is he's sick and tired of always repressing his
feelings. He knows he feels passive and fake when he does that. Now close with still another
perspective on Boswell's psychological experience. Here I'll be drawing on another modern concept
that nobody back then could have envisioned. I think Boswell is a classic narcissist. Somebody
who's preoccupied with himself, but who has an insecure self-image. So he constantly needs to
see his own worth reflected back by other people. And from that perspective, think about this little
episode. He's decided to buy an expensive sword as the appropriate prop for a fine gentleman of the
day. I determined to make a trial of the civility of my fellow creatures and what extent my external
appearance would have. I accordingly went to the shop of Mr. Jeffries, sword cutter to his majesty,
not just any shop. I looked at a number of his swords and at last picked out a very handsome one
at Five Guinea's. Five Guinea's, a manual laborer, might earn that in a whole year.
Mr. Jeffries said, I have not money here to pay for it. Will you trust me? Upon my word, sir,
said he, you must excuse me. It's never a thing we do for a stranger. I bowed gentilly and said,
indeed, sir, I believe it is not right. However, I stood and looked at him. And he looked at me.
Come, sir, cried he, I will trust you. It's all so clear. Basel has the money, but he needs to
confirm he's unmistakably an honorable gentleman. So he stages this little scene. He looks at the
shopkeeper and the shopkeeper looks back. And when the man gives in and lets him take the sword,
he's reassured to see that his projected self image has been reflected back to him successfully.
Well, that's to invoke a modern concept that Basel had no way at all of anticipating.
But as I say, he was familiar with the kind of experience that theories like that were
eventually invented to explain. So there's an introduction to Basel's London Journal.
In the next lecture, we'll follow out these ideas and we'll also address something else
that Basel is understandably anxious not to address. And that was something that barely
appears, you might say, between the lines of this journal, the threat of very serious mental illness.
There's nothing trivial about the inner conflicts that Basel is trying to resolve.
And as we'll see, there was a hereditary threat of true insanity as he understood it,
which he was constantly trying to prove to himself was not going to occur in his own life.
We'll also return to the question of role playing, which we'll see Basel carrying out
in all sorts of occasions. And we'll ask whether on his own showing, it's even possible ever to be
authentic. Or what if, as human others thought, roles are all there is? What if the true language
of the heart is just a rationalization for conning yourself as well as others?
In an earlier lecture, I quoted a modern sociologist who says,
sincerity is the illusion of someone who is taken in by his own act.
And he could very well apply that remark to James Boswell.
