Lecture 9, Voltaire, Johnson, Gibbon, Some Lives
In the last three lectures, we considered the empiricist philosophy from various perspectives.
Its power is an enabling ideology for the activist pragmatic enlightenment, but also
its considerable limitations as a means of understanding psychology.
And in Voltaire's Candide, we looked at a work of satire that treats psychology as more
or less irrelevant.
It's time now to turn to some of the more searching and imaginative attempts to reconceive
human behavior.
In the next lecture, we'll look at a fascinating diary kept by James Boswell.
Later on, we'll look at the very different takes on life of two great Enlightenment writers
Denis Diderot and Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
But before we go there, I want to devote this lecture to suggesting how badly new modes
of understanding were needed.
The best way to do that is to see what some major writers had to say when they wrote biographies,
that is, when they tried to explain the motives and conduct of actual people.
In Halifax's character of King Charles II, we saw a portrait in profile summarizing consistent
features of a person's behavior and assuming those were the key to everything he does.
Increasingly, writers got interested in full-length biography, tracing a person's life over time.
But they still assumed that the subject of the story ought to have a fixed character,
so they were still very close to the assumptions that Halifax had back in the 17th century.
The works I'm going to concentrate on in this lecture span most of the 18th century.
Voltaire published a biography of the warrior king Charles XII of Sweden in 1731.
Edward Gibbon published the first volume of his great history, The Decline and Fall of
the Roman Empire, in 1776, and Samuel Johnson published a biography of Alexander Pope in
1781.
We'll also glance at a brief autobiographical sketch that Hume wrote shortly before his
death in 1776.
These are very different writers, but they do share some assumptions, and I'm going
to argue that these included at least two major obstacles to the kind of explanatory
narration we would expect to see today.
First, since they're looking for a fixed character, they don't have any way to develop
insight into inconsistencies and contradictions, or really to look for development and change
over a whole lifetime.
This is something we'll see Rousseau pretty much inventing.
The second obstacle is they aspire to a kind of Olympian overview, a total control and mastery
of their subject, and in each case it's assisted by an elegant, brilliantly crafted prose style.
So instead of acknowledging the muddle and confusion that bedevils so much of life, particularly
if it's life in the past, where we have to figure out what we can from inadequate scraps
of evidence, instead of acknowledging that, they smooth it over with their lucid persuasive
narration.
Voltaire, indeed, was proud of what Enlightenment writers called philosophical history.
They felt contempt for mere catalogues of facts.
They aspired to explain things at a deeper level.
But the trouble was, from a modern historian's point of view, they tended to be too careless
about facts, and they failed to realize how subjective they actually were in deciding
which facts to mention in support of their grand explanations.
We'll start then with Voltaire's biography of Charles XII of Sweden.
Carl, of course, the Swedes call him, he's largely forgotten today, except in Sweden,
but in the early 18th century, he was a compelling figure on the international scene.
He spent his whole life promoting Sweden's status as a great power, and he was ruined
in the end by attempting a winter invasion of Russia, exactly like Napoleon and Hitler
after him.
In fact, the Nazi Wehrmacht in 1942 went right through Poltava, which is the place where Charles
XII had his fatal defeat before they arrived at their own catastrophe in the dreadful Siege
of Stalingrad.
For people living through those times, Charles XII was a charismatic figure and also a mysterious
and unsettling one.
They were eager to read this biography, published 20 years after his death, by the man who was
regarded as the greatest writer in Europe.
We've already seen in Khandid, which was written long after the biography, 30 years
later, how acerbically Voltaire can deal with warfare, but what can he make of the phenomenon
of Charles XII?
Not much, it turns out.
As Voltaire tells it, the man was a killing machine, arrogant, ambitious, he couldn't
be argued with, he never showed physical pain.
The portrait that Voltaire paints is curiously two-dimensional.
When we do get a telling anecdote, it's always to illustrate the same simple picture, an
egomaniac who lives to fight and somehow drags the rest of his nation along with him.
In a typical anecdote, Voltaire describes how, at his coronation, he couldn't wait for
the bishop to put the crown on his head, but grabbed it and crowned himself.
What Voltaire can do, superbly, is tell a good story, as when he narrates the death of
the king.
I'll read you a piece of it, and even in my literal translation, I hope something of Voltaire's
lucid clarity will come through.
C.K.A. and Megle saw the king of Sweden fall on the parapet with a deep sigh.
They ran to him, but he was already dead.
A cannonball that weighed half a pound had struck his right temple and made a hole you
could have put three fingers into.
His head fell back on the parapet, his left eye was pushed in and the right entirely out
of its socket.
The instant he was wounded, he was dead, and yet he had the strength, expiring in so sudden
a manner to grasp his sword by a natural reaction, and he was still lying in that posture.
At this spectacle, Megle, a singular man with a disengaged manner, said only, there the
play is over, let's go to supper.
Voltaire gives us the macabre details with wonderful clarity, along with that final reflexive
gesture of the warrior monarch reaching for his sword at the instant of death, and then
the cynical comment of the Frenchman Megle, military engineer who happened to be there
at the end, the play is over, let's go to supper.
The tone is much the same as what Samuel Johnson made of it ten years later in a poem called
The Vanity of Human Wishes.
For Johnson too, Charles XII becomes a symbolic figure, the overreaching conqueror who ends
up in ignominious death.
And as Johnson saw it in his poem, Charles was just one more in a long line of would-be
conquerors who all became cautionary warnings against pride.
Johnson writes, his fall was destined to a barren strand, a petty fortress, and a dubious
hand, dubious because there were rumors maybe his own man shot him, he left the name at
which the world grew pale to point a moral and adorn a tale, as of course it's pointing
Johnson's moral.
In this Olympian perspective of Johnson as a Voltaire, it's always the same, Alexander
the Great and Hannibal and Charles XII and eventually Napoleon and Hitler and whoever
comes after that, endless replays of the same thing, all examples of the same overweening
pride.
This way of thinking has a kind of grandeur, but it's pretty remote from the biography
of a real individual.
And when Voltaire does summarize Charles's character for us, the result is amazingly
vague and indistinct.
Almost all his actions, even those of his private life, were far from easy to believe.
He was perhaps the only man and certainly the only king who ever lived without any weakness.
He carried all the virtues of a hero to such an excess that they became as dangerous as
the opposite vices would have been.
Well as Voltaire says, this is not easy to believe.
In fact he uses the word placeum blah blah, he's talking about verisimilitude, but somehow
he's satisfied with it, instead of looking for a different kind of more complicated explanation.
If you read a modern biography of Charles XII or even the entry in a good encyclopedia,
you'll get a totally different picture.
It seems that Charles was a man with deep intellectual interest.
He would much rather have been a scientist than a soldier.
He learned to adopt a pose of single-minded dedication, including his supposed indifference
to pain, in order to inspire a rather reluctant army to follow him.
And his goal throughout was geopolitical.
He was pursuing the foreign policy of a relatively weak country that could easily be overrun
by powerful neighbors.
So in other words, Charles had a well thought out idea of what to accomplish by war and
how to do it, and he wasn't just driven by crazed ambition.
And his rigidity and remoteness were a willed strategy in order to get people to do what
they needed to do.
Well if we think of him this way, we'll be likely to think of other explanations, even
for the anecdotes that Voltaire does tell.
When Charles put that crown on his head, surely it was a symbolic gesture to show that the
monarchy wasn't subordinate to the church, not just impatience because the bishop was
taking too long.
Well, this course is about the invention of the modern self.
And you can see how Voltaire is still confined within an old-fashioned model of presentation.
It works well for an engrossing narrative of events, but it's largely helpless when
it comes to explaining motivation and behavior.
In another way of saying it is, the idea of unchanging constants in human behavior made
it hard to really develop specific insights out of the welter of evidence from a person's
life.
And that was the fundamental problem with philosophical history.
It was supposed to rise above mere chronicle, but it assumed the way to do it was to bring
out universal truths.
Johnson wrote an essay on biography in which he calls for memorable details, and yet he
ends up saying this.
There is such a uniformity in the state of man that there is scarcely any possibility
of good or ill, but is common to humankind.
We are all prompted by the same motives, all deceived by the same fallacies, animated by
hope obstructed by danger, entangled by desire, and seduced by pleasure.
Well, of course that's true, but only at an extremely general level.
To say that Romeo and Juliet and Antony and Cleopatra and Madame Bovary are all entangled
by desire doesn't tell you much about any one of them.
In a later lecture we'll see Rousseau exposing this contradiction at the heart of empiricism.
It claims it believes in nothing but particulars, but it ends up calling for truths at a level
of generality that basically erases the particulars.
In fact, Johnson, who was committed to empiricism as a philosophy, always praised what he called
the grandeur of generality.
In addition to an attachment to this idea of universal truths, which goes all the way
back to ancient Greece, this way of writing about people reflects the traditional concept
of character as opposed to the just emerging and not yet named modern concept of personality.
John Hume knew that he was dying of cancer in 1776.
He wrote a brief autobiographical sketch called My Own Life, which puts a continuously positive
spin on everything, including his impending death.
We know from other sources that Hume was devastated when he published his Great Treatise of Human
Nature and it was totally ignored.
But what he says in My Own Life is,
Being naturally of a cheerful and sanguine temper, I very soon recovered from the blow.
That's really the terminology of the old humor psychology.
He has a sanguine temper and he goes on to describe himself in good empiricist terms
in a very objective and very general way.
To conclude historically with my own character, there's that term character.
I am, or rather was, for that is the style I must now use in speaking of myself.
I was, I say, a man of mild dispositions, of command of temper, of an open social and
cheerful humor, there's humor again, capable of attachment but little susceptible of enmity
and of great moderation in all my passions.
There's nothing insincere or dishonest about this self-portrait.
It's Hume as he worked very hard to make himself be.
He has built on a naturally sanguine temperament to create a character of perfectly controlled
moderation in his passions and later on we'll see Benjamin Franklin doing exactly the same
thing and doing it very well.
But before we get there, we'll look at other writers, especially Rousseau, who have a much
more complex and subtle idea of the self.
Now let's turn to another account of a person's life, a biography of Alexander Pope, which
Johnson included in a collection called Lives of the Poets that he published late in the
century in 1781.
Johnson greatly admired Pope.
He was proud that Pope had praised an early poem of his own.
He knew plenty of people who knew Pope well, so there were lots of anecdotes about this
in fact, unusually prickly individual.
So it's not like Voltaire was the king of Sweden, Johnson is very much in his own element
here.
Moreover, Johnson thought deeply about human life and he was troubled by mental distress
of his own, as we remarked when he looked at his fictional account of that astronomer
who thought he was influencing the weather.
Yet very much as in Voltaire's case, Johnson's picture of Pope seems to any modern reader
to ignore some questions that any biographer today would ask.
Here's a good example.
When Johnson starts to describe Pope's appearance, the person of Pope is well known not to have
been formed by the nicest model.
He compared himself to a spider and by another as described as protuberant behind and before.
He said to have been beautiful in his infancy, but he was of a constitution originally feeble
and weak and as bodies of a tender frame are easily distorted, his deformity was probably
in part the effect of his application.
In other words, Pope was stunted and deformed, he was well under five feet high and hunchbacked
because he applied himself to studying too much.
While we know today he contracted tuberculosis of the spine as a child, that's why he grew
up hunchbacked and weak.
But the more interesting point is Johnson never considers apparently the humiliation
that that deformity caused for Pope.
No indication of the psychological damage that it would cause to look like that after
a perfectly normal boyhood always condescended to by men literally looked down on and with
no hope of being attractive to women.
Johnson mentions Pope wore an absurdly small sword after the fashion of gentlemen at the
time always carried a sword.
He doesn't comment on the pathos of the poet trying to look manly with that little steak
knife at his side.
So instead of supposing that reading too much is what caused Pope's disability, it would
be normal today to turn it upside down and suspect his deep reading and above all his
tireless pursuit of poetic theme were a compensation for everything he had to do without.
And it's especially striking that Johnson doesn't think this way because he himself
was physically strange looking.
The opposite of Pope though, he was an ungainly giant with squinting eyes and a pockmarked
face.
He was well aware that women found him unattractive.
So Johnson, if anyone, might have been able to think of a literary career as compensation
for other things.
But this is my point, nobody in those days was thinking like that.
Nobody was even asking the questions to which that kind of answer might be given.
And this is what I mean when I say a new understanding of the self was badly needed,
but anything but easy to invent.
These three writers I've been talking about, Voltaire and Hume and Johnson, were absolutely
brilliant intellects each in a different way.
It would be impossible to condescend to them.
But from the perspective of the early 21st century, we have a whole set of tools for
interpreting human behavior that were just being created when those three were writing.
And for various reasons none of them were drawn in the new directions.
I'll just give you one more example from Johnson's life of Pope.
In familiar or convivial conversation, it does not appear that he excelled.
It's remarkable that so much should be known of what he has written and so little of what
he has said.
Traditional memory retains no sallies of railery nor sentences of observation, nothing, either
pointed or solid, wise or merry.
Pope sometimes condescended to be jocular with servants or inferiors, but by no merriment,
either of others or his own, was he ever seen excited to laughter.
Well, that's strange, isn't it?
This seems to be a blank when we get to the center of Pope's experience.
He was a brilliantly witty satirist, and yet his conversation was so ordinary no one could
remember any of it, and he never laughed.
So why didn't he laugh?
That's what we would immediately ask.
But as I say, the framework for asking the question wasn't there yet.
Johnson himself was famous for laughing enormously.
His body would heave and roll around.
The windows would rattle when Johnson laughed.
He was like a well-read ogre, so it's clear that he's baffled by Pope, but he doesn't
know where to go with these anecdotal details he's accumulated.
It makes no sense to him that Pope wouldn't laugh.
He doesn't try to understand the self-protective wall that Pope erected between himself and
other people, or the way his witty poems could do his laughing for him from behind that wall.
Finally, I want to say something about the greatest historical work of the 18th century.
It's one that's very much worth reading today.
This is Edward Gibbons' massive decline and fall of the Roman Empire, the first volume
of which came out in 1776.
The very same year is Hume's little sketch, My Own Life, not to mention Adam Smith's
Wealth of Nations and a historical event we Americans aren't likely to forget.
Gibbon had made himself absolutely fluent in classical Latin.
And unlike Voltaire, he had great respect for detailed factual information.
He was unbelievably good at digesting and making sense of an endless welter of details.
Modern experts still praise his accuracy.
Every page of Gibbons' thousands of pages has a dense undergrowth of footnotes, but
up on top is a flowing, lucid narrative that makes it all hold together almost as if it
were an epic poem.
And in the way it is, it's the gradual collapse of the greatest empire the world had ever
known, which was of great intrinsic interest in England and France especially, which were
competing to acquire empires of their own.
All the same, like Voltaire, Gibbon is at his best when he's narrating events and considerably
less effective when he's trying to explain motivation.
And for the most part, he's working with a very simplified model of character in which
a person is motivated by one or two ruling passions.
That was something Pope wrote a lot about, the idea that under all the contradictory
details of a person's life, there must be a single main spring that drives the machinery.
Here's a typical one-sentence character summary from Gibbons' Decline and Fall.
Cruelty and superstition were the ruling passions of the soul of Maximum.
The former suggested the means, the latter pointed out the objects of persecution.
Like an algebra problem, you have to read it twice and work out the A and B terms.
Cruelty suggested how to persecute, superstition suggested whom to persecute.
A very remote view of a man.
Now I'll give you a longer example, an emperor called Comodus, who happened to follow his
father, the great philosopher emperor Marcus Aurelius, but quickly became one of those
sadistic monsters that emerged so often in Roman history, Nero and Caligula, names we
remember to this day.
So Gibbon, the highly civilized, scholarly man of the 18th century enlightenment, has
to explain the conduct of a truly vicious tyrant, and he's absolutely baffled by it.
He starts out with a promising idea.
Suddenly the lust for power turns men into brutes.
But if he works with that idea, you can see it falling apart on him.
Of all our passions and appetites, the love of power is of the most imperious and unsociable
nature, since the pride of one man requires the submission of the multitude.
The ardor of contention, the pride of victory, the memory of past injuries, fear of future
dangers, all contribute to infling the mind and silence the voice of pity.
So far so good, but then Gibbon realizes this might be true for most people, but surely
not this one.
Commodus was born to total power, so how could he have to corrupt himself in quest of it?
So Gibbon goes on, but these motives will not account for the unprovoked cruelties of
Commodus, who had nothing to wish and everything to enjoy.
You see what's missing here.
Gibbon literally can't imagine sadism, a person getting pleasure from hurting other people.
It always has to be a rational basis.
There are no unconscious drives that might turn even the man who has everything into
a cruel monster.
Remember even Hobbes, who saw power as the root of everything, even he couldn't imagine
cruelty for its own sake.
Putting it another way, the Enlightenment got rid of the concept of evil, which it saw
as the product of a mistaken religious system.
But having done that, they no longer had any explanation for the things the concept of
evil was meant to explain.
And they can't seem to envision what the romantic poet Coleridge, he's talking about
Iago and Shakespeare's Othello, calls motiveless malignity.
So where does this leave Gibbon on Commodus?
He's got to come up with something, and this is what he settles for.
Commodus was not, as he has been represented, a tiger born with an insatiate thirst of human
blood.
Nature had formed him of a weak rather than a wicked disposition.
His simplicity and timidity rendered him the slave of his attendants, who gradually corrupted
his mind.
His cruelty, which at first obeyed the dictates of others, degenerated into habit, and at
length became the ruling passion of his soul.
So we have the key sort of, apparently Commodus was so weak that he listened to bad advisers.
It's like saying Hitler was a nice guy, but Goering and Himmler led him astray.
And just as Johnson can't imagine how Pope's life might have been compensation for certain
kinds of defect, Gibbon can't imagine that if Commodus really was weak, his brutality
might be a lashing out at a world that he found intimidating, and now he had the chance
to pay it back.
In closing, I'd like to look briefly at Gibbon's autobiography, which he worked on in various
drafts, but never published.
It looks like he couldn't decide how to pitch it.
He was a very private person, reluctant to reveal very much.
But in any case, he shared the empiricist view that we're all basically similar and
that nobody wants to hear a lot of personal details.
Here's what he tells about the onset of puberty, which happened when he was living in Switzerland,
which is where his remote and chilly father had sent him to be educated.
I hesitate from the apprehension of ridicule when I approach the delicate subject of my
early love.
I do not confine myself to the grosser appetite, which our pride may affect to disdain because
it's been implanted by nature and the whole animal creation.
The discovery of a sixth sense, the first consciousness of manhood, is a very interesting
moment of our lives, but it less properly belongs to the memoirs of an individual than
to the natural history of the species.
In other words, since these are feelings that we share with goats and parakeets, there's
no reason to be specific.
In Rousseau's Confessions, which were being written at just the same time, we'll meet
a totally different approach to early life experiences.
So, Gibbon is ready now to tell us about the young woman he fell for, an exceptionally
talented minister's daughter.
And once again, you'll see how externalized, how generalized the picture is that he presents.
The report of such a prodigy awakened by curiosity.
I saw and loved.
I found her learned without pedantry, lively in conversation, pure in sentiment, and elegant
in manners.
But, on my return to England, I soon discovered my father would not hear of this strange alliance,
and that without his consent, I was myself destitute and helpless.
After a painful struggle, I yielded to my fate.
The remedies of absence and time were at length effectual, and my love subsided in friendship
and esteem.
I sighed as a lover, I obeyed as a son.
This is a sexual awakening that's presented in carefully generic terms, in which the young
woman's charms are described with abstractions, pure in sentiment, elegant in manners, and
Gibbon's own disappointment is likewise compartmentalized as a duel between two roles.
I sighed as a lover, I obeyed as a son.
People have made fun of that sentence as shallow and emotionless, I don't think that's fair.
Like so many of his contemporaries, Gibbon sees himself committed to a set of roles,
and however much he may have suffered at the time, it was long ago, and now he can try
to be more objective about himself.
And seeing people objectively, especially including ourselves, was fundamental to the
Enlightenment understanding of psychology.
We'll meet it again in Franklin and Adam Smith.
But the more interesting trend in 18th century thought, and the one that's been most influential
ever since, is the one that says, you're not supposed to be objective about yourself,
people are subjective, that's the point.
And just as with the other examples I gave, a modern biographer would emphasize aspects
of Gibbon's experience that he himself did not.
We would emphasize today.
He was a sickly child.
He was expected to die.
He was terribly lonely.
He had a kindly aunt who mattered much more to him than either parent.
And very much as with Pope, it's obvious Gibbon took precocious refuge in books.
I don't really think he understood himself.
That was what was driving him.
And in fact, his autobiography gets most eloquent when he's describing the vision of the past
that drew him to that mighty subject, the Roman Empire.
It's as an author that he makes sense to himself.
Moreover, the total mastery of the decline in fall is tremendously empowering.
It's at such a safe distance from the present.
We don't have any comodices and niros anymore.
It's the way a six-year-old child gets excited about dinosaurs because they're extinct.
This intellectual pleasure, too, in detecting patterns in the chaos of experience, whereas
most modern historians would be much more attentive to the chaos itself and suspicious
of their own pattern finding, above all, there's vicarious power over people who were
once great.
Commodus was terrifying, but now Edward Gibbon Esquire is more powerful than Commodus.
So from a modern perspective, we might see Gibbon, like Pope, compensating for his limitations
by living through his art, but it's just not a concept that he would have understood.
So there's a view of biographical understanding in what you might call the mainstream 18th
century.
And starting with the next lecture, we'll turn to writers who, from various different
angles, began to create subtler and more penetrating ways of thinking about the self.
