Lecture 12 Diderot's Dialogues
In Boswell's diary, we met a somewhat naive but very fresh and believable picture of a
gap between available models of the self and a real person's own conflicted experience.
And we saw how words like sentiment and sensibility were having to mutate to express new ways of
understanding. Now we turn to a very different kind of writer at exactly the same time,
a leading figure in the French Enlightenment who uses the dialogue form to explore the
complexity of psychological experience and to concentrate on the self in its social context.
Giving us not a single perspective, as Boswell does, but the multiple perspectives that an
accomplished fiction writer can create. This is Denis Diderot. He was born in 1713. That's a
generation later than Voltaire, the same generation as Johnson and Hume. He was born in one of the
eastern provinces of France, not an aristocrat, the son of a master cutler, that is an expert maker
of knives, and all his life he retained a keen interest in the trades and practical technology.
Since he was an exceptionally bright boy, his family expected him to go into the church,
as indeed one of his brothers did, but he disliked it intensely. So he went to Paris and became a
student there and started to make his living with miscellaneous writing of various kinds.
Before we turn to the works that will concern us in this course, works that he never published
because of their potentially controversial implications, I need to sketch for you his role
in the public campaign of the Enlightenment. And that was to give fully 15 years of his life
as editor-in-chief of a monumental undertaking, and that was the great encyclopedia of the
sciences, arts, and trades, which began to appear in 1751 and in the end filled 17 huge folio-sized
volumes. It was immensely recognized as enormously important, and ever since then it's been seen as
the central work of the Enlightenment, and it's very relevant that it was a collective undertaking.
The idea was to gather authoritative articles on every subject a reader might want to know about.
The preliminary discourse of the encyclopedia was written very brilliantly and quickly became
famous by Jean d'Alembert, whom we'll meet shortly in one of Diderot's dialogues.
D'Alembert was a mathematician. He stressed the familiar Enlightenment theme of the interconnection
of the sciences and shared research programs. And the goal was to gather all of human knowledge,
but with particular emphasis on practical technology, which up until then have been
protected as the insider knowledge of particular crafts and guilds. And for this reason the encyclopedia
includes several volumes of highly detailed, beautiful engravings that show how to dye cloth
and make a spinning machine and so forth. D'Alembert was supposed to be the co-editor,
but in fact the bulk of the work was done by Diderot himself. Diderot was a true polymath.
He loved all kinds of knowledge and among other things he was a pioneer philosopher of science,
especially the life sciences, which were beginning to replace physics,
much has happened again during the 20th century at the center of scientific inquiry.
Diderot belonged to the very last generation for whom science and philosophy were still
one and the same. There are two essential points I want to make about the encyclopedia.
First, it treats knowledge as interrelated, but not hierarchical, and that's completely
different from the older encyclopedias going back to the Middle Ages where theology was called
the queen of the sciences and came first and controlled everything else. Now, of course it's
the format we all take for granted today, the only arrangement is alphabetical, which implies that
knowledge is empirical. It's based on accumulated experience. It's not organized in a systematic
way because systems change. Remember looking once at the original English encyclopedia Britannica,
which was a sort of small-scale imitation of the French encyclopedia, and I had some reason to
look up the entry for God, and I noted it came right after the entry for glue. So it's simply
working your way through the alphabet. And that's my first point about the encyclopedia.
It's commitment to an ideal effectual objectivity, which is arranged for easy retrieval of information.
I'm sure Idra would have thought our modern internet search engines were the perfect fulfillment of
his goal. The second point is quite different. The philosoph of the Enlightenment may have thought
their program was totally objective, but in actuality it was driven by a highly ideological
motive. They are committed to an ideology of progress in what has often been called a religion of
humanity. Knowledge wasn't just an end in itself. It was meant to be instrumental to help us improve
our world, conquer disease, put politics on a better footing, in general improve every aspect of human
life. And this religion of humanity could well find itself in conflict and did with the entrenched
religious and political systems of Europe. Diderot himself experienced that firsthand. Very
early in his career in 1749, he was imprisoned for several months, admittedly in an extremely
pleasant chateau, because he had published a book with, you would think, the innocuous title,
A Letter on the Blind. And what he did was follow empiricist logic to raise the subversive
possibility that if someone was born blind, that is lacking a major part of the sensory input,
which according to empiricism is our only source of knowledge, then that person might not at all
form the moral, or you might say religious assumptions, that religious teachings still
said were inborn in us all. And the church authorities noticed this, banned the book, put
the guy in prison, and let him out only on the strength of a solemn promise to never publish
anything ever again that might be contrary to religion and morals. And he kept that promise.
It wasn't a sellout he had to. His larger mission of promoting enlightenment progress would have
been thwarted if he hadn't. But as it turned out, it liberated him to be much freer and more
exploratory than he otherwise could have been in the unpublished works that he went on adding to
in revising for years. And that's exactly what did happen with the ones that we'll turn to now.
Let's start with the shortest of them, Dullinbert's Dream, which is preceded by a very brief
conversation between Dullinbert and Diderot. He began at some time in the 1760s. It wasn't published
till 1782, and then only in a very limited circulation form. The larger public never saw
it until half a century after Diderot's death. In the conversation, Dullinbert is made to take
the standard empiricist line that personal existence is based on memory. If we couldn't
connect up all the bits of data from our past experiences, we wouldn't have a self. Diderot,
however, is interested in the sub-rational or non-conscious connections that we share with
all other living organisms. And so in the longer work that follows the little conversation, the
work called Dullinbert's Dream, he imagines his friend, the mathematician, sound asleep and talking
in his sleep. And there are two friends there with him. His doctor, his name is Bourdieu,
and his mistress, Menzel de Lesbinas. And the two of them carry on a rambling, free-wheeling
discussion about the mysteriousness of life. What Diderot is concerned with, fundamentally,
is the then shocking philosophy of materialism, which held that nothing exists in the universe
except matter. That was implicit a hundred years before, with Hobbes and others, but for them,
the model was mathematical physics, which made it seem sort of abstract and not so threatening.
The new 18th century materialism was very threatening to traditional thought,
because it focused on matter as the sole basis of all living forms. There's no spirit, no soul,
not even any mind, except as a phenomenon of brain chemistry. Of course, that's an issue still
being debated to this very day. And the most dangerous claim in Diderot's Letter on the Blind
was denying the existence of a perfect order that had continued without alteration
since God first established it. The religious position was, no species has ever changed
since the creation of the world. And no new species has ever been added, and all species
are linked in a great chain that includes every possible form from lowest to highest.
But what people were beginning to envision by the middle of the 18th century was the possibility
of evolution. It would be a hundred years before Darwin would give evolution a secure conceptual
basis with its theory of natural selection, but the idea of evolution itself was very much in
circulation by Diderot's time, and he personally was extremely interested in it. You can see what
this might imply for thinking about the self. Human beings are not special and unique.
They're not distinguished from all other life forms by their ability to think.
On the contrary, as the logic of empiricism would suggest, human beings are instinctual
organisms, just as much as mice are or worms are. And whatever holds us together as individuals
must be a system of programmed behaviors, not a personal self that we construct out of specific
data of our own memory experiences. And it follows, too, that the evolutionary process
is still continuing. Humes had the self as a flux, now all of nature is imagined in flux,
not just a few species that never changed, but a continual variation in transformation.
Also, by introducing Manzal de Lesbinas into the dialogue, Diderot makes an important point
about gender. It was still common to think of men and women as fundamentally different,
which of course helped to justify different social relationships. But according to the new
biology, which Diderot was so interested in, the only difference really is the sexual organs and
even those differentiated from a common origin during fetal development. They knew that then.
So his conclusion is a very radical one for the time. Men and women are fundamentally the same,
and therefore equal. For Diderot, then, our unity of selves has nothing to do with conscious thought
and is to prove the point in his dialogue. He makes D'Alembert keep tossing in his sleep
and uttering incoherent remarks, but interesting ones. Now you remember Locke said someone asleep
is literally not the same person as when they're awake. But Dr. Bordeaux and Manzal de Lesbinas,
who know D'Alembert well, can tell perfectly well it's him, though when he's dreaming,
he lets himself go and thinks a lot more imaginatively than he does when he's awake.
Now for the longer work I want to take up in this lecture, Ramos Nephew. Like D'Alembert's dream,
it too was begun in the 1760s and added to for many years. It remained virtually unknown among
Diderot's papers until finally, long after his death, it was published. A really reliable manuscript
didn't surface till 1891. In this work, D'Alembert imagines himself at a café, which you might say
is a kind of new place for intellectual exchange at the time, replacing those fashionable aristocratic
salons. And there he falls into conversation with a journeyman musician he happens to know
called Jean-François Ramos. And this guy is a nephew of a very great composer,
Jean-Philippe Ramos. But the nephew makes a very ignoble living as a parasite on wealthy patrons.
Now in fact, both speakers in this dialogue are clearly aspects of Diderot himself. He calls one
the moi, the me, who is made to express the ideal of a coherent, stable character and coherent moral
values, which the Philis of Diderot is hoping to have achieved through experience that gives him
wisdom. The other speaker, the near-duel Ramos, is the lui, the he. So it's me and he in conversation.
And this Ramos is very well aware. He's far inferior to his uncle, the great musician,
but he's also aware his uncle is a mean, selfish person because genius doesn't necessarily go
along with good human qualities. And he argues a profoundly cynical view of life. According to
Ramos, the nephew, all of us are putting on an act all the time, and at least he is honest enough to
admit it, which he says the moi character speaking for Diderot does not. It's notable that all of
these unpublished works of Diderot are extremely open-ended. Someone called him once an uncompleting
man. He's an initiator, not a concluter, and in a way that too fits the spirit of empiricism,
which is all about provisional guesses that give way to others when more evidence comes in.
So dividing himself into two different speakers in a dialogue is a way of recognizing multiple
perspectives. I think it's a literary form that actually expresses the humian self better than
Hume's own systematic exposition does, and uncompletedness is the message. It begins with a quote
from the Roman poet Horus. And this is a dialogue between Horus and his slave, which takes place on
the Saturnalia. That was a festival every year when the slaves would get to speak their mind.
And so this one accuses Horus of himself being a slave, of the people he always wants to impress.
And the slave says, you're moved like a wooden puppet by wires that other people pull.
That quote from Horus gives the central theme of Diderot's dialogue, which is why he put it at
the beginning. We're all puppets. We like to think we're free, but really we respond very
predictably to outside stimuli. Not surprisingly, Diderot's materialism included the determinism
that we talked about in connection with Hobbes and Hume, and that's something we'll discuss
more in the next two lectures when we take up Diderot's novel, Jacques the Fatalist,
whose title contains the idea. The very first paragraph of Rameau's nephew is an engaging
account of the mind as a scene of playfulness and whim. It's my custom to take a stroll at five in
the afternoon in the Garden of the Palais Royal. That's me that you see all alone meditating on
a bench. I converse with myself on politics, love, taste, or philosophy. I abandon my mind to
libertinism. I let it follow the first wise or foolish idea that turns up. The way one sees
in the Allée de Foix are disillute young men following the footsteps of a courtesan who has
an airy manner, laughing face, lively eye, and turned up nose, only to lever for another,
accosting all of them and attaching themselves to none. My thoughts, those are my girlfriends.
I converse with myself, he says. So even before the dialogue that he now engages in with Rameau,
Diderot has already split himself into parts. It's like our childhood phrase, me, myself, and I.
This is not the strenuous logical reasoning of the old rationalists like Descartes, who's still on
the whole, held their authority in the intellectual culture of France at this time. Diderot is letting
his thoughts wander freely, and most important, he describes it as pleasurable. Remember, Samuel
Johnson was afraid of letting his thoughts go free. Diderot calls him his girlfriend. He says he's
behaving like a libertine, and that was the word which meant not just free love, but free thinking,
free thought. Boswell chased ignoble after actual girls. Diderot has a sort of love affair with
ideas. Rameau's nephew is a very miscellaneous work. It's full of clever jabs that real people
whom Diderot happened to dislike, all of whom are forgotten today, because he's a very witty
writer. Some of that is still enjoyable to read, but I won't be going into any of that. In this
lecture, I want to highlight two themes, and they'll both be very important in the other works we
go on to read. The first, which we've already touched on, is the question of role playing in
society. The second is the difference between books and real life, and that theme will be
the startling gap that appears once people begin to see it that way between the moral values that
we hold dear and the aesthetic values that give us pleasure and works of imagination.
First, then the role playing. Hume, of course, saw role playing as the normal way we live our
lives, and for him that was apparently a perfectly comfortable thought. He liked playing the role
of Le Bon David, the genial, gregarious, worldly philosopher. Diderot is suggesting something
more disquieting, something closer to the uneasiness that Boswell sometimes experiences when he's
pretending to be Captain MacHeath and is really just paying for the company of a couple of teenage
prostitutes and pretending not to. But Ramo describes, always I mean Ramo the nephew, not the
composer, is a life of humiliating parasitism. He gives music lessons to rich people's kids,
and then they let him dine at their luxurious tables, but only on condition that he say harmlessly
clever things and never forget he's really little better than an employee. And Ramo describes one
occasion where he got kicked out of a mansion for cracking a joke that was too close to the truth.
He'd been asked to give up the place of honor to an abbey who was currently in favor.
Abbey is a confusing term. It was a church sinecure for someone who might actually have no
religious duties at all. And so Ramo says, cheerfully, that's fine for today, but tomorrow
you'll take the next seat down and so on. Until finally you'll be next to me, a poor dull bugger
like yourself, qui siede sempre, com'e un mestoso cazzo, fra due coglioni. He's discreet enough to
say it in Italian that everyone knows he's saying a majestic phallus between two testicles,
so they kick him out. But what comes through vividly as Ramo's self-contempt, he's made a
successful career out of fawning on the rich and he despises himself for it. At one point
he sarcastically reproaches himself for ever allowing himself to act like he's his own person,
so he's addressing himself. He says, how can you be so idiotic? Can't you flatter like others do?
Couldn't you lie, swear, purge yourself, promise, keep your promise or renege on it like others?
Can't you get down on all fours like others? There's a memorable saying by the great Irish
satirist Jonathan Swift. He says, climbing is performed in the same posture as creeping.
That is, you see someone climbing up the ladder of success, but all you have to do is rotate at
90 degrees and they're crawling on all fours, which is just what Ramo is saying. So what's being
tested in this dialogue is the problem of sincerity or authenticity at its very heart. The word
hypocrite in Greek originally meant an actor and in that sense, as Ramo acknowledges, he's a total
hypocrite, role playing all the time, but he challenges the moi, the Diderot character,
to admit he too is a role player who pretends he's not one. So not only is Ramo sincere in
telling his real values or anti-values, but he also embodies the only kind of authenticity
according to him that can really exist. Society makes the rules, degrading though the rules may be,
he's willing to play by them. So he's trapped in the self-contempt of somebody who's figured it
all out, but now he can only despise himself for it. Here's another of his descriptions of his
lifestyle. He has to heap flattery on a rich actress who is extremely fat and absolutely
talentless, but the mistress of a politician who makes sure the theaters keep giving her
star rolls. So Ramo says, item, she's meaner, prouder, and stupider than a goose. Item, she
thinks she's witty. Item, you've got to persuade her that you think she's wittier than anyone.
Item, she knows nothing but she makes the decisions. Item, you've got to applaud your
decisions with hands and feet. Jump for joy, go weak with admiration.
But if Ramo is poisoned by his own self-contempt, the Diderot character and the dialogue is made
very uneasy by what he's saying. What if everyone, even the great editor of the encyclopedia,
is really just currying favor like Ramo? What if everyone, like Horace's slave said,
is just a puppet jerking around when his strings are pulled? The Diderot character,
the moi, does his best to argue for virtue and truth. But if it's really society that makes
all the rules, why should you regard it as anything but a game you're trying to win?
And of course, both characters, as I say, are aspects of Diderot himself. Try as he may,
he can never silence this disturbing voice in his own head. Maybe virtue and truth are just
conventions. Maybe you're a sucker if you really believe in them. So that's where this provisional,
uncompleting book gets to with its picture of human life. Now for my other theme, the difference
between real life and the imaginary world of art. The classical view was art is supposed to reproduce
life, hold the mirror up to nature, and also teach us moral insights by showing us not just how things
are, but why they have to be that way. Because in classical theory, an accurate picture of the
universe is automatically a moral, meaningful picture. But what if art is altogether different
from life? And it was at just this moment in the history of our culture that the concept of
the aesthetic began to develop. That is a privileged, self-contained, separate realm of art.
Before that time, nobody thought of the arts as a single phenomenon. But now, painting and music
and poetry and dance were all being grouped together as the aesthetic, which was not then
necessarily holding the mirror up to life, but maybe creating an alternative to life. And people
began to realize that any written work is always at a considerable remove from what it describes.
We saw that even James Boswell sitting down the very day to record the details of his day
accurately, he would still end up with an idealized version of his life more satisfying than the real
one. And here's something else that began to develop at this time. Instead of thinking of an art as a
craft or a skill, more or less impersonal, something you learn how to do, people began to glorify
the artist as a special kind of genius who has a creative imagination that ordinary people don't.
And this trend is closely related to something I mentioned in the very first lecture of the
course. A new, expressivist theory of art begins to see art as expressing, forcing out from within
a highly personal vision. And this change can be illustrated as a very well-known example.
Music historians tell us that Mozart, unbelievably gifted though he was,
thought of his music as a craft. He prolifically turned out scores for other musicians to play.
Whereas Beethoven, only a generation later, like to philosophize about questions of ultimate meaning
and Beethoven thought of his music as embodying a personal vision of truth. There's a lot about
music in Ramo's nephew. And Diderot is very modern in bringing out a contrast between talent
and genius. Ramo the nephew has a certain amount of talent and the one thing he actually loves
and believes in is music. But he knows he'll never be able to do anything much good. And he knows
his hated uncle was a true genius whose music will live forever, as indeed it has. And at one
point in the dialogue Ramo gives a savagely unsympathetic portrait of that uncle, a man that
Diderot knew personally and certainly didn't like. And Ramo says, if he ever did any good to anyone,
it was without realizing it. He's a philosopher in his own way. He thinks of nothing but himself
and the rest of the universe isn't worth any more to him than a nail on a pair of bellows.
His wife and his daughter can go ahead and die when they like. And as long as the church bell
tolls for them in intervals of a 12th and a 17th, everything will be fine. That's lucky for him.
That's what I admire in these men of genius. They're only good for one thing and beyond that,
nothing. Classical theory always claimed that a great artist necessarily had to be
a good human being. This new concept of the aesthetic puts art off by itself with its own
internal beauty and coherence. And the power of genius that makes someone able to create great
art is expressly distinguished from the qualities that make up a good person. The artist is supposed
to create art, not necessarily moral truth. And it's not just the artist who's excused from
ordinary moral standards. The work of art is set free from them. There's a wonderful remark by
Simone Weil, the French religious philosopher writing at the time of World War II. She said
memorably that whereas real goodness is endlessly varied and satisfying, goodness and fiction always
tends to be boring. And whereas real evil is ugly and hateful, imaginary evil is somehow fascinating.
So we want books and movies about villains and crooks. And this is a very important insight
that we'll return to when we read La Clos' great novel Le Liaison d'Angereuse.
It's something that interests Diderot very much. He makes Ramot tell a whole series of stories
about con men whose audacity and cleverness are very entertaining to hear about. And then the
moi character reflects with some distress, I didn't know whether to stay or escape, laugh or get
indignant. I began to feel aggravated in the presence of a man who would talk about a horrible
act, a hideous crime, the way a connoisseur of painting would examine the beauties of a work
of art, or the way that a moralist or historian would bring out the circumstances of a heroic act.
If we return with this perspective to the question of role playing, we should note that
among his other talents, Diderot was a successful playwright. And he wrote a short work called
Paradox on the Actor, c'est le comédien in French, that's become a classic of drama theory.
In modern America, there's a strong tradition of method acting. The performer reaches down into
his or her own emotional experience to find an equivalent for the role on the stage. The European
tradition is very different. It teaches the best actors to attach their personal feelings from the
roles they play. This is the paradox that Diderot spells out. The actor, he says, has long listened
to himself. The cries of his own grief are noted in his ear. The gestures of his despair come from
memory and have been prepared before a mirror. The actor's tears descend from his brain. Those of
the man of sensibility may rise from his heart. It's the feelings that disturb beyond measure the
head of the man of sensibility. It's the actor's head that sometimes gives a passing disturbance
to his feelings. He weeps like an unbelieving priest who preaches the passion, like a seducer on his
knees before a woman he doesn't love but wants to deceive, like a beggar in the street who abuses
you and he gives up hope of moving you, or like a courtesan who feels nothing but swoons in your
arms. Some of the central issues of this course are there in a nutshell. Sensibility was supposed
to be all about spontaneous, genuine emotion, but emotions can be simulated. And to do it well,
it's better to not actually feel in too much yourself. The courtesan gives most satisfaction
when she's faking pleasure. Remember Boswell. Similarly, the actor learns to use a mirror
to see himself from the outside, which is very much the empiricist's take on what we should all
do. If they'd had video recorders, then it would have been even better. So here's what we end up
with. People in society are all actors, conning each other, flattering each other, playing their
roles more or less well. And if they have any self-awareness at all, conscious of their own
hollowness and inauthenticity. On the other hand, works of art are self-contained holes,
observing rules of their own. So Ramo the uncle can be a thoroughly hateful person in real life
that can compose immortal harmonies. And the conscious role-playing that seems so degrading
in real life in Ramo the nephew becomes the perfection of art when a great actor does it on
stage. The philosopher Hegel at the beginning of 19th century saw in Ramo's nephew the anxiety of
modern self-consciousness floundering around, trying to find a basis of value when the old
order is breaking down. The moi keeps asserting wisdom and truth. The Louis Ramo just jeers at him
and says the only truth we can find is the literally artificial truth of art. The wit of
the enlightenment from Hegel's point of view is a symptom of despair. And this unpublished work
of Diderot represents the self-critique of that publicly confident movement.
